THE 



ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA 



ELEVENTH EDITION 



FIRST edit 


^on, published 


in three volumes, 1768— 1771. 


SECOND , 


> »» 


ten , 


, 1777— 1784. 


THIRD , 


i > 




eighteen , 


, 1788— 1797. 


FOURTH , 


i > 




twenty , 


, 1801 — 1810. 


FIFTH , 


j > 




twenty , 


, 1815— 1817. 


SIXTH , 


i > 




twenty , 


, 1823 — 1824. 


SEVENTH , 


> > 




twenty-one , 


, 1830 — 1842. 


EIGHTH , 


9 ) 




twenty-two , 


, 1853—1860 


NINTH , 


J ) 




twenty-five , 


1875—1889. 


TENTH 


, ninth editibn and eleven 






supplementary volumes, 


1902 — 1903. 


ELEVENTH , 


, publi 


shed 


in twenty-nine volume 


is, 1910— 1911. 



COPYRIGHT 

in all countries subscribing to the 

Bern Convention 

by 

THE CHANCELLOR, MASTERS AND SCHOLARS 

of the 

UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE 



All rights reserved 



THE 



ENCYCLOPEDIA BRITANNICA 



DICTIONARY 

OF 

ARTS, SCIENCES, LITERATURE AND GENERAL 

INFORMATION 

ELEVENTH EDITION 



VOLUME II 

ANDROS to AUSTRIA 



New York 

Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc. 

342 Madison Avenue 



INITIALS USED IN VOLUME II. TO IDENTIFY INDIVIDUAL 

CONTRIBUTORS, 1 WITH THE HEADINGS OF THE 

ARTICLES IN THIS VOLUME SO SIGNED. 



A. A. B. 



Assaying. 



A. B. R. 


A. C. R* C« 


A. C. Sp. 


A.F.L. 


A. F. P. 


A.O. 


A. H. S. 


A. H.-S. 


A.J.L. 


At. 


A. M. C. 


A. S. M. 


A.T. 


A.W.R. 


B. 


B.R. 


C. At. 


C.B.* 


CCh. 



Askew. 



4 Anthropometry. 



Andrew Alexander Blair. 

Chief Chemist, U.S. Geological Survey and Tenth U.S. Census, 1879-1881. 
Member American Philosophical Society. Author of Chemical Analysis of Iron ; &c. 

Alfred Barton Rendle, F.R.S., F.L.S., D.Sc. 

Keeper of the Department of Botany, British Museum. 

Albert Charles Robinson Carter. . 
Editor of The Year's Art. 

Arthur Coe Spencer, Ph.D. 

Geologist to the Geological Survey of the United States. 

Arthur Francis Leach, M.A. r 

Charity Commissioner since 1906. Fellow of All Souls' College, Oxford, 1874-1881. J Ascham 
Formerly Assistant Secretary, Board of Education. Author of English Schools at] ' 

the Reformation; History of Winchester College; Bradfield College; &c. I 

Albert Frederick Pollard, M.A., F.R.Hist.Soc. 

Professor of English History in University of London. Fellow of All Souls' College, - 
Oxford. 

Major Arthur George Frederick Griffiths (d. 1908). 

H.M. Inspector of Prisons, 1878-1896. Author of The Chronicles of Newgate; 
Secrets of -the Prison House ; &c. 

Rev. Archibald Henry Sayce, D.Litt., LL.D., D.D. 
See the biographical article: Sayce, A. H. 

Sir A. Houtum-Schindler, CLE. 

General in the Persian Army. Author of Eastern Persian Irak. 

Andrew Jackson Lamoureux. 

Librarian, College of Agriculture, Cornell University. Editor of the Rio News 
(Rio de Janeiro), 1879-1901. 

Andrew Lang. 

See the biographical article: Lang, Andrew. 

Agnes Mary Clerke. 

See the biographical article: Clerke, A. M. 

Alexander Stuart Murray, LL.D. 

See the biographical article: Murray, Alexander Stuart. 

Antoine Thomas, D.-es-L. 

Professor in the University of Paris. Member of the Institute of France. Director 
of Studies at the ficole Pratique des Hautes fitudes. Author of Les Utats pro- 
vinciaux de la France centrale sous Charles VII ; &c. 

Alexander Wood Renton, M.A., LL.B. 

Puisne Judge of the Supreme Court of Ceylon. Editor of Encyclopaedia of the Laws 
of England. . 

Lord Balcarres, M.P., F.S.A. 

Eldest son of the 26th Earl of Crawford. Trustee of National Portrait Gallery. 
Hon. Secretary, Society for Protection of Ancient Buildings. Author of Donatello ; &c. 

Sir Boverton Redwood, D.Sc, F.R.S. (Edin.), Assoc.Inst.CE., M.Inst.M.E. 
Adviser on Petroleum to the Admirajty, the Home Office and the Indian Office. 
President, Society Chemical Ind., 1907-1908. 

Channing Arnold. 

University College, Oxford. Barrister-at-law. Author of The American Egypt. 

Charles Bemont, D.-is-L., D.Litt. (Oxon.). 
See the biographical article: Bemont, Charles. 

Charles Chree, M.A,, D.Sc, LL.D., F.R.S. 

Superintendent, Observatory Department, National Physical Laboratory. Formerly 
Fellow of King's College, Cambridge. President, Physical Society of London. 



■i Angiosperms (in part); Apple. 

-j Art Societies. 

4 Appalachian Mountains. 



j Assur: City ; Assur-Bani-Pal. 

-I Ardebil. 

Argentina: Geography. 
Asuncidn; 
Atacama, Desert of. 

■I Apparitions. 

j Astronomy: History. 

A Aqueduct (in part). 



\ Aubusson: Town. 

J Apportionment; 
1 Arbitration. 

Art Galleries. 



-j Asphalt. ' < 

J Australia: Aborigines. 

J Annals; Anselme; 

\ Arbois de Jubainville; Aulard. 

J Atmospheric Electricity; 
I Aurora Polaris. 



1 A complete list, showing all individual contributors, appears in the final volume. 

v 



C.E1. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



C. P. A. 


C. 


H.Rd 


C. 


Pf. 


C. 


PL 


C. 


W.* 



c. w. w. 



D. C. B. 



D. F. T. 



D. G. H. 



D. 


H. 




E. 


Br 




E. 


B. 


T 


E. 


C. 


B 



Ed. M. 



E. 


G. 




E. 


0. 


* 


E. 


P. 


H.* 


E. 


R. 


L. 



E.Tn. 
E. V. L, 



Sir Charles Norton Edgecumbe Eliot, K.C.M.G., C.B., M.A., LL.D., D.C.L. 

Vice-Chancellor of Sheffield University. Scholar of Balliol, Oxford, 1881-1885. 
Hertford, Boden, Ireland, Craven and Derby Scholar. Fellow of Trinity. Third. 
Secretary Embassy at St Petersburg, 1888-1892; Constantinople, 1893-1898. 
Commissioner for British East Africa, 1900-1904. Author of Turkey in Europe; 
Letters from the Far East. 

Charles Francis Atkinson. 

Formerly Scholar of Queen's College, Oxford. Captain, 1st City of London (Royal ' 
Fusiliers). Author of The Wilderness and Cold Harbour. 

Charles Hercules Read, LL.D. (St Andrews). 

Keeper of British and Medieval Antiquities and Ethnography, British Museum. . 
President of the Society of Antiquaries of London. Past President of the Anthro- 
pological Institute. Author of Antiquities from Benin; &c. 

Christian Pfister, D.-es-L. 

Professor at the Sorbonne, Paris. Chevalier of the Legion of Honour, 
of Etudes sur le r'egne de Robert le Pieux. 

Rev. Charles Plummer, M.A. 

Fellow of Corpus Christi College, Oxford. 
and Times of Alfred the Great; &c. 



Asia: History. 



Arms and Armour: Firearms; 
Army; Artillery. 



Author ■ 



Archaeology. 



Antrustion; 
Austrasia. 



Ford's Lecturer, 1901. Author of Life\ Anglo-Saxon Chronicle. 



Argos: The Heraeum. 



Ararat; 
Armenia; 
Asia Minor. 



Charles Waldstein, M.A., D.Litt., Ph.D. 

Slade Professor of Fine Art, Cambridge. Fellow of King's College, Cambridge. . 
Director of the Fitzwilliam Museum at Cambridge, 1883-1889. Director of the 
American Archaeological School at Athens, 1 889-1 893. 

Sir Charles William Wilson, K.C.B., K.C.M:G., F.R.S. (1836-1897). 

Major-General, Royal Engineers. Secretary to the North American Boundary 
Commission, 1 858-1 862. British Commissioner on the Servian Boundary Com-, 
mission. Director-General of the Ordnance Survey, 1 886-1 894. Director- 
General of Military Education, 1895-1898. Author of From Korti to Khartum; 
Life of Lord Clive; &c. 

Demetrius Charles Boulger. f ■ 

Author of England and Russia in Central Asia; History of China; Life of Gordon -A Antwerp. 
India in the igth Century ; History of Belgium ; &c. I 

Donald Francis Tovey. f 

Balliol College, Oxford. Author of Essays in Musical Analysis, comprising The A Aria. 
Classical Concerto, The Goldberg Variations, and analyses of many other classical works. I 

David George Hogarth, M.A. r 

Keeper of the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford. Anlioch; Apamea; Arabgir; 
Fellow of the British Academy, Excavated at Paphos, 1888; Naukratis, 1899 -j. Asia Minor; Aspendus; 
and 1903; Ephesus, 1 904-1905; Assiut, 1906-1907. Director, British School at a ssus 
Athens, 1 897-1 900. Director, Cretan Exploration Fund, 1899. ^ assus. 

David Hannay. f Anson, Baron; 

Formerly British Vice-Consul at Barcelona. Author of Short History of the Royal A Antonio Prior Of Crato - 
Navy, 1217-1688; Life of Emilio Castelar; &c. I Aranda,' Count of ; Arhiada. 

Ernest Barker, M.A. 

Fellow and Lecturer of St John's College, Oxford. Formerly Fellow and Tutor of -{ Alllic Council. 
Merton College. 

Edward Burnett Tylor, F.R.S. , D.C.L. (Oxon.). 
See the biographical article : Tylor, E. B. 

Right Rev. Edward Cuthbert Butler, O.S.B., D.Litt. (Dubl.). 
Abbot of Downside Abbey, Bath. 



Eduard Meyer, D.Litt. (Oxon.). 

Professor of Ancient History in the University of Berlin. Author of Geschichte des 
Alterthums; Forschungen zur alten Geschichte; Geschichte des alten Aegyptens; Die 
Israeliten und ihre Nachbarstdmme ; &c. 

Edmund Gosse, LL.D.. 

See the biographical article: Gosse, E. W. 

Edmund Owen, M.B., F.R.C.S., LL.D., D.Sc 

Consulting Surgeon to St Mary's Hospital, London, and to the Children's Hospital, 
Great Ormond Street. Late Examiner in Surgery at the Universities of Cam- 
bridge, Durham and London. Author of A Manual of Anatomy for Senior Students. 

Ernest Prescot Hill, M.Inst.C.E. 

Member of the firm of G. A. Hill & Sons, Civil Engineers, London. 

Sir Edwin Ray Lankester, K.C.B., F.R.S., D.Sc (Oxon.) LL.D. 

Hon. Fellow of Exeter College, Oxford. President of the British Association, 1906. 
Professor of Zoology and Comparative Anatomy in University College, London, 
1874-1890. Linacre Professor of Comparative Anatomy at Oxford, 1891-1898. 
Director of the Natural History Departments of the British Museum, 1898-1907. 
Vice-President of the Royal Society, 1896. Romanes Lecturer at Oxford, 1905. 
Author of Degeneration ; The Advancement of Science; The Kingdom of Man; &c. 

Rev. Ethelred Leonard Taunton (d. 1907). f 

Author of The English Black Monks of St Benedict; History of the Jesuits in -j Aquaviva, Claodio. 
England; &c. I 

Edward Verrall Lucas. 

Editor of Letters of Charles and Mary Lamb. Author of Life of Charles Lamb. 



J Anthropology. 

r Anthony, Saint; Augustinian 
A Canons; Augustinian 
I Hermits; Augustinians. 

{Arbaces; Ardashir; Arsaces; 
Arses; Artabanus; 
Artaphernes; Artaxerxes; 
Astyages. 

f Asbjornsen and Moe; 
I Assonance. 

J Aneurysm; 
1 Appendicitis. 

-j Aqueduct: Modern. 



Arachnida; 
Arthropods. 



I Austen, Jane. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



Vll 



P. c. c. 

F. G. P 



Frederick Cornwallis Conybeare, M.A. D.Th. (Giessen). 



F. 


H. 


Ne. 


F. 


y. 


G. 


F. 


R. 


C. 


F. 


T. 


M. 


F. 


W 


Mo. 


F. W 


R.* 


G. 


C. 


B. 


G. 


E. 




G. 


H. 


C. 



G. H. Fo. 

G.K. 
G. Sn. 

G. W. B. 

G. W. T. 

H.B. 

H. Ch. 

H. F. G. 

H. F. P. 
H.F.T. 

H. Ha. 
H. H. S. 

H. M. C. 



f Anointing; Armenian Chureh; 
Formerly Fellow of University College, Oxford. Fellow of the British Academy. < Armenian Language and 
Author of The Ancient Armenian Texts of Aristotle; Myth, Magie and Morals; &c. Literature; Asceticism. 

Frederick Gymer Parsons, F.R.C.S., F.Z.S., F.R.Anthrop.Inst. 

Vice-President Anatomical Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Lecturer on 
Anatomy at St Thomas's Hospital and the London School of Medicine for -| Arteries. 
Women. Formerly Examiner in the Universities of Cambridge, Aberdeen, London 
and Birmingham ; and Hunterian Professor at the Royal College of Surgeons. 

Francis Henry Neville, M.A., F.R.S. [" 

Fellow of Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, and Lecturer on Physics and A Atom. 
Chemistry. (_ 

Francis Llewelyn Griffith, M.A., Ph.D. (Leipzig), F.S.A. f . 

Reader in Egyptology, Oxford. Editor of the Archaeological Survey and Archaeo- J Anubis; Apis; 
logical Reports of the Egypt Exploration Fund. Fellow of the Imperial German 1 Assiut; Assuan. 
Archaeological Institute. I 

Frank R. Cana. 

Author of South Africa from the Great Trek to the Union. 

Sir Frank T. Marzials, C.B. f 

Formerly Accountant-General of the Army. Author of Lives of Victor Hugo ; -i Augier, G. V. E. 
Moliere; Dickens; &c. (_ 



j Ashanti. 



Apoplexy. 

Asbestos; 
Atacamite. 



j Argentina : History. 



Frederick Walker Mott, F.R.S., M.D. 

Physician to Charing Cross Hospital. Pathologist to the London County Asylums. 
Fullerian Professor of Physiology at the Royal Institution. 

Frederick William Rudler, I.S.O., F.G.S. 

Curator and Librarian of the Museum of Practical Geology, London, 1879-1902. 
President of the Geologists' Association, 1887-1889. 

Gilbert Charles Bourne, M.A., F.R.S. , F.L.S., D.Sc. (Oxon.). 

Linacre Professor of Comparative Anatomy at Oxford. Fellow of Merton-j Anthozoa. 
College, Oxford. 

Rev. George Edmundson, M.A., F.R.Hist.S. 

Formerly Fellow and Tutor of Brasenose College, Oxford. Ford's Lecturer, 1909. 

George Herbert Carpenter, B.Sc. 

Professor of Zoology in the Royal College of Science, Dublin. President of the 
Association of Economic Biologists. Author of Insects: their Structure and Life. 

George Herbert Fowler, F.Z.S., F.L.S., Ph.D. 

Formerly Berkeley Fellow of Owens College, Manchester, and Assistant Professor 
of Zoology at University College, London. 

Gustav Kruger, Ph.D. 

Professor of Church History, University of Giessen. • Author of Das Papsttum; &c. 

Grant Showerman, Ph.D. 

Professor of Latin in the University of Wisconsin. 
the Gods. 

George Willis Botsford, A.M. 

Professor in Columbia University, New York. 
(1909); &c. 



Ant; 
Aptera. 

Aquarium. 



Arius; Athanasius; 
Augustine, Saint (of Hippo). 



0f\ J 



Author of The Great Mother of < Attis, 



Author of The Roman Assemblies \ Areopagus. 



Rev. Griffithes Wheeler Thatcher, M.A., B.D. 

Warden of Camden College, Sydney, N.S.W. Formerly Tutor in Hebrew and 
Old Testament History at Mansfield College, Oxford. 



'Antara ibn Shaddad; 

Arabia : Antiquities, History, 
Literature ; Arabian Philo- 
sophy (in part) ; A'Sha; 

Ash'Arl; Asma'T; Assassin. 



Hilary Bauermann, F.G.S. (d. 1909). r 

Formerly Lecturer on Metallurgy at the Ordnance College, Woolwich. Author of J Anthracite 
A Treatise on the Metallurgy of Iron. [ 

Hugh Chisholm, M.A. 

Formerly Scholar of Corpus Christi College, Oxford. Editor of the nth edition of 
the Encyclopaedia Britannica; co-editor of the 10th edition. 

Hans Friedrich Gadow, F.R.S., Ph.D. 

Strickland Curator and Lecturer on Zoology in the University of Cambridge. 
Author of Amphibia and Reptiles. 

Henry Francis Pelham, LL.D. 

See the biographical article: Pelham, H. F. 

Rev. Henry Fanshawe Tozer, M.A., F.R.G.S. 

Hon. Fellow of Exeter College, Oxford. Fellow of the British Academy. Corre- 
sponding Member of Historical Society of Greece. Author of Lectures on the Geo- 
graphy of Greece ; History of Ancient Geography. Editor of Finlay's History of Greece. 

Heber Hart. 

Barrister-at-law. 



Argyll, Earls and Dukes 0! 
(in part) ; Asquith, H. H. 

Archaeopteryx. 

Augustus. 

Attica. 



Henry Heathcote Statham, F.R.I.B.A. 

Editor of The Builder. Author of Architecture (Modern) for General Readers; 
Modern Architecture; &c. 

Hector Munro Chadwick, M.A. 

FelloTtr and Librarian of Clare College, Cambridge. 
Saxon Institutions. 



Auctions and Auctioneers. 
Architecture: Modem. 



Author of Studies on Anglo- J Angli; Anglo-Saxons. 



Vlll 


H 


N. D 


H. 


Se. 


H. 


Sm. 


I. 


A. 



INITIALS AMD HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



I. B. B. 

J. A. H. 
J. A. R. 

J. B. T. 

J. Bn. 
J. D. B. 

J. D. Pr. 



J. 


6. 


C. A. 


J. 


G. 


F. 


J. 


G. 


H. 


J. 


G. 


Sc. 


J. 


H. 


A. H 


J. 


H.F. 


J. 


H. 


R. 


J. 


HI 


. R. 


J. 


I. 




J. 


L. 


W. 



J. M. M. 



J. Mac. 



J. P. E. 



Henry Newton Dickson, M.A., D.Sc. (Oxon.), F.R.G.S., F.R.S. (Edin.). 

Professor of Geography, University College, Reading. Author of ; Elementary 
Meteorology; Papers on Oceanography; &c. ;■ ' . 

Henri See. , , , . 

Professor in the University of Rennes. 

Hugh Sheringham. 

Angling Editor of The Field (London). 

Israel Abrahams, M.A. 

Reader in Talmudic and Rabbinic Literature, University of ' Cambridge. President, 
Jewish Historical Society of England. Author of A Short History of Jewish Litera- 
ture; Jewish Life in the Middle Ages. 

Isaac Bayley Balfour, F.R.S., M.D. ' 

King's Botanist in Scotland. Regius Keeper of Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh. 
•Professor of Botany in the University of Edinburgh. Regius Professor of 
Botany in the University of Glasgow, 1 879-1 884. Sherardian Professor of Botany 
in the University of Oxford, 1884-1888. 

John Allen Howe, B.Sc. 

Curator and Librarian of the Museum of Practical Geology, London. 

■" Very Rev. Joseph Armitage Robinson, M.A., D.D. 

Dean of Westminster. Fellow of the British Academy. Hon. Fellow of Christ's 
College, Cambridge. Formerly Fellow of Christ's College, Cambridge, and Norrisian 
Professor of Divinity. Author of Some Thoughts on the Incarnation ; &c. 

Sir John Batty Tuke, M.D., LL.D. (Edin.), D.Sc (Dubl.) 

President of the Neurological Society of the United Kingdom. Medical Director 
of New Saughton Hall Asylum, Edinburgh. M.P. for the Universities of Edinburgh 
and St Andrews, 1900-1910. 

John Bilson. 

External Examiner in Architecture, University of Manchester. • 

James David Bourchier, M.A., F.R.G.S. 

Correspondent of The Times in South-Eastern Europe. Commander of the Orders 
of Prince Danilo of Montenegro and of the Saviour of Greece, and Officer of the 
Order of St Alexander of Bulgaria. ' 

John Dyneley Prince, Ph.D. 

Professor of Semitic Languages, Columbia University, New York. Took part in 
the Expedition to Southern Babylonia, 1888-89. Author of A Critical Commentary 
on the Book of Daniel; Assyrian Primer. 

John George Clark Anderson, M.A. . , ■ 

Student, Censor and Tutor of Christ Church, Oxford. Craven Fellow, 1896. 
Formerly Fellow of Lincoln College, Oxford. Joint-author of Studica Pontica, 

Sir Joshua Girling Fitch. , 

See the biographical article: Fitch, Sir Joshua G. 



Atlantic Ocean. 



Anne of Brittany. 



1.1 



I Angling. 



'Asher Ben Jehiel. 



Angiosperms (in part). 

J~ Archean System; 
\ Arenig Group. 

1 Aristides, Apology of. 



< Aphasia. 

f Architecture : Romanesque and 
[ Gothic, in England. ., i 



J Athens; 
1 Athos. 

I 



Assur (Biblical). 



■1 Angora. 



{ 



Arnold, Matthew (in part% 



Joseph G. Horner, A.M.I.Mech.E. 

Author 6f Plating and Boiler Making ; &c. 



J Annealing. 



Sir James George Scott, K.C.I.E. 

Superintendent and Political Officer, Southern Shan States. Author of Burma, a J Arakan. 
Handbook ; The Upper Burma Gazetteer ; &c. 



John Henry Arthur Hart, M.A. 

Fellow, Lecturer and Librarian of St John's College, Cambridge. 

John Henry Freese, M.A. 

Formerly Fellow of St John's College, Cambridge. 

John Horace Round, M.A., LL.D. (Edin.). 

Author of Feudal England ; Peerage and Pedigree ; &c. 

John Holland Rose, M.A., Litt.D. f 

Lecturer on Modern History to the Cambridge University Local Lectures I . 1 

Syndicate. Author of Life of Napoleon I; Napoleonic Studies; The Development of \ AU S ereau - 
the European Nations; The Life of Pitt; Chapters in the Cambridge Modern History. '[" 



J" Arehelaus, King of Judaea; 
\Asmoneus; Assideans. 
J Annalists; Aphrodite;; Apollo; 
\ Artemis; Athena. 

-j Arundel, Earldom of. 



Jules Isaac. , 

Professor of History at the Lycee of Lyons. 

Miss Jessie L. Weston. 

Author of Arthurian Romances. 

John Malcolm Mitchell. 

Formerly Scholar of Queen's College, Oxford. Lecturer in Classics, East London 
College (University of London). Joint-editor of Grote's History of Greece. 



James Macqueen. 

Member and Fellow of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons." Professor of 
Surgery at the Royal Veterinary College, London. Examiner for the Fellowship 
Diploma of the R.C.V.S. Editor, of Fleming's Operative Veterinary Surgery (2nd 
edition); Dun's Veterinary Medicines (10th edition); and Neumann's Parasites and 
Parasitic Diseases of the Domesticated Animals (2nd edition). 

Jean Paul Hippolyte Emmanuel Adhemar Esmein. 

Professor of Law in the University of Paris. Officer of the Legion of Honour. 
Member of the Institute of France. Author of Cours eWnentaire d'histoire du~ 
droit franqais; &c. 



4 Anne of France. 

/Arthur (King); 

\ Arthurian Legend. 
Aqueduct: Ancient and ''■ -^ 
M edieval ; Aquinas, Thomas 
(in part); Archon; Arnte'- 
and Armour: Ancient. 



Anthrax. 



Appanage. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



IX 



J. S. B. 


J. S. F. 


J. Si.* 


J. V. B. 



J. W. G. 
J. W. He. 

K.S. 
L. H.* 

L. J. S. 

L. M. Br. 
L.W. 

M.6. 



M. H. C. 

M. J. De G. 
M. Ja. 

M. L. H. 
M. N. T. 

M. 0. B. C. 

M. P.* 
N.M. 

H. W. T. 



Jacob; Samuel Ballin. 

Founder and Hon. Sec. of the National Institution of Apprenticeship, London. 

John Smith Flett, D.Sc, F.G.S. f 

Peirographer to the Geological Survey. Formerly Lecturer on Petrology in Edin- J 
burgh University. Neill Medallist of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. Bigsby I 
Medallist of the Geological Society of London. L 

Rev. James Sibree. 

Author of Madagascar and its People; &c. 

James Vernon Bartlet, M.A., D.D. (St Andrews). 

Professor of Church History, Mansfield College, Oxford. 
Age; &c. 

John Walter Gregory, F.R.S., D.Sc. 

Professor of Geology, University of Glasgow. 
Mineralogy, University of Melbourne, 1900-1904. 
Australia; Australasia. 



{ 



{ 



Author of The Apostolic < 

Professor of Geology and j 
Author of The Dead Heart of j 



Apprenticeship. 



Aplite. 



Antananarivo. 

Apostle; 
Apostolic Fathers. 

Australia: Physical 
Geography. 



James Wycliffe Headlam, M.A. f 

Staff Inspector of Secondary Schools under the Board of Education. Formerly J 

Fellow of King's College, Cambridge. Professor of Greek and Ancient History at ") Arnim, Count. 

Queea's College, London. Author of Bismarck and the Foundation of the German 

. Empire ; &c. 



Kathleen Schlesinger. 

Author of The Instruments of the Orchestra. 

Louis Halfhen, D.-es-L. 

Lecturer on Medieval History at the University of Bordeaux. 
• of the Ecole des Chartes, Paris. 



' { 



Formerly Secretary -s 



Leonard James Spencer, M.A., F.G.S. 

Department of Mineralogy, British Museum. Formerly Scholar of Sidney Sussex 
College, Cambridge, and Harkness Scholar. Editor of the Mineralogical Magazine. 

Louis Maurice Brandin, M.A. 

Fielden Professor of French and of Romance Philology in the University of London. " 



Formerly President of 



Arghoul; Asor; Aulos. 

Anjou. 

Anhydrite; Ankerite; 
Annabergite; Anorthite; 
Apatite; Apophyllite; 
Aragonite; Argentite; 
Argyrodite; Augite. 

Anglo-Norman Literature. 
Anti-Semitism. 



Anthim the Iberian. 



Lucien, Wolf. 

Vice-President of the Jewish Historical Society of England, 
the Society. Joint editor of the Btbliotheca Anglo-Judaica. 

Moses GAster. 

Chief Rabbi of the Sephardic communities of England. Vice-President, Zionist 
Congress, 1898, 1899,1 1900. Ilchester Lecturer at Oxford on Slavonic and 
Byzantine Literature, 1886 and 1891. President, Folklore Society of England." 
Vice-President, Anglo-Jewish Association. Author of History of Rumanian 
Popular Literature ; A New Hebrew Fragment of Ben-Sira ; The Hebrew Version of 
Sectitum Secrelorum of Aristotle: 

Montague Hughes Crackanthorpe, K.C., D.C.L. f 

President of the Eugenics Education Society. Formerly Member of the General J Arbitration, International. 
Council of the Bar and Council of Legal Education. Late Chairman, Incorporated 
Council of Law Reporting. Honorary Fellow St John's College, Oxford. I 

MichAel Jan de Goeje. 

See the biographical article : Goeje, Michael Jan de. 

Morris JastrOW, Ph.D. (Leipzig). 

, Professor of Semitic Languages, University of Pennsylvania. 
of the Babylonians and Assyrians; &c. 

Lady Huggins. 

See the biographical article: Huggins, Sir William. 

Marcus Niebuhr Tod, M.A. fAnoiia. i^hM.mtic 

Fellow and Tutor of Oriel College, Oxford. University Lecturer in Epigraphy. A . p .' 8 ' Arcnmamus, 
Joint author of Catalogue of the Sparta Museum. I Anstodemus; Anstomenes. 



-j Arabia: Literature (in part). 



Author of Religion 



J Anu; Assur (God) ; 
■(_ Astrology. 



{ 



Armilla; Astrolabe. 



Maximilian Otto Bismarck Caspari, M.A. 

Reader in Ancient History at London University. Lecturer in Greek at Birming- 
ham University, 1905-1908. Author of chapters on Greek History in The Year's' 
Work in Classical Studies. 



f Aratus of Sicyon; Arcadia; 
Argos: History; 
Aristides the Just; 
Athens (in part). 



Leon Jacques Maxime Prinet. 

Formerly Archivist Jo the French National Archives, 
of France (Academy of Moral and Political Sciences). 



Auxiliary to the Instituted Aumale, Due d\ 



Norman McLean, M.A. r 

Fellow, Lecturer and Librarian of Christ's College, Cambridge. University Lecturer J a-i,.--^- 
in Aramaic. Examiner for the Oriental Languages Tripos and the Theological ") Apnraaws. 
Tripos at Cambridge. [ 

Northcote Whitbridge Thomas, M.A. f Animal- Worship* 

Government Anthropologist to Southern Nigeria. Corresponding Member of the J . . . 
Societe d'Anthropologie de Paris. Author of Thought Transference; Kinship and~\ Animism. 
Marriage in Australia; &c. [_ 



X 




0. 


Ba. 


0. 


Br. 


p. 


A. 


p. 


A. K 


p. 


CM. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 

Oswald Barron, F.S. A. f Arms and Armour- 

Editor of The Ancestor, 1902-1905. Hon. Genealogist to Standing Council of -i * rms *. Armour « 
Honourable Society of Baronetage. I English. 

Oscar Briliant. \ Austria: Statistics. 

Paul Daniel Alphandery. , , f , ._ 

Professor of the History of Dogma, Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, Sorbonne, J ApostOllClJ 
Paris. Author of Les Idees morales chez les heterodoxes latines au debut du XIII' j Arnold Of Brescia. 

siede. I 

Prince Peter Alexeivitch Kropotkin. J Aral* Astrakhan. 

See the biographical article: Kropotkin, Prince Peter A. I ' 



Annelida. 



Peter Chalmers Mitchell, F.R.S., F.Z.S., D.Sc, LL.D. 

Secretary to the Zoological Society of London from 1903. University Demon- Animal' 

strator in Comparative Anatomy and Assistant to Linacre Professor at Oxford, - ' 

1888-1891. Lecturer on Biology at Charing Cross Hospital, 1892-1894; at London 

Hospital, 1894. Examiner in Biology to the Royal College of Physicians, 1892- 

1896,1901-1903. Examiner in Zoology to the University of London, 1903.; r ■ ' " 

Anglesey, 1st Earl of; 

Anne, Queen; 

Anne of Cleves; 
P. C. Y Philip Chesney Yorke, M.A. -\ Anne of Denmark; 

Magdalen College, Oxford. Antrjmj lgt Marquess „,. 



P. G. Percy Gardner, Litt.D., LL.D 



Argyll, Earls and Dukes of; 
Arlington, Earl of. 



:y Gardner, Litt.D., LL.D. f . 

See the biographical article: Gardner, Percy. \ Apelles. 

P. Gi. Peter Giles, M.A., Litt.D., LL.D. f , . . 

Fellow and Classical Lecturer of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, and University -{ Aryan. 
Reader in Comparative Philology. Author of Manual of Comparative Philology. I 

P. La. Philip Lake, M.A., F.G.S. fAoennines- 

Lecturer on Physical and Regional Geography in Cambridge University. Formerly J V . „ .' 
of the Geological Survey of India. Author of Monograph of British Cambrian 1 Asia: Geology; ,.. 

TrUobites. Translator and editor of Kayser's Comparative Geology. I Austria: Geology. 

P. Vi. Paul Vinogradoff, D.C.L. (Oxford), LL.D. (Cambridge and Harvard). f 

Corpus Professor of Jurisprudence in the University of Oxford. Fellow of the J Anglo-Saxdn Law. ' 

British Academy. Honorary Professor of History in the University of Moscow. | 
Author of Villainage in England; English Society in the nth Century; Set. L 

The Right Hon. Lord Rayleigh. -(Argon. ■'"' 

See the biographical article: Rayleigh, 3RD Baron. , I 

Robert Alexander Stewart Macalister, M.A., F.S. A. /Ascalon. 

Director of Excavations for the Palestine Exploration Fund. \ 

Colonel Robert Alexander Wahab, CM.G-, CLE. f 

Served in the Afghan War, 1878-1880; with the Hazara Expeditions, 1888 and J Arabia: Modem History; 

1891; with the Tirah Expeditionary Force, 1897-1898, &c. Commissioner for] Asir. 

the Aden Boundary Delimitation. L ' ' ■;; 

Sir Richard Claverhouse Jebb, LL.D., D.C.L. J . . , . 

See the biographical article: Jebb, Sir Richard C. ' l AHStopnaneS. 

Richard Garnett, LL.D. f . . ,. 

See the biographical article: Garnett, Richard. -^Anthology; Apot(»eofflS. 

Rev. Robert Henry Charles, M.A., D.D., Litt.D. (Oxon.). r 

Grinfield Lecturer and Lecturer in Biblical Studies, Oxford. Fellow of the British J Apocalyptic Literature^ 
Academy. Professor of Biblical Greek at Trinity College, Dublin, 1 898-1906. ] Apocryphal Literature. 
Author of Critical History of a Future Life ; &c. I 

Reginald Innes Pocock, F.Z.S., F.L.S. r . . » • 

Superintendent of the Zoological Gardens, London. ~\ AnWioB; Aphides. ■'■ -■ • 

Ronald John McNeill, M.A. r 

Christ Church, Oxford. Formerly Editor of the St James's Gazette (London). 4 Australia: Recent LegislatiOK. 

Richard Lydekker, F.R.S., F.G.S., F.Z.S. r 

Author of Catalogues of Fossil Mammals, Reptiles and Birds in British Museum;) Antelope; Arsinoitherium; 
The Deer of all Lands; &c. | Artiodaetyla; Aurpchs. , 

Rev. Robert Mackintosh, M.A., D.D. J Anthropomorphism; Apolo- 

Professor at Lancashire Independent College, Manchester. ^ getics; Apotheosis(t« />ar/). 

Robert Nisbet Bain (d. 1909). f Anne, Empress of Russia; 

Assistant Librarian, British Museum, 1883-1909. Author of Scandinavia: the 
Political History of Denmark, Norway and Sweden, 1513-1900; The Firstjiomanovs, - 
1613 to 1725; Slavonic Europe : the Political History of Poland and Russia from 1469 
to 1796; &c. 



R. 






R. 


A. 


S. M 


R. 


A. 


W. 


R. 


C. 


J. 


R. 


G. 




R. 


H 


c. 


R. 


I. 


p. 


R. 


J. 


M. 


R. 


L. 


* 


R. 


Ma. 


R. 


N. 


B. 



Apraksin, T. M.; 
Arakcheev, A. A., Count; 
Arany, Janos; 
Armielt, G. M., Count. < 



R. N. W. Ralph Nicholson Wornum (1812-1877). 

Keeper of the National Gallery, 1854-1877. Author of The Epochs of Painting; &c. -j Arabesque. 

R. P. S. R. Phene Spiers, F.S.A., F.R.I.B.A. fApse; 

Formerly Master of the Architectural School, Royal Academy, London. Past. Arcade* 
President of Architectural Association. Associate and Fellow of King's College,^ . . . ' 
London. Corresponding Membej of the Institute of France. Editor of Fergusson's Arcn; 
History of Architecture. Author of Architecture: East and West; &c. . I Architecture. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



XI 



R, Po. 



R 


s. 


R 


S.C 


R. 


Tr. 


S. 


A.C 



S.C. 
S.N. 
STC. 
Sw. 

T. A. C. 

r. a. i. 



T. As. 



T.Ba. 



T.Ca. 



T. 


H. 






T. 


H. 


H.* 




T.L. 


H. 




T. 


M. 


L. 




T. W 


-D. 




T. 


W 


R. 


D 



Rene Poupardin, D.-es-L. 

Secretary of the Ecole des Chartes. Honorary Librarian at the Bibliotheque ~j Aries, Kingdom of. 
Nationale, Paris. 

Lieut.-Gen. Sir Richard Strachey, R.E., G.C.S.I., LL.D., F.R.S. 
See the biographical article: Strachey, Sir R. 



f Asia: Climate, Flora and 
\ Fauna. 



Robert Seymour Conway, M.A., D.Litt. (Cantab.). f 

Professor of Latin in the University of Manchester. Formerly Professor of Latin J Apulia: Archaeology; 



in University College, Cardiff. 
Author of The Italic Dialects. 



Fellow of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. | Aricini; Aurunci. 



Roland Tsuslove, M.A. 

Fellow and Lecturer in Classics, Worcester College, Oxford, 
of Christ Church, Oxford. 



Formerly Scholar 



Aries. 



Ark; 
Asa; 
Asher; 
Astarte. 



Art. 



Stanley Arthur Cook, M.A. 

Editor for Palestine Exploration Fund. Formerly Fellow and Lecturer in Hebrew 
and Syriac, Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. Examiner in Hebrew and 
Aramaic, London University, 1904-1908; Council of Royal Asiatic Society," 
1904-1905. Author of Glossary of Aramaic Inscriptions; The Laws of Moses and 
Code of Hammurabi; Critical Notes on Old Testament History; Religion of Ancient 
Palestine; &c. 

Sidney Colvtn, M.A., D.Litt. 

See the biographical article : Colvin, Sidney. 

Simon Newcomb, LL.D., D.Sc, D.CL. (Oxon.). 
See the biographical article: Newcomb, Simon. 

Viscount St Cyres. 

See the biographical article: Iddesleigh, ist Earl of. L 

The Right Hon. Lord Swaythling (Sir Samuel Montagu). [ 

M.P. for Whitechapel, 1885-1900. Founder of the firm of Samuel Montagu & Co., "j Arbitrage. 
Bankers, London. I 

Timothy Augustine Coghlan, I.S.O. f 

Agent-General for New South Wales. President of Australasian Association for the J Australia. 
Advancement of Science (Economics and Statistics), 1902. Author of The Seven | 
Colonies of Australia; Statistical Account of Australia and New Zealand. I 

Thomas Allan Ingram, M.A., LL.D. 
Trinity College, Dublin. 



f Astronomy: Descriptive- 
X Astrophysics. 

4 Arnauld : Family. 



{ 



Thomas Ashby, M.A., D.Litt. (Oxon.). 

Director of the British School of Archaeology at Rome. Formerly Scholar of 
Christ Church, Oxford. Craven Fellow, 1897. Author of numerous articles in the - 
Papers of the British School at Rome; The Classical Topography of the Roman 
Campagna; &c. 



Assignats. 

Antium; Appia Via; 

Apulia: History; 

Aqueduct: Roman; 

Aquileia; Aquino; 

Ardea; Arezzo; 

Ariano di Puglia; Aricia; 

Ariminum; Arpi; Arpino; 

Arretium; Ascoli Piceno; 

Asisium; Assisi; Astura; 

Ateste; Aufidena; 

Augusta (Sicily); 

Augusta Bagiennorum; 

Augusta Praetoria Salassorum* 

Aurelia, Via. 

Angary; 

Annexation. 

Asylum, Right of. 

Aristotle. 



Sir Thomas Barclay, M.P. 

Member of the Institute of International Law. Member of the Supreme Council of ^ 
the Congo Free State. Officer of the Legion of Honour. Author of Problems of* 
International Practice and Diplomacy; &c. M.P. for Blackburn, 1910. 

Thomas Case, M.A. 

President of Corpus Christi College, Oxford. Formerly Waynflete Professor of Moral • 
and Metaphysical Philosophy at Oxford. Author of Physical Realism; &c. 

Thomas Hodgkin, LL.D., D.Litt. 

See the biographical article: Hodgkin, T. 

Col. Sir Thomas Hungerford Holdich, K.C.M.G., K.C.I. E., D.Sc, F.R.G.S. j Asia: Geography and 
Superintendent, Frontier Surveys, India, 1892-1898. Author of The Indian^ Ethnology. 
Borderland; The Countries of the King's Award; &c. 



Attila. 



Sir Thomas Little Heath, K.C.B., 

Assistant Secretary to the Treasury. 



D Sc (Cantab ) f Anthemius ; 

Formerly Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. ] A P ollonius 0* Perga; 

[ Archimedes. 
Rev. Thomas Martin Lindsay, LL.D., D.D. r 

Principal of the United Free Church College, Glasgow. Formerly Assistant to the J A nl] ;_ a - Thnmae 
Professor of Logic and Metaphysics in the University of Edinburgh. Author of 1 A Q ulnas > momas. 
History of the Reformation; Life of Luther; &c. [ 

Walter Theodore Watts-Dunton -f Arnold, Matthew. 

See the biographical article : Watts-Dunton, W. T. [_ 

T. W. Rhys Davids, M.A., Ph.D., LL.D. f 

Professor of Comparative Religion in the University of Manchester. President of J Agolsa. 
the Pali Text Society. Fellow of the British Academy. Secretary and Librarian ] • 
of Royal Asiatic Society, 18.85-1902. Author of Buddhism; &c. I 



Xll 

W» A* Be C 

W. A. P. 

W. Bo. 

W. Cr. 
W. E. Co. 

W. E. E. 

W. F. C. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



w. 


F. 


Sh. 


w. 


H. 


Be 


w. 


H 


Di. 


w. 


J. 


F. 


w. 


Ma. 


w. 


M. 


R. 


w. 


P. 


R. 



W. R. L. 

W.W. 
W. W. F.* 

W. W. R.* 



Rev. William Augustus Brevoort Coolidge, M.A.,F.R.G.S., Hon. Ph.D. (Bern). 
Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford. Professor of English History, St David's 
College, Lampeter, 1880-1881. Author of Guide du haut dauphine; The Range of* 
the Todi; Guide to Grindelwald; Guide to Switzerland; The Alps in Nature and in 
History; &c. Editor of the Alpine Journal, 1880-1889; &c. 

Walter Alison Phillips, M.A. 

Principal Assistant Editor of the nth edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica. . 
Formerly Exhibitioner of Merton College, Oxford, and Senior Scholar of St John's 
College. Author of Modern Europe ; &c. 



Annecy; 
Antibes; 
Appenzell; 
Arnaud, Henri. 

Archbishop; 
Archdeacon. 



WlLHELM BOUSSET, D.THEOL. 

Professor of New Testament Exegesis in the University of Gottingen. 
Das We sen der Religion; The Antichrist Legend; &c. 

Walter Crane. 

See the biographical article: Crane, Walter. 

Right Rev. William Edward Collins, D.D., Bishop of Gibraltar 
Formerly Professor of Ecclesiastical History, King's College, London. 



Author of j Antichrist. 



f Arts and Crafts; 
I Art Teaching. 



istical History, Kings College, London. Lecturer, J « , .. . „ ... ,. 
St John's and Selwyn Colleges, Cambridge. Author of The Beginnings of English 1 Apostolical Constitutions. 
Christianity. |_ 

Major William Egerton Edwards. f 

Captain and Brevet Major, Royal Field Artillery. Inspector, Inspection Staff, Wool- J Armour Plates 
wich Arsenal. Lecturer on Armour and Explosives at the Royal Naval War 1 ridw». 

College, Greenwich, 1904-1909. I 

William Feilden Craies, M.A. f 

Barrister-at-law, Inner Temple. Lecturer on Criminal Law, King's College, London. J Anneal 
Editor of Archbold's Criminal Pleading (23rd edition). Author of Craies on Statute 1 "PP eal * 
Law. L 



William Fleetwood Sheppard, M.A., D.Sc. 

Senior Examiner under the Board of Education. Senior Wrangler, 18 
Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. 

William Henry Bennett, M.A., D.D., D.Litt. (Cantab.). f 

Professor of Old Testament Exegesis in New and Hackney Colleges, London. J 
Formerly Fellow of St John's College, Cambridge. Lecturer in Hebrew at Firth j 
College, Sheffield. Author of Religion of the Post-Exilic Prophets; &c. I 

William Henry Dines, F.R.S. -j 

William Justice Ford, M.A. (d. 1904). 

Formerly Scholar of St John's College, Cambridge. Head Master of Leamington 
College. 

Sir William Markby, K.C.I.E., D.C.L. J 

See the biographical article: Markby, Sir W. \ 

William Michael Rossetti. f 

See the biographical article: Rossetti, Dante Gabriel. 1 

Hon. William Pember Reeves. 

Director, London School of Economics. Agent-General and High Commissioner 
for New Zealand, 1896-1909. Author of A History of New Zealand. 

W. R. Lethaby, F.S.A. f 

Principal of the Central School of Arts and Crafts under the London County -\ 
Council. Author of A rchitecture, Mysticism and Myth ; &c. L 

William Wallace, M.A. f 

See the biographical article: Wallace, William (d. 1897). \ 

William Warde Fowler, M.A. f 

Fellow of Lincoln College, Oxford. Sub-Rector, 1881-1904. Gifford Lecturer, j 
Edinburgh University, 1908. Author of The City-State of the Greeks and Romans; j 
The Roman Festivals of the Republican Period ; &c. I 

William Walker Rockwell, Lie. Theol. 

Assistant Professor of Church History, Union Theological Seminary, New York. 



Formerly -j Arithmetic. 



Angel; Atonement. 

Anemometer. 

Archery. 

Austin, John. 

Angelico, Fra. 

Atkinson, Sir Henry Albert. 

Architecture: Romanesque 
and Gothic in France. 

Arabian Philosophy {in part). 



Anna Perenna; 
Argei. 

Antioeh, Synods of; 
Aries, Synod of; 
Augsburg, Confession of. 



PRINCIPAL UNSIGNED ARTICLES 



Anglican Communion. 
Angola. 
Annuity. 
Anselm. 
Antimony. 
Apothecary. 
Arabs. 

Arbitration and Concilia- 
tion in Labour Disputes. 



Argenson: Family. 

Ariosto. 

Arizona. 

Arkansas. 

Arsenic. 

Arthur, Chester Alan. 

Art Sales. 

Arundel, Earls of. 



Arya Samaj. 

Asparagus. 

Aspern-Essling. 

Assam. 

Assembly. 

Assets. 

Assize. 

Association of Ideas. 



Asthma. 

Athletic Sports. 

Atholl, Earls and Dukes 

of. 
Atlas Mountains. 
Attainder. 
Atterbury, Francis. 
Audit and Auditor. 



Augurs. 

Augustan History. 
Aungervyle, R. 
Aurangzeb. 
Aurelian. 
Auricula. 
Auscultation. 
Austerlitz. 



ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA 



ELEVENTH EDITION 



VOLUME II 



ANDROS, SIR EDMUND (1637-1714), English colonial 
governor in America, was born in London on the 6th of December 
1637, son of Amice Andros, an adherent of Charles I., and the 
royal bailiff of the island of Guernsey. He served for a short 
time in the army of Prince Henry of Nassau, and in 1660-1662 
was gentleman in ordinary to the queen of Bohemia (Elizabeth 
Stuart, daughter of James I. of England). He then served 
against the Dutch, and in 1672 was commissioned major in what 
is said to have been the first English regiment armed with the 
bayonet. In 1674 he became, by the appointment of the duke 
of York (later James II.), governor of New York and the Jerseys, 
though his jurisdiction over the Jerseys was disputed, and until 
his recall in 1681 to meet an unfounded charge of dishonesty 
and favouritism in the collection of the revenues, he proved 
himself to be a capable administrator, whose imperious disposi- 
tion, however, rendered him somewhat unpopular among the 
colonists. During a visit to England in 1678 he was knighted. 
In 1686 he became governor, with Boston as his capital, of the 
" Dominion of New England," into which Massachusetts (in- 
cluding Maine), Plymouth, Rhode Island, Connecticut and New 
Hampshire were consolidated, and in 1688 his jurisdiction was 
extended over New York and the Jerseys. But his vexatious 
interference with colonial rights and customs aroused the keenest 
resentment, and on the 18th of April 1689, soon after news of 
the arrival of William, prince of Orange, in England reached 
Boston, the colonists deposed and arrested him. In New York 
his deputy, Francis Nicholson, was soon afterwards deposed by 
Jacob Leisler (q.v.) ; and the inter-colonial union was dissolved. 
Andros was sent to England for trial in 1690, but was immediately 
released without trial, and from 1692 until 1698 he was governor 
of Virginia, but was recalled through the agency of Commissary 
James Blair (q.v.), with whom he quarrelled. In 1693-1694 
he was also governor of Maryland. From 1704 to 1706 he was 
governor of Guernsey. He died in London in February 17 14 
and was buried at St Anne's, Soho. 

See The Andros Tracts (3 vols., Boston, 1 869-1 872). 

ANDROS, or Andro, an island of the Greek archipelago, the 
most northerly of the Cyclades, 6 m. S.E. of Euboea, and about 
2 m. N. of Tenos; it forms an eparchy in the modern kingdom 
of Greece. It is nearly 25 m. long, and its greatest breadth is 
10 m. Its surface is for the most part mountainous, with many 
fruitful and well-watered valleys. Andros, the capital, on the 
east coast, contains about 2000 inhabitants. The ruins of 
Palaeopolis, the ancient capital, are on the west coast; the town 



possessed a famous temple, dedicated to Bacchus. The island 
has about 18,000 inhabitants. 

The island in ancient times contained an Ionian population, 
perhaps with an admixture of Thracian blood. Though originally 
dependent on Eretria, by the 7th century B.C. it had become 
sufficiently prosperous to send out several colonies to Chalcidice 
(Acanthus, Stageirus, Argilus, Sane). In 480 it supplied ships 
to Xerxes and was subsequently harried by the Greek fleet. 
Though enrolled in the Delian League it remained disaffected 
towards Athens, and in 447 had to be coerced by the settlement of 
a cleruchy. In 411 Andros proclaimed its freedom and in 408 
withstood an Athenian attack. As a member of the second 
Delian League it was again controlled by a garrison and an 
archon. In the Hellenistic period Andros was contended for 
as a frontier-post by the two naval powers of the Aegean Sea, 
Macedonia and Egypt. In S33 it received a Macedonian garrison 
from Antipater; in 308 it was freed by Ptolemy I. In the 
Chremonidean War (266-263) it passed again to Macedonia after 
a battle fought off its shores. In 200 it was captured by a com- 
bined Roman, Pergamene and Rhodian fleet, and remained a 
possession of Pergamum until the dissolution of that kingdom 
in 133 B.C. Before falling under Turkish rule, Andros was from 
a.d. 1207 till 1566 governed by the families Zeno and Sommariva 
under Venetian protection. 

ANDROTION (c. 350 B.C.), Greek orator, and one of the leading 
politicians of his time, was a pupil of Isocrates and a con- 
temporary of Demosthenes. He is known to us chiefly from the 
speech of Demosthenes, in which he was accused of illegality 
in proposing the usual honour of a crown to the Council of Five 
Hundred at the expiration of its term of office. Androtion filled 
several important posts, and during the Social War was appointed 
extraordinary commissioner to recover certain arrears of taxes. 
Both Demosthenes and Aristotle (Rhet. iii. 4) speak favourably 
of his powers as an orator. He is said to have gone into exile 
at Megara, and to have composed an Atthis, or annalistic account 
of Attica from the earliest times to his own days (Pausanias 
vi. 7; x. 8). It is disputed whether the annalist and orator are 
identical, but an Androtion who wrote on agriculture is certainly 
a different person. Professor Gaetano de Sanctis (in L'Attide 
di Androzione e un papiro di Oxyrhynchos, Turin, 1908) attributes 
to Androtion, the atthidographer, a 4th-century historical frag- 
ment, discovered by B. P. Grenfell and A. S. Hunt (Oxyrhynckus 
Papyri, vol. v.). Strong arguments against this view are set 
forth by E. M. Walker in the Classical Review, Mayi9o8i 

II 



ANDUJAR— ANEMOMETER 



ANDUJAR (the anc. Slilurgi), a town of southern Spain, 
in the province of Jaen; on the right bank of the river Guadal- 
quivir and the Madrid-Cordova railway. Pop. (1900) 16,302. 
Andujar is widely known for its porous earthenware jars, called 
alcarrazas, which keep water cool in the hottest weather, and are 
manufactured from a whitish clay found in the neighbourhood. 

ANECDOTE (from av-, privative, and e/cSiSw/ii, to give out 
or publish), a word originally meaning something not published. 
It has now two distinct significations. The primary one is 
something not published, in which sense it has been used to denote 
either secret histories — Procopius, e.g., gives this as one of the 
titles of his secret history of Justinian's court — or portions of 
ancient writers which have remained long in manuscript and 
are edited for the first time. Of such anecdola there are many 
collections; the earliest was probably L. A. Muratori's, in 1709. 
In the more general and popular acceptation of the word, 
however, anecdotes are short accounts of detached interesting 
particulars. Of such anecdotes the collections are almost infinite; 
the best in many respects is that compiled by T. Byerley (d. 1826) 
and J. Clinton Robertson (d. 1852), known as the Percy Anecdotes 
(1820-1823). 

ANEL, DOMINIQUE (1 679-1 730), French surgeon, was born at 
Toulouse about 1679. After studying at Montpellier and Paris, 
he served as surgeon-major in the French army in Alsace; then 
after two years at Vienna he went to Italy and served in the 
Austrian army. In 17 10 he was teaching surgery in Rouen, 
whence he went to Genoa, and in 17 16 he was practising in 
Paris. He died about 1730. He was celebrated for his successful 
surgical treatment of fistula lacrymalis, and while at Genoa 
invented for use in connexion with the operation the fine-pointed 
syringe still known by his name. 

ANEMOMETER (from Gr. dvefios, wind, and n'trpov, a 
measure), an instrument for measuring either the velocity or the 
pressure of the wind. Anemometers may be divided into two 
classes, (1) those- that measure the velocity, (2) those that 
measure the pressure of the wind, but inasmuch as there is a close 
connexion between the pressure and the velocity, a suitable 
anemometer of either class will give information about both these 
quantities. 

Velocity anemometers may again be subdivided into two 
classes, (1) those which do not require a wind vane or weather- 
cock, (2) those which do. The Robinson anemometer, invented 
(1846) by Dr Thomas Romney Robinson, of Armagh Observatory, 
is the best-known and most generally used instrument, and belongs 
to the first of these. It consists of four hemispherical cups, 
mounted one on each end of a pair of horizontal arms, which lie 
at right angles to each other and form a cross. A vertical axis 
round which the cups turn passes through the centre of the cross; 
a train of wheel-work counts up the number of turns which this 
axis makes, and from the number of turns made in any given time 
the velocity of the wind during that time is calculated. The cups 
are placed symmetrically on the end of the arms, and it is easy to 
see that the wind always has the hollow of one cup presented to 
it ; the back of the cup on the opposite end of the cross also faces 
the wind, but the pressure on it is naturally less, and hence a 
continual rotation is produced; each cup in turn as it comes 
round providing the necessary force. The two great merits of 
this anemometer are its simplicity and the absence of a w ind vane ; 
on the other hand it is not well adapted to leaving a record on 
paper of the actual velocity at any definite instant, and hence it 
leaves a short but violent gust unrecorded. Unfortunately, when 
Dr Robinson first designed his anemometer, he stated that no 
matter what the size'of the cups or the length of the arms, the cups 
always moved with one-third of the velocity of the wind. This 
result was apparently confirmed by some independent experi- 
ments, but it is very far from the truth, for it is now known that 
the actual ratio, or factor as it is commonly called, of the velocity 
of the wind to that of the cups depends very largely on the 
dimensions of the cups and arms, and may have almost any value 
between two and a little over three. The result has been that 
wind velocities published in many official publications have often 
been in error by nearly 50 %. 



The other forms of velocity anemometer may be described as 
belonging to the windmill type. In the Robinson anemometer 
the axis of rotation is vertical, but with this subdivision the axis 
of rotation must be parallel to the direction of the wind and 
therefore horizontal. Furthermore, since the wind varies in 
direction and the axis has to follow its changes, a wind vane or 
some other contrivance to fulfil the saft.e purpose must be em- 
ployed. This type of instrument is very little used in England, 
but seems to be more in favour in France. In cases where the 
direction of the air motion is always the same, as in the ventilating 
shafts of mines and buildings for instance, these anemometers, 
known, however, as air meters, are employed, and give most 
satisfactory results. 

Anemometers which measure the pressure may be divided into 
the plate and tube classes, but the former term must be taken as 
including a good many miscellaneous forms. The simplest type 
of this form consists of a flat plate, which is usually square or 
circular, while a wind vane keeps this exposed normally to the 
wind, and the pressure of the wind on its face is balanced by a 
spring. The distortion of the spring determines the actual force 
which the wind is exerting on the plate, and this is either read off 
on a suitable gauge, or leaves a record in the ordinary way by 
means of a pen writing on a sheet of paper moved by clockwork. 
Instruments of this kind have been in use for a long series of years, 
and have recorded pressures up to and even exceeding 60 lb 
per sq. ft., but it is now fairly certain that these high values are 
erroneous, and due, not to the wind, but to faulty design of 
the anemometer. 

The fact is that the wind is continually varying in force, and 
while the ordinary pressure plate is admirably adapted for 
measuring the force of a steady and uniform wind, it is entirely 
unsuitable for following the rapid fluctuations of the natural wind. 
To make matters worse, the pen which records the motion of the 
plate is often connected with it by an extensive system of chains 
and levere. A violent gust strikes the plate, which is driven back 
and carried by its own momentum far past the position in which 
a steady wind of the same force would place it; by the time the 
motion has reached the pen it has been greatly exaggerated by 
the springiness of the connexion, and not only is the plate itself 
driven too far back, but also its position is wrongly recorded by 
the pen; the combined errors act the same way, and more than 
double the real maximum pressure may be indicated on the chart. 

A modification of the ordinary pressure-plate has recently been 
designed. In this arrangement a catch is provided so that the 
plate being once driven back by the wind cannot return until 
released by hand; but the catch does not prevent the plate being 
driven back farther by a gust stronger than the last one that 
moved it. Examples of these plates are erected on the west coast 
of England, where in the winter fierce gales often occur; a pres- 
sure of 30 lb per sq. ft. has not been shown by them, and instances 
exceeding 20 lb are extremely rare. 

Many other modifications have been used and suggested. 
Probably a sphere would prove most useful for a pressure 
anemometer, since owing to its symmetrical shape it would not 
require a weathercock. A small light sphere hanging from the end 
of 30 or 40 ft. of fine sewing cotton has been employed to measure 
the wind velocity passing over a kite, the tension of the cotton 
being recorded, and this plan has given satisfactory results. 

Lind's anemometer, which consists simply of a (J tube contain- 
ing liquid with one end bent into a horizontal direction to face the 
wind, is perhaps the original form from which the tube class of 
instrument has sprung. If the wind blows into the mouth of a 
tube it causes an increase of pressure inside and also of course an 
equal increase in all closed vessels with which the mouth is in air- 
tight communication. If it blows horizontally over the open end 
of a vertical tube it causes a decrease of pressure, but this fact is 
not of any practical use in anemometry, because the magnitude 
of the decrease depends on the wind striking the tube exactly 
at right angles to its axis, the most trifling departure from the true 
direction causing great variations in the magnitude. The pressure 
tube anemometer (fig. 1) utilizes the increased pressure in the 
open mouth of a straight tube facing the wind, and the decrease 



ANEMONE— ANERIO 



of pressure caused inside when the wind blows over a ring of small 
holes drilled through the metal of a vertical tube which is closed 
at the upper end. The pressure differences on which the action 
depends are very small, and special means are required to register 
them, but in the ordinary form of recording anemometer (fig. 2), 
any wind capable of turning the vane which keeps the mouth of 
the tube facing the wind is capable of registration. 

The great advantage of the tube anemometer lies in the fact 
that the exposed part can be mounted on a high pole, and requires 
no oiling or attention for years; and the registering part can be 
placed in any convenient position, no matter how far from the 
external part. Two connecting tubes are required. It might 
appear at first sight as though one connexion would serve, but the 
differences in pressure on which these instruments depend are so 
minute, that the pressure of the air in the room where the record- 
ing part is placed has to be considered. Thus if the instrument 
depends on the pressure or suction effect alone, and this pressure 
or suction is measured against the air pressure in an ordinary 
room, in which the doors and windows are carefully closed and a 
newspaper is then burnt up the chimney, an effect may be pro- 
duced equal to a wind of 10 m. an hour; and the opening of a 




I 4 

Fig. 1. 




Fig. 2. 



window in rough weather, or the opening of a door, may entirely 
alter the registration. 

The connexion between the velocity and the pressure of the 
wind is one that is not yet known with absolute certainty. Many 
text-books on engineering give the relation P= -005 v 2 when P is 
the pressure in lb per sq. ft. and v the velocity in miles per hour. 
The history of this untrue relation is curious. It was given about 
the end of the 18th century as based on some experiments, but 
with a footnote stating that little reliance could be placed on it. 
The statement without the qualifying note was copied from book 
to book, and at last received general acceptance. There is no 
doubt that under average conditions of atmospheric density, the 
.005 should be replaced by -003, for many independent authorities 
using different methods have found values very close to this 
last figure. It is probable that the wind pressure is not strictly 
proportional to the extent of the surface exposed. Pressure plates 
are generally of moderate size, from a half or quarter of a sq. ft. 
up to two or three sq. ft., are round or square, and for these sizes, 
and shapes, and of course for a flat surface, the relation P= .003 1> 2 
is fairly correct. 

In the tube anemometer also it is really the pressure that is 
measured, although the scale is usually graduated as a velocity 
scale. In cases where the density of the air is not of average value, 
as on a high mountain, or with an exceptionally low barometer 
for example, an allowance must be made. Approximately i\% 
should be added to the velocity recorded by a tube anemometer 
for each 1000 ft. that it stands above sea-level. (W. H. Di.) 



ANEMONE, or Wind-Flower (from the Gr. foe/ios, wind), a 
genus of the buttercup order (Ranunculaceae), containing about 
ninety species in the north and south temperate zones. Anemone 
ncmorosa, wood anemone, and A. Pulsatilla, Pasque-flower, 
occur in Britain; the latter is found on chalk downsand limestone 
pastures in some of the more southern and eastern counties. 
The plants are perennial herbs with an underground rootstock, 
and radical, more or less deeply cut, leaves. The elongated 
flower stem bears one or several, white, red, blue or rarely yellow, 
flowers; there is an involucre of three leaflets below each flower. 
The fruits often bear long hairy styles which aid their distribution 
by the wind. Many of the species are favourite garden plants; 
among the best known is Anemone coronaria, often called the 
poppy anemone, a tuberous-rooted plant, with parsley-like 
divided leaves, and large showy poppy-like blossoms on stalks 
of from 6 to 9 in. high; the flowers are of various colours, but the 
principal are scarlet, crimson, blue, purple and white. There are 
also double-flowered varieties, in which the stamens in the centre 
are replaced by a tuft of narrow petals. It is an old garden 
favourite, and of the double forms there are named varieties. 
They grow best in a loamy soil, enriched with well-rotted manure, 
which should be dug in below the tubers. These may be planted 
in October, and for succession in January, the autumn-planted 
ones being protected by a covering of leaves or short stable 
litter. They will flower in May and June, and when the leaves 
have ripened should be taken up into a dry room till planting 
time. They are easily raised from the seed, and a bed of the 
single varieties is a valuable addition to a flower-garden, as it 
affords, in a warm situation, an abundance of handsome and 
often brilliant spring flowers, almost as early as the snowdrop or 
crocus. The genus contains many other lively spring-blooming 
plants, of which A. hortensis and A. fulgens have less divided 
leaves and splendid rosy-purple or scarlet flowers; they require 
similar treatment. Another set is represented by A. Pulsatilla, 
the Pasque-flower, whose violet blossoms have the outer surface 
hairy; these prefer a calcareous soil. The splendid A. japonica, 
and its white variety called Honorine Joubert, the latter especially, 
are amongst the finest of autumn-blooming hardy perennials; 
they grow well in light soil, and reach 2§ to 3 ft. in height, 
blooming continually for several weeks. A group of dwarf 
species, represented by the native British A. nemorosa and 
A. apennina, are amongst the most beautiful of spring flowers 
for planting in woods and shady places. 

The genus Hepatica is now generally included in anemone as a 
subgenus. The plants are known in gardens as hepaticas, and 
are varieties of the common South European A. Hepatica; 
they are charming spring-flowering plants with usually blue 
flowers. 

ANENCLETUS, or Anacletus, second bishop of Rome. Abcut 
the 4th century he is treated in the catalogues as two persons — 
Anacletus and Cletus. According to the catalogues he occupied 
the papal chair for twelve years (c. 77-88). 

ANERIO, the name of two brothers, musical composers, very 
great Roman masters of 16th-century polyphony. Felice, the 
elder, was born about 1560, studied under G. M. Nanino and 
succeeded Palestrina in 1594 as composer to the papal chapel. 
Several masses and motets of his are printed in Proske's Musica 
Divina and other modern anthologies, and it is hardly too much 
to say that they are for the most part worthy of Palestrina 
himself. The date of his death is conjecturally given as 1630. 
His brother, Giovanni Francesco, was born about 1567, and 
seems to have died about 1620. The occasional attribution of 
some of his numerous compositions to his elder brother is a 
pardonable mistake, if we may judge by the works that have been 
reprinted. But the statement, which continues to be repeated 
in standard works of reference, that " he was one of the first of 
Italians to use the quaver and its subdivisions " is incompre- 
hensible. Quavers were common pioperty in all musical countries 
quite early in the 16th century, and' semiquavers appear in a 
madrigal of Palestrina published in 1574. The two brothers are 
probably the latest composers who handled 16th-century music 
as their mother-language; suffering neither from the temptation 



ANET— ANGEL 



to indulge even in such mild neologisms as they might have 
learnt from the elder brother's master, Nanino, nor from the 
necessity of preserving their purity of style by a mortified 
negative asceticism. They wrote pure polyphony because they 
understood it and loved it, and hence their work lives, as neither 
the progressive work of their own day nor the reactionary work 
of their imitators could live. The 12-part Stabat Mater in the 
seventh volume of Palestrina's complete works has been by some 
authorities ascribed to Felice Anerio. 

ANET, a town of northern France, in the department of 
Eure-et-Loir, situated between the rivers Eure and Vegre, 
10 m. N.E. of Dreux by rail. Pop. (1906) 1324. It possesses 
the remains of a magnificent castle, built in the middle of the 
16th century by Henry II. for Diana of Poitiers. Near it is the 
plain of Ivry, where Henry IV. defeated the armies of the League 
in 1590. 

ANEURIN, or Aneirin, the name of an early 7th-century 
British (Welsh) bard, who has been taken by Thomas Stephens 
(1821-1875), the editor and translator of Aneurin's principal epic 
poem Gododin, for a son of Gildas, the historian. Gododin is an 
account of the British defeat (603) by the Saxons at Cattraeth 
(identified by Stephens with Dawstane in Liddesdale), where 
Aneurin is said to have been taken prisoner; but the poem is 
very obscure and is differently interpreted. It was translated 
and edited by W. F. Skene in his Four Ancient Books of Wales 
(1866), and Stephens' version was published by the Cymmro- 
dorion Society in 1888. See Celt: Literature (Welsh). 

ANEURYSM, or Aneubism (from Gr. avevpur/xa, a dilata- 
tion), a cavity or sac which communicates with the interior of 
an artery and contains blood. The walls of the cavity are formed 
either of the dilated artery or of the tissues around that vessel. 
The dilatation of the artery is due to a local weakness, the result 
of disease or injury. The commonest cause is chronic inflamma- 
tion of the inner coats of the artery. The breaking of a bottle 
or glass in the hand is apt to cut through the outermost coat of 
the artery at the wrist (radial) and thus to cause a local weakening 
of the tube which is gradually followed by dilatation. Also when 
an artery is wounded and the wound in the skin and superficial 
structures heals, the blood may escape into the tissues, displacing 
them, and by its pressure causing them to condense and form the 
sac-wall. The coats of an artery, when diseased, may be torn 
by a severe strain, the blood escaping into the condensed tissues 
which thus form the aneurysmal sac. 

The division of aneurysms into two classes, true and false, is 
unsatisfactory. On the face of it, an aneurysm which is false 
is not an aneurysm, any more than a false bank-note is legal 
tender. A better classification is into spontaneous and traumatic. 
The man who has chronic inflammation of a large artery, the 
result, for instance, of gout, arduous, straining work, or kidney- 
disease, and whose artery yields under cardiac pressure, has a 
spontaneous aneurysm; the barman or window-cleaner who has 
cut his radial artery, the soldier whose brachial or femoral artery 
has been bruised by a rifle bullet or grazed by a bayonet, and the 
boy whose naked foot is pierced by a sharp nail, are apt to be 
the subjects of traumatic aneurysm. In those aneurysms which 
are a saccular bulging on one side of the artery the blood may be 
induced to coagulate, or may of itself deposit layer upon layer 
of pale clot, until the sac is obliterated. This laminar coagulation 
by constant additions gradually fills the aneurysmal cavity and 
the pulsation in the sac then ceases; contraction of the sac and 
its contents gradually takes place and the aneurysm is cured. 
But in those aneurysms which are fusiform dilatations of the 
vessel there is but slight chance of such cure, for the blood 
sweeps evenly through it without staying to deposit clot or 
laminated fibrine. 

In the treatment of aneurysm the aim is generally to lower the 
blood pressure by absolute rest and moderated diet, but a cure is 
rarely effected except by operation, which, fortunately, is now 
resorted to more promptly and securely than was previously the 
case. Without trying the speculative and dangerous method of 
treatment by compression, or the application of an indiarubber 
bandage, the surgeon now without loss of time cuts down upon the 



artery, and applies an aseptic ligature close above the dilatation. 
Experience has shown that this method possesses great advantages, 
and that it has none of the disadvantages which were formerly 
supposed to attend it. Saccular dilatations of arteries which are 
the result of cuts or other injuries are treated by tying the vessel 
above and below, and by dissecting out the aneurysm. Pop- 
liteal, carotid and other aneurysms, which are not of traumatic 
origin, are sometimes dealt with on this plan, which is the old 
" Method of Antyllus " with modern aseptic conditions. Speak- 
ing generally, if an aneurysm can be dealt with surgically the 
sooner that the artery is tied the better. Less heroic measures 
are too apt to prove painful, dangerous, ineffectual and dis- 
appointing. For aneurysm in the chest or abdomen (which 
cannot be dealt with by operation) the treatment may be tried 
of injecting a pure solution of gelatine into the loose tissues of 
the armpit, so that the gelatine may find its way into the blood 
stream and increase the chance of curative coagulation in the 
distant aneurysmal sac. (E. O.*) 

ANFRACTUOSITY (from Lat. anfracluosus, winding), twisting 
and turning, circuitousness; a word usually employed in the 
plural to denote winding channels such as occur in the depths 
of the sea, mountains, or the fissures {sulci) separating the 
convolutions of the brain, or, by analogy, in the mind. 

ANGARIA (from 0770730$, the Greek form of a Babylonian 
word adopted in Persian for " mounted courier "), a sort of 
postal system adopted by the Roman imperial government 
from the ancient Persians, among whom, according to Xenophon 
(Cyrop. viii. 6; cf. Herodotus viii. 98) it was established by 
Cyrus the Great. Couriers on horseback were posted at certain 
stages along the chief roads of the empire, for the transmission 
of royal despatches by night and day in all weathers. In the 
Roman system the supply of horses and their maintenance was 
a compulsory duty from which the emperor alone could grant 
exemption. The word, which in the 4th century was used for 
the heavy transport vehicles of the cursus publicus, and also for 
the animals by which they were drawn, came to mean generally 
" compulsory service." So angaria, angariare, in medieval 
Latin, and the rare English derivatives " angariate," " angaria- 
tion/' came to mean any service which was forcibly or unjustly 
demanded, and oppression in general. 

ANGARY (Lat. jus angariae; Fr. droit d'angarie; Ger. 
Angarie; from the Gr. ayyapela, the office of an ayyapos, courier 
or messenger), the name given to the right of a belligerent to 
seize and apply for the purposes of war (or to prevent the enemy 
from doing so) any kind of property on, belligerent territory, 
including that which may belong to subjects or citizens of a 
neutral state. Art. 53 of the Regulations respecting the Laws 
and Customs of War on Land, annexed to the Hague Convention 
of 1899 on the same subject, provides that railway plant, land 
telegraphs, telephones, steamers and other ships (other than 
such as are governed by maritime law), though belonging to 
companies or private persons, may be used for military opera- 
tions, but " must be restored at the conclusion of peace and 
indemnities paid for them." And Art. 54 adds that " the 
plant of railways coming from neutral states, whether the 
property of those states or of companies or private persons, 
shall be sent back to them as soon as possible." These articles 
seem to sanction the right of angary against neutral property, 
while limiting it as against both belligerent and neutral property. 
It may be considered, however, that the right to use implies as 
wide a range of contingencies as the " necessity of war " can be 
made to cover. (T. Ba.) 

ANGEL, a general term denoting a subordinate superhuman 
being in monotheistic religions, e.g. Islam, Judaism, Christianity, 
and in allied religions, such as Zoroastrianism. In polytheism 
the grades of superhuman beings are continuous; but in mono- 
theism there is a sharp distinction of kind, as well as degree, 
between God on the one hand, and all other superhuman beings 
on the other; the latter are the " angels." 

1 " Angel " is a transcription of the Gr. 0,776X05, messenger. 
O.yye\os in the New Testament, and the corresponding mal'akh 
in the Old Testament, sometimes mean " messenger," and 



ANGEL 



sometimes " angel," and this double sense is duly represented 
in the English Versions. " Angel " is also used in the English 
Version for "v?* 'Abbir, Ps. lxxviii. 25. (lit. "mighty"), for 
d'.jjk 'Elohim, Ps. viii. 5, and for the obscure Jkb* shin' an, in 
Ps. lxviii. 17. 

In the later development of the religion of Israel, 'Elohim 
is almost entirely reserved for the one true God; but in 
earlier times 'Elohim (gods), bne 'Elohim, bne Elim (sons of 
gods, i.e. members of the class of divine beings) were general 
terms for superhuman beings. Hence they came to be used 
collectively of superhuman beings, distinct from Yahweh, and 
therefore inferior, and ultimately subordinate. 1 So, too, the 
angels are styled "holy ones," 2 and "watchers," 3 and are 
spoken, of as the " host of heaven" 4 or of " Yahweh." 6 The 
'' hosts," n'wyt Sebdoth in the title Yahweh Sebaoth, Lord of 
Hosts, were probably at one time identified with the angels. 6 The 
New Testament often speaks of "spirits," irvevfiara. 7 In the 
earlier periods of the religion of Israel, the doctrine of monotheism 
had not been formally stated, so that the idea of " angel " in 
the modern sense does not occur, but we find the Mal'akh 
Yahweh, Angel of the Lord, or Mal'akh Elohim, Angel of God. 
The Mal'akh Yahweh is an appearance or manifestation of 
Yahweh in the form of a man, and the term Mal'akh Yahweh is 
used interchangeably with Yahweh (cf. Exod. iii. 2, with 
iii. 4; xiii. 21 with xiv. 19). Those who see the Mai' akh 
Yahweh say they have seen God. 8 The Mal'akh Yahweh (or 
Elohim) appears to Abraham, Hagar, Moses, Gideon, &c, and 
leads the Israelites in the Pillar of Cloud. 9 The phrase Mal'akh 
Yahweh may have been originally a courtly circumlocution for 
the Divine King; but it readily became a means of avoiding 
crude anthropomorphism, and later on, when the angels were 
classified, the Mal'akh Yahweh came to mean an angel of 
distinguished rank. 10 The identificaton of the Mal'akh Yahweh 
with the Logos, or Second Person of the Trinity, is not indicated 
by the references in the Old Testament; but the idea of a Being 
partly identified with God, and yet in some sense distinct from 
Him, illustrates the tendency of religious thought to distinguish 
persons within the unity of the Godhead, and foreshadows the 
doctrine of the Trinity, at any rate in some slight degree. 

In the earlier literature the Mal'akh Yahweh or Elohim is 
almost the only mal'akh (" angel ") mentioned. There are, 
however, a few passages which speak of subordinate superhuman 
beings other than the Mal'akh Yahweh or Elohim. There are 
the cherubim who guard Eden. In Gen. xviii., xix. (J) the 
appearance of Yahweh to Abraham and Lot is connected with 
three, afterwards two, men or messengers; but possibly in the 
original form of the story Yahweh appeared alone. 11 At Bethel, 
Jacob sees the angels of God on the ladder, 12 and later on they 
appear to him at Mahanaim. 13 In all these cases the angels, like 
the Mal'akh Yahweh, are connected with or represent a theo- 
phany. Similarly the " man " who wrestles with Jacob at Peniel 
is identified with God. 14 In Isaiah vi. the seraphim, superhuman 
beings with six wings, appear as the attendants of Yahweh. 
Thus the pre-exilic literature, as we now have it, has little to say 
about angels or about superhuman beings other than Yahweh 
and manifestations of Yahweh; the pre-exilic prophets hardly 
mention angels. 15 Nevertheless we may well suppose that the 
popular religion of ancient Israel had much to say of super- 
human beings other than Yahweh, but that the inspired writers 
have mostly suppressed references to them as unedifying. 
Moreover such beings were not strictly angels. 

I E.g. Gen. vi. 2; Job i. 6; Ps. viii. 5, xxix. 1. 2 Zech. xiv. 5. 
3 Dan. iv. 13. 4 Deut. xvii. 3 (?). 5 Josh. v. 14 (?). 

6 The identification of the " hosts " with the stars comes to the 
same thing; the stars were thought of as closely connected with 
angels. It is probable that the " hosts " were also identified with 
the armies of Israel. 

7 Rev. i. 4. 8 Gen. xxxii. 30; Judges xiii. 22. 
9 Exod. iii. 2, xiv. 19. M Zech. i. 11 f. 

II Cf. xviii. 1 with xviii. 2, and note change of number in xix. 17. 
12 Gen. xxviii. 12, E. 13 Gen. xxxii. 1, E. u Gen. xxxii. 24, 30, J. 
15 " An angel " of I Kings xiii. 18 might be the Mal'akh Yahweh, 

as in xix. 5, cf. 7, or the passage, at any rate in its present form, may 
be exilic or post-exilic. 



The doctrine of monotheism was formally expressed in the 
period immediately before and during the Exile, in Deuteronomy 16 
and Isaiah 17 ; and at the same time we find angels prominent in 
Ezekiel who, as a prophet of the Exile, may have been influenced 
by the hierarchy of supernatural beings in the Babylonian 
religion, and perhaps even by the angelology of Zoroastrianism. 18 
Ezekiel gives elaborate discriptions of cherubim 19 ; and in one 
of his visions he sees seven angels execute the judgment of God 
upon Jerusalem. 20 As in Genesis they are styled " men," mal'akh 
for " angel " does not occur in Ezekiel. Somewhat later, in the 
visions of Zechariah, angels play a great part; they are some- 
times spoken of as " men," sometimes as mal'akh, and the 
Mal'akh Yahweh seems to hold a certain primacy among them. 21 
Satan also appears to prosecute (so to speak) the High Priest 
before the divine tribunal. 22 Similarly in Job the bne Elohim, 
sons of God, appear as attendants of God, and amongst them 
Satan, still in his r61e of public prosecutor, the defendant being 
Job. 23 Occasional references to " angels " occur in the Psalter 24 ; 
they appear as ministers of God. 

In Ps. lxxviii. 49 the " evil angels " of A. V. conveys a false 
impression; it should be "angels of evil," as R.V., i.e. angels 
who inflict chastisement as ministers of God. 

The seven angels of Ezekiel may be compared with the seven 
eyes of Yahweh in Zech. iii. 9, iv. 10. The latter have- been 
connected by Ewald and others with the later doctrine of seven 
chief angels 25 , parallel to and influenced by the Ameshaspentas 
(Amesha Spenta), or seven great spirits of the Persian mythology, 
but the connexion is doubtful. 

In the Priestly Code, c. 400 B.C., there is no reference to angels 
apart from the possible suggestion in the ambiguous plural 
in Genesis i. 26. 

During the Persian and Greek periods the doctrine of angels 
underwent a great development, partly, at any rate, under 
foreign influences. In Daniel, c. 160 B.C., angels, usually 
spoken of as " men " or " princes," appear as guardians or 
champions of the nations; grades are implied, there are " princes " 
and " chief " or " great princes "; and the names of some angels 
are known, Gabriel, Michael; the latter is pre-eminent 26 , he is 
the guardian of Judah. Again in Tobit a leading part is played 
by Raphael, " one of the seven holy angels." 27 

In Tobit, too, we find the idea of the demon or evil angel. 
In the canonical Old Testament angels may inflict suffering 
as ministers of God, and Satan may act as accuser or tempter; 
but they appear as subordinate to God, fulfilling His will; and 
not as morally evil. The statement 28 that God " chargeth His 
angels with folly " applies to all angels. In Daniel the princes 
or guardian angels of the heathen nations oppose Michael the 
guardian angel of Judah. But in Tobit we find Asmodaeus 
the evil demon, to irovrjpdv dai/ioviov, who strangles Sarah's 
husbands, and also a general reference to " a devil or evil 
spirit," irPevfia.' 19 The Fall of the Angels is not properly a 
scriptural doctrine, though it is based on Gen. vi. 2, as inter- 
preted by the Book of Enoch. It is true that the bne Elohim 
of that chapter are subordinate superhuman beings (cf. above), 
but they belong to a different order of thought from the angels 
of Judaism and of Christian doctrine; and the passage in no 
way suggests that the bne Elohim suffered any loss of status 
through their act. 

The guardian angels of the nations in Daniel probably represehx 
the gods of the heathen, and we have there the first step of the 
process by which these gods became evil angels, an idea expanded 
by Milton in Paradise Lost. The development of i.he doctrine 
of an organized hierarchy of angels belongs to the Jewish litera- 
ture of the period 200 B.C. to a.d. 100. In Jewish apocalypses 
especially, the imagination ran riot on the rank, classes and names 
of angels; and such works as the various books of Enoch and 

16 Deut. vi. 4. 5. 17 Isaiah xliii. 10 &c. 

18 It is not however certain that these doctrines of Zoroastrianism 
were developed at so early a date. 

19 Ezek. i. x. 20 Ezek. ix. 21 Zech. i. 11 f. 22 Zech. iii. 1. 
23 Job i., ii. Cf. 1 Chron. xxi. I. 24 Pss. xci. 11, ciii. 20 &c. 

25 Tobit xii. 15; Rev. viii. 2. 26 Dan. viii. 16, x. 13, 20,21. 

27 Tob. xii. 15. 2S Job iv. 18. m Tobit iii. 8, 17, vi. 7. 



ANGEL— ANGELICO 



the Ascension of Isaiah supply much information on this 
subject. 

In the New Testament angels appear frequently as the 
ministers of God and the agents of revelation 1 ; and Our Lord 
speaks of angels as fulfilling such functions 2 , implying in one saying 
that they neither marry nor are given in marriage. 3 Naturally 
angels are most prominent in the Apocalypse. The New Testa- 
ment takes little interest in the idea of the angelic hierarchy, 
but there are traces of the doctrine. The distinction of good 
and bad angels is recognized; we have names, Gabriel 4 , and 
the evil angels Abaddon or Apollyon 6 , Beelzebub 6 , and Satan 7 ; 
ranks are implied, archangels 8 , principalities and powers 9 , 
thrones and dominions 10 . Angels occur in groups of four or 
seven 11 . In Rev. i.-iii. we meet with the "Angels " of the Seven 
Churches of Asia Minor. These are probably guardian angels, 
standing to the churches in the same relation that the " princes " 
in Daniel stand to the nations; practically the " angels " are 
personifications of the churches. A less likely view is that the 
" angels " are the human representatives of the churches, the 
bishops or chief presbyters. There seems, however, no parallel 
to such a use of " angel," and it is doubtful whether the mon- 
archical government of churches was fully developed when 
the Apocalypse was written. 

Later Jewish and Christian speculation followed on the lines 
of the angelology of the earlier apocalypses; and angels play 
an important part in Gnostic systems and in the Jewish Mid- 
rashim and the Kabbala. Religious thought about the angels 
during the middle ages was much influenced by the theory of the 
angelic hierarchy set forth in the De Hierarchia Celesti, written 
in the 5th century in the name of Dionysius the Areopagite and 
passing for his. The creeds and confessions do not formulate 
any authoritative doctrine of angels; and modern rationalism 
has tended to deny the existence of such beings, or to regard 
the subject as one on which we can have no certain knowledge. 
The principle of continuity, however, seems to require the 
existence of beings intermediate between man and God. 

The Old Testament says nothing about the origin of angels; 
but the Book of Jubilees and the Slavonic Enoch describe their 
creation; and, according to Col. i. 16, the angels were created 
in, unto and through Christ. 

Nor does the Bible give any formal account of the nature 
of angels. It is doubtful how far Ezekiel's account of the 
cherubim and Isaiah's account of the seraphim are to be taken 
as descriptions of actual beings; they are probably figurative, 
or else subjective visions. Angels are constantly spoken of as 
" men," and, including even the Angel of Yahweh, are spoken 
of as discharging the various functions of human life; they eat 
and drink 12 , walk 13 and speak 14 . Putting aside the cherubim 
and seraphim, they are not spoken of as having wings. On the 
other hand they appear and vanish 15 , exercise miraculous powers 16 , 
and fly 17 . Seeing that the anthropomorphic language used of 
the angels is similar to that used of God, the Scriptures would 
hardly seem to require a literal interpretation in either case. 
A special association is found, both in the Bible and elsewhere, 
between the angels and the heavenly bodies 18 , and the elements 
or elemental forces, fire, water, &c 19 . The angels are infinitely 
numerous 20 . 

The function of the angels is that of the supernatural servants 
of God, His agents and representatives; the Angel of Yahweh, 
as we have seen, is a manifestation of God. In old times, the 
bne Elohim and the seraphim are His court, and the angels are 
alike the court and the army of God; the cherubim are his 
throne-bearers. In his dealings with men, the angels, as their 

1 E.g. Matt. i. 20 (to Joseph), iv. n (to Jesus), Luke i. 26 (to Mary), 
Acts xii. 7 (to Peter). 

2 E.g. Mark viii. 38, xiii. 27. 3 Mark xii. 25. 4 Luke i. 19. 
5 Rev. ix. 11. 6 Mark iii. 22. 7 Mark i. 13. 

8 Michael, Jude 9. 9 Rom. viii. 38; Co!, ii. 10. 

10 Col. i. 16. » Rev. vii. I. 12 Gen. xviii. 8. 

13 Gen. xix. 16. 14 Zech. iv. I. u Judgss vi. 12, 21. 

16 Rev. vii. I. viii. 17 Rev. viii. 13, xiv. 6. 

18 Job xxxviii. 7; Asc. of Isaiah, iv. 18; Slav. Enoch, iv. 1. 

19 Rev. xiv. 18, xvi. 5; possibly Gal. iv. 3; Col. ii. 8, 20. 

20 Ps. lxviii. 17; Dan. vii. 10. 



name implies, are specially His messengers, declaring His will 
and executing His commissions. Through them he controls 
nature and man. They are the guardian angels of the nations; 
and we also find the idea that individuals have guardian angels 21 . 
Later Jewish tradition held that the Law was given by angels 22 . 
According to the Gnostic Basilides, the world was created by 
angels. Mahommedanism has taken over and further elaborated 
the Jewish and Christian ideas as to angels. 

While the scriptural statements imply a belief in the existence 
of spiritual beings intermediate between God and men, it is 
probable that many of the details may be regarded merely as 
symbolic imagery. In Scripture the function of the angel 
overshadows his personality; the stress is on their ministry; 
they appear in order to perform specific acts. 

Bim.iOGRAPHY. — See the sections on " Angels " in the handbooks 
of O. T. Theology by Ewald, Schultz, Smend, Kayser-Marti, &c. ; 
and of N. T. Theology by Weiss, and in van Oosterzee's Dogmatics. 
Also commentaries on special passages, especially Driver and Bevan 
on Daniel, and G. A. Smith, Minor Prophets, ii. 310 ff. ; and articles 
s.v. " Angel " in Hastings' Bible Dictionary, and the Encyclopaedia 
Biblica. (W. H. Be.) 

ANGEL, a gold coin, first used in France (angelot, ange) in 1340, 
and introduced into England by Edward IV. in 1465 as a new 
issue of the "noble," and so at first called the " angel-noble." 
It varied in value between that period and the time of Charles I. 
(when it was last coined) from 6s. 8d. to 10s. The name was 
derived from the representation it bore of St Michael and the 
dragon. The angel was the coin given to those who came to be 
touched for the disease known as king's evil; after it was no 
longer coined, medals, called touch-pieces, with the same device, 
were given instead. 

ANGELICA, a genus of plants of the natural order Umbelliferae, 
represented in Britain by one species, A . sylvestris, a tall perennial 
herb with large bipinnate leaves and large compound umbels of 
white or purple flowers. The name Angelica is popularly given 
to a plant of an allied genus, Archangelica officinalis, the tender 
shoots of which are used in making certain kinds of aromatic 
sweetmeats. Angelica balsam is obtained by extracting the roots 
with alcohol, evaporating and extracting the residue with ether. 
It is of a dark brown colour and contains angelica oil, angelica 
wax and angelicin, Ci 8 H 30 O. The essential oil of the roots of 
Angelica archangelica contains /3-terebangelene, CioHic, and other 
terpenes; the oil of the seeds also contains /J-terebangelene, 
together with methylethylacetic acid and hydroxymyristic acid. 

The angelica tree is a member of the order Avaliaceae, a species 
of Aralia {A. spinosa), a native of North America; it grows 
8 to 12 ft. high, has a simple prickle-bearing stem forming an 
umbrella-like head, and much divided leaves. 

ANGELICO, FRA (1387-1455), Italian painter. II Beato Fra 
Giovanni Angelico da Fiesole is the name given to a far-famed 
painter-friar of the Florentine state in the 15th century, the 
representative, beyond all other men, of pietistic painting. He 
is often, but not accurately, termed simply " Fiesole," which is 
merely the name of the town where he first took the vows; more 
often Fra Angelico. If we turn his compound designation into 
English, it runs thus — " the Beatified Friar John the Angelic 
of Fiesole." In his lifetime he was known no doubt simply as 
Fra Giovanni or Friar John; "The Angelic" is a laudatory 
term which was assigned to him at an early date, — we find it in 
use within thirty years after his death; and, at some period 
which is not defined in our authorities, he was beatified by due 
ecclesiastical process. His baptismal name was Guido, Giovanni 
being only his name in religion. He was born at Vicchio, in the 
Tuscan province of Mugello, of unknown but seemingly well-to-do 
parentage, in 1387 (not 1390 as sometimes stated); in 1407 he 
became a novice in the convent of S. Domenico at Fiesole, and 
in 1408 he took the vows and entered the Dominican order. 
Whether he had previously been a painter by profession is not 
certain, but may be pronounced probable. The painter named 
Lorenzo Monaco may have contributed to his art-training, and 
the influence of the Sienese school is discernible in his work. 

21 Matt, xviii. 10; Acts xii. 15. 
22 Gal. iii. 19; Heb. ii. 2; LXX. of Deut. xxxiii. 2. 



ANGELICO 



According to Vasari, the first paintings of this artist were in the 
Certosa of Florence; none such exist there now. His earliest 
extant performances, in considerable number, are at Cortona, 
whither he was sent during his novitiate, and here apparently he 
spent all the opening years of his monastic life. His first works 
executed in fresco were probably those, now destroyed, which he 
painted in the convent of S. Domenico in this city; as a fresco- 
painter, he may have worked under, or as a follower of, Gherardo 
Stamina. From 1418 to 1436 he was back at Fiesole; in 1436 
he was transferred to the Dominican convent of S. Marco in 
Florence, and in 1438 undertook to paint the altarpiece for the 
choir, followed by many other works; he may have studied 
about this time the renowned frescoes in the Brancacci chapel in 
the Florentine church of the Carmine and also the paintings of 
Orcagna. In or about 1445 he was invited by the pope to Rome. 
The pope who reigned from 143 1 to 1447 was Eugenius IV., and 
he it was who in 1445 appointed another Dominican friar, a 
colleague of Angelico, to be archbishop of Florence. If the story 
(first told by Vasari) is true — that this appointment was made at 
the suggestion of Angelico only after the archbishopric had been 
offered to himself, and by him declined on the ground of his 
inaptitude for so elevated and responsible a station — Eugenius, 
and not (as stated by Vasari) his successor Nicholas V., must 
have been the pope who sent the invitation and made the offer to 
Fra Giovanni, for Nicholas only succeeded in 1447. The whole 
statement lacks authentication, though in itself credible enough. 
Certain it is that Angelico was staying in Rome in the first half 
of 1447; and he painted in the Vatican the Cappella del Sacra- 
mento, which was afterwards demolished by Paul III. In June 
1447 he proceeded to Orvieto, to paint in the Cappella Nuova 
of the cathedral, with the co-operation of his pupil Benozzo 
Gozzoli. He afterwards returned to Rome to paint the chapel 
of Nicholas V. In this capital he died in 1455, and he lies 
buried in the church of the Minerva. 

According to all the accounts which have reached us, few men 
on whom the distinction of beatification has been conferred could 
have deserved it more nobly than Fra Giovanni. He led a holy 
and self-denying life, shunning all advancement, and was a 
brother to the poor; no man ever saw him angered. He painted 
with unceasing diligence, treating none but sacred subjects; he 
never retouched or altered his work, probably with a religious 
feeling that such as divine providence allowed the thing to 
come, such it should remain He was wont to say that he who 
illustrates the acts of Christ should be with Christ. It is averred 
that he never handled a brush without fervent prayer and he 
wept when he painted a Crucifixion. The Last Judgment and 
the Annunciation were two of the subjects he most frequently 
treated. 

Bearing in mind the details already given as to the dates of Fra 
Giovanni's sojournings in various localities, the reader will be able 
to trace approximately the sequence of the works which we now 
proceed to name as among his most important productions. In 
Florence, in the convent of S. Marco (now converted into a national 
museum), a series of frescoes, beginning towards 1443; in the 
first cloister is the Crucifixion with St Dominic kneeling; and 
the same treatment recurs on a wall near the dormitory; in the 
chapterhouse is a third Crucifixion, with the Virgin swooning, a 
composition of twenty life-sized figures — the red background, 
which has a strange and harsh effect, is the misdoing of some 
restorer; an '' Annunciation," the figures of about three-fourths 
of life-size, in a dormitory; in the adjoining passage, the " Virgin 
enthroned," with four saints; on the wall of a cell, the " Corona- 
tion of the Virgin," with Saints Paul, Thomas Aquinas, Benedict, 
Dominic, Francis and Peter Martyr; two Dominicans welcom- 
ing Jesus, habited as a pilgrim; an " Adoration of the Magi "; 
the" Marysat the Sepulchre." All these works are later than the 
altarpiece which Angelico painted (as before mentioned) for the 
choir connected with this convent, and which is now in the 
academy of Florence; it represents the Virgin with Saints Cosmas 
and Damian (the patrons of the Medici family), Dominic, Peter, 
Francis, Mark, John Evangelist and Stephen; the pediment 
illustrated the lives of Cosmas and Damian, but it has long been 



severed from the main subject. In the Uffizi gallery, an altarpiece, 
the Virgin (life-sized) enthroned, with the Infant and twelve 
angels. In S. Domenico, Fiesole, a few frescoes, less fine than 
those in S. Marco; also an altarpiece in tempera of the Virgin and 
Child between Saints Peter, Thomas Aquinas, Dominic and 
Peter Martyr, now much destroyed. The subject which originally 
formed the predella of this picture has, since i860, been in the 
National Gallery, London, and worthily represents there the hand 
of the saintly painter. The subject is a Glory, Christ with the 
banner of the Resurrection, and a multitude of saints, including, 
at the extremities, the saints or beati of the Dominican order; 
here are no fewer than 266 figures or portions of figures, many of 
them having names inscribed. This predella was highly lauded 
by Vasari; still more highly another picture which used to form 
an altarpiece in Fiesole, and which now obtains world-wide 
celebrity in the Louvre — the " Coronation of the Virgin," with 
eight predella subjects of the miracles of St. Dominic. For the 
church of Santa Trinita, Florence, Angelico executed a " Depo- 
sition from the Cross," and for the church of the Angeli, a " Last 
Judgment," both now in the Florentine academy; for S. Maria 
Novella, a " Coronation of the Virgin," with a predella in three 
sections, now in the Uffizi, — this again is one of his masterpieces. 
In Orvieto cathedral he painted three triangular divisions of the 
ceiling, portraying respectively Christ in a glory of angels, sixteen 
saints and prophets, and the virgin and apostles: all these are 
now much repainted and damaged. In Rome, in the Chapel of 
Nicholas V., the acts of Saints Stephen and Lawrence; also 
various figures of saints, and on the ceiling the four evangelists. 
These works of the painter's advanced age, which have suffered 
somewhat from restorations, show vigour superior to that of his 
youth, along with a more adequate treatment of the architectural 
perspectives. Naturally, there are a number of works currently 
attributed to Angelico, but not really his; for instance, a " St 
Thomas with the Madonna's girdle," in the Lateran museum, and 
a " Virgin enthroned," in the church of S. Girolamo, Fiesole. It 
has often been said that he commenced and frequently practised 
as an illuminator; this is dubious and a presumption arises that 
illuminations executed by Giovanni's brother, Benedetto, also a 
Dominican, who died in 1448, have been ascribed to the more 
famous artist. Benedetto may perhaps have assisted Giovanni in 
the frescoes at S. Marco, but nothing of the kind is distinctly 
traceable. A folio series of engravings from these paintings was 
published in Florence, in 1852. Along with Gozzoli already 
mentioned, Zanobi Strozzi and Gentile da Fabriano are named 
as pupils of the Beato. 

We have spoken of Angelico 's art as " pietistic "; this is in 
fact its predominant character. His visages have an air of rapt 
suavity, devotional fervency and beaming esoteric consciousness, 
which is intensely attractive to some minds and realizes beyond 
rivalry a particular ideal — that of ecclesiastical saintliness and 
detachment from secular fret and turmoil. It should not be 
denied that he did not always escape the pitfalls of such a method 
of treatment, the faces becoming sleek and prim, with a smirk of 
sexless religiosity which hardly eludes the artificial or even the 
hypocritical; on other minds, therefore, and these some of the 
most masculine and resolute, he produces little genuine impres- 
sion. After allowing for this, Angelico should nevertheless be 
accepted beyond cavil as an exalted typical painter according to 
his own range of conceptions, consonant with his monastic calling, 
unsullied purity of life and exceeding devoutness. Exquisite as 
he is in his special mode of execution, he undoubtedly falls far 
short, not only of his great naturalist contemporaries such as 
Masaccio and Lippo Lippi, but even of so distant a precursor as 
Giotto, in all that pertains to bold or life-like invention of a subject 
or the realization of ordinary appearances, expressions and 
actions — the facts of nature, as distinguished from the aspirations 
or contemplations of the spirit. Technically speaking, he had 
much finish and harmony of composition and colour, without 
corresponding mastery of light and shade, and his knowledge of 
the human frame was restricted. The brilliancy and fair light 
scale of his tints is constantly remarkable, combined with a free 
use of gilding; this conduces materially to that celestial character 



8 



ANGELL— ANGERS 



which so pre-eminently distinguishes his pictured visions of the 
divine persons, the hierarchy of heaven and the glory of the 
redeemed. 

Books regarding Fra Angelico are numerous. We may mention 
those by S. Beissel, 1895; V. M. Crawford, 1900; R. L. Douglas, 
1900; I. B. Supino, 1901 ; D. Tumiati, 1897; G. Williamson, 1901. 

(VV. M. R.) 

ANGELL, GEORGE THORNDIKE (1823-1909), American 
philanthropist, was born at Southbridge, Massachusetts, on the 
5th of June 1823. He graduated at Dartmouth in 1846, studied 
law at the Harvard Law School, and in 1851 was admitted to the 
bar in Boston, where he practised for many years. In 1868 
he founded and became president of the Massachusetts Society 
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, in the same year 
establishing and becoming editor of Our Dumb Animals, a 
journal for the promotion of organized effort in securing the 
humane treatment of animals. For many years he was active 
in the organization of humane societies in England and America. 
In 1882 he initiated the movement for the establishment of 
Bands of Mercy (for the promotion of humane treatment of 
animals), of which in 1908 there were more than 72,000 in active 
existence. In 1889 he founded and became president of the 
American Humane Education Society. He became well known 
as a criminologist and also as an advocate of laws for the safe- 
guarding of the public health and against adulteration of food. 
He died at Boston on the 16th of March 1909. 

ANGEL-LIGHTS, in architecture, the outer upper lights in 
a perpendicular window, next to the springing; probably a 
corruption of the word angle-lights, as they are nearly 
triangular. 

ANGELUS, a Roman Catholic devotion in memory of the 
Annunciation. It has its name from the opening words, Angelus 
Domini nuntiavit Mariae. It consists of three texts describing 
the mystery, recited as versicle and response alternately with 
the salutation " Hail, Mary! " This devotion is recited in the 
Catholic Church three times daily, about 6 a.m., noon and 6 p.m. 
At these hours a bell known as the Angelus bell is rung. This 
is still rung in some English country churches, and has often 
been mistaken for and alleged to be a survival of the curfew-bell. 
The institution of the Angelus is by some ascribed to Pope 
Urban II., by some to John XXII. The triple recitation is 
ascribed to Louis XI. of France, who in 1472 ordered it to be 
thrice said daily. 

ANGELUS SILESIUS (1624-1677), German religious poet, 
was born in 1624 at Breslau. His family name was Johann 
Scheffler, but he is generally known by the pseudonym Angelus 
Silesius, under which he published his poems and which marks 
the country of his birth. Brought up a Lutheran, and at first 
physician to the duke of Wiirttemberg-Oels, he joined in 1652 
the Roman Catholic Church, in 1661 took orders as a priest, 
and became coadjutor to the prince bishop of Breslau. He died 
at Breslau on the 9th of July 1677. In 1657 Silesius published 
under the title Heilige Seelenlust, oder geistliche Hirtenlieder der 
in ihrenjesumverliebten Psyche (1657), a collection of 205 hymns, 
the most beautiful of which, such as, Liebe, die du mich zum 
Bilde deiner Gottheit hast gemacht and Mir nach, spricht Christus, 
unser Held, have been adopted in the German Protestant hymnal. 
More remarkable, however, is his Geistreiche Sinn- und Schluss- 
reime (1657), afterwards called Cherubinischer Wander smann 
(1674). This is a collection of " Reimspriiche " or rhymed 
distichs embodying a strange mystical pantheism drawn mainly 
from the writings of Jakob Bohme and- his followers. Silesius 
delighted specially in the subtle paradoxes of mysticism. The 
essence of God, for instance, he held to be love; God, he said, 
can love nothing inferior to himself; but he cannot be an object 
of love to himself without going out, so to speak, of himself, 
without manifesting his infinity in a finite form; in other words, 
by becoming man. God and man are therefore essentially one. 

A complete edition of Scheffler's works {Sdmtliche poetische Werke) 
was published by D. A. Rosenthal, 2 vols. (Rej,ensburg, 1862). 
Both the Cherubinischer Wandersmann and Heilige Seelenlust have 
been republished by G. Ellinger (1895 and 1901); a selection from 
the former work by O. E. Hartleben (1896). For further notices 



of Silesius' life and work, see Hoffmann von Fallersleben in Wei' 
mar'sches Jahrbuch I. (Hanover, 1854) ; A. Kahlert, Angelus Silesius 
(1853) ; C. Seltmann, Angelus Silesius und seine Mystik (1896), and 
a biog. by H. Mahn (Dresden, 1896). 

ANGERMUNDE, a town of Germany, in the Prussian province 
of Brandenburg, on Lake Miinde, 43 m. from Berlin by the Berlin- 
Stettin railway, and at the junction of lines to Prenzlau, Freien- 
walde and Schwedt. Pop. (1900) 7465. It has three Protestant 
churches, a grammar school and court of law. Its industries 
embrace iron founding and enamel working. In 1420 the elector 
Frederick I. of Brandenburg gained here a signal victory over the 
Pomeranians. 

ANGERONA, or Angeronia, an old Roman goddess, whose 
name and functions are variously explained. According to 
ancient authorities, she was a goddess who relieved men from 
pain and sorrow, or delivered the Romans and their flocks from 
angina (quinsy) ; or she was the protecting goddess of Rome 
and the keeper of the sacred name of the city, which might not 
be pronounced lest it should be revealed to her enemies; it was 
even thought that Angerona itself was' this name. Modern 
scholars regard her as a goddess akin to Ops, Acca Larentia and 
Dea Dia; or as the goddess of the new year and the returning 
sun (according to Mommsen, ab angerendo = airo tov ava<t>ipe<xdcu 
tov y/Xlov). Her festival, called Divalia or Angeronalia, 
was celebrated on the 21st of December. The priests offered 
sacrifice in the temple of Volupia, the goddess of pleasure, in 
which stood a statue of Angerona, with a finger on her mouth, 
which was bound and closed (Macrobius i. 10; Pliny, Nat. Hist. 
iii. 9; Varro, L. L. vi. 23). She was worshipped as Ancharia 
at Faesulae, where an altar belonging to her has been recently 
discovered. (See Faesulae.) 

ANGERS, a city of western France, capital of the department 
of Maine-et-Loire, 191 m. S.W. of Paris by the Western railway 
to Nantes. Pop. (1906) 73,585. It occupies rising ground on 
both banks of the Maine, which are united by three bridges. The 
surrounding district is famous for its flourishing nurseries and 
market gardens. Pierced with wide, straight streets, well 
provided with public gardens, and surrounded by ample, tree- 
lined boulevards, beyond which lie new suburbs, Angers is one 
of the pleasantest towns in France. Of its numerous medieval 
buildings the most important is the cathedral of St Maurice, 
dating in the main from the 12th and 13th centuries. Between 
the two flanking towers of the west facade, the spires of which 
are of the 16th century, rises a central tower of the same period. 
The most prominent feature of the fagade is the series of eight 
warriors carved on the base of this tower. The vaulting of the 
nave takes the form of a series of cupolas, and that of the choir 
and transept is similar. The chief treasures of the church are 
its rich stained glass (12th, 13th and 15th centuries) and valuable 
tapestry (14th to 18th centuries). The bishop's palace which 
adjoins the cathedral contains a fine synodal hall of the 12th 
century. Of the other churches of Angers, the principal are 
St Serge, an abbey-church of the 12th and 15th centuries, and 
La Trinite ( 1 2 th century) . The prefecture occupies the buildings 
of the famous abbey of St Aubin ; in its courtyard are elaborately 
sculptured arcades of the nth and 12th centuries, from which 
period dates the tower, the only survival of the splendid abbey- 
church. Ruins of the old churches of Toussaint (13th century) 
and Notre-Dame du Ronceray (nth century) are also to be seen. 
The castle of Angers, an imposing building girt with towers and 
a moat, dates from the 13th century and is now used as an 
armoury. The ancient hospital of St Jean (12th century) is 
occupied by an archaeological museum; and the Logis Barrault, 
a mansion built about 1500, contains the public library, the 
municipal museum, which has a large collection of pictures and 
sculptures, and the Musee David, containing works by the famous 
sculptor David d' Angers, who was a native of the town. One of 
his masterpieces, a bronze statue of Rene of Anjou, stands close 
by the castle. The Hotel de Pince or d' Anjou (1 523-1530) 
is the finest of the stone mansions of Angers; there are also 
many curious wooden houses of the 15th and 16th centuries. 
The palais de justice, the Catholic institute, a fine theatre, and 



ANGERSTEIN— ANGIOSPERMS 



a hospital with 1500 beds are the more remarkable of the modern 
buildings of the town. Angers is the seat of a bishopric, dating 
from the 3rd century, a prefecture, a court of appeal and a court 
of assizes. It has a tribunal of first instance, a tribunal of com- 
merce, a board of trade-arbitrators, a chamber of commerce, 
a branch of the Bank of France and several learned societies. 
Its educational institutions include ecclesiastical seminaries, a 
lycee, a preparatory school of medicine and pharmacy, a uni- 
versity with free faculties (Jacultis libres) of theology, law, letters 
and science, a higher school of agriculture, training colleges, a 
school of arts and handicrafts and a school of fine art. The 
prosperity of the town is largely due to the great slate-quarries 
of the vicinity, but the distillation of liqueurs from fruit, cable, 
rope and thread-making, and the manufacture of boots and shoes, 
umbrellas and parasols are leading industries. The weaving of 
sail-cloth and woollen and other fabrics, machine construction, 
wire-drawing, and manufacture of sparkling wines and preserved 
fruits are also carried on. The chief articles of commerce, 
besides slate and manufactured goods, are hemp, early vegetables, 
fruit, flowers and live-stock. 

Angers, capital of the Gallic tribe of the Andecavi, was under 
the Romans called Juliomagus. During the 9th century it 
became the seat of the counts of Anjou (q.v.) . It suffered severely 
from the invasions of the Northmen in 845 and the succeeding 
years, and of the English in the 12th and 15th centuries; the 
Huguenots took it in 1585, and the Vendean royalists were 
repulsed near it in 1793. Till the Revolution, Angers was the 
seat of a celebrated university founded in the 14th century. 

See L. M. Thorode, Notice de la ville a" Angers (Angers, 1897). 

ANGERSTEIN, JOHN JULIUS (1735-1822), London merchant, 
and patron of the fine arts, was born at St Petersburg and settled 
in London about 1749. His collection of paintings, consisting 
of about forty of the most exquisite specimens of the art, 
purchased by the British government, on his death, formed the 
nucleus of the National Gallery. 

ANGILBERT (d. 814), Frankish Latin poet, and minister 
of Charlemagne, was of noble Frankish parentage, and educated 
at the palace school under Alcuin. As the friend and adviser 
of the emperor's son, Pippin, he assisted for a while in the govern- 
ment of Italy, and was later sent on three important embassies 
to the pope, in 792, 794 and 796. Although he was the father 
of two children by Charlemagne's daughter, Bertha, one of them 
named Nithard, we have no authentic account of his marriage, 
and from 790 he was abbot of St Riquier, where his brilliant 
rule gained for him later the renown of a saint. Angilbert, 
however, was little like the true medieval saint; his poems reveal 
rather the culture and tastes of a man of the world, enjoying 
the closest intimacy with the imperial family. He accompanied 
Charlemagne to Rome in 800 and was one of the witnesses to 
his will in 814. Angilbert was the Homer of the emperor's 
literary circle, and was the probable author of an epic, of which 
the fragment which has been preserved describes the life at the 
palace and the meeting between Charlemagne and Leo III. It 
is a mosaic from Virgil, Ovid, Lucan and Fortunatus, composed 
in the manner of Einhard's use of Suetonius, and exhibits a true 
poetic gift. Of the shorter poems, besides the greeting to Pippin 
on his return from the campaign against the Avars (796), an 
epistle to David (Charlemagne) incidentally reveals a delightful 
picture of the poet living with his children in a house surrounded 
by pleasant gardens near the emperor's palace. The reference 
to Bertha, however, is distant and respectful, her name occurring 
merely on the list of princesses to whom he sends his salutation. 

Angilbert's poems have been published by E. Dummler in the 
Monumenta Germaniae Historica. For criticisms of this edition see 
Traube in Roederer's Schriften fur germanische Philologie (1888). 
See also A. Molinter, Les Sources de Vhistoire de France. 

ANGINA PECTORIS (Latin for " pain of the chest "), a term 
applied to a violent paroxysm of pain, arising almost invariably 
in connexion with disease of the coronary arteries, a lesion 
causing progressive degeneration of the heart muscle (see Heart: 
Disease). An attack of angina pectoris usually comes on with 
a sudden seizure of pain, felt at.first over the region of the heart, 
but radiating through the chest in various directions, and 



frequently extending down the left arm. A feeling of constriction 
and of suffocation accompanies the pain, although there is 
seldom actual difficulty in breathing. When the attack comes 
on, as it often does, in the course of some bodily exertion, the 
sufferer is at once brought to rest, and during the continuance 
of the paroxysm experiences the most intense agony. The 
countenance becomes pale, the surface of the body cold, the 
pulse feeble, and death appears to be imminent, when suddenly 
the attack subsides and complete relief is obtained. The dura- 
tion of a paroxysm rarely exceeds two or three minutes, but it 
may last for a longer period. The attacks are apt to recur on 
slight exertion, and even in aggravated cases without any such 
exciting cause. Occasionally the first seizure proves fatal; but 
more commonly death takes place as the result of repeated 
attacks. Angina pectoris is extremely rare under middle life, 
and is much more common in males than in females; It must 
always be regarded as a disorder of a very serious nature. In the 
treatment of the paroxysm, nitrite of amyl has now replaced all 
other remedies. It can be carried by the patient in the form of 
nitrite of amyl pearls, each pearl containing the dose prescribed 
by the physician. Kept in this way the drug does not lose 
strength. As soon as the pain begins the patient crushes a 
pearl in his handkerchief and holds it to his mouth and nose.. 
The relief given in this way is marvellous and usually takes place 
within a very few seconds. In the rare cases where this drug 
does not relieve, hypodermic injections of morphia are used. 
But on account of the well-known dangers of this drug, it should 
only be administered by a medical man. To prevent recurrence 
of the attacks something may be done by scrupulous attention 
to the general health, and by the avoidance of mental and 
physical strain. But the most important preventive of all is 
" bed," of which fourteen days must be enforced on the least 
premonition of anginal pain. 

Pseudo-angina. — In connexion with angina pectoris, a far 
more common condition must be mentioned that has now 
universally received the name of pseudo-angina. This includes 
the praecordial pains which very closely resemble those of true 
angina. The essential difference lies in the fact that pseudo- 
angina is independent of structural disease of the heart and 
coronary arteries. In true angina there is some condition within 
the heart which starts the stimulus sent to the nerve centres. In 
pseudo-angina the starting-point is not the heart but some 
peripheral or visceral nerve. The impulse passes thence to the 
medulla, and so reaching the sensory centres starts a feeling of 
pain that radiates into the chest or down the arm. There are 
three main varieties: — (1) the reflex, (2) the vaso-motor, (3) the 
toxic. The reflex is by far the most common, and is generally due 
to irritation from one of the abdominal organs. An attack of 
pseudo-angina may be agonizing, the pain radiating through the 
chest and into the left arm, but the patient does not usually 
assume the motionless attitude of true angina, and the duration 
of the seizure is usually much longer. The treatment is that of 
the underlying neurosis and the prognosis is a good one, sudden 
death not occurring. 

ANGIOSPERMS. The botanical term " Angiosperm " (ayyeiov, 
receptacle, and cnrkpixa, seed) was coined in the form Angio- 
spermae by Paul Hermann in 1690, as the name of that one of 
his primary divisions of the plant kingdom, which included 
flowering plants possessing seeds enclosed in capsules, in contra- 
distinction to his Gymnospermae, or flowering plants with 
achenial or schizo-carpic fruits — the whole fruit or each of its 
pieces being here regarded as a seed and naked. The term and 
its antonym were maintained by Linnaeus with the same sense, 
but with restricted application, in the names of the orders of his 
class Didynamia. Its use with any approach to its modern scope 
only became possible after Robert Brown had established in 
1827 the existence of truly naked seeds in the Cycadeae and 
Coniferae, entitling them to be correctly called Gymnosperms. 
From that time onwards, so long as these Gymnosperms were, 
as was usual, reckoned as dicotyledonous flowering plants, the 
term Angiosperm was used antithetically by botanical writers, 
but with varying limitation, as a group-name for other 



IO 



ANGIOSPERMS 



dicotyledonous plants. The advent in 1851 of Hofmeister's 
brilliant discovery of the changes proceeding in the embryo-sac 
of flowering plants, and his determination of the correct relation- 
ships of these with the Cryptogamia, fixed the true position of 
Gymnosperms as a class distinct from Dicotyledons, and the 
term Angiosperm then gradually came to be accepted as the suit- 
able designation for the whole of the flowering plants other than 
Gymnosperms, and as including therefore the classes of Dicoty- 
ledons and Monocotyledons. This is the sense in which the term 
is nowadays received and in which it is used here. 

The trend of the evolution of the plant kingdom has been in 
the direction of the establishment of a vegetation of fixed habit 
and adapted to the vicissitudes of a life on land, and the Angio- 
sperms are the highest expression of this evolution and constitute 
the dominant vegetation of the earth's surface at the present 
epoch. There is no land-area from the poles to the equator, 
where plant-life is possible, upon which Angiosperms are not 
found. They occur also abundantly in the shallows of rivers and 
fresh-water lakes, and in less number in salt lakes and in the sea; 
such aquatic Angiosperms are not, however, primitive forms, but 
are derived from immediate land-ancestors. Associated with 
this diversity of habitat is great variety in general form and 
manner of growth. The familiar duckweed which covers the 
surface of a pond consists of a tiny green " thalloid " shoot, one, 
that is, which shows no distinction of parts — stem and leaf, and 
a simple root growing vertically downwards into the water. The 
great forest-tree has a shoot, which in the course perhaps of 
hundreds of years, has developed a wide -spreading system of 
trunk and branches, bearing on the ultimate twigs or branchlets 
innumerable leaves, while beneath the soil a widely-branching 
root-system covers an area of corresponding extent. Between 
these two extremes is every conceivable gradation, embracing 
aquatic and terrestrial herbs, creeping, erect or climbing in 
habit, shrubs and trees, and representing a much greater variety 
than is to be found in the other subdivision of seed-plants, the 
Gymnosperms. 

In internal structure also the variety of tissue-formation far 
exceeds that found in Gymnosperms (see Plants: Anatomy). 
The vascular bundles of the stem belong to the col- 
stmctare. lateral type, that is to say, the elements of the wood or 
xylem and the bast or phloem stand side by side on the 
same radius. In the larger of the two great groups into which 
the Angiosperms are divided, the Dicotyledons, the bundles in 
the very young stem are arranged in an open ring, separating 
a central pith from an outer cortex. In each bundle, separating 
the xylem and phloem, is a layer of meristem or active formative 
tissue, known as cambium; by the formation of a layer of 
cambium between the bundles (interfascicular cambium) a 
complete ring is formed, and a regular periodical increase in 
thickness results from it by the development of xylem on the 
inside and phloem on the outside. The soft phloem soon becomes 
crushed, but the hard wood persists, and forms the great bulk of 
the stem and branches of the woody perennial. Owing to 
differences in the character of the elements produced at the 
beginning and end of the season, the wood is marked out in 
transverse section into concentric rings, one for each season of 
growth — the so-called annual rings. In the smaller group, the 
Monocotyledons, the bundles are more numerous in the young 
stem and scattered through the ground tissue. Moreover they 
contain no cambium and the stem once formed increases in 
diameter only in exceptional cases. 

As in Gymnosperms, branching is monopodial; dichotomy or 
the forking of the growing point into two equivalent branches 
which replace the main stem, is absent both in the case 
organs. °f tne si -em an d the root. The leaves show a remark- 
able variety in form (see Leat), but are generally small 
in comparison with the size of the plant; exceptions occur in 
some Monocotyledons, e.g. in the Aroid family, where in some 
genera the plant produces one huge, much-branched leaf each 
season. 

In rare cases the main axis is unbranched and ends in a flower, 
as, for instance, in the tulip, where scale-leaves, forming the 



underground bulb, green foliage-leaves and coloured floral 
leaves are borne on one and the same, axis. Generally, flowers 
are formed only on shoots of a higher order, often only on the 
ultimate branches of a much branched system. A potential 
branch or bud, either foliage or flower, is formed in the axil of 
each leaf; sometimes more than one bud arises, as for instance 
in the walnut, where two or three stand in vertical series above 
each leaf. Many of the buds remain dormant, or are called to 
development under exceptional circumstances, such as the 
destruction of existing branches. For instance, the clipping of 
a hedge or the lopping of a tree will cause to develop numerous 
buds which may have been dormant for years. Leaf-buds 
occasionally arise from the roots, when they are called adven- 
titious; this occurs in many fruit trees, poplars, elms and others. 
For instance, the young shoots seen springing from the ground 
around an elm are not seedlings but root-shoots. Frequently, 
as in many Dicotyledons, the primary root, the original root of 
the seedling, persists throughout the life of the plant, forming, 
as often in biennials, a thickened tap-root, as in carrot, or in 
perennials, a much-branched root system. In many Dicotyledons 
and most Monocotyledons, the primary root soon perishes, and 
its place is taken by adventitious roots developed from the 
stem. 

The most characteristic feature of the Angiosperm is the 
flower, which shows remarkable variety in form and elaboration, 
and supplies the most trustworthy characters for the Flower 
distinction of the series and families or natural orders, 
into which the group is divided. The flower is a shoot (stem 
bearing leaves) which has a special form associated with the 
special function of ensuring the fertilization of the egg and the 
development of fruit containing seed. Except where it is 
terminal it arises, like the leaf-shoot, in the axil of a leaf, which 
is then known as a bract. Occasionally, as in violet, a flower 
arises singly in the axil of an ordinary foliage-leaf; it is then 
termed axillary. Generally, however, the flower-bearing portion 
of the plant is sharply distinguished from the foliage leaf- 
bearing or vegetative portion, and forms a more or less elaborate 
branch-system in which the bracts are small and scale-like. 
Such a branch-system is called an inflorescence. The primary 
function of the flower is to bear the spores. These, as in Gymno- 
sperms, are of two kinds, microspores or pollen-grains, borne 
in the stamens (or microsporophylls) and megaspores, in which 
the egg-cell is developed, contained in the ovule, which is borne 
enclosed in the carpel (or megasporophyll) . The flower may 
consist only of spore-bearing leaves, as in willow, where each 
flower comprises only a few stamens or two carpels. Usually, 
however, other leaves are present which are only indirectly 
concerned with the reproductive process, acting as protective 
organs for the sporophylls or forming an attractive envelope. 
These form the perianth and are in one series, when the flower 
is termed monochlamydeous, or in two series (dichlamydeous) . 
In the second case the outer series (calyx of sepals) is generally 
green and leaf-like, its function being to protect the rest of the 
flower, especially in the bud; while the inner series (corolla of 
petals) is generally white or brightly coloured, and more delicate 
in structure, its function being to attract the particular insect or 
bird by agency of which pollination is effected. The insect, &c, 
is attracted by the colour and scent of the flower, and frequently 
also by honey which is secreted in some part of the flower. 
(For further details on the form and arrangement of the flower 
and its parts, see Flower.) 

Each stamen generally bears four pollen-sacs (microsporangia) 
which are associated to form the anther, and carried up on a 
stalk or filament. The development of the micro- 
sporangia and the contained spores (pollen-grains) an< / „„//,,„, 
is closely comparable with that of the microsporangia 
in Gymnosperms or heterosporous ferns. The pollen is set free 
by the opening (dehiscence) of the anther, generally by means 
of longitudinal slits, but sometimes by pores, as in the heath 
family (Ericaceae), or by valves, as in the barberry. It is then 
dropped or carried by some external agent, wind, water or some 
member of the animal kingdomj on to the receptive surface of 



ANGIOSPERMS 



ii 



embryo- 

sac 



the carpel of the same or another flower. The carpel, or aggregate 
of carpels forming the pistil or gynaeceum, comprises an ovary 
containing one or more ovules and a receptive surface or stigma; 
the stigma is sometimes carried up on a style. The mature pollen- 
grain is, like other spores, a single cell; except in the case of 
some submerged aquatic plants, it has a double wall, a thin 
delicate wall of unaltered cellulose, the endospore or intine, 
and a tough outer cuticularized exospore or extine. The exo- 
spore often bears spines or warts, or is variously sculptured, 
and the character of the markings is often of value for the 
distinction of genera or higher groups. Germination of the 
microspore begins before it leaves the pollen-sac. In very few 
cases has anything representing prothallial development been 
observed; generally a small cell (the antheridial or generative 
cell) is cut off, leaving a larger tube-cell. When placed on 
the stigma, under favourable circumstances, the pollen-grain 
puts forth a pollen-tube which grows down the tissue of the style 
to the ovary, and makes its way along the placenta, guided by 
projections or hairs, to the mouth of an ovule. The nucleus of 
the tube-cell has meanwhile passed into the tube, as does also the 
generative nucleus which divides to form two male- or sperm- 
cells. The male-cells are carried to their destination in the tip 
of the pollen-tube. 

The ovary contains one or more ovules borne on a pla- 
centa, which is generally some part of the ovary-wall. The 
development of the ovule, which represents the 
f™!'!".!"' macrosporangium, is very similar to the process in 
Gymnosperms; when mature it consists of one or two 
coats surrounding the central nucellus, except at the 
apex where an opening, the micropyle, is left. The nucellus is a 
cellular tissue enveloping one large cell, the embryo-sac or 
macrospore. The germination of the macrospore consists in 
the repeated division of its nucleus to form two groups of four, 
one group at each end of the embryo-sac. One nucleus from each 
group, the polar nucleus, passes to the centre of the sac, where 
the two fuse to form the so-called definitive nucleus. Of the 
three cells at the micropylar end of the sac, all naked cells 
(the so-called egg-apparatus), one is the egg-cell or oosphere, 
the other two, which may be regarded as representing abortive 
egg-cells (in rare cases capable of fertilization), are known as 
synergidae. The three cells at the opposite end are known 
as antipodal cells and become invested with a cell-wall. The 
gametophyte or prothallial generation is thus extremely reduced, 
consisting of but little more than the male and female sexual 
cells — the two sperm-cells in the pollen-tube and the egg-cell 
(with the synergidae) in the embryo-sac. At the period of 
fertilization the embryo-sac lies in close proximity 
Uoo. ' to l ^ e opening of the micropyle, into which the pollen- 
tube has penetrated, the separating cell-wall becomes 
absorbed, and the male or sperm-cells are ejected into the embryo- 
sac. Guided by the synergidae one male-cell passes into the 
oosphere with which it fuses, the two nuclei uniting, while the 
other fuses with the definitive nucleus, or, as it is also called, the 
endosperm nucleus. This remarkable double fertilization as it 
has been called, although only recently discovered, has been 
proved to take place in widely-separated families, and both in 
Monocotyledons and Dicotyledons, and there is every probability 
that, perhaps with variations, it is the normal process in Angio- 
sperms. After impregnation the fertilized oosphere immediately 
surrounds itself with a cell-wall and becomes the oospore which 
by a process of growth forms the embryo of the new plant. 
The endosperm-nucleus divides rapidly to produce a cellular 
tissue which fills up the interior of the rapidly-growing embryo- 
sac, and forms a tissue, known as endosperm, in which is stored 
a supply of nourishment for the use later on of the embryo. It 
has long been known that after fertilization of the egg has taken 
place, the formation of endosperm begins from the endosperm 
nucleus, and this had come to be regarded as the recommence- 
ment of the development of a prothallium after a pause following 
the reinvigorating union of the polar nuclei. This view is still 
maintained by those who differentiate two acts of fertilization 
within the embryo-sac, and regard that of the egg by the first 



male-cell, as the true or generative fertilization, and that of the 
polar nuclei by the second male gamete as a vegetative fertiliza- 
tion which gives a stimulus to development in correlation with the 
other. If, on the other hand, the endosperm is the product 
of an act of fertilization as definite as that giving rise to the 
embryo itself, we have to recognize that twin-plants are produced 
within the embryo-sac — one, the embryo, which becomes the 
angiospermous plant, the other, the endosperm, a short-lived, 
undifferentiated nurse to assist in the nutrition of the former, 
even as the subsidiary embryos in a pluri-embryonic Gymno- 
sperm may facilitate the nutrition of the dominant one. If this is 
so, and the endosperm like the embryo is normally the product 
of a sexual act, hybridization will give a hybrid endosperm as 
it does a hybrid embryo, and herein (it is suggested) we may have 
the explanation of the phenomenon of xenia observed in the 
mixed endosperms of hybrid races of maize and other plants, 
regarding which it has only been possible hitherto to assert 
that they were indications of the extension of the influence of 
the pollen beyond the egg and its product. This would not, 
however, explain the formation of fruits intermediate in size and 
colour between those of crossed parents. The signification of 
the coalescence of the polar nuclei is not explained by these new 
facts, but it is noteworthy that the second male-cell is said to 
unite sometimes with the apical polar nucleus, the sister of the 
egg, before the union of this with the basal polar one. The idea 
of the endosperm as a second subsidiary plant is no new one; 
it was suggested long ago in explanation of the coalescence of 
the polar nuclei, but it was then based on the assumption that 
these represented male and female cells, an assumption for which 
there was no evidence and which was inherently improbable. 
The proof of a coalescence of the second male nucleus with the 
definitive nucleus gives the conception a more stable basis. 
The antipodal cells aid more or less in the process of nutrition 
of the developing embryo, and may undergo multiplication, 
though they ultimately disintegrate, as do also the synergidae. 
As in Gymnosperms and other groups an interesting qualitative 
change is associated with the process of fertilization. The 
number of chromosomes (see Plants: Cytology) in the nucleus 
of the two spores, pollen-grain and embryo-sac, is only half the 
number found in an ordinary vegetative nucleus; and this 
reduced number persists in the cells derived from them. The 
full number is restored in the fusion of the male and female nuclei 
in the process of fertilization, and remains until the formation of 
the cells from which the spores are derived in the new generation. 

In several natural orders and genera departures from the course 
of development just described have been noted. In the natural 
order Rosaceae, the series Querciflorae, and the very anomalous 
genus Casuarina and others, instead of a single macrospore a 
more or less extensive sporogenous tissue is formed, but only one 
cell proceeds to the formation of a functional female cell. In 
Casuarina, Juglans and the order Corylaceae, the pollen-tube 
does not enter by means of the micropyle, but passing down the 
ovary wall and through the placenta, enters at the chalazal end 
of the ovule. Such a method of entrance is styled chalazogamic, 
in contrast to the porogamic or ordinary method of approach by 
means of the micropyle. 

The result of fertilization is the development of the ovule into 
the seed. By the segmentation of the fertilized egg, now invested 
by cell-membrane, the embryo-plant arises. A varying 
number of transverse segment-walls transform it into i <&, 
a pro-embryo — a cellular row of which the cell nearest 
the micropyle becomes attached to the apex of the embryo-sac, 
and thus fixes the position of the developing, embryo, while the 
terminal cell is projected into its cavity. In Dicotyledons the 
shoot of the embryo is wholly derived from the terminal cell of the 
pro-embryo, from the next cell the root arises, and the remaining 
ones form the suspensor. In many Monocotyledons the terminal 
cell forms the'cotyledonary portion alone of the shoot of the 
embryo, its axial part and the root being derived from the 
adjacent cell; the cotyledon is thus a terminal structure and the 
apex of the primary stem a lateral one — a condition in marked 
contrast with that of the Dicotyledons. In some Monocotyledons, 



12 



ANGIOSPERMS 



however, the cotyledon is not really terminal. The primary root 
of the embryo in all Angiosperms points towards the micropyle. 
The developing embryo at the end of the suspensor grows out to 
a varying extent into the forming endosperm, from which by 
surface absorption it derives good material for growth; at the 
same time the suspensor plays a direct part as a carrier of nutrition, 
and may even develop, where perhaps no endosperm is formed, 
special absorptive " suspensor roots " which invest the developing 
embryo, or pass out into the body and coats of the ovule, or even 
into the placenta. In some cases the embryo or the embryo-sac 
sends out suckers into the nucellus and ovular integument. As 
the embryo develops it may absorb all the food material available, 
and store, either in its cotyledons or in its hypocotyl, what is not 
immediately required for growth, as reserve-food for use in 
germination, and by so doing it increases in size until it may fill 
entirely the embryo-sac; or its absorptive power at this stage may 
be limited to what is necessary for growth and it remains of 
relatively small size, occupying but a small area of the embryo-sac, 
which is otherwise filled with endosperm in which the reserve-food 
is stored. There are also intermediate states. The position of the 
embryo in relation to the endosperm varies, sometimes it is 
internal, sometimes external, but the significance of this has not 
yet been established. 

The formation of endosperm starts, as has been stated, from 
the endosperm nucleus. Its segmentation always begins before 
that of the egg, and thus there is timely preparation for the 
nursing of the young embryo. If in its extension to contain the 
new formations within it the embryo-sac remains narrow, endo- 
sperm formation proceeds upon the lines of a cell-division, but in 
wide embryo-sacs the endosperm is first of all formed as a layer 
of naked cells around the wall of the sac, and only gradually 
acquires a pericellular character, forming a tissue filling the sac. 
The function of the endosperm is primarily that of nourishing the 
embryo, and its basal position in the embryo-sac places it 
favourably for the absorption of food material entering the ovule. 
Its duration varies with the precocity of the embryo. It may be 
wholly absorbed by the progressive growth of the embryo within 
the embryo-sac, or it may persist as a definite and more or less 
conspicuous constituent of the seed. When it persists as a massive 
element of the seed its nutritive function is usually apparent, for 
there is accumulated within its cells reserve-food, and according 
to the dominant substance it is starchy, oily, or rich in cellulose, 
mucilage or proteid. In cases where the embryo has stored 
reserve food within itself and thus provided for self -nutrition, 
such endosperm as remains in the seed may take on other 
functions, for instance, that of water-absorption. 

Some deviations from the usual course of development may be 
noted. Parthenogenesis, or the development of an embryo from an 
egg-cell without the latter having been fertilized has been de- 
scribed in speciesof Thalictrum, Antennaria&iid Alchemilla. Poly- 
embryony is generally associated with the development of cells 
other than the egg-cell. Thus in Erythronium and Limnocharis the 
fertilized egg may form a mass of tissue on which several embryos 
are produced. Isolated cases show that any of the cells within the 
embryo-sac may exceptionally form an embryo, e.g. the synergidae 
in species of Mimosa, Iris and Allium, and in the last-mentioned 
the antipodal cells also. In Coelebogyne (Euphorbiaceae) and in 
Funkia (Liliaceae) polyembryony results from an adventitious 
production of embryos from the cells of the nucellus around the 
top of the embryo-sac. In a species of Allium, embryos have 
been found developing in the same individualfrom the egg-cell, 
synergids, antipodal cells and cells of the nucellus. In two 
Malayan species of Balanophora, the embryo is developed from 
a cell of the endosperm, which is formed from the upper polar 
nucleus only, the egg apparatus becoming disorganized. The 
last-mentioned case has been regarded as representing an 
apogamous development of the sporophy te from the gametophy te 
comparable to the cases of apogamy described in Ferns. But 
the great diversity of these abnormal cases as shown in the 
examples cited above suggests the use of great caution in for- 
mulating definite morphological theories upon them. 

As the development of embryo and endosperm proceeds within 



the embryo-sac, its wall enlarges and commonly absorbs the 
substance of the nucellus (which is likewise enlarging) to near its 
outer limit, and combines with it and the integument 
to form the seed-coat: or the whole nucellus and even 



Fruit and 
seed. 



the integument may be absorbed. In some plants the 
nucellus is not thus absorbed, but itself becomes a seat of de- 
posit of reserve-food constituting the perisperm which may coexist 
with endosperm, as in the water-lily order, or may alone form a 
food-reserve for the embryo, as in Canna. Endospermic food- 
reserve has evident advantages over perispermic, and the latter 
is comparatively rarely found and only in non-progressive series. 
Seeds in which endosperm or perisperm or both exist are com- 
monly called albuminous or endospermic, those in which neither is 
found are termed exalbuminous or exendospermic. These terms, 
extensively used by systematists, only refer, however, to the 
grosser features of the seed, and indicate the more or less evident 
occurrence of a food-reserve ; many so-called exalbuminous seeds 
show to microscopic examination a distinct endosperm which may 
have other than a nutritive function. The presence or absence 
of endosperm, its relative amount when present, and the position 
of the embryo within it, are valuable characters for the distinction 
of orders and groups of orders. Meanwhile the ovary wall has 
developed to form the fruit or pericarp, the structure of which is 
closely associated with the manner of distribution of the seed. 
Frequently the influence of fertilization is felt beyond the ovary, 
and other parts of the flower take part in the formation of the 
fruit, as the floral receptacle in the apple, strawberry and others. 
The character of the seed-coat bears a definite relation to that of 
the fruit. Their function is the twofold one of protecting the 
embryo and of aiding in dissemination; they may also directly 
promote germination. If the fruit is a dehiscent one and the seed 
is therefore soon exposed, the seed-coat has to provide for the 
protection of the embryo and may also have to secure dissemina- 
tion. On the other hand, indehiscent fruits discharge these 
functions for the embryo, and the seed-coat is only slightly 
developed. Dissemination is effected by the agency of 
water, of air, of animals — and fruits and seeds are a tion. 
therefore grouped in respect of this as hydrophilous, 
anemophilous and zooidiophilous. The needs for these are 
obvious — buoyancy in water and resistance to wetting for the 
first, some form of parachute for the second, and some attaching 
mechanism or attractive structure for the third. The methods in 
which these are provided are of infinite variety, and any and 
every part of the flower and of the inflorescence may be called into 
requisition to supply the adaptation (see Fruit). Special 
outgrowths, arils, of the seed-coat are of frequent occurrence. In 
the feature of fruit and seed, by which the distribution of Angio- 
sperms is effected, we have a distinctive character of the class. In 
Gymnosperms we have seeds, and the carpels may become modified 
and close around these, as in Pinus, during the process of ripening 
to form an imitation of a box-like fruit which subsequently open- 
ing allows the seeds to escape; but there is never in them the 
closed ovary investing from the outset the ovules, and ultimately 
forming the ground-work of the fruit. 

Their fortuitous dissemination does not always bring seeds 
upon a suitable nidus for germination, the primary essential of 
which is a sufficiency of moisture, and the duration of 
vitality of the embryo is a point of interest. Some Oermina- 
seeds retain vitality for a period of many years, though seeA 
there is no warrant for the popular notion that genuine 
" mummy wheat " will germinate; on the other hand some seeds 
lose vitality in little more than a year. Further, the older the 
seed the more slow as a general rule will germination be in 
starting, but there are notable exceptions. This pause, often of 
so long duration, in the growth of the embryo between the time 
of its perfect development within the seed and the moment of 
germination, is one of the remarkable and distinctive features of 
the life of Spermatophytes. The aim of germination is the fixing 
of the embryo in the soil, effected usually by means of the root, 
which is the first part of the embryo to appear, in preparation 
for the elongation of the epicotyledonary portion of the shoot, 
and there is infinite variety in the details of the process. In 



ANGIOSPERMS 



13 



repro- 
duction. 



albuminous Dicotyledons the cotyledons act as the absorbents of 
the reserve-food of the seed and are commonly brought above 
ground (epigeal), either withdrawn from the seed-coat or carrying 
it upon them, and then they serve as the first green organs of the 
plant. The part of the stem below the cotyledons (hypocotyl) 
commonly plays the greater part in bringing this about. Ex- 
albuminous Dicotyledons usually store reserve-food in their 
cotyledons, which may in germination remain below ground 
(hypogeal) . In albuminous Monocotyledons the cotyledon itself, 
probably in consequence of its terminal position, is commonly 
the agent by which the embryo is thrust out of the seed, and it 
may function solely as a feeder, its extremity developing as a 
sucker through which the endosperm is absorbed, or it may 
become the first green organ, the terminal sucker dropping 
off with the seed-coat when the endosperm is exhausted. 
Exalbuminous Monocotyledons are either hydrophytes or 
strongly hygrophilous plants and have often peculiar features 
in germination. 

Distribution by seed appears to satisfy so well the requirements 
of Angiosperms that distribution by vegetative buds is only an 

occasional process. At the same time every bud on a 
~ e # Sff Wve shoot has the capacity to form a new plant if placed 

in suitable conditions, as the horticultural practice 

of propagation by cuttings shows; in nature we see 
plants spreading by the rooting of their shoots, and buds we 
know may be freely formed not only on stems but on leaves and 
on roots. Where detachable buds are produced, which can be 
transported through the air to a distance, each of them is an 
incipient shoot which may have a root, and there is always 
reserve-food stored in some part of it. In essentials such a bud 
resembles a seed. A relation between such vegetative distribu- 
tion buds and production of flower is usually marked. Where 
there is free formation of buds there is little flower and commonly 
no seed, and the converse is also the case. Viviparous plants are 
an illustration of substitution of vegetative buds for flower. 

The position of Angiosperms as the highest plant-group is 
unassailable, but of the point or points of their origin from the 

general stem of the plant kingdom, and of the path 
Phytogeny or p^hs f their evolution, we can as yet say little. 
taxonomy. Until well on in the Mesozoic period geological history 

tells us nothing about Angiosperms, and then only by 
their vegetative organs. We readily recognize in them now-a- 
days the natural classes of Dicotyledons and Monocotyledons 
distinguished alike in vegetative and in reproductive construction, 
yet showing remarkable parallel sequences in development; 
and we see that the Dicotyledons are the more advanced and 
show the greater capacity for further progressive evolution. 
But there is no sound basis for the assumption that the Dicoty- 
ledons are derived from Monocotyledons; indeed, the palaeonto- 
logical evidence seems to point to the Dicotyledons being the 
older. This, however, does not entitle us to assume the origin 
of Monocotyledons from Dicotyledons, although there is mani- 
festly a temptation to connect helobic forms of the former with 
ranal ones of the latter. There is no doubt that the phylum of 
Angiosperms has not sprung from that of Gymnosperms. 

Within each class the flower-characters as the essential feature of 
Angiosperms supply the clue to phylogeny, but the uncertainty 
regarding the construction of the primitive angiospermous flower 
gives a fundamental point of divergence in attempts to construct 
progressive sequences of the families. Simplicity of flower-structure 
has appeared to some to be always primitive, whilst by others it has 
been taken to be always derived. There is, however, abundant 
evidence that it may have the one or the other character in different 
cases. Apart from this, botanists are generally agreed that the 
concrescence of parts of the flower-whorls — in the gynaeceum as 
the seed-covering, and in the corolla as the seat of attraction, more 
than in the androecium and the calyx — is an indication of advance, 
as is also the concrescence that gives the condition of epigyny. 
Dorsiventrality is also clearly derived from radial construction, and 
anatropy of the ovule has followed atropy. We should expect the 
albuminous state of the seed to be an antecedent one to the ex- 
albuminous condition, and the recent discoveries in fertilization 
tend to confirm this view. Amongst Dicotyledons the gamopetalous 
forms are admitted to be the highest development and a dominant 
one of our epoch. Advance has been along two lines, markedly in 
relation to insect-pollination, one of which has culminated in the 



hypogynous epipetalous bicarpellate forms with dorsiventral often 
large and loosely arranged flowers such as occur in Scrophulariaceae, 
and the other in the epigynous bicarpellate small-flowered families of 
which the Compositae represent the most elaborate type. In the 
polypetalous forms progression from hypogyny.to epigyny is gener- 
ally recognized, and where dorsiventrality with insect-pollination 
has been established, a dominant group has been developed as in the 
Leguminosae. The starting-point of the class, however, and the 
position within it of apetalous families with frequently unisexual 
flowers, have provoked much discussion. In Monocotyledons a 
similar advance from hypogyny to epigyny is observed, and from the 
dorsiventral to the radial type of flower. In this connexion it is 
noteworthy that so many of the higher forms are adapted as bulbous 
geophytes, or as aerophytes to special xerophilous conditions. The 
Gramineae offer a prominent example of a dominant self-pollinated 
or wind-pollinated family, and this may find explanation in a 
multiplicity of factors. 

Though best known for his artificial (or sexual) system, Linnaeus 
was impressed with the importance of elaborating a natural system 
of arrangement in which plants should be arranged according to 
their true affinities. In his Philosophia Botanica (1751) Linnaeus, 
grouped the genera then known into sixty-seven orders (fragmenta), 
all except five of which are Angiosperms. He gave names to these 
but did not characterize them or attempt to arrange them in larger 
groups. Some represent natural groups and had in several cases 
been already recognized by Ray and others, but the majority are, 
in the light of modern knowledge, very mixed. Well-defined poly- 
petalous and gamopetalous genera sometimes occur in the same order, 
and even Monocotyledons and Dicotyledons are classed together 
where they have some striking physiological character in common. 

Work on the lines suggested by the Linnaean fragmenta was 
continued in France by Bernard de Jussieu and his nephew, Antoine 
Laurent, and the arrangement suggested by the latter in his Genera 
Plantarum secundum Or dines Naturales disposita (1789) is the first 
which can claim to be a natural system. The orders are carefully 
characterized, and those of Angiosperms are grouped in fourteen 
classes under the two main divisions Monocotyledons and Dicoty- 
ledons. The former comprise three classes, which are distinguished 
by the relative position of the stamens and ovary; the eleven 
classes of the latter are based on the same set of characters and fall 
into the larger subdivisions Apetalae, Monopetalae and Polypetalae, 
characterized respectively by absence, union or freedom of the 
petals, and a subdivision, Diclines Irregulares, a very unnatural group, 
including one class only. A. P. de Candolle introduced several 
improvements into the system. In his arrangement the last sub- 
division disappears, and the Dicotyledons fall into two groups, a 
larger containing those in which both calyx and corolla are present 
in the flower, and a smaller, Monochlamydeae, representing the 
Apetalae and Diclines Irregulares of Jussieu. The dichlamydeous 
group is subdivided into three, Thalamiflorae, Calyciflorae and 
Corolliflorae, depending on the position and union of the petals. 
This, which we may distinguish as the French system, finds its most 
perfect expression in the classic Genera Plantarum (1862-1883) of 
Bentham and Hooker, a work containing a description, based on 
careful examination of specimens, of all known genera of flowering 
plants. The subdivision is as follows : — 
Dicotyledons. 

f Thalamiflorae. 
Polypetalae -I Disciflorae. 
I Calyciflorae. 
[Inferae. 
Gamopetalae < Heteromerae. 
[Bicarpellatae. 
Monochlamydeae in eight series. 
Monocotyledons in seven series. 

Of the Polypetalae, series 1, Thalamiflorae, is characterized by 
hypogynous petals and stamens, and contains 34 orders distributed 
in 6 larger groups or cohorts. Series 2, Disciflorae, takes its name 
from a development of the floral axis which forms a ring or cushion 
at the base of the ovary or is broken up into glands; the ovary is 
superior. It contains 23 orders in 4 cohorts. Series 3, Calyciflorae, 
has petals and stamens perigynous, or sometimes superior. It 
contains 27 orders in 5 cohorts. 

Of the Gamopetalae, series 1, Inferae, has an inferior ovary and 
stamens usually as many as the corolla-lobes. It contains 9 orders 
in 3 cohorts. Series 2, Heteromerae, has generally a superior ovary, 
stamens as many as the corolla-lobes or more, and more than two 
carpels. It contains 12 orders in 3 cohorts. Series 3, Bicarpellatae, 
has generally a superior ovary and usually two carpels. It contains 
24 orders in 4 cohorts. 

The eight series of Monochlamydeae, containing 36 orders, form 
groups characterized mainly by differences in the ovary and ovules, 
and are now recognized as of unequal value. 

The seven series of Monocotyledons represent a sequence beginning 
with the most complicated epigynous orders, such as Orchideae and 
Scitamineae, and passing through the pe'taloid hypogynous orders 
(series Coronarieae) of which Liliaceae is the representative to 
juncaceae and the palms (series Calycinae) where the perianth loses 
its petaloid character and thence to the Aroids, screw-pines and 



H 



ANGKOR— ANGLE 



others where it is more or less aborted (series Nudiflorae). Series 6, 
Apocarpeae, is characterized by 5 carpels, and in the last series 
Glumaceae, great simplification in the flower is associated with a 
grass-like habit. 

The sequence of orders in the polypetalous subdivision of Dicoty- 
ledons undoubtedly represents a progression from simpler to more 
elaborate forms, but a great drawback to the value of the system is 
the inclusion among the Monochlamydeae of a number of orders 
which are closely allied with orders of Polypetalae though differing 
in absence of a corolla. The German systematise A. W. Eichler, 
attempted to remove this disadvantage which since the time of 
Jussieu had characterized the French system, and in 1883 grouped 
the Dicotyledons in two subclasses. The earlier Choripetalae 
embraces the Polypetalae and Monochlamydae of the French 
systems. It includes 21 series, and is an attempt to arrange as far 
as possible in a linear series those orders which are characterized by 
absence or freedom of petals. The second subclass, Gamopetalae, 
includes 9 series and culminates in those which show the most 
elaborate type of flower, the series Aggregatae, the chief representa- 
tive of which' is the great and wide-spread order Compositae. A 
modification of Eichler's system, embracing the most recent views 
of the affinities of the orders of Angiosperms, has been put forward 
by Dr Adolf Engler of Berlin, who adopts the suggestive names 
Archichlamydeae and Metachlamydeae for the two subdivisions of 
Dicotyledons. Dr Engler is the principal editor of a large series of 
volumes which, under the title Die naturlichen Pflanzenfamilien, is 
a systematic account of all the known genera of plants and represents 
the work of many botanists. More recently in Das Pflanzenreich 
the same author organized a series of complete monographs of the 
families of seed-plants. 

As an attempt at a phylogenetic arrangement, Engler's system is 
now preferred by many botanists. More recently a startling novelty 
in the way of system has been produced by van Tieghem, as follows : 
Monocotyledons. 
Liorhizal Dicotyledons. 
Dicotyledons. 

Insemineae. 
Semineae. 

Unitegmineae. 
Bitegmineae. 

The most remarkable feature here is the class of Liorhizal Dicoty- 
ledons, which includes only the families of Nymphaeaceae and 
Gramineae. It is based upon the fact that the histological differentia- 
tion of the epidermis of their root is that generally characteristic of 
Monocotyledons, whilst they have two cotyledons — the old view of 
the epiblast as a second cotyledon in Gramineae being adopted. 
But the presence of a second cotyledon in grasses is extremely 
doubtful, and though there may be ground for reconsidering the 
position of Nymphaeaceae, their association with the grasses as a 
distinct class is not warranted by a comparative examination of the 
members of the two orders. Ovular characters determine the group- 
ing in the Dicotyledons, van Tieghem supporting the view that the 
integument, the outer if there be two, is the lamina of a leaf of which 
the funicle is the petiole, whilst the nucellus is an outgrowth of this 
leaf, and the inner integument, if present, an indusium. The 
Insemineae include forms in which the nuceilus is not developed, 
and therefore there can be no seed. The plants included are, however, 
mainly well-established parasites, and the absence of nucellus is only 
one of those characters of reduction to which parasites are liable. 
Even if we admit van Tieghem's interpretation of the integuments 
to be correct, the diagnostic mark of his unitegminous and biteg- 
minous groups is simply that of the absence or presence of an in- 
dusium, not a character of great value elsewhere, and, as we know, 
the number of the ovular coats is inconstant within the same family. 
At the same time the groups based upon the integuments are 
of much the same extent as the Polypetalae and Gamopetalae of 
other systems. We do not yet know the significance of this correla- 
tion, which, however, is not an invariable one, between number of 
integuments and union of petals. 

Within the last few years Prof. John Coulter and Dr C. J. 
Chamberlain of Chicago University have given a valuable general 
account of the morphology of Angiosperms as far as concerns the 
flower, and the series of events which ends in the formation of the 
seed {Morphology of Angiosperms, Chicago, 1903). 

Authorities. — The reader will find in the following works details 
of the subject and references to the literature: Bentham and 
Hooker, Genera Plantarum (London, 1862-1883); Eichler, Bluthen- 
diagramme (Leipzig, 1875-1878) ; Engler and Prantl, Die naturlichen 
Pflanzenfamilien (Leipzig, 1887-1899); Engler, Syllabus der 
Pflanzenfamilien, 3rd ed. (Berlin, 1903) ; Knuth, Handbuch der 
Btutenbiologie (Leipzig, 1898, 1899); Sachs, History of Botany, 
English ed. (Oxford, 1890); Solereder, Syslematische Anatomie der 
Dicotyledonen (Stuttgart, 1899); van Tieghem, Elements de botan- 
ique; Coulter and Chamberlain, Morphology of Angiosperms (New 
York, 1903). _ (I. B. B.; A. B. R.) 

ANGKOR, an assemblage of ruins in Cambodia, the relic of 
the ancient Khmer civilization. They are situated in forests 
to the north of the Great Lake (Tonle-Sap), the most conspicuous 



of the remains being the town of Angkor-Thorn and the temple 
of Angkor-Vat, both of which lie on the right bank of the river 
Siem-Reap, a tributary of Tonle-Sap. Other remains of the 
same form and character lie scattered about the vicinity on 
both banks of the river, which is crossed by an ancient stone 
bridge. 

Angkor-Thorn lies about a quarter of a mile from the river. 
According to Aymonier it was begun about a. d. 860, in tht 
reign of the Khmer sovereign Jayavarman III., and finished 
towards a.d. 900. It consists of a rectangular enclosure, nearly 
2 m. in each direction, surrounded by a wall from 20 to 30 ft. 
in height. Within the enclosure, which is entered by five monu- 
mental gates, are the remains of palaces and temples, overgrown 
by the forest. The chief of these are: — 

(1) The vestiges of the royal palace, which stood within an 
enclosure containing also the pyramidal religious structure 
known as the Phimeanakas. To the east of this enclosure there 
extends a terrace decorated with magnificent reliefs. 

(2) The temple of Bayon, a square enclosure formed by 
galleries with colonnades, within which is another and more 
elaborate system of galleries, rectangular in arrangement and 
enclosing a cruciform structure, at the centre of which rises a 
huge tower with a circular base. Fifty towers, decorated 
with quadruple faces of Brahma, are built at intervals upon 
the galleries, the whole temple ranking as perhaps the most 
remarkable of the Khmer remains. 

Angkor-Vat, the best preserved example of Khmer architec- 
ture, lies less than a mile to the south of the royal city, within 
a rectangular park surrounded by a moat, the outer perimeter 
of which measures 6060 yds. On the west side of the park a 
paved causeway, leading over the moat and under a magnificent 
portico, extends for a distance of a quarter of a mile to the chief 
entrance of the main building. The temple was originally 
devoted to the worship of Brahma, but afterwards to that of 
Buddha; its construction is assigned by Aymonier to the first 
half of the 1 2th century a.d . It consists of three stages, connected 
by numerous exterior staircases and decreasing in dimensions 
as they rise, culminating in the sanctuary, a great central tower 
pyramidal in form. Towers also surmount the angles of the 
terraces of the two upper stages. Three galleries with vault- 
ing supported on columns lead from the three western portals 
to the second stage. They are connected by a transverse 
gallery, thus forming four square basins. Khmer decoration, 
profuse but harmonious, consists chiefly in the representa- 
tion of gods, men and animals, which are displayed on 
every flat surface. Combats and legendary episodes are often 
depicted; floral decoration is reserved chiefly for borders, 
mouldings 'and capitals. Sandstone of various colours was the 
chief material employed by the Khmers; limonite was also used. 
The stone was cut into huge blocks which are fitted together 
with great accuracy without the use of cement. 

See E. Aymonier, Le Cambodge (3 vols., 1900-1904) ; Doudart de 
Lagree, Voyage d' exploration en Indo-Chine (1872-1873); A. H. 
Mouhot, Travels in Indo-China, Cambodia and Laos (2 vols., 1864); 
Fournereau and Porcher, Les Ruines a" Angkor (1890) ; L. Delaporte, 
Voyage au Cambodge: V architecture Khmer (1880); J. Moura, Le 
Royaume de Cambodge (2 vols., 1883). 

ANGLE (from the Lat. angulus, a corner, a diminutive, of 
which the primitive form, angus, does not occur in Latin; 
cognate are the Lat. angere, to compress into a bend or to 
strangle, and the Gr. ay/cos, a bend; both connected with 
the Aryan root ank-, to bend: see Angling), in geometry, the 
inclination of one line or plane to another. Euclid (Elements, 
book 1) defines a plane angle as the inclination to each other, in 
a plane, of two lines which meet each other, and do not lie 
straight with respect to each other (see Geometry, Euclidean). 
According to Proclus an angle must be either a quality or a 
quantity, or a relationship. The first concept was utilized by 
Eudemus, who regarded an angle as a deviation from a straight 
line; the second by Carpus of Antioch, who regarded it as the 
interval or space between the intersecting lines; Euclid adopted 
the third concept, although his definitions of right, acute, and 
obtuse angles are certainly quantitative. A discussion of 



ANGLER— ANGLESEY 



15 



these concepts and the various definitions of angles in Euclidean 
geometry is to be found in W. B. Frankland, The First Book 
of Euclid's Elements (ipoj). Following Euclid, a right angle 
is formed by a straight line standing upon another straight line 
so as to make the adjacent angles equal; any angle less than a 
right angle is termed an acute angle, and any angle greater than 
a right angle an obtuse angle. The difference between an acute 
angle and a right angle is termed the complement of the angle, 
and between an angle and two right angles the supplement of the 
angle. The generalized view of angles and their measurement 
is treated in the article Trigonometry. A solid angle is definable 
as the space contained by three or more planes intersecting in 
a common point; it is familiarly represented by a corner. The 
angle between two planes is termed dihedral, between three 
trihedral, between any number more than three polyhedral. A 
spherical angle is a particular dihedral angle; it is the angle 
between two intersecting arcs on a sphere, and is measured 
by the angle between the planes containing the arcs and the 
centre of the sphere. 

The angle between a line and a curve ( mixed angle) or between 
two curves (curvilinear angle) is measured by the angle between 
the line and the tangent at the point of intersection, or between the 
tangents to both curves at their common point. Various names 
(now rarely, if ever, used) have been given to particular cases: — • 
amphicyrtic (Gr. a/x<t>i, on both sides, Kvpros, convex) or 
cissoidal (Gr. macros, ivy), biconvex; xystroidal or sistroidal 
(Gr. %varpLs, a tool for scraping), concavo-convex; amphicoelic 
(Gr. Koi\r], a hollow) or angulus lunularis, biconcave. 

ANGLER, also sometimes called fishing-frog, frog-fish, sea- 
devil (Lophius piscatorius), a fish well known off the coasts of 
Great Britain and Europe generally, the grotesque shape of its 
body and its singular habits having attracted the attention of 
naturalists of all ages. To the North Sea fishermen this fish is 
known as the " monk," a name which more properly belongs to 
Rhina squatina, a fish allied to the skates. Its head is of enormous 
size, broad, flat and depressed, the remainder of the body 
appearing merely like an appendage. The wide mouth extends 




The Angler {Lophius piscatorius). 

all round the anterior circumference of the head; and both 
jaws are armed with bands of long pointed teeth, which are 
inclined inwards, and can be depressed so as to offer no impedi- 
ment to an object gliding towards the stomach, but to prevent 
its escape from the mouth. The pectoral and ventral fins are so 
articulated as to perform the functions of feet, the fish being 
enabled to move, or rather to walk, on the bottom of the sea, 
where it generally hides itself in the sand or amongst sea-weed. 
All round its head and also along the body the skin bears 
fringed appendages resembling short fronds of sea-weed, a 
structure which, combined with the extraordinary faculty of 
assimilating the colcur of the body to its surroundings, assists 
this fish greatly in concealing itself in places which it selects 
on account of the abundance of prey. To render the organization 
of this creature perfect in relation to its wants, it is provided with 
three lohg filaments inserted along the middle of the head, 
which are, in fact, the detached and modified three first spines 
of the anterior dorsal fin. The filament most important in the 
economy of the angler is the first, which is the longest, terminates 
in a lappet, and is movable in every direction. The angler is 



believed to attract other fishes by means of its lure, and then to 
seize them with its enormous, jaws. It is probable enough thai 
smaller fishes are attracted in this way, but experiments have 
shown that the action of the jaws is automatic and depends 
on contact of the prey with the tentacle. Its stomach is disten- 
sible in an extraordinary degree, and not rarely fishes have 
been taken out quite as large and heavy as their destroyer. It 
grows to a length of more than 5 ft.; specimens of 3 ft. are 
common. The spawn of the angler is very remarkable. It 
consists of a thin sheet of transparent gelatinous material 2 or 3 ft. 
broad and 25 to 30 ft. in length. The eggs in this sheet are in a 
single layer, each in its own little cavity. The spawn is free in 
the sea. The larvae are free-swimming and have the pelvic fins 
elongated into filaments. The British species is found all round 
the coasts of Europe and western North America, but becomes 
scarce beyond 6o° N. lat.; it occurs also on the coasts of the 
Cape of Good Hope. A second species {Lophius budegassa) 
inhabits the Mediterranean, and a third {L. seligerus) the coasts of 
China and Japan. 

ANGLESEY, ARTHUR ANNESLEY, 1st Earl of (1614-1686), 
British statesman, son of the 1st Viscount Valentia (cr. 1621) 
and Baron Mountnorris (cr. 1628), and of Dorothy, daughter 
of Sir John Philipps of Picton Castle, Pembrokeshire, was born 
at Dublin on the 10th of July 1614, was educated at Magdalen 
College, Oxford, and was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1634. 
Having made the grand tour he returned to Ireland; and being 
employed by the parliament in a mission to the duke of Ormonde, 
now reduced to the last extremities, he succeeded in conclud- 
ing a treaty with him on the 19th of June 1647, thus securing 
the country from complete subjection to the rebels. In April 
1647 he was returned for Radnorshire to the House of Commons. 
He supported the parliamentary as against the republican or 
army party, and appears to have been one of the members 
excluded in 1648. He sat in Richard Cromwell's parliament 
for Dublin city, and endeavoured to take his seat in the restored 
Rump Parliament of 1659. He was made president of the council 
in February 1660, and in the Convention Parliament sat for 
Carmarthen borough. The anarchy of the last months of the 
commonwealth converted him to royalism, and he showed great 
activity in bringing about the Restoration. He used his influence 
in moderating measures of revenge and violence, and while 
sitting in judgment on the regicides was 01- the side of leniency. 
In November 1660 by his father's death he had become Viscount 
Valentia and Baron Mountnorris in the Irish peerage, and on 
the 20th April 1661 he was created Baron Annesley of Newport 
Pagnell in Buckinghamshire and earl of Anglesey in the peerage 
of Great Britain. He supported the king's administration in 
parliament, but opposed strongly the unjust measure which, on 
the abolition of the court of wards, placed the extra burden of 
taxation thus rendered necessary on the excise. His services 
in the administration of Ireland were especially valuable. He 
filled the office of vice- treasurer from 1660 till 1667, served on 
the committee for carrying out the declaration for the settlement 
of Ireland and on the committee for Irish affairs, while later, in 
167 1 and 1672, he was a leading member of various commissions 
appointed to investigate the working of the Acts of Settlement. 
In February 1661 he had obtained a captaincy of horse, and 
in 1667 he exchanged his vice-treasuryship of Ireland for the 
treasuryship of the navy. His public career was marked by 
great independence and fidelity to principle. On the 24th of July 
1 663 he alone signed a protest against the bill" for the encourage- 
ment of trade," on the plea that owing to the free export of coin 
and bullion allowed by the act, and to the importation of foreign 
commodities being greater than the export of home goods, 
" it must necessarily follow . . . that our silver will also be 
carried away into foreign parts and all trade fail for want of 
money." 1 He especially disapproved of another clause in the 
same bill forbidding the importation of Irish cattle into England, 
a mischievous measure promoted by the duke of Buckingham, and 
he opposed again the bill brought in with that object in January 

1 Protests of the Lords, by J. E. Thorold Rogers (1875), i. 27: 
Carti's Life of Ormonde (1851), iv. 234; Pari. Hist. iv. 284. 



i6 



ANGLESEY 



1667. This same year his naval accounts were subjected to an 
examination in consequence of his jndignant refusal to take part 
in the attack upon Ormonde; 1 and he was suspended from his 
office in 1 668, no charge,however, against him being substantiated. 
He took a prominent part in the dispute in 167 1 between the two 
Houses concerning the right of the Lords to amend money 
bills, and wrote a learned pamphlet on the question entitled 
The Privileges of the House of Lords and Commons (1702), in 
which the right of the Lords was asserted. In April 1673 he was 
appointed lord privy seal, and was disappointed at not obtaining 
the great seal the same year on the removal of Shaftesbury. In 
1679 he was included in Sir W. Temple's new-modelled council. 

In the bitter religious controversies of the time Anglesey 
showed great moderation and toleration. In 1674 he is men- 
tioned as endeavouring to prevent the justices putting into Torce 
the laws against the Roman Catholics and Nonconformists. 2 
In the panic of the " Popish Plot " in 1678 he exhibited a saner 
judgment than most of his contemporaries and a conspicuous 
courage. On the 6th of December he protested with three 
other peers against the m asure sent up from the Commons 
enforcing the disarming of all convicted recusants and taking 
bail from them to keep the peace; he was the only peer to dissent 
from the motion declaring the existence of an Irish plot; and 
though believing in the guilt and voting for the death of Lord 
Stafford, he interceded, according to his own account, 3 with 
the king for him as well as for Langhorne and Plunket. His 
independent attitude drew upon him an attack by Dangerfield, 
and in the Commons by the attorney-general, Sir W. Jones, 
who accused him of endeavouring to stifle the evidence against 
the Romanists. In March 1679 he protested against the second 
reading of the bill for disabling Danby. In 1681 Anglesey 
wrote A Letter from a Person of Honour in the Country, as a 
rejoinder to the earl of Castlehaven, who had published memoirs 
on the Irish rebellion defending the action of the Irish and the 
Roman Catholics. In so doing Anglesey was held by Ormonde 
to have censured his conduct and that of Charles I. in concluding 
the " Cessation," and the duke brought the matter before the 
council. In 1682 he wrote The Account of Arthur, Earl of 
Anglesey . . . of the true state of Your Majesty's Government and 
Kingdom, which was addressed to the king in a tone of censure 
and remonstrance, but appears not to have been printed till 
1694. 4 In consequence he was dismissed on the 9th of August 
1682 from the office of lord privy seal. In 1683 he appeared 
at the Old Bailey as a witness in defence of Lord Russell, and 
in June 1685 he protested alone against the revision of Stafford's 
attainder. He died at his home at Blechingdon in Oxfordshire 
on the 26th of April 1686, closing a career marked by great 
ability, statesmanship and business capacity, and by con- 
spicuous courage and independence of judgment. He amassed 
a large fortune in Ireland, in which country he had been allotted 
lands by Cromwell. 

The unfavourable character drawn of him by Burnet is 
certainly unjust and not supported by any evidence. Pepys, 
a far more trustworthy judge, speaks of him invariably in terms 
of respect and approval as a " grave, serious man," and com- 
mends his appointment as treasurer of the navy as that of 
"a very notable man and understanding and will do things 
regular and understand them himself." 5 He was a learned 
and cultivated man and collected a celebrated library, which 
was dispersed at his death. Besides the pamphlets already 
mentioned, he wrote: — A True Account of the Whole Proceedings 
betwixt . . .the Duke of Ormond and . . . the Earl of Anglesey 
(1682); A Letter of Remarks upon Jovian (1683); other works 
ascribed to him being The King's Right of Indulgence in Matters 
Spiritual . . . asserted (1688) ; Truth Unveiled, to which is 
added a short Treatise on . . . Transubstantiation (1676) ; The 
Obligation resulting from the Oath of Supremacy (1688); and 

1 Carti's Ormonde, iv. 330, 340. 

1 Cat. of State Pap. Dom. (1673-1675), p. 152. 3 Memoirs, 8, 9. 
' By Sir J. Thompson, his son-in-law. Reprinted in Somers Tracts 
(Scott, 1812), viii. 344, and in Pari. Hist. iv. app. xvi. 
1 Diary (ed. Wheatley, 19.04), iv. 298, vii. 14. 



England's Confusion (1659). Memoirs of Lord Anglesey were 
published by Sir P. Pett in 1693, but contain little biographical 
information and were repudiated as a, mere imposture by Sit 
John Thompson (Lord Haversham), his son-in-law, in his preface 
to Lord Anglesey's State of the Government in 1694. The authoJ 
however of the preface to The Rights of the Lords asserted (1702), 
while blaming their publication as "scattered and unfinished 
papers," admits their genuineness. 

Lord Anglesey married Elizabeth, daughter and co-heiress 
of Sir James Altham of Oxey, Hertfordshire, by whom, besides 
other children, he had James, who succeeded him, Altham, 
created Baron Altham, and Richard, afterwards 3rd Baron 
Altham. His descendant Richard, the 6th earl (d. 1761), left 
a son Arthur, whose legitimacy was doubted, and the peerage 
became extinct. He was summoned to the Irish House of Peers 
as Viscount Valentia, but was denied his writ to the parliament 
of Great Britain by a majority of one vote. He was created 
in 1793 earl of Mountnorris in the peerage of Ireland. All the 
male descendants of the 1st earl of Anglesey became extinct 
in the person of George, 2nd earl of Mountnorris, in 1844, when 
the titles of Viscount Valentia and Baron Mountnorris passed 
to his cousin Arthur Annesley (1785-1863), who thus became 
10th Viscount Valentia, being descended from the 1st Viscount 
Valentia. the father of the 1st earl of Anglesey in the Annesley 
family. The 1st viscount was also the ancestor of the Earls 
Annesley in the Irish peerage. 

Authorities. — Diet, of Nat. Biography, with authorities there 
collected; lives in Wood's Athenae Oxonienses (Bliss), iv. 181, 
Biographia Britannica, and H. Walpole's Royal and Noble Authors 
(1806), iii. 288 (the latter a very inadequate review of Anglesey's 
character and career) ; also Biblioiheca A nglesiana . . . perThomam 
Philippum (1686) ; The Happy Future State of England, by Sir Peter 
Pett (1688); Great News from Poland (1683), where his religious 
tolerance is ridiculed; Somers Tracts (Scott, 1812), viii. 344; Notes 
of the Privy Council (Roxburghe Club, 1896) ; Cat. of State Papers, 
Dom.;State Trials, viii. and ix. 619. (P. C. Y.) 

ANGLESEY, HENRY WILLIAM PAGET, 1st Marquess of 
(1768-1854), British field-marshal, was born on the 17th of May 
1 768. He was the eldest son of Henry Paget, 1st earl of Uxbridge 
(d. 1812), and was educated at Westminster School and Christ 
Church, Oxford, afterwards entering parliament in 1790 as 
member for Carnarvon, for which he sat for six years. At the 
outbreak of the French Revolutionary wars Lord Paget (as he 
was then styled), who had already served in the militia, raised 
on his father's estate the regiment of Staffordshire volunteers, in 
which he was given the temporary rank of lieutenant-colonel 
(1793). The corps soon became part of the regular army as the 
80th Foot, and it took part, under Lord Paget's command, in 
the Flanders campaign of 1794. In spite of his youth he held a 
brigade command for a time, and gained also, during the campaign, 
his first experience of the cavalry arm, with which he was thence- 
forward associated. His substantive commission as lieutenant- 
colonel of the 1 6th Light Dragoons bore the date of the 
15th of June 1795, and in 1796 he was made a colonel 
in the army. In 1795 he married Lady Caroline Elizabeth 
Villiers, daughter of the earl of Jersey. In April 1797 Lord 
Paget was transferred to a lieut.-colonelcy in the 7th Light 
Dragoons, of which regiment he became colonel in 1801. From 
the first he applied himself strenously to the improvement of 
discipline, and to the perfection of a new system of cavalry 
evolutions. In the short campaign of 1799 in Holland, Paget 
commanded the cavalry brigade, and in spite of the unsuitable 
character of the ground, he made, on several occasions, brilliant 
and successful charges. After the return of the expedition, he 
devoted himself zealously to his regiment, which under his 
command became one of the best corps in the service. In 1802 
he was promoted major-general, and six years later lieutenant- 
general. In command of the cavalry of Sir John Moore's army 
during the Corunna campaign, Lord Paget won the -greatest 
distinction. At Sahagun, Mayorga and Benavente, the British 
cavalry behaved so well under his leadership that Moore wrote : — 
" It is impossible for me to say too much in its praise. . . . Our 
cavalry is very superior in quality to any the French have, and 



ANGLESEY 



17 



the right spirit has been infused into them by the example and 
instruction of their . . . leaders . . . ." At Benavente one of 
Napoleon's best cavalry leaders, General Lefebvre Desnoettes, 
was taken prisoner. Corunna was Paget's last service in the 
Peninsula. His liaison with the wife of Henry Wellesley, after- 
wards Lord Cowley, made it impossible at that time for him to 
serve with Wellington, whose cavalry, on many occasions during 
the succeeding campaigns, felt the want of the true cavalry 
leader to direct them. His only war service from 1809 to 181 5 
was in the disastrous Walcheren expedition (1809) in which he 
commanded a division. During these years he occupied himself 
with his parliamentary duties as member for Milborne Port, 
which he represented almost continuously up to his father's 
death in 18 12, when he took his seat in the House of Lords as 
earl of Uxbridge. In 18 10 he was divorced and married Mrs 
Wellesley, who had about the same time been divorced from her 
husband. Lady Paget was soon afterwards married to the duke 
of Argyll. In 181 5 Lord Uxbridge received command of the 
British cavalry in Flanders. At a moment of danger such as 
that of Napoleon's return from Elba, the services of the best 
cavalry general in the British army could not be neglected. 
Wellington placed the greatest confidence in him, and on the eve 
of Waterloo extended his command so as to include the whole of 
the allied cavalry and horse artillery. He covered the retirement 
of the allies from Quatre Bras to Waterloo on the 17th of June, 
and on the 18th gained the crowning distinction of his military 
career in leading the great cavalry charge of the British centre, 
which checked and in part routed D'Erlon's corps d'armee (see 
Waterloo Campaign) . Freely exposing his own life throughout, 
the earl received, by one of the last cannon shots fired, a severe 
wound in the leg, necessitating amputation. Five days later 
the prince regent created him marquess of Anglesey in recognition 
of his brilliant services, which were regarded universally as 
second only to those of the duke himself. He was made a G.C.B. 
and he was also decorated by many of the allied sovereigns. 

In 1818 the marquess was made a knight of the Garter, in 1819 
he became full general, and at the coronation of George IV. he 
acted as lord high steward of England. His support of the 
proceedings against Queen Caroline made him for a time un- 
popular, and when he was on one occasion beset by a crowd, who 
compelled him to shout " The Queen," he added the wish, " May 
all your wives be like her." At the close of April 1827 he became 
a member of the Canning administration, taking the post of 
master-general of the ordnance, previously held by Wellington. 
He was at the same time sworn a member of the privy council. 
Under the Wellington administration he accepted the appoint- 
ment of lord-lieutenant of Ireland (March 1828), and in the 
discharge of his important duties he greatly endeared himself 
to the Irish people. The spirit in which he acted and the aims 
which he steadily set before himself contributed to the allaying 
of party animosities, to the promotion of a willing submission 
to the laws, to the prosperity of trade and to the extension and 
improvement of education. On the great question of the time 
his views were opposed to those of the government. He saw 
clearly that the time was come when the relief of the Catholics 
from the penal legislation of the past was an indispensable 
measure, and in December 1828 he addressed a letter to the 
Roman Catholic primate of Ireland distinctly announcing his 
view. This led to his recall by the government, a step sincerely 
lamented by the Irish. He pleaded for Catholic emancipation 
in parliament, and on the formation of Earl Grey's administration 
in November 1830, he again became lord-lieutenant of Ireland. 
The times were changed; the act of emancipation had been 
passed, and the task of viceroy in his second tenure of office was 
to resist the agitation for repeal of the union carried on by 
O'Connell. He felt it his duty now to demand Coercion Acts for 
the security of the public peace; his popularity was diminished, 
differences appeared in the cabinet on the difficult subject, and 
in July 1833 the ministry resigned. To the marquess of Anglesey 
Ireland is indebtedfor the board of education, the origination of 
which may perhaps be reckoned as the most memorable act of 
his viceroyalty. For thirteen years after his retirement he 



remained out of office, and took little part in the affairs of govern- 
ment. He joined the Russell administration in July 1846 as 
master-general of the ordnance, finally retiring with his chief in 
March 1852. His promotion in the army was completed by his 
advancement to the rank of field-marshal in 1846. Four years 
before, he exchanged his colonelcy of the 7th Light Dragoons 
which he had held over forty years, for that of the Royal Horse 
Guards. He died on the 29th of April 1854. 

The marquess had a large family by each of his two wives, two 
sons and six daughters by the first and six sons and four daughters 
by the second. His eldest son, Henry, succeeded him in the 
marquessate; but the title passed rapidly in succession to the 3rd, 
4th and 5th marquesses. The latter, whose extravagances were 
notorious, died in 1905, when the title passed to his cousin. 

Other members of the Paget family distinguished themselves 
in the army and the navy. Of the first marquess's brothers one, 
Sir Charles Paget (1778-1839), rose to the rank of vice-admiral 
in the Royal Navy; another, General Sir Edward Paget 
(1 775-1849), won great distinction by his skilful and resolute 
handling of a division at Corunna, and from 1822 to 1825 was 
commander-in-chief in India. One of the marquess's sons by his 
second marriage, Lord Clarence Edward Paget (1811-1895), 
became an admiral; another, Lord George Augustus 
Frederick Paget (1818-1880), led the 4th Light Dragoons in the 
charge of the Light Brigade at Balaklava, and subsequently 
commanded the brigade, and, for a short time, the cavalry 
division in the Crimea. In 1865 he was made inspector-general 
of cavalry, in 1871 lieutenant-general and K.C.B., and in 1877 
full general. His Crimean journals were published in 1881. 

ANGLESEY, or Anglesea, an insular northern county of Wales. 
Its area is 176,630 acres or about 276 sq. m. Anglesey, in the see 
of Bangor, is separated from the mainland by the Menai Straits 
(Afon Menai), over which were thrown Telford's suspension 
bridge, in 1826, and the Stephenson tubular railway bridge in 
1850. The county is flat, with slight risings such as Parys, Cadair 
Mynachdy (or Monachdy, i.e. "chair of the monastery"; there 
is a Nanner, " convent," not far away) and Holyhead Mountain. 
There are a few lakes, such as Cors cerrig y daran, but rising water 
is generally scarce. The climate is humid, the land poor for the 
most part compared with its old state of fertility, and there are 
few industries. 

As regards geology, the younger strata in Anglesey rest upon a 
foundation of very old pre-Cambrian rocks which appear at the 
surface in three areas: — (1) a western region including Holyhead 
and Llanfaethlu, (2) a central area about Aberffraw and Tref- 
draeth, and (3) an eastern region which includes Newborough, 
Caerwen and Pentraeth. These pre-Cambrian rocks are schists 
and slates, often much contorted and disturbed. The general line 
of strike of the formations in the island is from N.E. to S.W. A 
belt of granitic rocks lies immediately north-west of the central 
pre-Cambrian mass, reaching from Llanfaelog near the coast to 
the vicinity of Llanerchymedd. Between this granite and the 
pre-Cambrian of Holyhead is a narrow tract of Ordovician slates 
and grits with Llandovery beds in places; this tract spreads out 
in the N. of the island between Dulas Bay and Carmel Point. A 
small patch of Ordovician strata lies on the northern side of 
Beaumaris. In parts, these Ordovician rocks are much folded, 
crushed and metamorphosed, and they are associated with schists 
and altered volcanic rocks which are probably pre-Cambrian. 
Between the eastern and central pre-Cambrian masses carboni- 
ferous rocks are found. The carboniferous limestone occupies a 
broad area S. of Ligwy Bay and Pentraeth, and sends a narrow 
spur in a south-westerly direction by Llangefni to Malldraeth 
sands. The limestone is underlain on the N. W. by a red basement 
conglomerate and yellow sandstone (sometimes considered to be 
of Old Red Sandstone age). Limestone occurs again on the N. 
coast about Llanfihangel and Llangoed; and in the S.W. round 
Llanidan on the border of the Menai Strait. Puffin Island is 
made of carboniferous limestone. Malldraeth Marsh is occupied 
by coal measures, and a small patch of the same formation appears 
near Tall-y-foel Ferry on the Menai Straits. A patch of granitic 
and felsitic rocks form Parys Mountain, where copper and iron 



i8 



ANGLESITE— ANGLI 



ochre have been worked. Serpentine (Mona Marble) is found 
near Llanfaerynneubwll and upon the opposite shore in Holyhead. 
There are abundant evidences of glaciation, and much boulder 
clay and drift sand covers the older rocks. Patches of blown sand 
occur on the S.W. coast. 

The London & North-Western railway (Chester and Holy- 
head branch) crosses Anglesey from Llanfairpwllgwyngyll to 
Gaerwen and Holyhead (Caer Gybi), also from Gaerwen to 
Amlwch. The staple of the island is farming, the chief crops 
being turnips, oats, potatoes, with flax in the centre. Copper 
(near Amlwch), lead, silver, marble, asbestos, lime and sandstone, 
marl, zinc and coal have all been worked in Anglesey, coal 
especially at Malldraeth and Trefdraeth. The population of the 
county in iooi was 50,606. There is no parliamentary borough, 
but one member is returned for the county. It is in the north- 
western circuit, and assizes are held at Beaumaris, the only 
municipal borough (pop. 2326). Amlwch (2994), Holyhead 
(10,079), Llangefni (1751) and Menai Bridge (Pont y Borth, 
1 700) are urban districts. There are six hundreds and seventy- 
eight parishes. 

Mon (a cow) is the Welsh name of Anglesey, itself a corrupted 
form of O.E., meaning the Isle of the Angles. Old Welsh names 
are Ynys Dywyll (" Dark Isle ") and Ynys y cedairn (cedyrn or 
kedyrn; " Isle of brave folk "). It is the Mona of Tacitus (Ann. 
xiv. 29, Agr. xiv. 18), Pliny the Elder (iv. 16) and Dio Cassius 
(62). It is called Mam Cymru by Giraldus Cambrensis. Clas 
Merddin, Y vel Ynys (honey isle), Ynys Prydein, Ynys Brut are 
other names. According to the Triads (67), Anglesey was once 
part of the mainland, as geology proves. The island was the seat 
of the Druids, of whom 28 cromlechs remain, on uplands over- 
looking the sea, e.g. at Plas Newydd. The Druids were attacked 
in a.d. 61 by Suetonius Paulinus, and by Agricola in a.d. 78. In 
the 5th century Caswallon lived here, and here, at Aberffraw, the 
princes of G wy nedd lived till 1 2 7 7 . The present road from Holyhead 
to Llanfairpwllgwyngyll is originally Roman. British and Roman 
camps, coins and ornaments have been dug up and discussed, 
especially by the Hon. Mr Stanley of Penrhos. Pen Caer Gybi is 
Roman. The island was devastated by the Danes (Dub Gint or 
black nations, genies), especially in a.d. 853. 

See Edw. Breese, Kalendar of Gwynedd (Venedocia), on Anglesey, 
Carnarvon and Merioneth (London, 1873) ; and The History of 
Powys Fadog. 

ANGLESITE, a mineral consisting of lead sulphate, PbS0 4 , 
crystallizing in the orthorhombic system, and isomorphous with 
barytes and celestite. It was first recognized as a mineral species 
by Dr Withering in 1783, who discovered it in the Parys copper- 
mine in Anglesey; the name anglesite, from this locality, was 
given by F. S. Beudant in 1832. The crystals from Anglesey, 
which were formerly found abundantly on a matrix of dull 
limonite, are small in size and simple in form, being usually 
bounded by four faces of a prism and four faces of a dome; they 
are brownish-yellow in colour owing to a stain of limonite. 
Crystals from some other localities, notably from Monteponi in 
Sardinia, are transparent and colourless, possessed of a brilliant 
adamantine lustre, and usually modified by numerous bright 
faces. The variety of combinations and 
habits presented by the crystals is very 
extensive, nearly two hundred distinct 
forms being figured by V. von Lang in 
his monograph of the species; without 
measurement of the angles the crystals 
are frequently difficult to decipher. The 
haidness is 3 and the specific gravity 6-3. There are distinct 
cleavages parallel to the faces of the prism jnof and the 
basal plane \ 001 } , but these are not so well developed as in 
the isomorphous minerals barytes and celestite. 

Anglesite is a mineral of secondary origin, having been formed 
by the oxidation of galena in the upper parts of mineral lodes 
where these have been affected by weathering processes. At 
Monteponi the crystals encrust cavities in glistening granular 
galena; and from Leadhills, in Scotland, pseudomorphs of 
anglesite after galena are known. At most localities it is found 




as isolated crystals in the lead-bearing lodes, but at some places, 
in Australia and Mexico, it occurs as large masses, and is then 
mined as an ore of lead, of which the pure mineral contains 68 %. 

ANGLI, Anglii or Angles, a Teutonic people mentioned 
by Tacitus in his Germania (cap. 40) at the end of the 1st century. 
He gives no precise indication of their geographical position, 
but states that, together with six, other tribes, including the 
Varini (the Warni of later times), they worshipped a goddess 
named Nerthus, whose sanctuary was situated on " an island 
in the Ocean." Ptolemy in his Geography (ii. n. § 15), half a 
century later, locates them with more precision between the 
Rhine, or rather perhaps the Ems, and the Elbe, and speaks of 
them as one of the chief tribes of the interior. Unfortunately, 
however, it is clear from a comparison of his map with the evidence 
furnished by Tacitus and other Roman writers that the indica- 
tions which he gives cannot be correct. Owing to the uncertainty 
of these passages there has been much speculation regarding 
the original home of the Angli. One theory, which however has 
little to recommend it, is that they dwelt in the basin of the 
Saale (in the neighbourhood of the canton Engilin), from which 
region the Lex Angliorum et Werinorum hoc est Thuringorum 
is believed by many to have come. At the present time the 
majority of scholars believe that the Angli had lived from the 
beginning on the coasts of the Baltic, probably in the southern 
part of the Jutish peninsula. The evidence for this view is 
derived partly from English and Danish traditions dealing 
with persons and events of the 4th century (see below), and 
partly from the fact that striking affinities to the cult of Nerthus 
as described by Tacitus are to be found in Scandinavian, especially 
Swedish and Danish, religion. Investigations in this subject 
have rendered it very probable that the island of Nerthus was 
Sjaelland (Zealand), and it is further to be observed that the 
kings of Wessex traced their ancestry ultimately to a certain 
Scyld, who is clearly to be identified with Skioldr, the mythical 
founder of the Danish royal family (Skioldungar). In English 
tradition this person is connected with " Scedeland " (pi.), 
a name which may have been applied to Sjaelland as well as 
Skane, while in Scandinavian tradition he is specially associated 
with the ancient royal residence at Leire in Sjaelland. 

Bede states that the Angli before they came to Britain dwelt 
in a land called Angulus, and similar evidence is given by the 
Historia Brittonwm. King Alfred and the chronicler ^Ethelweard 
identified this place with the district which is now called Angel 
in the province of Schleswig (Slesvig), though it may then have 
been of greater extent, and this identification agrees very well 
with the indications given by Bede. Full confirmation is afforded 
by English and Danish traditions relating to two kings named 
Wermund (q.v.) and Off a (q.v.), from whom the Mercian royal 
family were descended, and whose exploits are connected with 
Angel, Schleswig and Rendsburg. Danish tradition has pre- 
served record of two governors of Schleswig, father and son, 
in their service, Frowinus (Freawine) and Wigo (Wig), from 
whom the royal family of Wessex claimed descent. During the 
5th century the Angli invaded this country (see Britain, Anglo- 
Saxon), after which time their name does not recur on the con- 
tinent except in the title of the code mentioned above. 

The province of Schleswig has proved exceptionally rich in 
prehistoric antiquities which date apparently from the 4th and 
5th centuries. Among the places where these have been found, 
special mention should be made of the large cremation cemetery 
at Borgstedterfeld, between Rendsburg and Eckernforde, 
which has yielded many urns and brooches closely resembling 
those found in heathen graves in England. Of still greater 
importance are the great deposits at Thorsbjaerg (in Angel) 
and Nydam, which contained large quantities of arms, ornaments, 
articles of clothing, agricultural implements, &c, and in the 
latter case even ships. By the help of these discoveries we are 
able to reconstruct a fairly detailed picture of English civilization 
in the age preceding the invasion of Britain. 

Authorities. — Bede, Hist. Ecc. i. 15: King Alfred's version of 
Orosius, i. I.. §§ 12, 19; ^Ethelweard's Chronicle, lib. i. For traditions 
concerning the kings of Angel, see under Offa (i). L. Weiland, 



ANGLICAN COMMUNION 



J 9 



Die Angeln (1889); A. Erdmann, tfber die Heimat und den Namen 
der Angeln (Upsala, 1890 — cf. H. Moller in the Anzeiger fur deutsches 
Altertum und deutsche Litteratur, xxii. 129 ff.) ; A. Kock in the 
Historisk Tidskrift (Stockholm), 1895, xv. p. 163 ff. ; G. Schiitte, 
Var Anglerne Tyskere? (Flensborg, 1900) ; H. Munro Chadwick, 
Tlie Origin of the English Nation (Cambridge, 1907); C. Engelhardt, 
Denmark in the Early Iron Age (London, 1866); J. Mestorf, Urnen- 
friedhofe in Schleswig-Holstein (Hamburg, 1886) ; S. Miiller, Nordische 
A Itertumskundc (Ger. trans., Strassburg, 1898), ii. p. 122 ff. ; see 
further Anglo-Saxons and Britain, Anglo-Saxon. (H. M. C.) 

ANGLICAN COMMUNION, the name used to denote that 
great branch of the Christian Church consisting of the various 
churches in communion with the Church of England. The 
necessity for such a phrase as " Anglican Communion," first used 
in the 19th century, marked at once the immense development 
of the Anglican Church in modern times and the change which 
his taken place in the traditional conceptions of its character 
and sphere. The Church of England itself is the subject of a 
separate article (see England, Church of); and it is not 
without significance that for more than two centuries after the 
Reformation the history of Anglicanism is practically confined 
to its developments within the limits of the British Isles. Even 
in Ireland, where it was for over three centuries the established 
religion, and in Scotland, where it early gave way to the dominant 
Fresbyterianism, its religious was long overshadowed by its 
political significance. The Church, in fact, while still claiming to 
be Catholic in its creeds and in its religious practice, had ceased 
to be Catholic in its institutional conception, which was now 
bound up with a particular state and also with a particular 
conception of that state. To the native Irishman and the Scots- 
man, as indeed to most Englishmen, the Anglican Church wasone 
of the main buttresses of the supremacy of the English crown 
and nation. This conception of the relations of church and state 
was hardly favourable to missionary zeal; and in the age succeed- 
ing the Reformation there was no disposition on the part of the 
English Church to emulate the wonderful activity of the Jesuits, 
which, in the 16th and 17th centuries, brought to the Church 
of Rome in countries beyond the ocean compensation for what 
she had lost in Europe through the Protestant reformation. 
Even when English churchmen passed beyond the seas, they 
carried with them their creed, but not their ecclesiastical organiza- 
tion. Prejudice and real or imaginary legal obstacles stood 
in the way of the erection of episcopal sees in the colonies; and 
though in the 17th century Archbishop Laud had attempted 
to obtain a bishop for Virginia, up to the time of the American 
revolution the churchmen of the colonies had to make the best 
of the legal fiction that their spiritual needs were looked after 
by the bishop of London, who occasionally sent commissaries 
to visit them and ordained candidates for the ministry sent to 
England for the purpose. 

The change which has made it possible for Anglican churchmen 
to claim that their communion ranks with those of Rome and 
the Orthodox East as one of the three great historical divisions 
of the Catholic Church, was due, in the first instance, to the 
American revolution. The severance of the colonies from their 
allegiance to the crown brought the English bishops for the first 
time face to face with the idea of an Anglican Church which 
should have nothing to do either with the royal supremacy 
or with British nationality. When, on the conclusion of peace, 
the church-people of Connecticut sent Dr Samuel Seabury to 
England, with a request to the archbishop of Canterbury to 
consecrate him, it is not surprising that Archbishop Moore 
refused. In the opinion of prelates and lawyers alike, an act of 
parliament was necessary before a bishop could be consecrated 
for a see abroad; to consecrate one for a foreign country seemed 
impossible, since, though the bestowal of the poteslas ordinis 
would be valid, the crown, which, according to the law, was the 
source of the episcopal jurisdiction, could hardly issue the 
necessary mandate for the consecration of a bishop to a sec 
outside the realm (see Bishop). The Scottish bishops, however, 
being hampered by no such legal restrictions, were more amen- 
able; and on the nth of November 1784 Seabury was con- 
secrated by them to the see of Connecticut. In 1786, on the 



initiative of the archbishop, the legal difficulties in England 
were removed by the act for the consecration of bishops abroad ; 
and, on being satisfied as to the orthodoxy of the church in 
America and the nature of certain liturgical changes in con- 
templation, the two English archbishops proceeded, on the 
14th of February 1787, to consecrate William White and Samuel 
Prevoost to the sees of Pennsylvania and New York (see 
Protestant Episcopal Church). 

This act had a significance beyond the fact that it established 
in the United States of America a flourishing church, which, 
while completely loyal to its own country, is bound by special 
ties to the religious life of England. It marked the emergence 
of the Church of England from that insularity to which what may 
be called the territorial principles of the Reformation had 
condemned her. The change was slow, and it is not yet by any 
means complete. 

Since the Church of England, whatever her attitude towards 
the traditional Catholic doctrines, never disputed the validity 
of Catholic orders whether Roman or Orthodox, nor the juris- 
diction of Catholic bishops in foreign countries, the expansion 
of the Anglican Church has been in no sense conceived as a 
Protestant aggressive movement against Rome. Occasional 
exceptions, such as the consecration by Archbishop Plunket 
of Dublin of a bishop for the reformed church in Spain, raised 
so strong a protest as to prove the rule. In the main, then, 
the expansion of the Anglican Church has followed that of the 
British empire, or, as in America, of its daughter states; its 
claim, so far as rights of jurisdiction are concerned, is to be the 
Church of England and the English race, while recognizing its 
special duties towards the non-Christian populations subject 
to the empire or brought within the reach of its influence. As 
against the Church of Rome, with its system of rigid centraliza- 
tion, the Anglican Church represents the principle of local 
autonomy, which it holds to be once more primitive and more 
catholic. In this respect the Anglican communion has developed 
on the lines defined in her articles at the Reformation; but, 
though in principle there is no great difference between a 
church defined by national, and a church defined by racial 
boundaries, there is an immense difference in effect, especially 
when the race — as in the case of the English — is itself 
ecumenical. 

The realization of what may be called this catholic mission 
of the English church, in the extension of its organization to 
the colonies, was but a slow process. 

On the 12th of August 1787 Dr Charles Inglis was consecrated 
bishop of Nova Scotia, with jurisdiction over all the British 
possessions in North America. In 1793 the see of j-he 
Quebec was founded; Jamaica and Barbados followed Church 
in 1824, and Toronto and Newfoundland in 1839. I ^ t . he . 
Meanwhile the needs of India has $>een tardily met, on 
the urgent representations in parliament of William Wilberforce 
and others, by the consecration of Dr T. F. Middleton as bishop 
of Calcutta, with three archdeacons to assist him. In 181 7 Ceylon 
was added to his charge; in 1823 all British subjects in the East 
Indies and the islands of the Indian Ocean; and in 1824 "New 
South Wales and its dependencies"! Some five years later, on 
the nomination of the duke of Wellington, William Broughton 
was sent out to work in this enormous jurisdiction as archdeacon 
of Australia. Soon afterwards, in 1835 and 1837, the sees of 
Madras and Bombay were founded; whilst in 1836 Broughton 
himself was consecrated as first bishop of Australia. Thus down 
to 1840 there were but ten colonial bishops; and of these several 
were so hampered by civil regulations that they were little more 
than government chaplains in episcopal orders. In April of 
that year, however, Bishop Blomfield of London published his 
famous letter to the archbishop of Canterbury, declaring that 
" an episcopal church without a bishop is a contradiction in 
terms," and strenuously advocating a great eftort for the extension 
of the episcopate. It was not in vain. The plan was taken up 
with enthusiasm, and on Whitsun Tuesday of 1841 the bishops 
of the United Kingdom met and issued a declaration 
which inaugurated the Colonial Bishoprics Council. Subsequent 



20 



ANGLICAN COMMUNION 



declarations in 1872 and 1891 have served both to record progress 
and to stimulate to new effort. The diocese of New Zealand 
was founded in 1841, being endowed by the Church Missionary- 
Society through the council, and George Augustus Selwyn was 
chosen as the first bishop. Since then the increase has gone on, 
as the result both of home effort and of the action of the colonial 
churches. Moreover, in many cases bishops have been sent to 
inaugurate new missions, as in the cases of the Universities' 
Mission to Central Africa, Lebombo, Corea and New Guinea; 
and the missionary jurisdictions so founded develop in time 
into dioceses. Thus, instead of the ten colonial jurisdictions of 
1 84 1, there are now about a hundred foreign and colonial 
jurisdictions, in addition to those of the Protestant Episcopal 
Church of the United States. 

It was only very gradually that these dioceses acquired 
legislative independence and a determinate organization. At 
first, sees were created and bishops were nominated by the 
crown by means of letters patent; and in some cases an income 
was assigned out of public funds. Moreover, for many years 
all bishops alike were consecrated in England, took the customary 
" oath of due obedience " to the archbishop of Canterbury, and 
were regarded as his extra-territorial suffragans. But by degrees 
changes have been made on all these points. 

(1) Local conditions soon made a provincial organization 
necessary, and it was gradually introduced. The bishop of Cal- 
cutta received letters patent as metropolitan of India 

Provincial w jj en the sees of Madras and Bombay were founded; 
tioo. an d fresh patents were issued to Bishop Broughton in 

1847 and Bishop Gray in 1853, as metropolitans of 
Australia and South Africa respectively. Similar action was' 
taken in 1858, when Bishop Selwyn became metropolitan of 
New Zealand; and again in i860, when, on the petition of the 
Canadian bishops to the crown and the colonial legislature for 
permission to elect a metropolitan, letters patent were issued 
appointing Bishop Fulford of Montreal to that office. Since 
then metropolitans have been chosen and provinces formed by 
regular synodical action, a process greatly encouraged by the 
resolutions of the Lambeth conferences on the subject. The 
constitution of these provinces is not uniform. In some cases, as 
South Africa, New South Wales, and Queensland,the metropolitan 
see is fixed. Elsewhere, as in New Zealand, where no single city 
can claim pre-eminence, the metropolitan is either elected or else 
is the senior bishop by consecration. Two further developments 
must be mentioned: (a) The creation of diocesan and provincial 
synods, the first diocesan synod to meet being that of New 
Zealand in 1844, whilst the formation of a provincial synod was 
foreshadowed by a conference of Australasian bishops at Sydney 
in 1850; (b) towards the close of the 19th century the title of 
archbishop began to be assumed by the metropolitans of several 
provinces. It was first assumed by the metropolitans of Canada 
and Rupert's Land, at the desire of the Canadian general synod 
in 1893; and subsequently, in accordance with a resolution of 
the Lambeth conference of 1897, it was given by their synods to 
the bishop of Sydney as metropolitan of New South Wales and 
to the bishop of Cape Town as metropolitan of South Africa 
Civil obstacles have hitherto delayed its adoption by the metro- 
politan of India. 

(2) By degrees, also, the colonial churches have been freed 
from their rather burdensome relations with the state. The 

church of the West Indies was disestablished and 
Freedom disendowed in 1868. In 1857 it was decided, in 
control. Regina v. Eton College, that the crown could not claim 

the presentation to a living when it had appointed the 
former incumbent to a colonial bishopric, as it does in the case 
of an English bishopric. In 1861, after some protest from the 
crown lawyers, two missionary bishops were consecrated without 
letters patent for regions outside British territory: C. F. 
Mackenzie for the Zambezi region and J. C. Patteson for 
Melanesia, by the metropolitans of Cape Town and New Zealand 
respectively. In 1863 the privy council declared, in Long v. 
The Bishop of Cape Town, that " the Church of England, in places 
where there is no church established by law, is in the same 



situation with any other religious body." In 1865 it adjudged 
Bishop Gray's letters patent, as metropolitan of Cape Town, to 
be powerless to enable him " to exercise any coercive juris- 
diction, or hold any court or tribunal for that purpose," since 
the Cape colony already possessed legislative institutions when 
they were issued; and his deposition of Bishop Colenso was 
declared to be " null and void in law " {re The Bishop of 
Natal). With the exception of Colenso the South African 
bishops forthwith surrendered their patents, and formally accepted 
Bishop Gray as their metropolitan, an example followed in 1865 
in the province of New Zealand. In 1862, when the diocese of 
Ontario was formed, the bishop was elected in Canada, and con- 
secrated under a royal mandate, letters patent being by this time 
entirely discredited. And when, in 1867, a coadjutor was chosen 
for the bishop of Toronto, an application for a royal mandate 
produced the reply from the colonial secretary that " it was not 
the part of the crown to interfere in the creation of a new 
bishop or bishopric, and not consistent with the dignity of the 
crown that he should advise Her Majesty to issue a mandate 
which would not be worth the paper on which it was written, and 
which, having been sent out to Canada, might be disregarded 
in the most complete manner." And at the present day the 
colonial churches are entirely free in this matter. This, however, 
is not the case with the church in India. Here the bishops of 
sees founded down to 1879 receive a stipend from the revenue 
(with the exception of the bishop of Ceylon, who no longer does 
so). They are not only nominated by the crown and consecrated 
under letters patent, but the appointment is expressly subjected 
" to such power of revocation and recall as is by law vested " 
in the crown; and where additional oversight was necessary 
for the church in Tinnevelly, it could only be secured by the 
consecration of two assistant bishops, who worked under a com- 
mission for the archbishop of Canterbury which was to expire 
on the death of the bishop of Madras. Since then, however, 
new sees have been founded which are under no such restrictions: 
by the creation of dioceses either in native states (Travancore 
and Cochin), or out of the existing dioceses (Chota Nagpur, x 
Lucknow, &c). In the latter case there is no legal subdivision of 
the older diocese, the new bishop administering such districts as 
belonged to it under commission from its bishop, provision being 
made, however, that in all matters ecclesiastical there shall be 
no appeal but to the metropolitan of India. 

(3) By degrees, also, the relations of colonial churches to the 
archbishop of Canterbury have changed. Until 1855 no colonial 
bishop was consecrated outside the British Isles, the 
first instance being Dr MacDougall of Labuan, con- J^t oa u omy , 
secrated in India under a commission from the arch- 
bishop of Canterbury; and until 1874 it was held to be unlawful 
for a bishop to be consecrated in England without taking the 
suffragan's oath of due obedience. This necessity was removed 
by the Colonial Clergy Act of 1874, which permits the archbishop 
at his discretion to dispense with the oath. This, however, has 
not been done in all cases; and as late as 1890 it was taken by 
the metropolitan of Sydney at his consecration. Thus the 
constituent parts of the Anglican communion gradually acquire 
autonomy: missionary jurisdictions develop into organized 
dioceses, and dioceses are grouped into provinces with canons of 
their own. But the most complete autonomy does not involve 
isolation. The churches are in full communion with one another, 
and act together in many ways; missionary jurisdictions and 
dioceses are mapped out by common arrangement, and even 
transferred if it seems advisable; e.g. the diocese Honolulu 
(Hawaii), previously under the jurisdiction of the archbishop 
of Canterbury, was transferred in 1900 to the Episcopal Church 
in the United States on account of political changes. Though 
the see of Canterbury claims no primacy over the Anglican 
communion analogous to that exercised over the Roman Church 
by the popes, it is regarded with a strong affection and deference, 
which shows itself by frequent consultation and interchange of 
greetings. There is also a strong common life emphasized by 
common action. 

The conference of Anglican bishops from all parts of the world, 



ANGLING 



21 



instituted by Archbishop Longley in 1867, and known as the 
Lambeth Conferences (q.v.), though even for the 
a "a an Anglican communion they have not the authority of an 
Congress, ecumenical synod, and their decisions are rather of the 
nature of counsels than commands, have done much 
to promote the harmony and co-operation of the various branches 
of the Church. An even more imposing manifestation of this 
common life was given by the great pan-Anglican congress held 
in London between the 12th and 24th of June 1908, which 
preceded the Lambeth conference opened on the 5th of July. 
The idea of this originated with Bishop Montgomery, secretary 
to the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, and was endorsed 
by a resolution of the United Boards of Mission in 1903. As the 
result of negotiations and preparations extending over five years, 
250 bishops, together with delegates, clerical and lay, from every 
diocese in the Anglican communion, met in London, the opening 
service of intercession being held in Westminster Abbey. In its 
general character, the meeting was but a Church congress on an 
enlarged scale, and the subjects discussed, e.g. the attitude of 
churchmen towards the question of the marriage laws or that 
of socialism, followed much the same lines. The congress, of 
course, had no power to decide or to legislate for the Church, its 
main value being in drawing its scattered members closer together, 
in bringing the newer and more isolated branches into con- 
sciousness of their contact with the parent stem, and in opening 
the eyes of the Church of England to the point of view and the 
peculiar problems of the daughter-churches. 

The Anglican communion consists of the following: — (1) The 
Church of England, 2 provinces, Canterbury and York, with 
24 and 11 dioceses respectively. (2) The Church of Ireland, 
2 provinces, Armagh and Dublin, with 7 and 6 dioceses respec- 
tively. (3) The Scottish Episcopal Church, with 7 dioceses. 
(4) The Protestant Episcopal Church of the United States, with 
89 dioceses and missionary jurisdictions, including North Tokyo, 
Kyoto, Shanghai, Cape Palmas, and the independent dioceses of 
Hayti and Brazil. (5) The Canadian Church, consisting of (a)the 
province of Canada, with 10 dioceses; (b) the province of Rupert's 
Land, with 8 dioceses. (6) The Church in India and Ceylon, 1 
province of 11 dioceses. (7) The Church of the West Indies, 1 
province of 8 dioceses, of which Barbados and the Windward 
Islands are at present united. (8) The Australian Church, 
consisting of (a) the province of New South Wales, with 10 
dioceses; (b) the province of Queensland, with 5 dioceses; (c) the 
province of Victoria, with 5 dioceses. (9) The Church of New 
Zealand, 1 province of 7 dioceses, together with the missionary 
jurisdiction of Melanesia. (10) The South African Church, 1 
province of 10 dioceses, with the 2 missionary jurisdictions of 
Mashonaland and Lebombo. (n) Nearly 30 isolated dioceses 
and missionary jurisdictions holding mission from the see of 
Canterbury. 

Authorities. — Official Year-book of the Church of England; 
Phillimore, Ecclesiastical Law, vol. ii. (London, 1895); Digest of 
S.P.G. Records (London, 1893); E. Stock, History of the Church 
Missionary Society, 3 vols. (London, 1899); H. W. Tucker, The 
English Church in Other Lands (London, 1886) ; A. T. Wirgman, The 
Church and the Civil Power (London, 1893). 

ANGLING, the art or practice of the sport of catching fish by 
means of a baited hook or " angle " (from the Indo-European 
root ank-, meaning " bend "). 1 It is among the most ancient 
of human activities, and may be said to date from the time when 
man was in the infancy of the Stone Age, eking out a precarious 
existence by the slaughter of any living thing which he could 
reach with the rude weapons at his command. It is probable 
that attack on fishes was at first much the same as attack on 

1 As to whether " angling " necessarily implies a rod as well as a 
line and hook, see the discussion in the law case of Barnard v. Roberts 
(Times L.R., April 13, 1907), when the question arose as to the use 
of night-lines being angling; but the decision against night-lines 
went on the ground of the absence of the personal element rather 
than on the absence of a rod. The various dictionaries are blind 
guides on this point, and the authorities cited are inconclusive; 
but, broadly speaking, angling now implies three necessary factors — 
a personal angler, the sporting element, and the use of recognized 
fishing-tackle. 



animals, a matter of force rather than of guile, and conducted by 
means of a rude spear with a flint head. It is probable, too, that 
the primitive harpooners were not signally successful in their 
efforts, and so set their wits to work to devise other means of 
getting at the abundant food which waited for them in every 
piece of water near their caves. Observation would soon show 
them that fish fed greedily on each other and on other inhabitants 
of the water or living things that fell into it, and so, no doubt, 
arose the idea of entangling the prey by means of its appetite. 
Hence came the notion of the first hook, which, it seems certain, 
was not a hook at all but a " gorge," a piece of flint or stone 
which the fish could swallow with the bait but which it could not 
eject afterwards. From remains found in cave-dwellings and 
their neighbourhood in different parts of the world it is obvious 
that these gorges varied in shape, but in general the idea was the 
same, a narrow strip of stone or flake of flint, either straight or 
slightly curved at the ends, with a groove in the middle round 
which the line could be fastened. Buried in the bait it would be 
swallowed end first; then the tightening of the line would fix 
it cross- wise in the quarry's, stomach or gullet and so the capture 
would be assured. The device still lingers in France and in a 
few remote parts of England in the method of catching eels which 
is known as " sniggling." In this a needle buried in a worm plays 
the part of the prehistoric gorge. 

The evolution of the fish-hook from the slightly curved gorge 
is easily intelligible. The ends became more and more curved, 
until eventually an object not unlike a double hook was attained. 
This development would be materially assisted by man's dis- 
covery of the uses of bronze and its adaptability to his require- 
ments. The single hook, of the pattern more or less familiar to 
us, was possibly a concession of the lake-dweller to what may even 
then have been a problem — the " education " of fish, and to a 
recognition of the fact that sport with the crude old methods 
was falling off. But it is also not improbable that in some parts 
of the world the single hook developed pari passu with the 
double, and that, on the sea-shore for instance, where man was 
able to employ so adaptable a substance as shell, the first hook 
was a curved fragment of shell lashed with fibre to a piece of 
wood or bone, in such a way that the shell formed the bend of 
the hook while the wood or bone formed the shank. Both early 
remains and recent hooks from the Fiji Islands bear out this 
supposition. It is also likely that flint, horn and bone were 
pressed into service in a similar manner. The nature of the line 
or the rod that may have been used with these early hooks is 
largely a matter of conjecture. The first line was perhaps the 
tendril of a plant, the first rod possibly a sapling tree. But it is 
fairly obvious that the rod must have been suggested by the 
necessity of getting the bait out over obstacles which lay between 
the fisherman and the water, and that it was a device for increas- 
ing both the reach of the arm and the length of the line. It 
seems not improbable that the rod very early formed a part of the 
fisherman's equipment. 

Literary History. — From prehistoric times down to compara- 
tively late in the days of chronicles, angling appears to have 
remained a practice; its development into an art or sport is a 
modern idea. In the earliest literature references to angling are 
not very numerous, but there are passages in the Old Testament 
which show that fish-taking with hook as well as net was one of 
the common industries in the East, and that fish, where it was 
obtainable, formed an important article of diet. In Numbers 
(xi. 5) the children of Israel mourn for the fish which they " did 
eat in Egypt freely." So much too is proved by the monuments 
of Egypt; indeed more, for the figures found in some of the 
Egyptian fishing pictures using short rods and stout lines are 
sometimes attired after the manner of those who were great in 
the land. This indicates that angling had already, in a highly 
civilized country, taken its place among the methods of diversion 
at the disposal of the wealthy, though from the uncompromising 
nature of the tackle depicted and the. apparent simplicity of the 
fish it would scarcely be safe to assume that in Egypt angling 
arrived at the dignity of becoming an " art." In Europe it took 
I very much longer for the taking of fish to be regarded even as an 



22 



ANGLING 



amusement, and the earliest references to it in the Greek and 
Latin classics are not very satisfying to the sportsman. There is, 
however, a passage in the Odyssey (xii. 247) which is of consider- 
able importance, as it shows that fishing with rod and line was 
well enough understood in early Greece to be used as a popular 
illustration. It occurs in the well-known scene where Scylla 
seizes the companions of Odysseus out of the ship and bears them 
upwards, just as " some fisher on a headland with a long rod " 
brings small fishes gasping to the shore. Another important, 
though comparatively late, passage in Greek poetry is the 
twenty-first idyll of Theocritus. In this the fisherman Asphalion 
relates how in a dream he hooked a large golden fish and describes 
graphically, albeit with some obscurity of language, how he 
" played " it. Asphalion used a rod and fished from a rock, much 
after the manner of the Homeric angler. Among other Greek 
writers, Herodotus has a good many references to fish and fishing; 
the capture of fish is once or twice mentioned or implied by Plato, 
notably in the Laws (vii. 823); Aristotle deals with fish?s in his 
Natural History; and there are one or two fishing passages in the 
anthology. But in Greek literature, as a whole the subject of 
angling is not at all prominent. In writers of late Greek, however, 
there is more material. Plutarch, for instance, gives us the 
famous story of the fishing match between Antony and Cleopatra, 
which has been utilized by Shakespeare. Moreover, it is in Greek 
that the first complete treatise on fishing which has come down 
to us is written, the Halieutica of Oppian (c. a.d. 169). It is a 
hexameter poem in five books with perhaps more technical than 
sporting interest, and not so much even of that as the length of 
the work would suggest. Still it contains some information about 
tackle and methods, and some passages describing battles with 
big fish, in the right spirit of enthusiasm. Also in Greek is what is 
famous as the first reference in literature to fly-fishing, in the 
fifteenth book of Aelian's Natural History (3rd century a.d.). It 
is there described how the Macedonians captured a certain 
spotted fish in the river Astraeus by means of a lure composed of 
coloured wool and feathers, which was presumably used in the 
manner now known as " dapping." That there were other 
Greek writers who dealt with fish and fishing and composed 
" halieutics " we know from Athenaeus. In the first book of his 
Deipnosophislae he gives a list of them. But he compares their 
work unfavourably with the passage of Homer already cited, in a 
way which suggests that their knowledge of angling was not a 
great advance upon the knowledge of their remote literary 
ancestors. In Latin literature allusions to angling are rather 
more numerous than in Greek, but on the whole they are un- 
important. Part of a poem by Ovid, the Halieuticon, composed 
during the poet's exile at Tomi after a.d. 9, still survives. In 
other Roman writers the subject is only treated by way of allusion 
or illustration. Martial, however, provides, among other 
passages, what may perhaps be entitled to rank as the earliest 
notice of private fishery rights — the epigram Ad Piscatorem, 
which warns would-be poachers from casting a line in the Baian 
lake. Pliny the elder devoted the ninth book of his Natural 
History to fishes and water-life, and Plautus, Cicero, Catullus, 
Horace, Juvenal, Pliny the younger and Suetonius all allude to 
angling here and there. Agricultural writers, too, such as Varro 
and Columella, deal with the subject of fish ponds and stews 
rather fully. Later than any of these, but still just included in 
Latin literature, we have Ausonius (c. a.d. 320) and his well- 
known idyll the Mosella, which contains a good deal about the 
fish of the Moselle and the methods of catching them. In this 
poem is to be found the first recognizable description of members 
of the salmon family, and, though the manner of their application 
is rather doubtful, the names salmo, salar and Jario strike a 
responsive note in the breast of the modern angler. 

Post-classical Literature. — As to what happened in the world of 
angling in the first few centuries of the Christian era we know 
little. It may be inferred, however, that both fish and fishermen 
occupied a more honourable position in Christendom than they 
ever did before. The prominence of fishermen in the gospel 
narratives would in itself have been enough to bring this about, 
but it also happened that the Greek word for fish, IX0TS, had an 



anagrammatic significance which the devout were not slow to 
perceive. The initials of the word resolve into what is practically 
a confession of faith, 'Ir;<roDy Xpioros GeoO Tios 2<or)7p (Jesus 
Christ, Son of God, Saviour). It is therefore not surprising that 
we find the fish very prominent as a sacred emblem in the painting 
and sculpture of the primitive church, or that Clement of Alex- 
andria should have recommended it, among other things, as a 
device for signet rings or seals. The fisherman too is frequently 
represented in early Christian art, and it is worthy of remark 
that he more often uses a line and hook than a net. The refer- 
ences to fish and fishing scattered about in the writings of the 
early fathers for the most part reflect the two ideas of the 
sacredness of the fish and divine authorization of the fisherman; 
the second idea certainly prevailed until the time of Izaak 
Walton, for he uses it to justify his pastime. It is also not 
unlikely that the practice of fasting (in many cases fish was 
allowed when meat was forbidden) gave the art of catching fish 
additional importance. It seems at any rate to have been a 
consideration of weight when sites were chosen for monasteries 
in Europe, and in many cases when no fish-producing river was 
at hand the lack was supplied by the construction of fish-ponds. 
Despite all this, however, save for an occasional allusion in the 
early fathers, there is hardly a connecting link between the 
literature of Pagan Rome and the literature that sprang up on 
the invention of printing. One volume, the Geoponica, a Greek 
compilation concerning whose authorship and date there has 
been much dispute, is attributed in Bibliotheca Piscatoria to the 
beginning of the 10th century. It contains one book on fish, 
fish-ponds and fishing, with prescriptions for baits, &c, extracted 
for the most part from other writers. But it seems doubtful 
whether its date should not be placed very much earlier. Tradi- 
tion makes it a Carthaginian treatise translated into Greek. A 
more satisfactory fragment of fishing literature is to be found in 
the Colloquy of yElfric, written (ad pueros linguae latinae locu- 
tionis exercendos) towards the end of the same century. iElfric 
became archbishop of Canterbury in a.d. 995, and the passage 
in the Anglo-Saxon text-book takes honourable rank as the 
earliest reference to fishing in English writings, though it is not 
of any great length. It is to be noted that the fisher who takes a 
share in the colloquy states that he prefers fishing in the river to 
fishing in the sea. Ascribed to the 13th or 14th century is a 
Latin poem De Velula, whose author was apparently Richard de 
Fournival. It contains a passage on angling, and was placed to 
the credit of Ovid when first printed (c. 1470). A manuscript in 
the British museum, Comptes des pickeries dc I'&glise de Troyes 
(a.d. 1349-1413), gives a minute account of the fisheries with 
the weights of fish captured and the expenses of working. 
There is, however, practically nothing else of importance till we 
come to the first printed book on angling (a translation of Oppian, 
1478, excepted), and so to the beginning of the literature proper. 
This first book was a little volume printed in Antwerp probably 
in 1492 at the press of Matthias van der Goes. In size it is little 
more than a pamphlet, and it treats of birds as well as fish: — 
D.it Boecxken leert hoe men mach Voghelen . . . ende . . . 
visschen vangen met ten handen. Ende oeck andersins. . . . 
(" This book teaches how one may catch birds . . . and . . . 
fish with the hands, and also otherwise "). Only one copy 
apparently survives, in the Denison library, and a translation 
privately printed for Mr Alfred Denison in 1872 was limited to 
twenty-five copies. At least two other editions of the book 
appeared in Flemish, and it also made its way, in 1502, to 
Germany, where, translated and with certain alterations and 
additions, it seems to have been re-issued frequently. Next in 
date comes the famous Treaty se of Fysshynge wyth an Angle, 
printed at Westminster by Wynkyn de Worde in 1496 as a part 
of the second edition of The Book of St Albans. The treatise 
is for this reason associated with the name of Dame Juliana 
Berners, but that somewhat dubious compiler can have had 
nothing whatever to do with it.. The treatise is almost certainly 
a compilation from some earlier work on angling (" bokes of 
credence " are mentioned in its text), possibly from a manuscript 
of the earlier part of the 15th century, of which a portion is 



ANGLING 



23 



preserved in the Denison collection. This was published in 
1883 by Mr Thomas Satchell under the title An Older Form of the 
Treatyse of Fysshynge wyth an Angle. But it is also possible 
that a still older work was the parent of both books, for it has 
been held that the manuscript is an independent version. How- 
ever this may be, it is certain that the treatise itself has been the 
parent of many other works. Many of the instructions contained 
in it are handed down from generation to generation with little 
change except in diction. Especially is this the case with the list 
of trout-flies, a meagre twelve, which survives in many fishing 
books until well into the 18th century. 

From the beginning of the 16th century the fisherman's library 
begins to grow apace, as, though books solely devoted to fishing 
are not yet frequent, works on husbandry and country pursuits 
almost all contain something on the subject. In Italy the 
fisherman and his occupation apparently were considered poetic- 
ally; the word pescatore or its cognates are common on Italian 
16th and 17th century title-pages, though in many instances 
the fulfilment of the implied promise is not adequate, from an 
angler's point of view. From the pages of Bibliotheca Piscatoria 
a fairly long list of Italian writers could be gleaned. Among 
them may be mentioned Sannazaro {Piscatoria, &c, Rome, 1526) 
and Andrea Calmo (Rime pescalorie. Venice, 1557). A century 
later was Parthenius, who published a volume of Halieutica at 
Naples. This writer has an amusing reference to the art of 
" tickling " trout as practised in Britain. In Germany, as has 
been shown, the original little Flemish treatise had a wide vogue 
in the 16th century, and fishing played a part in a good many 
books on husbandry such as that of Conrad Heresbach (1570). 
Fish and fish-ponds formed the main topic of a Latin work by 
Dubravius (1552), while Gesner in the middle of the 16th and 
Aldrovandi at the beginning of the 17th centuries wrote at length 
on the natural history of fishes. In France the subject is less 
well represented, but Lcs Pcscheries of Chris, de Gamon (Lyons, 
1599) and Le Plaisir des champs of CI. Gauchet (Paris, 1604) 
deserve to be noted. Les Ruses innocentes by Francois Fortin, 
first published at Paris in 1600, and several times in later editions, 
is characterized by Messrs Westwood and Satchell as " on the 
whole the most interesting contribution made by France to 
the literature of angling." England during the most part of the 
16th century was evidently well enough served by the original 
treatise out of The Book of St Albans. It was republished twice 
by Wynkyn de Worde, six or seven times by Copland, and some 
five times by other printers. It was also practically republished 
in A Booke of Fishing by L. M. (1590). L. M. (Leonard Mascall) 
ranks as an angling author, but he did little more than borrow and 
edit the treatise. The same may be said of another version of The 
Book of St Albans " now newly collected by W. G. Faulkener " 
and issued in 1596. 

Modern Literature. — In 1 600 appeared John Taverner's Certaine 
Experiments concerning Fish and Fruite, and after this the period 
of angling literature proper begins. TheSecrets of Angling (1613), 
by J(ohn) D(ennys), Esq., is one of the most important 
volumes in the angler's library, both on account of the excellence 
of the verse in which it is written and also on account of its 
practical value. Gervase Markham, " the first journalist," as 
he has been called, published his first book of husbandry at 
the same date, and, as in most of his many books on the same 
subject, devoted a certain amount of space to fishing. But 
Markham gathered his materials in a rather shameless manner 
and his angling passages have little originality. Thomas Barker's 
The Art of Angling (1st ed., 1651) takes a more honourable 
position, and received warm commendation from Izaak Walton 
himself, who followed it in 1653 with The Compleat Angler. 
So much has been written about this treasured classic that it is 
only necessary to indicate its popularity here by saying that 
its editions occupy some twenty pages in Bibliotheca Piscatoria 
(1883), and that since that work was published at least forty 
new editions have to be added to the list. During Walton's 
life-time the book ran through five editions, and with the fifth 
(1676) was incorporated Charles Cotton's second part, the 
" instructions how to angle for a trout or grayling, in a clear 



stream." In some cases too there was added a third book, 
the fourth edition of The Experienced Angler, by Robert Venables 
(1st ed., 1662). The three books together bore the title of 
The Universal Angler. Venables's portion was dropped later, 
but it is worth reading, and contained sound instruction though 
it has not the literary merit of Walton and Cotton. 

A few other notable books of the century call for enumeration, 
The Gentleman 's Recreation by Nicholas Cox (1674), Gilbert's 
The Angler's Delight (1676), Chetham's Vade-Mecum (1681), 
The Complete Trotter by Robert Nobbes (1682), R. Franck's 
Northern Memoirs (1694), and The True Art of Angling by J. S. 
(1696). Of these Chetham, Nobbes, Franck and J. S. have the 
merit of considerable originality. Franck has gained some 
notoriety by his round abuse of Walton. In the 18th century 
among others we find The Secrets of Angling by C. G. (1705), 
Robert Howlett's The Angler's Sure Guide (1706), The Whole 
Art of Fishing (1714), The Compleat Fishermanby James Saunders 
(1724), The Art of Angling by R. Brookes (1740), another book 
with the same title by R. and C. Bowlker (Worcester, c. 1750), 
The Complete Sportsman by Thomas Fairfax (c. 1760), The 
Angler's Museum by T. Shirley (1784), and A Concise Treatise 
on the Art of Angling by Thomas Best (1787). Of these only 
Saunders's, Bowlker's and Best's books are of much importance, 
the rest being for the most part " borrowed." One volume of 
verse in the 18th century calls for notice, Moses Browne's 
Piscatory Eclogues (1729). Among greater names we get angling 
passages in Pope, Gay and Thomson; the two last were evidently 
brothers of the angle. 

With the 19th century angling literature becomes too big a 
subject to be treated in detail, and it is only possible to glance 
at a few of the more important books and writers. Daniel's 
Rural Sports appeared in 1801; it is a treasure-house of odd 
facts. In 1828 Sir Humphry Davy published his famous 
Salmonia, which was reviewed in the Quarterly by Sir Walter- 
Scott. At about this time too were appearing the Nodes Ambro- 
sianae in Blackwood's Magazine. Christopher North (Professor 
Wilson) often touched upon angling in them, besides contributing 
a good many angling articles to the magazine. In 1835 that 
excellent angling writer Thomas Tod Stoddart began his valuable 
series of books with The Art of Angling as Practised in Scotland. 
In 1839 he published Songs and Poems, among which are pieces 
of great merit. During this period, too, first appeared, year 
by year, the Newcastle Fishers' Garlands, collected by Joseph 
Crawhall afterwards and republished in 1864. These border. 
verses, like Stoddart's, have often a genuine ring about them 
which is missing from the more polished effusions of Gay and 
Thomson. Alfred Ronalds's The Fly-Fisher's Entomology 
(1st ed., 1836) was a publication of great importance, for it 
marked the beginning of the scientific spirit among trout-fishers. 
It ran through many editions and is still a valuable book of 
reference. A step in angling history is also marked by George 
Pulman's Vade-Mecum of Fly-fishing for Trout (1841), for it 
contains the first definite instructions on fishing with a " dry 
fly." Another is marked by Hewett Wheatley's The Rod and 
the Line (1849), where is to be found the earliest reference to the 
" eyed " hook. Yet another is marked by W. C. Stewart's 
The Practical Angler (1857), in which is taught the new doctrine 
of " up-stream " fishing for trout. This is a book of permanent 
value. Among the many books of this period Charles Kingsley's 
Miscellanies (1859) stands out, for it contains the immortal 
" Chalk-Stream Studies." The work of Francis Francis begins 
at about the same time, though his A Book on Angling, which 
is still one of the most valuable text-books, was not first published 
till 1867. Another well-known and excellent writer, Mr H. 
Cholmondeley Pennell, began in the early 'sixties; it is to him 
that we owe the admirable volumes on fresh-water fishing in 
the " Badminton Library." Among other English writers 
mention must be made of Messrs William Senior, John Bicker- 
dyke and F. M. Halford, who have all performed signal services 
for angling and its literature. (See further bibliography ad fin.) 
In America the latter half of the 19th century produced a good 
deal of fishing literature, much of it of a high standard. / go 



24- 



ANGLING 



a-Fishing by Dr W. C. Prime (1873), Fishing with the Fly by 
C. F. Orvis, A. Nelson Cheney and others (1883), The American 
Salmon Fisherman and Fly Rods and Fly Tackle by H. P. Wells 
(1886 and 1885), Little Rivers and other books by the Rev. H. 
Van Dyke — these are only a few specially distinguished in style 
and matter. Germany and France have not contributed so 
largely to the modern library, but in the first country we find 
several useful works by Max von dem Borne, beginning with 
the Handbuch der Angelfischerei of 1875, and there are a good 
many other writers who have contributed to the subject, while 
in France there are a few volumes on fishing by different hands. 
The most noticeable is M. G. Albert Petit's La Truite de riviere 
(1897), an admirable book on fly-fishing. Asyet, however, though 
there are many enthusiastic anglers in France, the sport has not 
established itself so firmly as to have inspired much literature 
of its own ; the same may be said of Germany. 

Modern Conditions. — In the modern history of angling there 
are one or two features that should be touched upon. The great 
increase in the number of fishermen has had several results. 
One is a corresponding increase in the difficulty of obtaining 
fishing, and a notable rise in the value of rivers, especially those 
which are famed for salmon and trout. Salmon-fishing now may 
be said to have become a pastime of the rich, and there are signs 
that trout-fishing will before long have to be placed in the same 
exclusive category, while even the right to angle for less-esteemed 
fish will eventually be a thing of price. The development is 
natural, and it has naturally led to efforts on the part of the 
angling majority to counteract, if possible, the growing difficulty. 
These efforts have been directed chiefly in two ways, one the 
establishment of fishing clubs, the other the adoption of angling 
in salt water. The fishing club of the big towns was originally 
a social institution, and its members met together to sup, con- 1 
verse on angling topics and perhaps to display notable fish that 
.they had caught. Later, however, arose the idea that it would be 
a convenience if a club could give its members privileges of fishing 
as well as privileges of reunion. So it comes about that all over 
the United Kingdom, in British colonies and dependencies, in 
the United States, and also in Germany and France, fishing clubs 
rent waters, undertake preservation and restocking and generally 
lead an active and useful existence. It is a good sign for the 
future of angling and anglers that they are rapidly increasing in 
number. One of the oldest fishing clubs, if not the oldest, was 
the Schuylkill club, founded in Pennsylvania in 1732. An 
account of its history was published in Philadelphia in 1830. 
Among the earliest clubs in London are to be numbered such 
societies as The True Waltonians, The Piscatorial, The Friendly 
Anglers and The Gresham, which are still flourishing. A certain 
amount of literary activity has been observable in the world of 
angling clubs, and several volumes of " papers " are on the 
records. Most noticeable perhaps are the three volumes of 
Anglers' Evenings published in 1880-1894, a collection of essays 
by members of the Manchester Anglers' Association. The other 
method of securing a continuance of sport, the adoption of sea- 
angling as a substitute for fresh-water fishing, is quite a modern 
thing. Within the memory of men still young the old tactics of 
hand-line and force were considered good enough for sea fish. 
Now the fresh-water angler has lent his centuries of experience 
in deluding his quarry; the sea-angler has adopted many of the 
ideas presented to him, has modified or improved others, and has 
developed the capture of sea-fish into a science almost as subtle 
as the capture of their fresh-water cousins. One more modern 
feature, which is also a result of the increase of anglers, is the great 
advance made in fish-culture, fish-stocking and fish-acclimatiza- 
tion during the last half-century. Fish-culture is now a 
recognized industry; every trout-stream of note and value is 
restocked from time to time as a matter of course; salmon- 
hatcheries are numerous, though their practical utility is still a 
debated matter, in Great Britain at any rate; coarse fish are 
also bred for purposes of restocking; and, lastly, it is now 
considered a fairly simple matter to introduce fish from one 
country to another, and even from continent to continent. In 
England the movement owes a great deal to Francis Francis, 



who, though he was not the earliest worker in the field, was 
among the first to formulate the science of fish-breeding; his 
book Fish-Culture, first published in 1863, still remains one of 
the best treatises on the subject. In the United States, where 
fishery science has had the benefit of generous governmental and 
official support and countenance and so has reached a high level 
of achievement, Dr. T. Garlick (The Artificial Reproduction oj 
Fishes, Cleveland, 1857) is honoured as a pioneer. On the 
continent of Europe the latter half of the 19th century saw a very 
considerable and rapid development in fish-culture, but until 
comparatively recently the propagation and care of fish in most 
European waters have been considered almost entirely from the 
point of view of the fish-stew and the market. As to what has 
been done in the way of acclimatization it is not necessary to say 
much. Trout {Salmo fario) were introduced to New Zealand in 
the late 'sixties from England; in the 'eighties rainbow trout 
(Salmo irideus) were also introduced from California ; now New 
Zealand provides the finest trout-fishing of its kind in the world. 
American trout of different kinds have been introduced into 
England, and brown trout have been introduced to America; 
but neither innovation can be said to have been an unqualified 
success, though the rainbow has established itself firmly in some 
waters of the United Kingdom. It is still regarded with some 
suspicion, as it has a tendency to wander from waters which do 
not altogether suit it. For the rest, trout have been established 
in Ceylon, in Kashmir and in South Africa, and early in 1906 an 
attempt was made to carry them to British Central Africa. In 
fact the possibilities of acclimatization are so great that, it seems 
probable, in time no river of the civilized world capable of holding 
trout will be without them. 

Methods and Practice 

Angling now divides itself into two main divisions, fishing in 
fresh water and fishing in the sea. The two branches of the 
sport have much in common, and sea-angling is really little more 
than an adaptation of fresh-water methods to salt-water con- 
ditions. Therefore it will not be necessary to deal with it at 
great length and it naturally comes in the second place. Angling 
in fresh water is again divisible into three principal parts, fishing 
on the surface, i.e. with the fly; in mid- water, i.e. with a bait 
simulating the movements of a small fish or with the small fish 
itself; and on the bottom with worms, paste or one of the many 
other baits which experience has shown that fish will take. With 
the premise that it is not intended here to go into the minutiae 
of instruction which may more profitably be discovered in the 
many works of reference cited at the end of this article, some 
account of the subdivisions into which these three styles of fishing 
fall may be given. 

Fresh-Water Fishing. 

Fly-fishing. — Fly-fishing is the most modern of them, but it 
is the most highly esteemed, principally because it is the method 
par excellence of taking members of the most valuable sporting 
family of fish, the Salmonidae. It may roughly be considered 
under three heads, the use of the " wet " or sunk fly, of the " dry " 
or floating fly, and of the natural insect. Of these the first 
is the most important, for it covers the widest field and is 
the most universally practised. There are few varieties of fish 
which may not either consistently or occasionally be taken with 
the sunk fly in one of its two forms. The large and gaudy bunch 
of feathers, silk and tinsel with which salmon, very large trout, 
black bass and occasionally other predaceous fish are taken is not, 
strictly speaking, a fly at all. Jt rather represents, if anything, 
some small fish or subaqueous creature on which the big fish is 
accustomed to feed and it may conveniently receive the generic 
name of salmon-fly. The smaller lures, however, which are used 
to catch smaller trout and other fish that habitually feed on 
insect food are in most cases intended to represent that food in 
one of its forms and are entitled to the name of "artificial flies." 
The dry or floating fly is simply a development of the imitation 
theory, and has been evolved from the wet fly in course of closer 
observation of the habits of flies and fish in certain waters. Both 
wet and dry fly methods are really a substitute for the third and 



ANGLING 



oldest kind of surface-fishing, the use of a natural insect as a bait. 
Each method is referred to incidentally below. 

Spinning, b'c. — Mid-water fishing, as has been said, broadly 
consists in the use of a small fish, or something that simulates it, 
and its devices are aimed almost entirely at those fish which prey 
on their fellows. Spinning, live-baiting and trolling 1 are these 
devices. In the first a small dead fish or an imitation of it made 
in metal, india-rubber, or other substance, is caused to revolve 
rapidly as it is pulled through the water, so that it gives the idea 
of something in difficulties and trying to escape. In the second 
a small fish is put on the angler's hook alive and conveys the 
same idea by its own efforts. In the third a small dead fish is 
caused to dart up and down in the water without revolving; it 
conveys the same idea as the spinning fish, though the manipula- 
tion is different. 

Bottom-Fishing. — Bottom-fishing is the branch of angling 
which is the most general. There is practically no fresh-water 
fish that will not take some one or more of the baits on the angler's 
list if they are properly presented to it when it is hungry. Usually 
the baited hook is on or near the bottom of the water, but the rule 
suggested by the name " bottom-fishing " is not invariable and 
often the bait is best used in mid-water; similarly, in " mid-water 
fishing " the bait must sometimes be used as close to the bottom 
as possible. Bottom-fishing is roughly divisible into two kinds, 
float-fishing, in which a bite is detected by the aid of a float 
fastened to the line above the hook and so balanced that its tip 
is visible above the water, and hand-fishing, in which no float is 
used and the angler trusts to his hand to feel the bite of a fish. In 
most cases either method can be adopted and it is a matter of 
taste, but broadly speaking the float-tackle is more suited to water 
which is not very deep and is either still or not rapid. In great 
depths or strong streams a float is difficult to manage. 

The Fish. 

It is practically impossible to classify the fish an angler 
catches according to the methods which he employs, as most 
fish can be taken by at least two of these methods, while many 
of those most highly esteemed can be caught by all three. 
Sporting fresh-water fish are therefore treated according to their 
families and merits from the angler's point of view, and it is briefly 
indicated which method or methods best succeed in pursuit of 
them. 

Salmon. — First in importance come the migratory Salmonidae, 
and at the head of them the salmon {Salmo salar), which has a 
two-fold reputation as a sporting and as a commercial asset. The 
salmon fisheries of a country are a very valuable possession, but 
it is only comparatively recently that this has been realized and 
that salmon rivers have received the legal protection which is 
necessary to their well-being. Even now it cannot be asserted 
that in England the salmon question, as it is called, is settled. 
Partly owing to our ignorance of the life-history of the fish, partly 
owing to the difficulty of reconciling the opposed interests of 
commerce and sport, the problem as to how a river should be 
treated remains only partially solved, though it cannot be denied 
that there has been a great advance in the right direction. The 
life-history of the salmon, so far as it concerns the matter in hand, 
may be very briefly summed up. It is bred in the rivers and fed 
in the sea. The parent fish ascend in late autumn as high a"s they 
can get, the ova are deposited on gravel shallows, hatching out in 
the course of a few weeks into parr. The infant salmon remains 
in fresh water at least one year, generally two years, without 
growingmore than a few inches, and then about May assumes what 
is called the smolt-dress, that is to say, it loses the dark parr-bands 
and red spots of infancy and becomes silvery all over. After this 
it descends without delay to the sea, where it feeds to such good 
purpose that in a year it has reached a weight of 2 lb to 4 lb or 
more, and it may then reascend as a grilse. Small grilse indeed 
may only have been in the sea a few months, ascending in the 
autumn of the year of their first descent. If the fish survives the 

1 Trolling is very commonly confused in angling writing and talk 
with trailing, which simply means drawing a spinning-bait along 
behind a boat in motion. 



perils of its first ascent and spawning season and as a kelt or 
spawned fish gets down to the sea again, it comes up a second time 
as a salmon of weight varying from 8 lb upwards. Whether 
salmon come up rivers, and, if so, spawn, every year, why some 
fish are much heavier than others of the same age, what their mode 
of life is in the sea, why some run up in spring and summer when 
the breeding season is not till about November or December, 
whether they were originally sea-fish or river-fish — these and 
other similar questions await a conclusive answer. One principal 
fact, however, stands out amid the uncertainty , and that is that 
without a free passage up and down unpolluted rivers and without 
protection on the spawning beds salmon have a very poor chance 
of perpetuating their species. Economic prudence dictates 
therefore that every year a considerable proportion of running 
salmon should be allowed to escape the dangers that confront 
them in the shape of nets, obstructions, pollutions, rods and 
poachers. And it is in the adjustment of the interests which are 
bound up in these dangers (the last excepted; officially poachers 
have no interests, though in practice their plea of " custom and 
right " has too often to be taken into consideration) that the 
salmon question consists. To secure a fair proportion of fish for 
the market, a fair proportion for the rods and a fair proportion 
for the redds, without unduly damaging manufacturing interests, 
this is the object of those who have the question at heart, and 
with many organizations and scientific observers at work it should 
not be long before the object is attained. Already the system of 
" marking " kelts with a small silver label has resulted in a con- 
siderable array of valuable statistics which have made it possible 
to estimate the salmon's ordinary rate of growth from year to 
year. It is very largely due to the efforts of anglers that the 
matter has gone so far. Whether salmon feed in fresh water is 
another question of peculiar interest to anglers, for it would seem 
that if they do not then the whole practice of taking them must 
be an anomaly. Champions have arisen on both sides of the argu- 
ment, some, scientists, asserting that salmon (parr and kelts 
excluded, for both feed greedily as opportunity occurs) do not 
feed, others, mostly anglers, maintaining strongly that they do, 
and bringing as evidence their undoubted and customary capture 
by rod and line, not only with the fly, but also with such obvious 
food-stuffs as dead baits, worms and prawns. On the other side 
it is argued that food is never found inside a salmon after it has 
been long enough in a river to have digested its last meal taken in 
salt water. The very few instances of food found in salmon which 
have been brought forward to support the contrary opinion are 
in the scientific view to be regarded with great caution; certainly 
in one case of recent years, which at first appeared to be well 
authenticated, it was afterwards found that a small trout had been 
pushed down a salmon's throat after capture by way of a joke. 
A consideration of the question, however, which may perhaps 
make some appeal to both sides, is put forward by Dr J. Kingston 
Barton in the first of the two volumes on Fishing {Country Life 
Series). He maintains that salmon do not habitually feed in 
fresh water, but he does not reject the possibility of their occasion- 
ally taking food. His view is that after exertion, such as that 
entailed by running from pool to pool during a spate, the fish may 
feel a very transient hunger and be impelled thereby to snap at 
anything in its vicinity which looks edible. The fact that the 
angler's best opportunity is undoubtedly when salmon have newly 
arrived into a pool, supports this contention. The longer they 
are compelled to remain in the same spot by lack of water the 
worse becomes the prospect of catching them, and " unfishable " 
is one of the expressive words which fishermen use to indicate the 
condition of a river during the long periods of drought which too 
often distinguish the sport. 

Salmon Tackle and Methods. — It is when the drought breaks up 
and the long-awaited rain has come that the angler has his chance 
and makes ready his tackle, against the period of a few days (on 
some short streams only a few hours) during which the water 
will be right; right is a very exact term on some rivers, meaning 
not only that the colour of the water is suitable to the fly, but 
that its height shall be within an inch or two of a given mark, 
prescribed by experience. As to the tackle which is made ready, 



26 



ANGLING 



there is, as in most angling matters, divergence of opinion. 
Salmon fly-rods are now made principally of two materials, 
greenheart and split-cane; the former is less expensive, the 
latter is more durable; it is entirely a matter of taste which a 
man uses, but the split-cane rod is now rather more in favour, 
and for salmon-fishing it is in England usually built with a 
core of steel running from butt to tip and known as a " steel 
centre." How long the rod shall be is also a matter on which 
anglers differ, but from 16 ft. to 17 ft. 6 in. represents the limits 
within which most rods are preferred. The tendency is to 
reduce rather than to increase the length of the rod, which may 
be accounted for by the adoption of a heavy line. Early in the 
19th century anglers used light-topped rods of 20 ft. and even 
more, and with them a light line composed partly of horse-hair; 
they thought 60 ft. with such material a good cast. Modern 
experience, however, has shown that a shorter rod with a heavier 
top will throw a heavy dressed silk line much farther with less 
exertion. Ninety feet is now considered a good fishing cast, 
while many men can throw a great deal more. In the United 
States, where rods have long been used much lighter than in 
England, the limits suggested would be considered too high. 
From 1 2 ft. 6 in. to 1 5 ft. 6 in. is about the range of the American 
angler's choice, though long rods are not unknown with him. 
The infinite variety of reels, lines, gut collars 1 and other forms of 
tackle which is now presented to the angler's consideration and 
for his bewilderment is too wide a subject to be touched upon 
here. Something, however, falls to be said about flies. One of 
the perennially fruitful topics of inquiry is what the fish takes a 
salmon-fly to be. Beyond a fairly general admission that it is 
regarded as something endowed with life, perhaps resembling 
a remembered article of marine diet, perhaps inviting gastro- 
nomic experiment, perhaps irritating merely and rousing an 
impulse to destroy, the discussion has not reached any definite 
conclusion. But more or less connected with it is the controversy 
as to variety of colour and pattern. Some authorities hold that 
a great variety of patterns with very minute differences in colour 
and shades of colour is essential to complete success; others 
contend that salmon do not differentiate between nice shades of 
colour, that they only draw distinctions between flies broadly 
as being light, medium or dark in general appearance, and that 
the size of a fly rather than its colour is the important point for 
the angler's consideration. Others again go some way with the 
supporters of the colour-scheme and admit the efficacy of flies 
whose general character is red, or yellow, or black, and so on. 
The opinion of the majority, however, is probably based on past 
experience, and a man's favourite flies for different rivers and 
condition of water are those with which he or someone else has 
previously succeeded. It remains a fact that in most fly-books 
great variety of patterns will be discoverable, while certain old 
standard favourites such as the Jock Scott, Durham Ranger, 
Silver Doctor, and Thunder and Lightning will be prominent. 
Coming out of the region of controversy it is a safe generalization 
to say that the general rule is: big flies for spring fishing when 
rivers are probably high, small flies for summer and low water, 
and flies medium or small in autumn according to the conditions. 
Spring fishing is considered the cream of the sport. Though 
salmon are not as a rule so numerous or so heavy as during the 

1 The precise date when silkworm gut (now so important a feature 
of the angler's equipment) was introduced is obscure. Pepys, in his 
Diary (1667), mentions " a gut string varnished over " which " is 
beyond any hair for strength and smallness " as a new angling secret 
which he likes " mightily." In the third edition (1700) of Chetham's 
Vade-Mecum, already cited, appears an advertisement of the " East 
India weed, which is the only thing for trout, carp and bottom- 
fishing." Again, in the third edition of Nobbes's Art of Trolling 
(1805), in the supplementary matter, appears a letter signed by 
J. Eaton and G. Gimber, tackle-makers of Crooked Lane (July 
20, 1801), in which it is stated that gut " is produced from the 
silkworm and not an Indian weed, as has hitherto been conjec- 
tured. . . ." The word " gut " is employed before this date, but it 
seems obvious that silkworm gut was for a long time used under the 
impression that it was a weed, and that its introduction was a thing 
of the 17th century. It is probable, however, that vegetable fibre 
was used too; we believe that in some parts of India it is used by 
natives to this day. Pepys' " minikin " was probably cat-gut. 



autumn run, and though kelts are often a nuisance in the early 
months, yet the clean-run fish of February, March or April 
amply repays patience and disappointment by its fighting powers 
and its beauty. Summer fishing on most rivers in the British 
Islands is uncertain, but in Norway summer is the season, 
which possibly explains to some extent the popularity of that 
country with British anglers, for the pleasure of a sport is largely 
increased by good weather. 

Two methods of using the fly are in vogue, casting and harling. 
The first is by far the more artistic, and it may be practised 
either from a boat, from the bank or from the bed of the river 
itself; in the last case the angler wades, wearing waterproof 
trousers or wading-stockings and stout nail-studded brogues. 
In either case the fishing is similar. The fly is cast across and 
down stream, and has to be brought over the " lie " of the fish, 
swimming naturally with its head to the stream, its feathers 
working with tempting movement and its whole appearance 
suggesting some live thing dropping gradually down and across 
stream. Most anglers add to the motion of the fly by "working " 
it with short pulls from the rod-top. When a fish takes, the rise 
is sometimes seen, sometimes not; in any case the angler should 
not respond with the rod until he feels the pull. Then he should 
tighten, not strike. The fatal word " strike," with its too literal 
interpretation, has caused many a breakage. Having hooked 
his fish, the angler must be guided by circumstances as to what 
he does; the salmon will usually decide that for him. But it is 
a sound rule to give a well-hooked fish no unnecessary advantage 
and to hold on as hard as the tackle will allow. Good tackle will 
stand an immense strain, and with this " a minute a pound " is a 
fair estimate of the time in which a fish should be landed. A 
foul-hooked salmon (no uncommon thing, for a fish not infre- 
quently misses the fly and gets hooked somewhere in the body) 
takes much longer to land. The other method of using the fly, 
harling, which is practised on a few big rivers, consists in trailing 
the fly behind a boat rowed backward and forwards across the 
stream and dropping gradually downwards. Fly-fishing for 
salmon is also practised on some lakes, into which the fish run. 
On lakes the boat drifts slowly along a " beat," while the angler 
casts diagonally over the spots where salmon are wont to lie. 
Salmon may also be caught by " mid-water fishing," with a 
natural bait either spun or trolled and with artificial spinning- 
baits of different kinds, and by " bottom-fishing " with prawns, 
shrimps and worms. Spinning is usually practised when the 
water is too high or too coloured for the fly; trolling is seldom 
employed, but is useful for exploring pools which cannot be 
fished by spinning or with the fly; the prawn is a valuable lure 
in low water and when fish are unwilling to rise ; while the worm 
is killing at all states of the river, but except as a last resource 
is not much in favour. There are a few waters where salmon 
have the reputation of not taking a fly at all; in them spinning 
or prawning are the usual modes of fishing. But most anglers, 
wherever possible, prefer to use the fly. The rod for the alter- 
native methods is generally shorter and stiffer than the fly-rod, 
though made of like material. Twelve to fourteen feet represents 
about the range of choice. Outside the British Islands the 
salmon-fisher finds the headquarters of his sport in Europe in 
Scandinavia and Iceland, and in the New World in some of the 
waters of Canada and Newfoundland. 

Land-locked Salmon. — The land-locked salmon (Salmo salar 
sebago) of Canada and the lakes of Maine is, as its name implies, 
now regarded by scientists as merely a land-locked form of the 
salmon. It does not often attain a greater size than 20 lb, 
but it is a fine fighter and is highly esteemed by American 
anglers. In most waters it does not take a fly so well as a spinning- 
bait, live-bait or worm. The methods of angling for it do not 
differ materially from those employed for other Salmonidae. 

Pacific. Salmon. — Closely allied to Salmo salar both in appear- 
ance and habits is the genus Oncorhynchus, commonly known 
as Pacific salmon. It contains six species, is peculiar to the North 
Pacific Ocean, and is of some importance to the angler, though 
of not nearly so much as the Atlantic salmon. The quinnat is 
the largest member of the genus, closely resembles salar in 



ANGLING 



27 



appearance and surpasses him in size. The others, sockeye, 
humpback, cohoe, dog-salmon and masu, are smaller and of less 
interest to the angler, though some of them have great commercial 
value. The last-named is only found in the waters of Japan, but 
the rest occur in greater or less quantities in the rivers of Kam- 
chatka, Alaska, British Columbia and Oregon. The problems 
presented to science by solar are offered by Oncorhynchus also, 
but there are variations in his life-history, such as the fact that 
few if any fish of the genus are supposed to survive their first 
spawning season. When once in the rivers none of these salmon 
is of very much use to the angler; as, though it is stated that 
they will occasionally take a fly or spoon in fresh water, they are 
not nearly so responsive as their Atlantic cousin and in many 
streams are undoubtedly not worth trying for. At the mouths of 
some rivers, however, where the water is distinctly tidal, and 
in certain bays of the sea itself they give very fine sport, the 
method of fishing for them being usually to trail a heavy spoon- 
bait behind a boat. By this means remarkable bags of fish have 
been made by anglers. The sport is of quite recent development. 
Sea-Trout. — Next to the salmon comes the sea-trout, the other 
migratory salmonid of Europe. This is a fish with many local 
names and a good deal of local variation. Modern science, how- 
ever, recognises two " races " only, Salmo trutta, the sea-trout 
proper, and Salmo cambricus or eriox, the bull-trout, or sewin 
of Wales, which is most prominent in such rivers as the Coquet 
and Tweed. The life-history of sea-trout is much the same as 
that of salmon, and the fish on their first return from the sea in 
the grilse-stage are called by many names, finnock, herling and 
whitling being perhaps the best known. Of the two races 
Salmo trutta alone is of much use to the fly-fisher. The bull-trout, 
for some obscure reason, is not at all responsive to his efforts, 
except in its kelt stage. Then it will take greedily enough, but 
that is small consolation. The bull-trout is a strong fish and 
grows to a great size and it is a pity that it is not of greater 
sporting value, if only to make up for its bad reputation as an 
article of food. Some amends, however, are made by its cousin 
the sea-trout, which is one of the gamest and daintiest fish on 
the angler's list. It is found in most salmon rivers and also 
in not a few streams which are too small to harbour the bigger 
fish, while there are many lakes in Scotland and Ireland (where 
the fish is usually known as white trout) where the fishing is 
superb when the trout have run up into them. Fly-fishing for 
sea-trout is not a thing apart. A three-pounder that will impale 
itself on a big salmon-fly, might equally well have taken a tiny 
trout-fly. Many anglers, when fishing a sea-trout river where 
they run large, 5 lb or more, and where there is also a chance of a 
salmon, effect a compromise by using a light 13 ft. or 14 ft. 
double-handed rod, and tackle not so slender as to make hooking 
a salmon a certain disaster. But undoubtedly to get the full 
pleasure out of sea-trout-fishing a single-handed rod of 10 ft. to 
12 ft. with reasonably fine gut and small flies should be used, and 
the way of using it is much the same as in wet-fly fishing for 
brown trout, which will be treated later. When the double- 
handed rod and small salmon-flies are used, the fishing is practically 
the same as salmon-fishing except that it is on a somewhat 
smaller scale. Flies for sea-trout are numberless and local 
patterns abound, as may be expected with a fish which has so 
catholic a taste. But, as with salmon-fishers so with sea-trout- 
fishers, experience forms belief and success governs selection. 
Among the small salmon-flies and loch-flies which will fill his 
book, the angler will do well to have a store of very small trout- 
flies at hand, while experience has shown that even the dry fly 
will kill sea-trout on occasion, a thing that is worth remembering 
where rivers are low and fish shy. July, August and September 
are in general the best months for sea-trout, and as they are dry 
months the angler often has to put up with indifferent sport. The 
fish will, however, rise in tidal water and in a few localities even 
in the sea itself, or in salt-water lochs into which streams run. 
Sea-trout have an irritating knack of " coming short," that is to 
say, they will pluck at the fly without really taking it. There are 
occasions, on the other hand, in loch-fishing where plenty of 
time must be given to the fish without tightening on it, especially 



if it happens to be a big one. Like salmon, sea-trout are to be 
caught with spinning-baits and also with the worm. The main 
controversy that is concerned with sea-trout is whether or no 
the fish captured in early spring are clean fish or well-mended 
kelts. On the whole, as sea-trout seldom run before May, the 
majority of opinion inclines to their being kelts. 

Non-migratory Salmonidae. — Of the non-migratory members 
of the Salmonidae the most impotant in Great Britain is the 
brown trout (Salmo fario). Its American cousin the rainbow 
trout (S. irideus) is now fairly well established in the country 
too, while other transatlantic species both of trout and char 
(which are some of them partially migratory, that is to say, 
migratory when occasion offers), such as the steelhead (S. rivu- 
laris), fontinalis (S. fonlinalis) and the cut-throat trout (S. 
clarkil), are at least not unknown.- All these fish,. together with 
their allied forms in America, can be captured wdth the fly, and, 
speaking broadly, the wet-fly method will do well for them all. 
Therefore it is only necessary to deal with the methods applicable 
to one species, the brown trout. 

Trout. — Of the game-fishes the brown trout is the most popular, 
for it is spread over the whole of Great Britain and most of 
Europe, wherever there are waters suited to it. It is a fine 
sporting fish and is excellent for the table, while in some streams 
and lakes it grows to a very considerable size, examples of 16 lb 
from southern rivers and 20 lb from Irish and Scottish lakes 
being not unknown. One of the signs of its popularity is that its 
habits and history have produced some very animated con- 
troversies. Some of the earliest discussions were provoked 
by the liability of the fish to change its appearance in different 
surroundings and conditions, and so at one time many a district 
claimed its local trout as a separate species. Now, however, 
science admits but one species, though, to such well-defined 
varieties as the i^och Leven trout, the estuarine trout and the 
gillaroo, it concedes the right to separate names and " races." 
In effect all, from the great Jerox of the big lakes of Scotland 
and Ireland to the little fingerling of the Devonshire brook, are 
one and the same — Salmo fario. 

Wet-Fly Fishing for Trout. — Fly-fishing for trout is divided into 
three kinds: fishing with the artificial fly sunk or " wet," fishing 
with it floating or " dry " and fishing with the natural insect. 
Of the two first methods the wet fly is the older and may be taken 
first. Time was when all good anglers cast their flies down- 
stream and thought no harm. But in 1857 W. C. Stewart pub- 
lished his Practical Angler, in which he taught that it paid better 
to fish up-stream, for by so doing the angler was not only less 
likely to be seen by the trout but was more likely to hook his fish. 
The doctrine was much discussed and criticized, but it gradually 
won adherents, until now up-stream fishing is the orthodox 
method where it is possible. Stewart was also one of the first to 
advocate a lighter rod in place of the heavy 12 ft. and 13 ft. 
weapons that were used in the North in his time. There are 
still many men who use the long rod for wet-fly fishing in streams, 
but there are now more who find 10 ft. quite enough for their 
purpose. For lake-fishing from a boat, however, the longer rod 
is still in many cases preferred. In fishing rivers the main art 
is to place the right flies in the right places and to let them come 
naturally down with the stream. The right flies may be ascer- 
tained to some extent from books and from local wisdom, but 
the right places can only be learnt by experience. It does not, 
however, take long to acquire "an eye for water" and that is 
half the battle, for the haunts of trout in rapid rivers are very 
much alike. In lake-fishing chance has a greater share in bring- 
ing about success, but here too the right fly and the right place 
are important; the actual management of rod, line and flies, of 
course, is easier, for there is no stream to be reckoned with. 
Though there is little left to be said about wet-fly fishing where 
the fly is an imitation more or less exact of a natural insect, 
there is another branch of the art which has been stimulated by 
modern developments. This is the use of salmon-flies for big 
trout much in the same way as for salmon. In such rivers as the 
Thames, where the trout are cannibals and run very large, 
ordinary trout-flies are of little use, and the fly-fisher's only 



28 



ANGLING 



chance is to use a big fly and " work " it, casting across and 
down stream. The big fly has also been found serviceable with 
the great fish of Ntew Zealand and with the inhabitants of such 
a piece of water as Blagdon Lake near Bristol, where the trout 
run very large. For this kind of fishing much stronger tackle 
and a heavier rod are required than for catching fish that seldom 
exceed the pound. 

Dry Fly. — Fishing with the floating fly is a device of southern 
origin, and the idea no doubt arose from the facts that on the 
placid south-country streams the natural fly floats on the surface 
and that the trout are accustomed to feed on it there. The 
controversy " dry versus wet " was long and spirited, but the 
new idea won the day and now not only on the chalk-streams, 
but on such stretches of even Highland rivers as are suitable, the 
dry-fly man may be seen testing his theories. These theories 
are simple and consist in placing before the fish an exact imitation 
of the insect on which it is feeding, in such a way that it shall 
float down exactly as if it were an insect of the same kind. To 
this end special tackle and special methods have been found 
necessary. Not only the fly but also the line has to float on the 
wa f er; the line is very heavy and therefore the rod (split-cane 
or greenheart) must be stiff and powerful; special precautions 
have to be taken that the fly shall float unhindered and shall not 
" drag "; special casts have to be made to counteract awkward 
winds; and, lastly, the matching of the fly with the insect on the 
water is a matter of much nicety, for the water-flies are of many 
shades and colours. Many brains have busied themselves with 
the solution of these problems with such success that dry-fly 
fishing is now a finished art. The entomology of the dry-fly 
stream has been studied very deeply by Mr F. M. Halford, the 
late G. S. Marryat and others, and improvements both in flies 
and tackle have been very great. Quite lately, however, there 
has been a movement in favour of light rods for dry-fly fishing 
as well as wet-fly fishing. The English split-cane rod for dry-fly 
work weighs about an ounce to the foot, rather more or rather 
less. The American rod of similar action and material weighs 
much less — approximately 6 oz. to 10 ft. The light rod, it is 
urged, is much less tiring and is quite powerful enough for ordinary 
purposes. Against it is claimed that dry-fly fishing is not 
"ordinary purposes," that chalk-stream weeds are too strong 
and chalk-stream winds too wild for the light rod to be efficient 
against them. However, the light rod is growing in popular 
favour; British manufacturers are building rods after the 
American style; and anglers are taking to them more and more. 
The dry-fly method is now practised by many fishermen both in 
Germany and France, but it has scarcely found a footing as yet 
in the United States or Canada. 

Fishing with the Natural Fly. — The natural fly is a very killing 
bait for trout, but' its use is not wide-spread except in Ireland. 
In Ireland " dapping " with the green drake or the daddy- 
longlegs is practised from boats on most of the big loughs. A 
light whole-cane rod of stiff build, about 16 ft. in length, is 
required with a floss-silk line light enough to be carried out on 
the breeze; the " dap " (generally two mayflies or daddy-long- 
legs on a small stout- wired hook) is carried out by the breeze and 
just allowed to touch the water. When a trout rises it is well to 
count " ten " before striking. Very heavy trout are caught in 
this manner during the mayfly season. In the North " creeper- 
fishing " is akin to this method, but the creeper is the larva of 
the stone-fly, not a fly itself, and it is cast more like an ordinary 
fly and allowed to sink. Sometimes, however, the mature insect 
is used with equally good results. A few anglers still practise 
the old style of dapping or " dibbling " after the manner advised 
by Izaak Walton. It is a deadly way of fishing small overgrown 
brooks. A stiff rod and strong gut are necessary, and a grass- 
hopper or almost any large fly will serve for bait. 

Other Methods. — The other methods of taking trout principally 
employed are spinning, live-baiting and worming. For big river 
trout such as those of the Thames a gudgeon or bleak makes the 
best spinning or live bait, for great lake trout (Jerox) a small fish 
of their own species and for smaller trout a minnow. There are 
numberless artificial spinning-baits which kill well at times, the 



Devon being perhaps the favourite. The use of the drop-minnow, 
which is trolling on a lesser scale, is a killing method employed 
more in the north of England than elsewhere. The worm is 
mostly deadly in thick water, so deadly that it is looked on 
askance. But there is a highly artistic mode of fishing known as 
" clear- water worming." This is most successful when rivers are 
low and weather hot, and it needs an expert angler to succeed in 
it. The worm has to be cast up-stream rather like a fly, and the 
method is little inferior to fly-fishing in delicacy and difficulty. 
The other baits for trout, or rather the other baits which they 
will take sometimes, are legion. Wasp-grubs, maggots, cater- 
pillars, small frogs, bread — there is very little the fish will not 
take. But except in rural districts little effort is made to catch 
trout by means less orthodox than the fly, minnow and worm, 
and the tendency nowadays both in England and America is to 
restrict anglers where possible to the use of the artificial fly only. 

Grayling. — The only other member of the salmon family in 
England which gives much sport to the fly-fisher is the grayling, 
a fish which possesses the recommendation of rising well in winter. 
It can be caught with either wet or dry fly, and with the same 
tackle as trout, which generally inhabit the same stream. Gray- 
ling will take most small trout-flies, but there are many patterns 
of fly tied specially for them, most of them founded on the red 
tag or the green insect. Worms and maggots are also largely 
used in some waters for grayling, and there is a curious con- 
trivance known as the " grasshopper," which is a sort of com- 
promise between the fly and bait. It consists of a leaded hook 
round the shank of which is twisted bright-coloured wool. The 
point is tipped with maggots, and the lure, half artificial, half 
natural, is dropped into deep holes and worked up and down in 
the water. In some places the method is very killing. The 
grayling has been very prominent of late years owing to the 
controversy " grayling versus trout." Many people hold that 
grayling injure a trout stream by devouring trout-ova and trout- 
food, by increasing too rapidly and in other ways. Beyond, 
however, proving the self-evident fact that a stream can only 
support a given amount of fish-life, the grayling's opponents do 
not seem to have made out a very good case, for no real evidence 
of its injuring trout has been adduced. 

Char. — The chars (Salvelinus) are a numerous family widely 
distributed over the world, but in Great Britain are not very 
important to the angler. One well-defined species (Salvelinus 
alpinus) is found in some lakes of Wales and Scotland, but 
principally in Westmorland acd Cumberland. It sometimes 
takes a small fly but is a ore cften caught with small artificial 
spinning-baits. The fish seldom exceeds if lb in Great Britain, 
though in Scandinavia it is caught up to 5 Jb or more. There are 
some important chars in America, fontinalis being one of the most 
esteemed. Some members of the genus occasionally attain a size 
scarcely excelled by the salmon. Among them are the Great Lake 
trout of America, Cristivomer namaycush, and the Danubian 
" salmon " or huchen, Salmo hucho. Both of these fish are caught 
principally with spinning-baits, but both will on occasion take a 
salmon-fly, though not with any freedom after they have reached 
a certain size. An attempt has been made to introduce huchen 
into the Thames but at the time of writing the result cannot yet 
be estimated. 

Pike. — The pike (Esox lucius), which after the Salmonidae is 
the most valued sporting fish in Great Britain, is a fish of prey 
pure and simple. Though it will occasionally take a large fly, a 
worm or other ground-bait, its systematic capture is only essayed 
with small fish or artificial spinning-baits. A live bait is supposed 
to be the most deadly lure for big pike, probably because it is the 
method employed by most anglers. But spinning is more artistic 
and has been found quite successful enough by those who give it a 
fair and full trial. Trolling, the method of " sink and draw " with 
a dead bait, referred to previously in this article, is not much 
practised nowadays, though at one time it was very popular. It 
was given up because the traditional form of trolling-tackle was 
such that the bait had to be swallowed by the pike before the hook 
would take hold, and that necessitated killing all fish caught, 
whether large or small. The same objection formerly applied to 



ANGLING 



29 



live-baiting with what was known as a gorge-hook. Now, how- 
ever, what is called snap-tackle is almost invariably used in 
live-baiting, and the system is by some few anglers extended to 
the other method too. Pike are autumn and winter fish and are 
at their best in December. They grow to a very considerable size, 
fish of 20 lb being regarded as " specimens '.' and an occasional 
thirty-pounder rewarding the zealous and fortunate. The 
heaviest pike caught with a rod in recent years which is sufficiently 
authenticated, weighed 37 ft), but heavier specimens are said to 
have been taken in Irish lakes. River pike up to about 10 lb in 
weight are excellent eating. 

America has several species of pike, of which the muskelunge 
of the great lake region (Esox masquinongy) is the most important. 
It is a very fine fish, excelling Esox lucius both in size and looks. 
From the angler's point of view it may be considered simply as a 
large pike and may be caught by similar methods. It occasion- 
ally reaches the weight of 80 lb or perhaps more. The pickerel 
{Esox reticulatus) is the only other of the American pikes which 
gives any sport. It reaches a respectable size, but is as inferior to 
the pike as the pike is to the muskelunge. 

Perch. — Next to the pikes come the perches, also predatory 
fishes. The European perch (Perca fluviatilis) has a place by 
itself in the affections of anglers. When young it is easy to catch 
by almost any method of fishing, and a large number of Walton's 
disciples have been initiated into the art with its help. Worms 
and small live-baits are the principal lures, but at times the fish 
will take small bright artificial spinning-baits well, and odd attrac- 
tions such as boiled shrimps, caddis-grubs, small frogs, maggots, 
wasp-grubs, &c. are sometimes successful. The drop-minnow is 
one of the best methods of taking perch. Very occasionally, and 
principally in shallow pools, the fish will take an artificial fly 
greedily, a small salmon-fly being the best thing to use in such a 
case. A perch of 2 lb is a good fish, and a specimen of 4J lb 
about the limit of angling expectation. There have been rare 
instances of perch over 5 lb, and there are legends of eight- 
pounders, which, however, need authentication. 

Black Bass. — The yellow perch of America (Perca flavescens) is 
very much like its European cousin in appearance and habits, but 
it is not so highly esteemed by American anglers, because they 
are fortunate in being possessed of a better fish in the black bass, 
another member of the perch family. There are two kinds of black 
bass (Micropterus salmoides and Micropterus dolomieu), the large- 
mouthed and the small-mouthed. The first is more a lake and 
pond fish than the second, and they are seldom found in the same 
waters. As the black bass is a fly-taking fish and a strong fighter, 
it is as valuable to the angler as a trout and is highly esteemed. 
Bass-flies are sui generis, but incline more to the nature of salmon- 
flies than trout-flies. An artificial frog cast with a fly-rod or very 
light spinning-rod is also a favourite lure. For the rest the fish 
will take almost anything in the nature of worms or small fish, 
like its cousin the perch. A 4 lb bass is a good fish, but five- 
pounders are not uncommon. Black bass have to some extent 
been acclimatized in France. 

The ruffe or pope (Acerina vulgaris) is a little fish common in the 
Thames and many other slow-flowing English rivers. It is very 
like the perch in shape but lacks the dusky bars which distinguish 
the other, and is spotted with dark brown spots on a golden olive 
background. It is not of much use to the angler as it seldom 
exceeds 3 oz. in weight. It takes small worms, maggots and 
similar baits greedily, and is often a nuisance when the angler is 
expecting better fish. Allied to the perches is the pike-perch, of 
which two species are of some importance to the angler, one the 
wall-eye of eastern America (Stizostedion vitreuvi) and the other 
the zander of Central Europe {Sandrus lucioperca). The last 
especially is a fine fighter, occasionally reaching a weight of 20 lb. 
It is usually caught by spinning, but will take live-baits, worms 
and other things of that nature. The Danube may be described 
as its headquarters. It is a fish whose sporting importance will be 
more realized as anglers on the continent become more numerous. 

Cyprinidae. — The carp family (Cyprinidae) is a large one and 
its members constitute the majority of English sporting fishes. 
In America the various kinds of chub, sucker, dace, shiner, &c. 



are little esteemed and are regarded as spoils for the youthful 
angler only, or as baits for the better fish in which the continent is 
so rich. In England, however, the Cyprinidae have an honoured 
place in the affections of all who angle " at the bottom," while in 
Europe some of them have a commercial value as food-fishes. In 
India at least one member of the family, the mahseer, takes rank 
with the salmon as a " big game " fish. 

Carp, Tench, Barbel, Bream. — The family as represented in 
England may be roughly divided into two groups, those which 
feed on the bottom purely and those which occasionally take flies. 
The first consists of carp, tench, barbel and bream. Of these 
carp, tench and bream are either river or pool fish, while the 
barbel is found only in rivers, principally in the Thames and 
Trent. The carp grows to a great size, 20 lb being not unknown; 
tench are big at 5 lb; barbel have been caught up to 14 lb or 
rather more; and bream occasionally reach 8 lb, while a fish of 
over n lb is on record. All these fish are capricious feeders, 
carp and barbel being particularly undependable. In some 
waters it seems to be impossible to catch the large specimens, and 
the angler who seeks to gain trophies in either branch of the sport 
needs both patience and perseverance. Tench and bream are not 
quite so difficult. The one fish can sometimes be caught in great 
quantities, and the other is generally to be enticed by the man 
who knows how to set about it. Two main principles have to be 
observed in attacking all these fish, ground-baiting and early 
rising. Ground-baiting consists in casting food into the water so 
as to attract the fish to a certain spot and to induce them to feed. 
Without it very little can be done with shy and large fish of these 
species. Early rising is necessary because they only feed freely, 
as a rule, from daybreak till about three hours after sun-rise. The 
heat of a summer or early autumn day makes them sluggish, but 
an hour or two in the evening is sometimes remunerative. The 
bait for them all should usually lie on the bottom, and it consists 
mainly of worms, wasp and other grubs, pastes of various kinds; 
and for carp, and sometimes bream, of vegetable baits such as 
small boiled potatoes, beans, peas, stewed wheat, pieces of 
banana, &c. None of these fish feed well in winter. 

Roach, Rudd, Dace, Chub. — The next group of Cyprinidae 
consists of fish which will take a bait similar to those already 
mentioned and also a fly. The sizes which limit the ordinary 
angler's aspirations are roach about 2 lb, rudd about 2§ lb, 
dace about 1 lb and chub about 5 lb. There are instances 
of individuals heavier than this, one or two roach and many 
rudd of over 3 lb being on record, while dace have been 
caught up to 1 lb 6 oz., and chub of over 7 lb are not 
unknown. Roach only take a fly as a rule in very hot weather 
when they are near the surface, or early in the season when they 
are on the shallows ; the others will take it freely all through the 
summer. Ordinary trout flies do well enough for all four species, 
but chub often prefer something larger, and big bushy lures called 
" palmers," which represent caterpillars, are generally used for 
them. The fly may be used either wet or dry for all these fish, and 
there is little to choose between the methods as regards effective- 
ness. Fly-fishing for these fish is a branch of angling which might 
be more practised than it is, as the sport is a very fair substitute 
for trout fishing. Roach, chub and dace feed on bottom food and 
give good sport all the winter. 

Gudgeon, Bleak, Minnow, &c. — The small fry of European 
waters, gudgeon, bleak, minnow, loach, stickleback and bullhead, 
are principally of value as bait for other fish, though the first- 
named species gives pretty sport on fine tackle and makes a 
succulent dish. Small red worms are the best bait for gudgeon 
and minnows, a maggot or small fly for bleak, and the rest are 
most easily caught in a small-meshed net. The loach is used 
principally in Ireland as a trout bait, and the ether two are of 
small account as hook-baits, though sticklebacks are a valuable 
form of food for trout in lakes and pools. 

Mahseer. — Among the carps of India, several of which give 
good sport, special mention must be made of the mahseer 
(Barbus mosal), a fish which rivals the salmon both in size and 
strength. It reaches a weight of 60 lb and sometimes more 
and is fished for in much the same manner as salmon, with the 



>> 



o 



ANGLING 



difference that after about 10 lb it takes a spinning-bait, usually 
a heavy spoon-bait, better than a fly. 

Cat-fish. — None of the fresh-water cat-fishes (of which no 
example is found in England) are what may be called sporting 
fish, but several may be caught with rod and line. There are 
several kinds in North America, and some of them are as heavy 
as 150 lb, but the most important is the wels (Silurus glanis) 
of the Danube and neighbouring waters. This is the largest 
European fresh-water fish, and it is credited with a weight of 
300 lb or more. It is a bottom feeder and will take a fish-bait 
either alive or dead; it is said occasionally to run at a spinning 
bait when used very deep. 

Burbot. — The burbot (Lota vulgaris) is the only fresh-water 
member of the cod family in Great Britain, and it is found only 
in a few slow-flowing rivers such as the Trent, and there not often, 
probably because it is a fish of sluggish habits which feeds only 
at night. It reaches a weight of 3 lb or more, and will take most 
flesh or fish baits on the bottom. The burbot of America has 
similar characteristics. 

Sturgeon. — The sturgeons, of which there are a good many 
species in Europe and America, are of no use to the angler. They 
are anadromous fishes of which little more can be said than that 
a specimen might take a bottom bait once in a way. In Russia 
they are sometimes caught on long lines armed with baited hooks, 
and occasionally an angler hooks one. Such a case was reported 
from California in The Field of the 19th of August 1905. 

Shad. — Two other anadromous fish deserve notice. The first 
is the shad, a herring-like fish of which two species, allice and 
twaite (Clupea alosa and C. finta), ascend one or two British 
and several continental rivers in the spring. The twaite is the 
more common, and in the Severn, Wye and Teme it sometimes 
gives very fair sport to anglers, taking worm and occasionally 
fly or small spinning bait. It is a good fighter, and reaches a 
weight of about 3 lb. Its sheen when first caught is particularly 
beautiful. America also has its shads. 

Flounder. — The other is the flounder (Pleuronectes flesus) , the 
only flat-fish which ascends British rivers. It is common a long 
way up such rivers as the Severn, far above tidal influence, and 
it will take almost any flesh-bait used on the bottom. A flounder 
of 1 lb is, in a river, a large one, but heavier examples are some- 
times caught. 

Eel. — The eel (Anguilla vulgaris) is regarded by the angler 
more as a nuisance than a sporting fish, but when of considerable 
size (and it often reaches a weight of 8 lb or more) it is a splendid 
fighter and stronger than almost any fish that swims. Its life 
history has long been disputed, but it is now accepted that it 
breeds in the sea and ascends rivers in its youth. It is found 
practically everywhere, and its occurrence in isolated ponds to 
which it has never been introduced by human agency has given 
rise to a theory that it travels overland as well as by water. The 
best baits for eels are worms and small fish, and the best time 
to use them is at night or in thundery or very wet weather. 

Sea Angling. 

Sea angling is attended by almost as many refinements of 
tackle and method as fresh-water angling. The chief differences 
are differences of locality and the habits of the fish. To a certain 
extent sea angling may also be divided into three classes — fishing 
on the surface with the fly, at mid-water with spinning or other 
bait, and on the bottom; but the first method is only practicable 
at certain times and in certain places, and the others, from the 
great depths that often have to be sounded and the heavy 
weights that have to be used in searching them, necessitate 
shorter and stouter rods, larger reels and stronger tackle than 
iresh-water anglers employ. Also, of course, the sea-fisherman 
is liable to come into conflict with very large fish occasionally. 
In British waters the monster usually takes the form of a skate 
or halibut. A specimen of the former weighing 194 lb has been 
landed off the Irish coast with rod and line in recent years. In 
American waters there is a much greater opportunity of catching 
fish of this calibre. 

Great Game Fishes. — There are several giants of the sea which 



are regularly pursued by American anglers, chief among them 
being the tarpon (Tarpon allanticus) and the tuna or tunny 
(Thunnus thynnus), which have been taken on rod and line 
up to 223 lb and 251 lb respectively. Jew-fish and black 
sea-bass of over 400 lb have been taken on rod and line, and 
there are many other fine sporting fish of large size which give 
the angler exciting hours on the reefs of Florida, or the coasts 
of California, Texas or Mexico. Practically all of them are taken 
with a fish-bait either live or dead, and used stationary on the 
bottom or in mid-water trailed behind a boat. 

British Game Fishes. — On a much smaller scale are the fishes 
most esteemed in British waters. The bass (Labrax lupus) 
heads the list as a plucky and rather difficult opponent. A 
fish of 10 lb is a large one, but fifteen-pounders have been taken. 
Small or " school " bass up to 3 lb or 4 lb may sometimes 
be caught with the fly (generally a roughly constructed thing 
with big wings), and when they are really taking the sport is 
magnificent. In some few localities it is possible to cast for 
them from rocks with a salmon rod, but usually a boat is required. 
In other places bass may be caught from the shore with fish bait 
used on the bottom in quite shallow water. They may again 
sometimes be caught in mid-water, and in fact there are few 
methods and few lures employed in sea angling which will not 
account for them at times. The pollack (Gadus pollachius) 
and coal-fish (Gadus virens) come next in esteem. Both in some 
places reach a weight of 20 lb or more, and both when young 
will take a fly. Usually, however, the best sport is obtained 
by trailing some spinning-bait, such as an artificial or natural 
sand-eel, behind a boat. Sometimes, and especially for pollack, 
the bait must be kept near the bottom and heavy weights on the 
line are necessary; the coal-fish are more prone to come to the 
surface for feeding. The larger grey mullet (Mugil capito) is 
a great favourite with many anglers, as it is extremely difficult 
to hook, and when hooked fights strongly. Fishing for mullet is 
more akin to fresh-water fishing than any branch of sea-angling, 
and indeed can be carried on in almost fresh water, for the fish 
frequent harbours, estuaries and tidal pools. They can be 
caught close to the surface, at mid-water and at the bottom, 
and as a rule vegetable baits, such as boiled macaroni, or rag- 
worms are found to answer best. Usually ground-baiting is 
necessary, and the finer the tackle used the greater is the chance 
of sport. Not a few anglers fish with a float as if for river fish. 
The fish runs up to about 8 lb in weight. The cod (Gadus 
morhua) grows larger and fights less gamely than any of the fish 
already mentioned. It is generally caught with bait used on 
the bottom from a boat, but in places codling, or young cod, 
give some sport to anglers fishing from the shore. The mackerel 
(Scomber scomber) gives the best sport to a bait, usually a strip 
of fish skin, trailed behind a boat fairly close to the surface, but 
it will sometimes feed on the bottom. Mackerel on light tackle 
are game fighters, though they do not usually much exceed 2 lb. 
Whiting and whiting-pout (Gadus merlangus and Gadus luscus) 
both feed on or near the bottom, do not grow to any great size, and 
are best sought with fine tackle, usually an arrangement of three 
or four hooks at intervals above a lead which is called a " pater- 
noster." If one or more of the hooks are on the bottom the tackle 
will do for different kinds of flat fish as well, flounders and dabs 
being the two species most often caught by anglers. The bream 
(Pagellus centrodontus) is another bottom-feeder which resembles 
the fresh-water bream both in appearance and habits. It is 
an early morning or rather a nocturnal fish, and grows to a weight 
of 3 lb or 4 lb. Occasionally it will feed in mid-water or even 
close tf- the surface. The conger eel (Conger vulgaris) is another 
night-feeder, which gives fine sport, as it grows to a great size, 
and is very powerful. Strong tackle is essential for conger 
fishing, as so powerful an opponent in the darkness cannot be 
given any law. The bait must be on or near the bottom. There 
are, of course, many other fish which come to the angler's rod 
at times, but the list given is fairly- complete as representing the 
species which are especially sought. Beside them are occasional 
(in some waters too frequent) captures such as dog-fish and sharks, 
skates and rays. Many of them run to a great size and give 



ANGLING— ANGLO-NORMAN 



3 



plenty of sport on a rod, though they are not as a rule welcomed. 
Lastly, it must be mentioned that certain of the Salmonidae, 
smelts (Osmerns eperlanus), sea-trout, occasionally brown trout, 
and still more occasionally salmon can be caught in salt water 
either in sea-lochs or at the mouths of rivers. Smelts are best 
fished for with tiny hooks tied on fine gut and baited with frag- 
ments of shrimp, ragworm, and other delicacies. 

Modern Authorities and Reference Books. — History and 
Literature : Prof. A. N. Mayer, Sport with Gun and Rod (New York 
and Edinburgh), with a chapter on " The Primitive Fish-Hook," by 
Barnet Phillips; Dr R. Munro, Lake Dwellings of Europe (London, 
1890), with many illustrations and descriptions of early fish-hooks, 
&c. ; H. Cholmondeley Pennell and others, Fishing Gossip (Edin- 
burgh, 1866), contains a paper on " Fishing and Fish-Hooks of the 
Earliest Date," by Jonathan Couch; C. D. Badham, Prose 
Halieutics (London, 1854), full of curious lore, relating, however, 
more to ichthyophagy than angling; The Angler's Note-Booh and 
Naturalist's Record (London, 1st series 1881, 2nd series 1888), 
edited by T. Satchell, the two volumes containing much valuable 
matter on angling history, literature, and other topics; R. Blakey, 
Angling Literature (London, 1856), inaccurate and badly arranged, 
but containing a good deal of curious matter not to be found else- 
where; O. Lambert, Angling Literature in England (London, 1881), 
a good little general survey; J. J. Manley, Fish and Fishing 
(London, 1881), with chapters on fishing literature, &c. ; R. B. 
Marston, Walton and Some Earlier Writers on Fish and Fishing 
(London and New York, 1894); Piscatorial Society's Papers (vol. i. 
London, 1890), contains a paper on " The Useful and Fine Arts in 
their Relation to Fish and Fishing," by S. C. Harding; Super 
Flumina (Anon.; London, 1904), gives passim useful information on 
fishing literature; T. Westwood and T. Satchell, Bibliotheca 
Piscatoria (London, 1883) an admirable bibliography of the sport: 
together with the supplement prepared by R. B. Marston, 1 901, it 
may be considered wonderfully complete. 

Methods and Practice. — General Fresh-water Fishing: F. Francis, 
A Book on Angling (London, 1885), though old, a thoroughly sound 
text-book, particularly good on salmon fishing; H. C. Pennell and 
others, Fishing — Salmon and Trout and Pike and Coarse Fish (Bad- 
minton Library, 2 vols., London, 1904); John Bickerdyke, The 
Book of the All-Round Angler (London, 1900) ; Horace G. Hutchinson 
and others, Fishing (Country Life Series, 2 vols., London, 1904), 
contains useful ichthyological notes by G. A. Boulenger, a chapter 
on " The Feeding of Salmon in Fresh-Water," by Dr J. Kingston 
Barton, and a detailed account of the principal salmon rivers of 
Norway, by C. E. Radclyffe. 

Salmon and Trout. — Major J. P. Traherne, The Habits of the 
Salmon (London, 1889); G. M. Kelson, The Salmon Fly (London, 
1895), contains instructions on dressing salmon-flies; A. E. 
Gathorne Hardy, Tlie Salmon (" Fur, Feather and Fin Series," 
London, 1898) ; Sir H. Maxwell, Bt., Salmon and Sea Trout (Angler's 
Library, London, 1898); Sir E. Grey, Bt., Fly Fishing (Haddon 
Hall Library, London and New York, 1899); W. Earl Hodgson, 
Salmon Fishing (London, 1906), contains a series of coloured plates 
of salmon flies; Marquis of Granby, The Trout (" Fur, Feather and 
Fin Series," London, 1898). Wet Fly Fishing: W. C. Stewart, 
The Practical Angler (London, 1905), a new edition of an old but 
still valuable work; E. M. Tod, Wet Fly Fishing (London, 1903); 
W. Earl Hodgson, Trout Fishing (London, 1905), contains a scries 
of admirable coloured plates of artificial flies. Dry Fly Fishing: 
F. M. Halford, Dry-Fly Fishing in Theory and Practice (London, 
1902), the standard work on the subject; G. A. B. Dewar, The 
Book of the Dry Fly (London, 1897). Grayling: T. E. Pritt, The 
Book of the Grayling (Leeds, 1888); H. A. Rolt, Grayling Fishing in 
South Country Streams (London, 1905). 

Coarse Fish. — C. H. Wheeley, Coarse Fish (Angler's Library, 
London, 1897); J. W. Martin, Practical Fishing (London); Float- 
fishing and Spinning (London, 1885) ; W. Senior and others, Pike 
and Perch (" Fur, Feather and Fin Series," London, 1900); A. J. 
Jardine, Pike and Perch (Angler's Library, London, 1898); H. C. 
Pennell, The Book of the Pike (London, 1884); Greville Fennell, 
The Book of the Roach (London, 1884). 

Sea Fishing. — J. C. Wilcocks, The Sea Fisherman (London, 
1884); John Bickerdyke (and others), Sea Fishing (Badminton 
Library, London, 1895); Practical Letters to Sea Fishers (London, 
1902); F. G. Aflalo, Sea Fish (Angler's Library, London, 1897); 
P. L. Haslope, Practical Sea Fishing (London, 1905). 

Tackle, Flies, afc. — H. C. Pennell, Modern Improvements in 
Fishing Tackle (London, 1887); H. P. Wells, Fly Rods and Fly 
Tackle (New York and London, 1901); A. Ronalds, The Fly-Fisher's 
Entomology (London, 1883); F. M. Halford, Dry Fly Entomology 
(London, 1902) ; Floating Flies and How to Dress them (London, 
1886); T. E. Pritt, North Country Flies (London, 1886); H. G. 
M'Clelland, How to tie Flies for Trout and Grayling (London, 1905); 
Capt. J. H. Hale, How to tie Salmon Flies (London, 1892); F. G. 
Aflalo, John Bickerdyke and C. H. Wheeley, How to buy Fishing 
Tackle (London). 

Ichthyology, Fislieries, Fish-Culture, &c. — Dr Francis Day, Fishes 
of Great Britain and Ireland (2 vols., London, 1889); British and 



Irish Salmonidae (London, 1887) ; Dr A. C. L. G. Giinther, Introduc- 
tion to the Study of Fishes (London, 1880) ; Dr D. S. Jordan, A Guide 
to the Study of Fishes (2 vols., New York and London, 1905); F. 
Francis, Practical Management of Fisheries (London, 1 883); Fish 
Culture (London, 1865) ; F. M. Halford, Making a Fishery (London, 
1902); J. J. Armistead, An Angler's Paradise (Dumfries, 1902); 
F. Mather, Modern Fish-Culture (New York, 1899) ; Livingstone 
Stone, Domesticated Trout (Charlestown and London, 1896). 

Angling Guide Books, Geographical Information, &c. — Great 
Britain: The Angler's Diary (London), gives information about 
most important waters in the British Isles, and about some foreign 
waters, published annually ; The Sportsman's and Tourist's Guide 
to Scotland (London), a good guide to angling in Scotland, published 
twice a year; Augustus Grimble, The Salmon Rivers of Scotland 
(London, 1900, 4 vols.) ; The Salmon Rivers of Ireland (London, 
1903); The Salmon and Sea Trout Rivers of England and Wales 
(London, 1904, 2 vols.), this fine series gives minute information as 
to salmon pools, flies, seasons, history, catches, &c. ; W. M. Gallichan, 
Fishing in Wales (London, 1903) ; Fishing in Derbyshire (London, 
I 9°5) ; J- Watson, English Lake District Fisheries (London, 1899) ; 
C. Wade, Exmoor Streams (London, 1903); G. A. B. Dewar, South 
Country Trout Streams (London, 1899); "Hi Regan," How and 
Where to Fish in Ireland (London, 1900) ; E. S. Shrubsole, The Land 
of Lakes (London, 1906), a guide to fishing in County Donegal). 
Europe: " Palmer Hackle," Hints on Angling (London, 1846), 
contains " suggestions for angling excursions in France and Bel- 
gium," but they are too old to be of much service; W. M. Gallichan, 
Fishing and Travel in Spain (London, 1905) ; G. W. Hartley, Wild 
Sport with Gun, Rifle and Salmon Rod (Edinburgh, 1903), contains 
a chapter on huchen fishing; Max von dem Borne, Wegweiser fur 
Angler durch Deutschland, Oesterreich und die Schweiz (Berlin, 1877), 
a book of good conception and arrangement, and still useful, though 
out of date in many particulars; Illustrierte Angler-Schule (der 
deutschen Fischerei Zeitung), Stettin, contains good chapters on the 
wels and huchen; H. Storck, Der Angelsport (Munich, 1898), 
contains a certain amount of geographical information; E. B. 
Kennedy, Thirty Seasons in Scandinavia (London, 1904), contains 
useful information about fishing; General E. F. Burton, Trouling 
in Norway (London, 1897); Abel Chapman, Wild Norway (London, 
1897); F. Sandeman, Angling Travels in Norway (London, 1895). 
America: C. F. Holder, Big Game Fishes of the United States (New 
York, 1903) ; J. A. Henshall, Bass, Pike, Perch and Pickerel (New 
York, 1903) ; Dean Sage and others, Salmon and Trout (New York, 
1902) ; E. T. D. Chambers, Angler's Guide to Eastern Canada (Quebec, 
1899); Rowland Ward, The English Angler in Florida (London, 
1898) ; J. Turner Turner, The Giant Fish of Florida (London, 1902). 
India: H. S. Thomas, The Rod in India (London, 1897); "Skene 
Dhu," The Mighty Mahseer (Madras, 1906), contains a chapter on 
the acclimatization of trout in India and Ceylon. New Zealand : 
W. H. Spackman, Trout in New Zealand (London, 1894); Capt. 
Hamilton, Trout Fishing and Sport in Maoriland (Wellington, 1905), 
contains a valuable section on fishing waters. 

Fishery Law. — G. C. Oke, A Handy Book of the Fishery Laws 
(edited by J. W. Willis Band and A. C. M'Barnet, London, 
I9°3) • 

ANGLO-ISRAELITE THEORY, the contention that the 
British people in the United Kingdom, its colonies, and the 
United States, are the racial descendants of the " ten tribes " 
forming the kingdom of Israel, large numbers of whom were 
deported by Sargon king of Assyria on the fall of Samaria in 
721 B.C. The theory (which is fully set forth in a book called 
Philo-Israel) rests on premises which are deemed by scholars — 
both theological and anthropological — to be utterly unsound. 

ANGLO-NORMAN LITERATURE:— The French language (q.v.j 
came over to England with William the Conqueror. During the 
whole of the 12th century it shared with Latin the distinction of 
being the literary language of England, and it was in use at the 
court until the 14th century. It was not until the reign of Henry 
IV. that English became the native tongue of the kings of 
England. After the loss of the French provinces, schools for the 
teaching of French were established in England, among the most 
celebrated of which we may quote that of Marlborough. 
The language then underwent certain changes which gradually 
distinguished it from the French spoken in France; but, except 
for some graphical characteristics, from which certain rules of 
pronunciation are to be inferred, the changes to which the 
language was subjected were the individual modifications of 
the various authors, so that, while we may still speak of Anglo- 
Norman writers, an Anglo-Norman language, properly so 
called, gradually ceased to exist. The prestige enjoyed by the 
French language, which, in the 14th century, the author of the 
Maniere de language calls " le plus bel et le plus gracious language 



32 



ANGLO-NORMAN LITERATURE 



et plus noble parler, apres latin d'escole, qui soit au monde et 
de touz genz mieulx prisee et amee que nul autre (quar Dieux 
le fist si douce et amiable principalement a l'oneur et loenge de 
luy mesmes. Et pour ce il peut comparer au parler des angels 
du ciel, pour la grand doulceur et biaultee d'icel)," was such 
that it was not till 1363 that the chancellor opened the parlia- 
mentary session with an English speech. And although the 
Hundred Years' War led to a decline in the study of French 
and the disappearance of Anglo-Norman literature, the French 
language continued, through some vicissitudes, to be the classical 
language of the courts of justice until the 17 th century. It is 
still the language of the Channel Islands, though there too it 
tends more and more to give way before the advance of 
English. 

It will be seen from the above that the most flourishing period 
of Anglo-Norman literature was from the beginning of the 12th 
century to the end of the first quarter of the 13 th. The end of 
this period is generally said to coincide with the loss of the 
French provinces to Philip Augustus, but literary and political 
history do not correspond quite so precisely, and the end of the 
first period would be more accurately denoted by the appearance 
of the history of William the Marshal in 1225 (published for the 
Societe de I'histoire de France, by Paul Meyer, 3 vols., 1891-1901). 
It owes its brilliancy largely to the protection accorded by Henry 
II. of England to the men of letters of his day. " He could speak 
French and Latin well, and is said to have known something of 
every tongue between 'the Bay of Biscay and the Jordan.' He 
was probably the most highly educated sovereign of his day, and 
amid all his busy active life he never lost his interest in literature 
and intellectual discussion; his hands were never empty, they 
always had either a bow or a book " {Diet, of Nat. Biog.). Wace 
and Benoit de Sainte-More compiled their histories at his bidding, 
and it was in his reign that Marie de France composed her poems. 
An event with which he was closely connected, viz. the murder of 
Thomas Becket, gave rise to a whole series of writings, some of 
which are purely Anglo-Norman. In his time appeared the 
works of Beroul and Thomas respectively, as well as some of the 
most celebrated of the Anglo-Norman romans d'aventure. It is 
important to keep this fact in mind when studying the different 
works which Anglo-Norman literature has left us. We will 
examine these works briefly, grouping them into narrative, 
didactic, hagiographic, lyric, satiric and dramatic literature. 

Narrative Literature: (a) Epic and Romance. — The French 
epic came over to England at an early date. We know that the 
Chanson de Roland was sung at the battle of Hastings, and we 
possess Anglo-Norman MSS. of a few chansons de geste. The 
Pelerinage de Charlemagne (Koschwitz, Altfranzosische Bibliothek, 
1883) was, for instance, only preserved in an Anglo-Norman 
manuscript of the British Museum (now lost), although the 
author was certainly a Parisian. The oldest manuscript of the 
Chanson de Roland that we possess is also a manuscript written 
in England, and amongst the others of less importance we may 
mention La Chancun de Willame, the MS. of which has (June 
1903) been published in facsimile at Chiswick (cf. Paul Meyer, 
Romania, xxxii. 597-618). Although the diffusion of epic poetry 
in England did not actually inspire any new chansons de geste, it 
developed the taste for this class of literature, and the epic style 
in which the tales of Horn, of Bovon de Hampton, of Guy of 
Warwick (still unpublished), of Waldef (still unpublished), and of 
Fulk Fitz Warine are treated, is certainly partly due to this 
circumstance. Although the last of these works has come down 
to us only in a prose version, it contains unmistakable signs of a 
previous poetic form, and what we possess is really only a render- 
ing into prose similar to the transformations undergone by many 
of the chansons de geste (cf. L. Brandin, Introduction to Fulk Fits 
Warine, London, 1904). 

The interinfluence of French and English literature can be 
studied in the Breton romances and the romans d'aventure even 
better than in the epic poetry of the period. The Lay of Orpheus 
is known to us only through an English imitation; the Lai du 
cor was composed by Robert Biket, an Anglo-Norman poet of 
the 12th century (Wulff, Lund, 1888). The lais of Marie de 



France were written in England, and the greater number of the 
romances composing the matiere de Brelagne seem to have passed 
from England to France through the medium of Anglo-Norman. 
The legends of Merlin and Arthur, collected in the Historia Regum 
Britanniae by Geoffrey of Monmouth (f 1 1 54) , passed into French 
literature, bearing the character which the bishop of St Asaph 
had stamped upon them. Chretien de Troye's Perceval (c. 1175) 
is doubtless based on an Anglo-Norman poem. Robert de Boron 
(c. 1 21 5) took the subject of his Merlin (published by G. Paris 
and J. Ulrich, 1886, 2 vols., SocietS des Anciens Textes) from 
Geoffrey of Monmouth. Finally, the most celebrated love-legend 
of the middle ages, and one of the most beautiful inventions of 
world-literature, the story of Tristan and Iseult, tempted two 
authors, Beroul and Thomas, the first of whom is probably, and 
the second certainly, Anglo-Norman (see Arthurian Legend; 
Grail, The Holy; Tristan). One Folie Tristan was composed 
in England in the last years of the 12th century. (For all these 
questions see Soc. des Anc. Textes, Muret's ed. 1903; Bedier's 
ed. 1902-1905). Less fascinating than the story of Tristan 
and Iseult, but nevertheless of considerable interest, are the two 
romans d'aventure of Hugh of Rutland, Ipomedon (published by 
Kolbing and Koschwitz, Breslau, 1889) and Protesilaus (still 
unpublished) written about 1185. The first relates the adven- 
tures of a knight who married the young duchess of Calabria, 
niece of King Meleager of Sicily, but was loved by Medea, the 
king's wife. The second poem is the sequel to Ipomedon, and 
deals with the wars and subsequent reconciliation between 
Ipomedon's sons, Daunus, the elder, lord of Apulia, and Prote- 
silaus, the younger, lord of Calabria. Protesilaus defeats Daunus, 
who had expelled him from Calabria. He saves his brother's 
life, is reinvested with the dukedom of Calabria, and, after the 
death of Daunus, succeeds to Apulia. He subsequently marries 
Medea, King Meleager's widow, who had helped him to seize 
Apulia, having transferred her affection for Ipomedon to his 
younger son (cf. Ward, Cat. of- Rom., i. 728). To these two 
romances by an Anglo-Norman author, Amadas et Idoine, of 
which we only possess a continental version, is to be added. 
Gaston Paris has proved indeed that the original was composed 
in England in the 12th century (An English Miscellany presented 
to Dr Furnivall in Honour of his Seventy-fifth Birthday, Oxford, 
1 901, 386-394). The Anglo-Norman poem on the Life of Richard 
Cceur de Lion is lost, and an English version only has been pre- 
served. About 1250 Eustace of Kent introduced into England 
the roman d' Alexandre in his Roman de toute chevalerie, many 
passages of which have been imitated in one of the oldest English 
poems on Alexander, namely, King Alisaunder (P. Meyer, 
Alexandre le grand, Paris, 1886, ii. 273, and Weber, Metrical 
Romances, Edinburgh). 

(b) Fableaux, Fables and Religious Tales. — In spite of the 
incontestable popularity enjoyed by this class of literature, we 
have only some half-dozen fableaux written in England, viz. Le 
chevalier d la corbeille, Le chevalier qui faisait parler les muets, Le 
chevalier, sa dame et un clerc, Les trois dames, La gageure, Le 
pre.tre d' Alison, La bourgeoise d'Orleans (Bedier, Les Fabliaux, 
1895). As to fables, one of the most popular collections in the 
middle ages was that written by Marie de France, which she 
claimed to have translated from King Alfred. In the Contes 
moralises, written by Nicole Bozon shortly before 1320 (Soc. Anc. 
Textes, 1889), a few fables bear a strong resemblance to those of 
Marie de France. 

The religious tales deal mostly with the Mary Legends, and 
have been handed down to us in three collections: 

(i.) The Adgar's collection. Most of these were translated 
from William of Malmesbury (tii43?) by Adgar in the 12th 
century ("Adgar's Marien-Legenden," Altfr. Biblioth. ix.; J. A. 
Herbert, Rom. xxxii. 394). 

(ii.) The collection of Everardof Gateley, a monk of St Edmund 
at Bury, who wrote c. 1250 three Mary Legends (Rom. xxix. 27). 

(iii.) An anonymous collection of sixty Mary Legends composed 
c. 1250 (Brit. Museum Old Roy. 20 B, xiv.), some of which have 
been published in Suchier's Bibliotheca Normannica; in the 
Altf. Bibl. See also Mussafia, " Studien zu den mittelalterlichen 



ANGLO-NORMAN LITERATURE 



33 



Marien-legenden " in Sitzungsb. der Wien. Akademie (t. cxiii., 
ex v., cxix., exxiii., exxix.). 

Another set of religious and moralizing tales is to be found in 
Chardri's Set dormans and Josaphat, c. 1216 (Koch, Altfr. Bibl., 
1880; G. Paris, Poemes et legendes du moyen dge). 

(c) History. — Of far greater importance, however, are the 
works which constitute Anglo-Norman historiography. The 
first Anglo-Norman historiographer is Geoffrey Gaimar, who 
wrote his Estorie des Angles (between 1147 and 1151) for Dame 
Constance, wife of Robert Fitz-Gislebert {The Anglo-Norman 
Metrical Chronicle, Hardy and Martin, i. ii., London,i888). This 
history comprised a first part (now lost), which was merely a 
translation of Geoffrey of Monmouth's Historia regumBritanniae, 
preceded by a history of the Trojan War, and a second part 
which carries us as far as the death of William Rufus. For this 
second part he has consulted historical documents, but he stops 
at the year 1087, just when he has reached the period about 
which he might have been able to give us some first-hand infor- 
mation. Similarly, Wace in his Roman de Rou et des dues de 
Normandie (ed. Andresen, Heilbronn, 1877-1870, 2 vols.), written 
1160-1174, stops at the battle of Tinchebray in 1107 just before 
the period for which he would have been so useful. His Brut 
or Geste des Bretons (Le Roux de Lincy, 1836-1838, 2 vols.), 
written in 1 1 55, is merely a translation of Geoffrey of Monmouth. 
" Wace," says Gaston Paris, speaking of the Roman de Rou, 
" traduit en les abregeant des historiens latins que nous posse- 
dons; mais ca. et la. il ajoute soit des contes populaires, par 
exemple sur Richard I", sur Robert I", soit des particularites 
qu'il savait par tradition (sur ce meme Robert le magnifique, 
sur l'expedition de Guillaume, &c.) et qui donnent a. son ceuvre 
un reel interet historique. Sa langue est excellente; son style 
clair, serre, simple, d'ordinaire assez monotone, vous plait par sa 
saveur archaique et quelquefois par une certaine grace et une 
certaine malice." 

The History of the Dukes of Normandy by Benolt de, Sainte- 
More is based on the work of Wace. It was composed at the 
request of Henry II. about 11 70, and takes us as far as the year 
1 135 (ed. by Francisque Michel, 1836-1844, Collection de docu- 
ments inedits, 3 vols.)'. The 43,000 lines which it contains are of 
but little interest to the historian; they are too evidently the 
work of a romancier courtois, who takes pleasure in recounting 
love-adventures such as those he has described in his romance 
of Troy. Other works, however, give us more trustworthy 
information, for example, the anonymous poem on Henry II. 's 
Conquest of Ireland in 1172 (ed. Francisque Michel, London, 1837), 
which, together with the Expugnatio hibernica of Giraud de 
Barri, constitutes our chief authority on this subject. The 
Conquest of Ireland was republished in 1892 by Goddard Henry 
Orpen, under the title of The Song of Dermot and the Earl (Oxford, 
Clarendon Press). Similarly, Jourdain Fantosme, who was in 
the north of England in n 74, wrote an account of the wars 
between Henry II., his sons, William the Lion of Scotland and 
Louis VII., in 1173 and 1174 (Chronicle of the reigns of Stephen 
. . . III., ed. by Joseph Stevenson and Fr. Michel, London, 1886, 
pp. 202-307). Not one of these histories, however, is to be com- 
pared in value with The History of William the Marshal, Count of 
Striguil and Pembroke, regent of England from 1216-1219, which 
was found and subsequently edited by Paul Meyer (Sociitt de 
Vhistoire de France, 3 vols., 1891-1901). This masterpiece of 
historiography was composed in 1225 or 1226 by a professional 
poet of talent at the request of William, son of the marshal. It 
was compiled from the notes of the marshal's squire, John d'Early 
(t 1230 or 1 231), who shared all the vicissitudes of his master's 
life and was one of the executors of his will. This work is of great 
value for the history of the period 11 86-1 2 19, as the informa- 
tion furnished by John d'Early is either personal or obtained at 
first hand. In the part which deals with the period before n 86, 
it is true, there are various mistakes, due to the author's 
ignorance of contemporary history, but these slight blemishes 
are amply atoned for by the literary value of the work. The 
style is concise, the anecdotes are well told, the descriptions 
short and picturesque; the whole constitutes one of the most 



living pictures of medieval society. Very pale by the side of 
this work appear the Chronique of Peter of Langtoft, written 
between 1311 and 1320, and mainly of interest for the period 
1294-1307 (ed. by T. Wright, London, 1866-1868); the Chron- 
ique of Nicholas Trevet (1258 ?-i328 ?), dedicated to Princess 
Mary, daughter of Edward I. (Duff us Hardy, Descr. Catal. III., 
349-350); the Scala Chronica compiled by Thomas Gray of 
Heaton (f c. 1369), which carries us to the year 1362-1363 (ed. 
by J. Stevenson, Maitland Club, Edinburgh, 1836); the Black 
Prince, a poem by the poet Chandos, composed about 1386, and 
relating the life of the Black Prince from 1346-1376 (re-edited by 
Francisque Michel, London and Paris, 1883); and, lastly, the 
different versions of the Brutes, the form and historical import- 
ance of which have been indicated by Paul Meyer {Bulletin de la 
SociUe des Anciens Textes, 1878, pp. 104-145), and by F. W. D. 
Brie (Geschichte und Quellen der mittelenglischen Prosachronik, 
The Brute of England or The Chronicles of England, Marburg, 
io°s)- 

Finally we may mention, as ancient history, the translation of 
Eutropius and Dares, by Geoffrey of Waterford (13th century), 
who gave also the Secret des Secrets, a translation from a work 
wrongly attributed to Aristotle, which belongs to the next 
division {Rom. xxiii. 314). 

Didactic Literature. — This is the most considerable, if not the 
most interesting, branch of Anglo-Norman literature: it com- 
prises a large number of works written chiefly with the object 
of giving both religious and profane instruction to Anglo-Norman 
lords and ladies. The following list gives the most important 
productions arranged in chronological order :— 

Philippe de Thaun, Comput, c. 11 19 (edited by E. Mall, 
Strassburg, 1873), poem on the calendar; Bestiaire, c. 1130 
(ed. by E. Walberg, Paris, 1900; cf. G. Paris, Rom. xxxi. 175); 
Lois de Guillaume le Conquer ant (redaction between it 50 and 
1 1 70, ed. by J. E. Matzke, Paris, 1899); Oxford Psalter, c. 11 50 
(Fr. Michel, Libri Psalmorum versio antiqua gallica, Oxford, 
i860); Cambridge Psalter, c. 11 60 (Fr. Michel, Le Livre des 
Psaumes, Paris, 1877); London Psalter, same as Oxford Psalter 
(cf. Beyer, Zt.f. rom. Phil. xi. 513-534; xii. 1-56); Disticha 
Catonis, translated by Everard de Kirkham and Elie de Winchester 
(Stengel, Ausg. u. Abhandlungen) ; Le Roman de fortune, summary 
of Boetius' De consolatione philosophiae, by Simon de Fresne (Hist. 
lit. xxviii. 408) ; Quatre liwes des rois, translated into French in 
the 12 th century, and imitated in England soon after (P. 
Schlosser, Die LautverhSltnisse der- quatre liwes des rois, Bonn, 
1886; Romania, xvii. 124); Donnei des Amanz, the conversation 
of two lovers, overheard and carefully noted by the poet, of a 
purely didactic character, in which are included three interesting 
pieces, the first being an episode of the story of Tristram, the 
second a fable, L'homme et le serpent, the third a tale, L'homme 
et I'oiseau, which is the basis of the celebrated Lai de I'oiselet 
(Rom. xxv. 497); Livre des Sibiles (1160); Enseignements 
Trebor, by Robert de Ho ( = Hoo, Kent, on the left bank of the 
Medway) [edited by Mary Vance Young, Paris; Picard, 101; 
cf. G. Paris, Rom. xxxii. 141]; Lapidaire de Cambridge (Pannier, 
Les Lapidaires franqais) ; Frere Angier de Ste. Frideswide, Dia- 
logues, 29th of November 1212 (Rom. xii. 145-208, and xxix.; 
M. K. Pope, £tude sur la langue de Frere Angier, Paris, 1903); 
Li dialoge Gregoire le pape, ed. by Foerster, 1876; Petit Plet, by 
Chardri, c. 1216 (Koch, Altfr Bibliothek, i., and Mussafia, Z.f. r.P. 
iii. 591); Petite philosophic, c. 1225 (Rom. xv. 356; xxix. 72); 
Histoire de Marie et de Jisus (Rom. xvi. 248-262); Poeme sut 
I'Ancien Testament (Not. et Extr. xxxiv. 1, 210; Soc. Anc. 
Textes, 1889, 73-74); Le Corset and Le Miroir, by Robert de 
Gretham (Rom. vii. 345; xv. 296); Lumiere as Lais, by Pierre 
de Peckham, c. 1 250 (Rom. xv. 287) ; an Anglo-Norman redaction 
of Image du monde, c. 1250 (Rom. xxi. 481); two Anglo-Norman 
versions of Quatre sceurs (Justice, Truth, Peace, Mercy), 13th 
century (ed. by Fr. Michel, Psautierd' Oxford, pp. 364-368, Bulletin 
Soc. Anc. Textes, 1886, 57, Romania, xv. 352); another Comput 
by Rauf de Lenham, 1256 (P. Meyer, Archives des missions, 
2nd series iv. 154 and 160-164; Rom. xv. 285); Le chastel 
d'amors, by Robert Grosseteste or Greathead, bishop of 

11 



34 



ANGLO-SAXON CHRONICLE 



Lincoln (J1253) [ed. by Cooke, Carmina Anglo-N ormannica, 
1852, Caxton Society]; Poeme sur V amour de Dieu et sur la haine 
du peche, 13th century, second part {Rom. xxix. 5); Le mariage 
des neuf filles du diable (Rom. xxix. 54); Ditie d'Urbain, attri- 
buted without any foundation to Henry I. (P. Meyer, Bulletin 
Soc. Anc. Textes, 1880, p. 73 and Romania xxxii, 68); Dialogue 
de I'eveque Saint Julien et son disciple {Rom. xxix. 21) ; Poeme sur 
V antichrist et lejugement dernier, by Henri d'Arci (Rom. xxix. 78; 
Not. et. Ex/r. 35, i. 137). Wilham de Waddington produced at 
the end of the 13 th century his Manuel des peches, which was 
adapted in England by Robert of Brunne in his Handlying Sinne 
(1303) {Hist. lit. xxviii. 179-207; Rom. xxix. 5, 47-53]; see 
Fumiv&ll, Robert of Brunne' s Handlying Synne (Roxb. Club, 1862) ; 
in the 14th century we find Nicole Bozon's Contes moralises (see 
above) ; Traite de naturesse (Rom. xiii. 508) ; Sermons in verse 
(P. Meyer, op. cit. xlv.) ; Proverbes de bon enseignement (op. cit. 
xlvi.). We have also a few handbooks on the teaching of 
French. Gautier de Biblesworth wrote such a treatise 
a Madame Dyonise de Mountechensi pur aprise de langage 
(Wright, A Volume of Vocabularies; P. Meyer, Rec. d'anc. textes, 
p. 360 and Romania xxxii, 22); Orthographia gallica (Stiirzinger, 
Altfr. Bibl. 1884); La mani'ere de language, written in 1396 
(P. Meyer, Rev. cril. d'hist. et de lilt. nos. compl. de 1870); Un 
petit livre pour enseigner les enfants de leur entreparler comun 
francois, c. 1399 (Stengel, Z. fur n. /. Spr. u. Litt. i. 11). The im- 
portant Mirour de I'omme, by John Gower, contains about 30,000 
lines written in very good French at the end of the 14th century 
(Macaulay, The Complete Works of John Gower, i., Oxford, 1899). 

Hagiography. — Among the numerous lives of saints written 
in Anglo-Norman the most important ones are the following, 
the list of which is given in chronological order: — Voyage de Saint 
Brandan (or Brandain), written in 1121, by an ecclesiastic for 
Queen Aelis of Louvain (Rom. St. i. 553-588; Z. f. r. P. ii. 438- 
459; Rom. xviii. 203. C. Wahlund, Die altfr. Prosauberseiz. 
von Brendan's Meerfahrt, Upsala, 1901); life of St Catherine by 
Clemence of Barking (Rom. xiii. 400, Jarnik, 1894); life of St 
Giles, c. 1 170, by Guillaume de Berneville (Soc. Anc. Textes fr., 
1 88 1 ; Rom. xi. and xxiii. 94) ; life of St Nicholas, life of Our Lady, 
by Wace (Delius, 1850; Stengel, Cod. Digby, 66); Uhlemann, 
Gram. Kril. Studien zu Wace's Conception und Nicolas, 1878; 
life of St George by Simon de Fresne (Rom. x. 319; J. E. Matzke, 
Public, of the Mod. Lang. Ass. of Amer. xvii. 1902; Rom. xxxiv. 
148); Expurgatoire de Ste. Patrice, by Marie de France (Jenkins, 
1894; Eckleben, Aelteste Schilderung vom Fegefeuer d. H. 
Patricius, 1851; Ph. de Felice, 1906); La vie de St Edmund 
le Rei, by Denis Pyramus, end of 12th century (Memorials of 
St Edmund's Abbey, edited by T. Arnold, ii. 1892; Rom. xxii. 
170); Henri d'Arci's life of St Thais, poem on the Antichrist, 
Visio S. Pauli (P. Meyer, Not. et Exir. xxxv. 137-158); life of 
St Gregory the Great by Frere Angier, 30th of April 12 14 (Rom. 
viii. 509-544; ix. 176; xviii. 201); life of St Modwenna, between 
1225 and 1250 (Suchier, Die dem Matthdns Paris zugeschriebene 
Vie de St Auban, 1873, pp. 54-58); Fragments of a life of St 
Thomas Becket, c. 1230 (P. Meyer,' Soc. Anc. Text.fr., 1885); 
and another life of the same by Benoit of St Alban, 13th century 
(Michel, Chron. des dues de Normandie; Hist. Lit. xxiii. 383); 
a life of Edward the Confessor, written before 1245 (Luard, 
Lives of Edward the Confessor, 1858; Hist. Lit. xxvii. 1), by an 
anonymous monk of Westminster; life of St Auban, c. 1250 
(Suchier, op. cit. ; Uhlemann, " Uber die vie de St Auban in Bezug 
auf Quelle," &c. Rom. St. iv. 543-626; ed. by Atkinson, 1876). 
The Vision of Tnudgal, an Anglo-Norman fragment, is preserved 
in MS. 312, Trinity College, Dublin; the MS. is of the 14th 
century; the author seems to belong to the 13th (La vision 
de Tondale, ed. by Friedel and Kuno Meyer, 1906). In this 
category we may add the life of Hugh of Lincoln, 13th century 
(Hist. Lit. xxiii. 436; Child, The English and Scottish Popular 
Ballads, 1888, p. v; Wolter, Bibl. Anglo-Norm^ ii. 115). Other 
lives of saints were recognized to be Anglo-Norman by Paul Meyer 
when examining the MSS. of the Welbeck library (Rom. xxxii. 
637 and Hist. Lit. xxxiii. 338-378). 

Lyric Poetry. — The only extant songs of any importance are 



the seventy-one Ballads of Gower (Stengel, Gower's Minnesang, 
1886). The remaining songs are mostly of a religious character. 
Most of them have been discovered and published by Paul Meyer 
(Bulletin de la Soc. Anc. Textes, 1889; Not. et Extr. xxxiv; 
Rom. xiii. 518, t. xiv. 370; xv. p. 254, &c). Although so few 
have come down to us such songs must have been numerous 
at one time, owing to the constant intercourse between English, 
French and Provencals of all classes. An interesting passage in 
Piers Plowman furnishes us with a proof of the extent to which 
these songs penetrated into England. We read of : 
"... dykers and deluers that doth here dedes ille, 
And dryuen forth the longe day with ' Deu, vous saue, 
Dame Emme! ' " (Prologue, 223 f.) 

One of the finest productions of Anglo-Norman lyric poetry 
written in the end of the 13th century, is the Plainte d'amour 
(Vising, Goteborg, 1905; Romania xiii. 507, xv. 292 and xxix. 4), 
and we may mention, merely as literary curiosities, various 
works of a lyrical character written in two languages, Latin and 
French, or English and French, or even in three languages, 
Latin, English and French. In Early English Lyrics (Oxford, 
1907) we have a poem in which a lover sends to his mistress a 
love-greeting composed in three languages, and his learned 
friend replies in the same style (De amico ad amicam, Responcio, 
viii and ix). 

Satire. — The popularity enjoyed by the Roman de Renarl 
and the Anglo-Norman version of the Riote du Monde (Z. f. rom. 
Phil. viii. 275-289) in England is proof enough that the French 
spirit of satire was keenly appreciated. The clergy and the fair 
sex presented the most attractive target for the shots of the 
satirists. However, an Englishman raised his voice in favour 
of the ladies in a poem entitled La Bonte des dames (Meyer, Rom. 
xv - 3 I 5"339)) and Nicole Bozon, after having represented 
" Pride " as a feminine being whom he supposes to be the 
daughter of Lucifer, and after having fiercely attacked the 
women of his day in the Char d'Orgueil (Rom. xiii. 516), also 
composed a Bounte des femmes (P. Meyer, op. cit. 33) in which 
he covers them with praise, commending their courtesy, their 
humility, their openness and the care with which they bring up 
their children. A few pieces of political satire show us French and 
English exchanging amenities on their mutual shortcomings. The 
Roman des Francais, by Andre de Coutances,was written on the 
continent, and cannot be quoted as Anglo-Norman although 
it was composed before 1204 (cf. Gaston Paris: Trois versions 
rimees de I'evangile de Nicodeme, Soc. Anc. Textes, i885),it is a 
very spiritedreply to Frenchauthors who hadattacked the English. 

Dramatic Literature. — This must have had a considerable 
influence on the development of the sacred drama in England, 
but none of the French plays acted in England in the 12 th and 
13th centuries has been preserved. Adam, which is generally 
considered to be an Anglo-Norman mystery of the 12th century, 
was probably written in France at the beginning of the 13th 
century (Romania xxxii. 637), and the so-called Anglo-Norman 
Resurrection belongs also to continental French. It is necessary 
to state that the earliest English moralities seem to have been 
imitations of the French ones. 

Bibliography. — Apart from the works already mentioned see 
generally: Scheibner, " Uber die Herrschaft der frz. Sprache in 
England " (Annaberg, Progr. der KSniglichen Realschule, 1880, 38 f.) ; 
Groeber, Grundr. der romanischen Philologie, ii. iii. (Strassburg, 
1902) ; G. Paris, La Litt. fr. au moyen age (1905) ; Esquisse historique 
de la litt. fr. au moyen age (1907); La Lilt. norm, avant V annexion 
912-1204 (Paris, 1899) ; " L'Esprit normand en Angleterre," La Poesie 
au moyen age (2nd series 45-74, Paris, 1906) ; Thomas Wright, 
Biographia britannica literaria (Anglo-Norman period, London, 
1846); Ten Brink, Geschichte der englischen Lilteratur (Berlin, 1877, 
i. 2) ; J. J. Jusserand, Hist. lilt, du peuple anglais (2nd ed. 1895, 
vol. i.); W. H.Schofield, English Literature from the Norman Con- 
quest to Chaucer (London, 1906) ; Johan Vising, Franska Spraket i 
England (Goteborg, 1900, 1901, 1902). (L. Br.) 

ANGLO-SAXON CHRONICLE. It is usual to speak of " the 
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle "; it would be more correct to say that 
there are four Anglo-Saxon Chronicles. It is true that these all 
grow out of a common stock, that in some even of their later 
entries two or more of them use common materials; but the same 



ANGLO-SAXON LAW 



35 



may be said of several groups of medieval chronicles, which no one 
dreams of treating as single chronicles. Of this fourfold Chronicle 
there are seven MSS. in existence; C.C.C. Cant. 173 (A); Colt. 
Tib. A vi. (B); Cott. Tib. B i. (C); Cott. Tib. B iv. (D); Bodl. 
Laud. Misc. 636 (E); Cott. Domitian A viii. (F); Cott. Otho B xi. 
(G). Of these G is now a mere fragment, and it is known to have 
been a transcript of A. F is bilingual, the entries being given both 
in Saxon and Latin. It is interesting as a stage in the transition 
from the vernacular to the Latin chronicle; but it has little 
independent value, being a mere epitome, made at Canterbury in 
the 1 1 th or 1 2 th century, of a chronicle akin to E. B, as far as it 
goes (to 1)77). is identical with C, both having been copied from a 
common original, but A, C, D, E have every right to be treated as 
independent chronicles. The relations between the four vary very 
greatly in different parts, and the neglect of this consideration has 
led to much error and confusion. The common stock, out of 
which all grow, extends to 892. The present writer sees no reason 
to doubt that the idea of a national, as opposed to earlier local 
chronicles, was inspired by Alfred, who may even have dictated, 
or at least revised, the entries relating to his own campaigns; 
while for the earlier parts pre-existing materials, both oral and 
written, were utilized. Among the latter the chronological 
epitome appended to Bede's Ecclesiastical History may be 
specially mentioned. But even this common stock exists in two 
different recensions, in A, B, C, on the one hand, and D, E on the 
other. The main points of difference are that in D, E (1) a series 
of northern annals have been incorporated; (2) the Bede entries 
are taken, not from the brief epitome, but from the main body of 
the Eccl. Hist. The inference is that, shortly after the compiling 
of this Alfredian chronicle, a copy of it was sent to some northern 
monastery, probably Ripon, where it was expanded in the way 
indicated. Copies of this northernized Chronicle afterwards found 
their way to the south. The impulse given by Alfred was con- 
tinued under Edward, and we have what may be called an official 
continuation of the history of the Danish wars, which, in B, C, D 
extends to 915, and in A to 924. After 915 B, C insert as a 
separate document a short register of Mercian affairs during the 
same period (902-924), which might be called the acts of ^Ethel- 
flaed, the famous " Lady of the Mercians," while D has incorpor- 
ated it, not very skilfully, with the official continuation. Neither 
of these documents exists in E. From 925 to 97 5 all the chronicles 
are very fragmentary; a few obits, three or four poems, among 
them the famous ballad on the battle of Brunanburh, make up 
the meagre tale of their common materials, which each has tried 
to supplement in its own way. A has inserted a number of 
Winchester entries, which prove that A is a Winchester book. 
And this local and scrappy character it retains to 1001, where it 
practically ends. At some subsequent time it was transferred 
bodily to Canterbury, where it received numerous interpolations 
in the earlier part, and a few later local entries which finally tail 
off into the Latin acts of Lanfranc. A may therefore be dismissed. 
C has added to the common stock one or two Abingdon entries, 
with which place the history of C is closely connected; while D and 
E have a second group of northern annals 901-966, E being how- 
ever much more fragmentary than D, omitting, or not having 
access to, much both of the common and of the northern material 
which is found in D. From 983 to 1018 C, D and E are practically 
identical, and give a connected history of the Danish struggles 
under /Ethelred II. This section was probably composed at 
Canterbury. From 1018 the relations of C, D, E become too 
complicated to be expressed by any formula; sometimes all three 
agree together, sometimes all three are independent; in other 
places each pair in turn agree against the third. It may be noted 
that C is strongly anti-Godwinist, while E is equallypro-Godwinist, 
1) occupying an intermediate position. C extends to 1066, where 
it ends abruptly, and probably mutilated. D ends at 1079 and is 
certainly mutilated. In its later history D is associated with some 
place in the diocese of Worcester, probably Evesham. In its 
present form D is a comparatively late MS., none of it probably 
much earlier, and some of it later, than 1100. In the case of 
entries in the earlier part of the chronicles, which are peculiar to 
D, we cannot exclude the possibility that they may be late 



interpolations. E is continued to 1 1 54. In its present form it is 
unquestionably a Peterborough book. The earlier part is full of 
Peterborough interpolations, to which place many of the later 
entries also refer. But (apart from the interpolations) it is only 
the entries after 1 1 2 1 , where the first hand in the MS. ends, which 
were actually composed at Peterborough. The section 1023-1067 
certainly, and possibly also the section 1068-1121, was composed 
at St Augustine's, Canterbury; and the former is of extreme 
interest and value, the writer being in close contact with the 
events which he describes. The later parts of E show a great 
degeneration in language, and a querulous tone due to the 
sufferings of the native population under the harsh Norman rule; 
" but our debt to it is inestimable; and we can hardly measure 
what the loss to English history would have been, if it had not 
been written; or if, having been written, it had, like so many 
another English chronicle, been lost." 

Bibliography. — The above account is based on the introduction 
in vol. ii. of the Rev. C. Plummer's edition of Two of the Saxon 
Chronicles Parallel (Clarendon Press, 1892, 1899); to which the 
student may be referred for detailed arguments. The editio princeps 
of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle was by Abraham Wheloc, professor 
of Arabic at Cambridge, where the work was printed (1643-1644). 
It was based mainly on the MS. called G above, and is the chief 
source of our knowledge of that MS. which perished, all but three 
leaves, in the Cottonian lire of 1723. Edmund Gibson of Queen's 
College, Oxford, afterwards bishop of London, published an edition 
in 1692. He used Wheloc's edition, and E, with collations or tran- 
scripts of B and F. Both Wheloc and Gibson give Latin translations. 
In 1823 appeared an edition by Dr Ingram, of Trinity College, 
Oxford, with an English translation. Besides A, B, E, F, Ingram 
used C and D for the first time. But both he and Gibson made the 
fatal error of trying to combine the disparate materials contained 
in the various chronicles in a single text. An improvement in this 
respect is seen in the edition made by Richard Price (d. 1833) for the 
first (and only) volume of Monumenta Ilistorica Britannica (folio 
1848). There is still, however, too much conflation, and owing to the 
plan of the volume, the edition only extends to 1066. A translation 
is appended. In 1861 appeared Benjamin Thorpe's six-text edition 
in the Rolls Series. Though not free from defects, this edition is 
absolutely indispensable for the study of the chronicles and the 
mutual relations of the different MSS. A second volume contains 
the translation. In 1865 the Clarendon Press published Two Saxon 
Chronicles (A and E) Parallel, with supplementary extracts from the 
others, by the Rev. John Earle. This edition has no translation, 
but in the notes and introduction a very considerable advance was 
made. On this edition is partly based the later edition by the 
Rev. C. Plummer, already cited above. In addition to the trans- 
lations contained in the editions already mentioned, the following 
have been issued separately. The first translation into modern 
English was by Miss Anna Gurney, privately printed in 1819. This 
was largely based on Gibson's edition, and was in turn the basis of 
Dr Giles' translation, published in 1847, and often reprinted. The 
best translation is that by the Rev. Joseph Stevenson, in his series 
of Church Historians of England (1853). Up to the Conquest it is a 
revision of the translation contained in Man. Hist. Brit. From that 
point it is an independent translation. (C. Pl.) 

ANGLO-SAXON LAW. 1. The body of legal rules and 
customs which obtained in England before the Norman conquest 
constitutes, with the Scandinavian laws, the most genuine 
expression of Teutonic legal thought. While the so-called 
"barbaric laws" (leges barbarorum) of the continent, not except- 
ing those compiled in the territory now called Germany, were 
largely the product of Roman influence, the continuity of Roman 
life was almost completely broken in the island, and even the 
Church, the direct heir of Roman tradition, did not carry on a 
continuous existence: Canterbury was not a see formed in a 
Roman province in the same sense as Tours or Reims. One of 
the striking expressions of this Teutonism is presented by the 
language in which the Anglo-Saxon laws were written. They are 
uniformly worded in English, while continental laws, apart from 
the Scandinavian, are all in Latin. The English dialect in which 
the Anglo-Saxon laws have been handed down to us is in most case? 
a common speech derived from West Saxon — naturally enough 
as Wessex became the predominant English state, and the court 
of its kings the principal literary centre from which most of the 
compilers and scribes derived their dialect and spelling. Traces 
of Kentish speech may be detected, however, in the Textus 
Roffensis, the MS. of the Kentish laws, and Northumbrian 
dialectical peculiarities are also noticeable on some occasions, 



36 



ANGLO-SAXON LAW 



while Danish words occur only as technical terms. At the 
conquest, Latin takes the place of English in the compilations 
made to meet the demand for Anglo-Saxon law texts as still 
applied in practice. 

2. It is easy to group the Anglo-Saxon laws according to the 
manner of their publication. They would fall into three divisions : 
(i) laws and collections of laws promulgated by public authority; 
(2) statements of custom; (3) private compilations of legal rules 
and enactments. To the first division belong the laws of the 
Kentish kings, yEthelberht, Hlothhere and Eadric, Withraed; 
those of Ine of Wessex, of Alfred, Edward the Elder, ^Ethelstan, 1 
Edmund, Edgar, /Ethelred and Canute; the treaty between 
Alfred and Guthrum and the so-called treaty between Edward 
and Guthrum. The second division is formed by the convention 
between the English and the Welsh Dunsaetas, the law of the 
Northumbrian priests, the customs of the North people, the 
fragments of local custumals entered in Domesday Book. The 
third division would consist of the collections of the so-called 
Pseudo-leges Canati, the laws of Edward the Confessor, of Henry I . , 
and the great compilation of the Quadripartitus, then of a number 
of short notices and extracts like the fragments on the " wedding 
of a wife," on oaths, on ordeals, on the king's peace, on rural 
customs (Rectitudines singularum personarum) , the treatises 
on the reeve (gerefa) and on the judge (dema), formulae of oaths, 
notions as to wergeld, &c. A fourth group might be made of the 
charters, as they are based on Old English private and public 
law and supply us with most important materials in regard to it. 
Looking somewhat deeper at the sources from which Old English 
law was derived, we shall have to modify our classification to 
some extent, as the external forms of publication, although 
important from the point of view of historical criticism, are not 
sufficient standards as to the juridical character of the various 
kinds of material. Direct statements of law would fall under the 
following heads, from the point of view of their legal origins: 
i. customary rules followed by divers communities capable 
of formulating law; ii. enactments of authorities, especially 
of kings; iii. private arrangements made under recognized 
legal rules. The first would comprise, besides most of the state- 
ments of custom included in the second division according to 
the first classification, a great many of the rules entered in 
collections promulgated by kings; most of the paragraphs of 
.Ethelberht's, Hlothhere's, and Eadric's and Ine's laws, are 
popular legal customs that have received the stamp of royal 
authority by their insertion in official codes. On the other hand, 
from Withraed's and Alfred's laws downwards, the element of 
enactment by central authority becomes more and more 
prominent. The kings endeavour, with the help of secular and 
clerical witan, to introduce new rules and to break the power 
of long-standing customs (e.g. the precepts about the keeping 
of holidays, the enactments of Edmund restricting private 
vengeance, and the solidarity of kindreds as to feuds, and the 
like). There are, however, no outward signs enabling us to 
distinguish conclusively between both categories of laws in the 
codes, nor is it possible to draw a line between permanent laws 
and personal ordinances of single sovereigns, as has been 
attempted in the case of Frankish legislation. 

3. Even in the course of a general survey of the legal lore at 
our disposal, one cannot help being struck by peculiarities in 
the distribution of legal subjects. Matters which seem to us 
of primary importance and occupy a wide place in our law-books 
are almost entirely absent in Anglo-Saxon laws or relegated 
to the background. While it is impossible to give here anything 
like a complete or exact survey of the field — a task rendered 
almost impossible by the arbitrary manner in which paragraphs 
are divided, by the difficulty of making Old English enactments 
fit into modern rubrics, and by the necessity of counting several 
times certain paragraphs bearing on different subjects — a brief 
statistical analysis of the contents of royal codes and laws may 
be found instructive. 

We find roughly 419 paragraphs devoted to criminal law and 

1 The Judicia civitatis Lundoniae are a gild statute confirmed by 
King /Ethelstan. 



procedure as against 91 concerned with questions of private 
law and civil procedure. Of the criminal law clauses, as many 
as 238 are taken up with tariffs of fines, while 80 treat of capital 
and corporal punishment, outlawry and confiscation, and 101 
include rules of procedure. On the private law side 18 clauses 
apply to rights of property and possession, 13 to succession and 
family law, 37 to contracts, including marriage when treated 
as an act of sale; 18 touch on civil procedure. A subject which 
attracted special attention was the law of status, and no less 
than 107 paragraphs contain disposition dictated by the wish 
to discriminate between the classes of society. Questions of 
public law and administration are discussed in 217 clauses, 
while 197 concern the Church in one way or another, apart from 
purely ecclesiastical collections. In the public law division it 
is chiefly the power, interests and privileges of the king that 
are dealt with, in roughly 93 paragraphs, while local administra- 
tion comes in for 39 and purely economic and fiscal matter for 
13 clauses. Police regulations are very much to the fore and 
occupy no less than 72 clauses of the royal legislation. As to 
church matters, the most prolific group is formed by general 
precepts based on religious and moral considerations, roughly 
115, while secular privileges conferred on the Church hold about 
62, and questions of organization some 20 clauses. 

The statistical contrasts are especially sharp and characteristic 
when we take into account the chronological sequence in the 
elaboration of laws. Practically the entire code of ^Ethelberht, 
for instance, is a tariff of fines for crimes, and the same subject 
continues to occupy a great place in the laws of Hlothhere and 
Eadric, Ine and Alfred, whereas it appears only occasionally 
in the treaties with the Danes, the laws of Withraed, Edward 
the Elder, ^Ethelstan, Edgar, Edmund and ^Ethelred. It re- 
appears in some strength in the code of Canute, but the latter 
is chiefly a recapitulation of former enactments. The system 
of " compositions " or fines, paid in many cases with the help 
of kinsmen, finds its natural place in the ancient, tribal period 
of English history and loses its vitality later on in consequence 
of the growth of central power and of the scattering of maegths. 
Royalty and the Church, when they acquire the lead in social 
life, work out a new penal system based on outlawry, death 
penalties and corporal punishments, which make their first 
appearance in the legislation of Withraed and culminate in that 
of /Ethelred and Canute. 

As regards status, the most elaborate enactments fall into 
the period preceding the Danish settlements. After the treaties 
with the Danes, the tendency is to simplify distinctions on the 
lines of an opposition between twelvehynd-men and twyhynd- 
men, paving the way towards the feudal distinction between the 
free and the unfree. In the arrangements of the commonwealth 
the clauses treating of royal privileges are more or less evenly 
distributed over all reigns, but the systematic development of 
police functions, especially in regard to responsibility for crimes, 
the catching of thieves, the suppression of lawlessness, is mainly 
the object of 10th and nth century legislation. The reign ol 
^Ethelred, which witnessed the greatest national humiliation 
and the greatest crime in English history, is also marked by the 
most lavish expressions of religious feeling and the most frequent 
appeals to morality. This sketch would, of course, have to be 
modified in many ways if we attempted to treat the unofficial 
fragments of customary law in the same way as the paragraphs 
of royal codes, and even more so if we were able to tabulate 
the indirect evidence as to legal rules. But, imperfect as such 
statistics may be, they give us at any rate some insight into the 
direction of governmental legislation. 

4. The next question to be approached concerns the pedigree 
of Anglo-Saxon law and the latter's natural affinities. What is 
its position in the legal history of Germanic nations? How 
far has it been influenced by non-Germanic elements, especially 
by Roman and Canon law? The oldest Anglo-Saxon codes, 
especially the Kentish and the West Saxon ones, disclose a close 
relationship to the barbaric laws of Lower Germany — those of 
Saxons, Parisians, Thuringians. We find a division of social ranks 
which reminds us of the threefold gradation of Lower Germany 



ANGLO-SAXON LAW 



37 



(edelings, frilings, lazzen — eorls, ceorls, laets), and not of the 
twofold Frankish one (ingenui Franci, Romani) , nor of the minute 
differentiation of the Upper Germans and Lombards. In sub- 
sequent history there is a good deal of resemblance between the 
capitularies' legislation of Charlemagne and his successors on 
one hand, the acts of Alfred, Edward the Elder, iEthelstan and 
Edgar on the other, a resemblance called forth less by direct 
borrowing of Frankish institutions than by the similarity of 
political problems and condition. Frankish law becomes a 
powerful modifying element in English legal history after the 
Conquest, when it was introduced wholesale in royal and in feudal 
courts. The Scandinavian invasions brought in many northern 
legal customs, especially in the districts thickly populated with 
Danes. The Domesday survey of Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire, 
Yorkshire, Norfolk, &c, shows remarkable deviations in local 
organization and justice (lagmen, sokes), and great peculiarities 
as to status (socmen, freemen), while from laws and a few 
charters we can perceive some influence on criminal law (nidings- 
vaerk), special usages as to fines (lahslit), the keeping of peace, 
attestation and sureties of acts (faeslermen) , &c. But, on the 
whole, the introduction of Danish and Norse elements,apart from 
local cases, was more important owing to the conflicts and 
compromises it called forth and its social results, than on account 
of any distinct trail of Scandinavian views in English law. The 
Scandinavian newcomers coalesced easily and quickly with the 
native population. 

The direct influence of Roman law was not great during the 
Saxon period: we notice neither the transmission of important 
legal doctrines, chiefly through the medium of Visigothic codes, 
nor the continuous stream of Roman tradition in local usage. 
But indirectly Roman law did exert a by no means insignificant 
influence through the medium of the Church, which, for all its 
insular character, was still permeated with Roman ideas and 
forms of culture. The Old English " books " are derived in a 
roundabout way from Roman models, and the tribal law of real 
property was deeply modified by the introduction of individual- 
istic notions as to ownership, donations, wills, rights of women, 
&c. Yet in this respect also the Norman Conquest increased 
the store of Roman conceptions by breaking the national isolation 
of the English Church and opening the way for closer intercourse 
with France and Italy. 

5. It would be useless to attempt to trace in a brief sketch 
the history of the legal principles embodied in the documents of 
Anglo-Saxon law. But it may be of some value to give an 
outline of a few particularly characteristic subjects. 

(a) The Anglo-Saxon legal system cannot be understood unless 
one realizes the fundamental opposition between folk-right and 
privilege. Folk-right is the aggregate of rules, formulated or 
latent but susceptible of formulation, which can be appealed to 
as the expression of the juridical consciousness of the people at 
large or of the communities of which it is composed. It is tribal 
in its origin, and differentiated, not according to boundaries 
between states, but on national and provincial lines. There may 
be the folk-right of West and East Saxons, of East Angles, of 
Kentish men, Mercians, Northumbrians, Danes, Welshmen, and 
these main folk-right divisions remain even when tribal kingdoms 
disappear and the people is concentrated in one or two realms. 
The chief centres for the formulation and application of folk- 
right were in the 10th and nth centuries the shire-moots, while 
the witan of the realm generally placed themselves on the higher 
ground of State expediency, although occasionally using folk- 
right ideas. The older law of real property, of succession, of 
contracts, the customary tariffs of fines, were mainly regulated 
by folk-right; the reeves employed by the king and great men 
were supposed to take care of local and rural affairs according to 
folk-right. The law had to be declared and applied by the people 
itself in its communities, while the spokesmen of the people were 
neither democratic majorities nor individual experts, but a few 
leading men — the twelve eldest thanes or some similar quorum. 
Folk-right could, however, be broken or modified by special law 
or special grant, and the fountain of such privileges was the 
royal power. Alterations and exceptions were, as a matter of 



fact, suggested by the interested parties themselves, and chiefly 
by the Church. Thus a privileged land-tenure was created — 
bookland; the rules as to the succession of kinsmen were set at 
nought by concession of testamentary power and confirmations 
of grants and wills; special exemptions from the jurisdiction of 
the hundreds and special privileges as to levying fines were 
conferred. In process of time the rights originating in royal 
grants of privilege overbalanced, as it were, folk-right in many 
respects, and became themselves the starting-point of a new 
legal system — the feudal one. 

(b) Another feature of vital importance in the history of 
Anglo-Saxon law is its tendency towards the preservation of 
peace. Society is constantly struggling to ensure the main 
condition of its existence — peace. Already in ^Ethelberht's 
legislation we find characteristic fines inflicted for breach of the 
peace of householders of different ranks — the ceorl, the eorl, 
and the king himself appearing as the most exalted among them. 
Peace is considered not so much a state of equilibrium and 
friendly relations between parties, but rather as the rule of a 
third within a certain region- — a house, an estate, a kingdom. 
This leads on one side to the recognition of private authorities 
— the father's in his family, the master's as to servants, the 
lord's as to his personal or territorial dependents. On the other 
hand, the tendency to maintain peace naturally takes its 
course towards the strongest ruler, the king, and we witness 
in Anglo-Saxon law the gradual evolution of more and more 
stringent and complete rules in respect of the king's peace and 
its infringements. 

(c) The more ancient documents of Anglo-Saxon law show us 
the individual not merely as the subject and citizen of a certain 
commonwealth, but also as a member of some group, all the 
fellows of which are closely allied in claims and responsibilities. 
The most elementary of these groups is the maegth, the associa- 
tion of agnatic and cognatic relations. Personal protection and 
revenge, oaths, marriage, wardship, succession, supervision over 
settlement, and good behaviour, are regulated by the law of 
kinship. A man's actions are considered not as exertions of his 
individual will, but as acts of the kindred, and all the fellows of 
the maegth are held responsible for them. What began as a 
natural alliance was used later as a means of enforcing responsi- 
bility and keeping lawless individuals in order. When the 
association of kinsmen failed, the voluntary associations — gilds 
— appeared as substitutes. The gild brothers associated in 
mutual defence and support, and they had to share in the 
payment of fines. The township and the hundred came also in 
for certain forms of collective responsibility, because they pre- 
sented groups of people associated in their economic and legal 
interests. 

(d) In course of time the natural associations get loosened and 
intermixed, and this calls forth the elaborate police legislation 
of the later Anglo-Saxon kings. Regulations are issued about 
the sale of cattle in the presence of witnesses. Enactments about 
the pursuit of thieves, and the calling in of warrantors to justify 
sales of chattels, are other expressions of the difficulties attending 
peaceful intercourse. Personal surety appears as a complement 
of and substitute for collective responsibility. The hlaford and 
his hiredmen are an institution not only of private patronage, 
but also of police supervision for the sake of laying hands on 
malefactors and suspected persons. The landrica assumes the 
same part in a territorial district. Ultimately the laws of the 
10th and 1 1 th centuries show the beginnings of the frankpledge 
associations, which came to act so important a part in the local 
police and administration of the feudal age. 

The points mentioned are not many, but, apart from their 
intrinsic importance in any system of law, they are, as it were, 
made prominent by the documents themselves, as they are 
constantly referred to in the latter. 

Bibliography. — Editions: Liebermann, Die Gesetze der Angel- 
sachsen (1903, 1906) is indispensable, and leaves nothing to be 
desired as to the constitution of the texts. The translations and 
notes are, of course, to be considered in the light of an instructive, 
but not final, commentary. R. Schmid, Gesetze der Angelsachsen 
(2nd ed., Leipzig, 1858) is still valuable on account of its handiness 



38 



ANGLO-SAXONS— ANGOLA 



and the fulness of its glossary. B. Thorpe, Ancient Laws and 
Institutes of England (1840) is not very trustworthy. Domesday 
Book, i. ii. (Rec. Comm.); Codex Diplomaticus Aevi Saxonici, i.-vi. 
ed. J. M. Kemble (1839-1848) ; Cartularium Saxonicum (up to 940), 
ed. W. de Gray Birch (1885-1893); J. Earle, Land Charters (Oxford, 
(888); Thorpe, Diplomatarium Anglicanum; Facsimiles 0} Ancient 
Charters, edited by the Ordnance Survey and by the British Museum ; 
Haddan and Stubbs, Councils of Great Britain, i.-iii. (Oxford, 1869- 
1878). 

Modem works. — Konrad Maurer, Uber Angelsachsische Rechts- 
verhaltnisse , Kritische Ueberschau (Munich, 1853 ff.), still the best 
account of the history of Anglo-Saxon law; Essays on Anglo-Saxon 
Law, by H. Adams, H. C. Lodge, J. L. Laughlin and E. Young 
(1876) ; J. M. Kemble, Saxons in England; F. Palgrave, History of the 
English Commonwealth; Stubbs, Constitutional History of England, 
{.; Pollock and Maitland, History of English Law, i. ; H. Brunner, 
'/.ur Reclitsgeschichte der romisch-germanischen Urkunde (1880); 
Sir F. Pollock, The King's Peace (Oxford Lectures); F. Seebohm; 
The English Village Community; Ibid. Tribal Custom in Anglo- 
Saxon Law; Marquardsen, Haft und Biirgschaft im Angelsdchsischen 
Recht; Jastrow, " t'ber die Strafrechtliche Stellung der Sklaven," 
Gierke's Untersuchungen, i. ; Steenstrup, Normannerne, iv. ; F. W. 
Maitland, Domesday and Beyond (Cambridge, 1897) ; H.M. Chadwick, 
Studies on A.nglo-Saxon Institutions (1905); P. Vinogradoff, " Folc- 
land " in the English Historical Review, 1893; " Romanistische Ein- 
flijsse im Angelsachsischen Recht : Das Buchland " in the Melanges 
Fitting, 1907; "The Transfer of Land in Old English Law" in 
the Harvard Law Review, 1907. (P. Vi.) 

ANGLO-SAXONS. The term " Anglo-Saxon " is commonly 
applied to that period of English history, language and literature 
which preceded the Norman Conquest. It goes back to the time 
of King Alfred, who seems to have frequently used the title rex 
Anglorum Saxonum or rex Angid-Saxonum. The origin of this 
title is not quite clear. It is generally believed to have arisen 
from the final union of the various kingdoms under Alfred in 
886. Bede (Hist. Eccl. i. 15) states that the people of the more 
northern kingdoms (East Anglia, Mercia, Northumbria, &c.) 
belonged to the Angli, while those of Essex, Sussex and Wessex 
were sprung from the Saxons {q.v.), and those of Kent and 
southern Hampshire from the Jutes (q.v.). Other early writers, 
however, do not observe these distinctions, and neither in 
language nor in custom do we find evidence of any appreciable 
differences between the two former groups, though in custom 
Kent presents most -remarkable contrasts with the other king- 
doms. Still more curious is the fact that West Saxon writers 
regularly speak of their own nation as a part of the Angelcyn 
and of their language as Englisc, while the West Saxon royal 
family claimed to be of the same stock as that of Bernicia. On 
the other hand, it is by no means impossible that the distinction 
drawn by Bede was based solely on the names Essex (East 
Seaxan), East Anglia, &c. We need not doubt that the Angli 
and the Saxons were different nations originally; but from the 
evidence at our disposal it seems likely that they had practically 
coalesced in very early times, perhaps even before the invasion. 
At all events the term Angli Saxones seems to have first come 
into use on the continent, where we find it, nearly a century 
before Alfred's time, in the writings of Paulus Diaconus (Paul 
the Deacon). There can be little doubt, however, that there it 
was used to distinguish the Teutonic inhabitants of Britain from 
the Old Saxons of the continent. 

See W. H. Stevenson, Asser's Life of King Alfred (Oxford, 1904, 
pp. 148 ff.) ; H. Munro Chadwick, The Origin of the English Nation 
(Cambridge, 1907); also Britain, Anglo-Saxon. (H. M. C.) 

ANGOLA, the general name of the Portuguese possessions on 
the west coast of Africa south of the equator. With the exception 
of the enclave of Kabinda (q.v.) the province lies wholly south of 
the river Congo. Bounded on the W. by the Atlantic Ocean, it 
extends along the coast from the southern bank of the Congo 
(6° S., 12 E.) to the mouth of the Kuncne river (17° 18' S., 
11° 50' E.). The coast-line is some 900 m. long. On the north 
the Congo forms for 80 m. the boundary separating Angola from 
the Congo Free State. The frontier thence (in 5° 52' S.) goes due 
east to the Kwango river. The eastern boundary — dividing the 
Portuguese possessions from the Congo State and Barotseland 
(N.W. Rhodesia) — is a highly irregular line. On the south 
Angola borders German South- West Africa, the frontier being 
drawn somewhat S. of the 17th degree of S. latitude. The area 



of the province is about 480,000 sq. m. The population is 
estimated (1906) at 4,119,000. 

The name Angola (a Portuguese corruption of the Bantu word 
Ngola) is sometimes confined to the 105 m. of coast, with its 
hinterland, between the mouths of the rivers Dande and Kwanza, 
forming the central portion of the Portuguese dominions in West 
Africa; in a looser manner Angola is used to designate all the 
western coast of Africa south of the Congo in the possession of 
Portugal; but the name is now officially applied to the whole of 
the province. Angola is divided into five districts: four on the 
coast, the fifth, Lunda, wholly inland, being the N.E. part of the 
province. Lunda is part of the old Bantu kingdom of Muata 
Yanvo, divided by international agreement between Portugal 
and the Congo Free State. 

The coast divisions of Angola are Congo on the N. (from the 
river Congo to the river Loje), corresponding roughly with the 
limits of the " kingdom of Congo " (see History below); Loanda, 
which includes Angola in the most restricted sense mentioned 
above; Benguella and Mossamedes to the south. Mossamedes 
is again divided into two portions — the coast region and the 
hinterland, known as Huilla. 

Physical Features. — The coast is for the most part flat, with 
occasional low cliffs and bluffs of red sandstone. There is but 
one deep inlet of the sea — Great Fish Bay (or Bahia dos Tigres), 
a little north of the Portuguese- German frontier. Farther north 
are Port Alexander, Little Fish Bay and Lobito Bay, while 
shallower bays are numerous. Lobito Bay has water sufficient 
to allow large ships to unload close inshore. The coast plain 
extends inland for a distance varying from 30 to 100 m. This 
region is in general sparsely watered and somewhat sterile. The 
approach to the great central plateau of Africa is marked by a 
series of irregidar terraces. This intermediate mountain belt is 
covered with luxuriant vegetation. Water is fairly abundant, 
though in the dry season obtainable only by digging in the sandy 
beds of the rivers. The plateau has an altitude ranging from 
4000 to 6000 ft. It consists of well-watered, wide, rolling plains, 
and low hills with scanty vegetation. In the east the tableland 
falls away to the basins of the Congo and Zambezi, to the south 
it merges into a barren sandy desert. A large number of rivers 
make their way westward to the sea; they rise, mostly, in the 
mountain belt, and are unimportant, the only two of any size 
being the Kwanza and the Kunene, separately noticed. The 
mountain chains which form the edge of the plateau, or diversify 
its surface, run generally parallel to the coast, as Tala Mugongo 
(4400 ft.), Chella and Vissecua (5250 ft. to 6500 ft.). In the 
district of Benguella are the highest points of the province, viz. 
Loviti (7780 ft.), in 1 2° 5' S., and Mt. Elonga (7550 ft.). South of 
the Kwanza is the volcanic mountain Caculo-Cabaza (3300 ft.). 
From the tableland the Kwango and many other streams flow 
north to join the Kasai (one of the largest affluents of the Congo), 
which in its upper course forms for fully 300 m. the boundary 
between Angola and the Congo State. In the south-east part of 
the province the rivers belong either to the Zambezi system, or, 
like the Okavango, drain to Lake Ngami. 

Geology. — The rock formations of Angola are met with in three 
distinct regions: (1) the littoral zone, (2) the median zone formed 
by a series of hills more or less parallel with the coast, (3) the 
central plateau. The central plateau consists of ancient crystal- 
line rocks with granites overlain by unfossiliferous sandstones 
and conglomerates considered to be of Palaeozoic age. The 
outcrops are largely hidden under laterite. The median zone is 
composed largely of crystalline rocks with granites and some 
Palaeozoic unfossiliferous rocks. The littoral zone contains the 
only fossiliferous strata. These are of Tertiary and Cretaceous 
ages, the latter rocks resting on a reddish sandstone of older date. 
The Cretaceous rocks of the Dombe Grande region (near Ben- 
guella) are of Albian age and belong to the A canthoceras mamillari 
zone. The beds containing Schloenbachia inflata are referable to 
the Gault. Rocks of Tertiary age aremet with at Dombe Grande, 
Mossamedes and near Loanda. The sandstones with gypsum, 
copper and sulphur of Dombe are doubtfully considered to be of 
Triassic age. Recent eruptive rocks, mainly basalts, form a line 



ANGOLA 



39 



of hills almost bare of vegetation between Benguella and Mossa- 
medes. Nepheline basalts and liparites occur at Dombe Grande. 
The presence of gum copal in considerable quantities in the 
superficial rocks is characteristic of certain regions. 

Climate. — With the exception of the district of Mossamedes, 
the coast plains are unsuited to Europeans. In the interior, 
above 3300 ft., the temperature and rainfall, together with 
malaria, decrease. The plateau climate is healthy and invigor- 
ating. The mean annual temperature at Sao Salvador do Congo 
is 72-5° F.; at Loanda, 74-3°; and at Caconda, 67-2°. The 
climate is greatly influenced by the prevailing winds, which arc 
W., S.W. and S.S.W. Two seasons are distinguished — the cool, 
from June to September; and the rainy, from October to May. 
The heaviest rainfall occurs in April, and is accompanied by 
violent storms. 

Flora and Fauna. — Both flora and fauna are those character- 
istic of the greater part of tropical Africa. As far south as 
Benguella the coast region is rich in oil-palms and mangroves. 
In the northern part of the province are dense forests. In the 
south towards the Kunene are regions of dense thorn scrub. 
Rubber vines and trees are abundant, but in some districts 
their number has been considerably reduced by the ruthless 
methods adopted by native collectors of rubber. The species 
most common are various root rubbers, notably the Carpodinus 
chylorrhiza. This species and other varieties of carpodinus are 
very widely distributed. Landolphias are also found. The 
coffee, cotton and Guinea pepper plants are indigenous, and the 
tobacco plant flourishes in several districts. Among the trees 
are several which yield excellent timber, such as the tacula 
(Pterocarpus tinctorius), which grows to an immense size, its 
wood being blood-red in colour, and the Angola mahogany. 
The bark of the musuemba {Albizzia coriaria) is largely used in 
the tanning of leather. The mulundo bears a fruit about the 
size of a cricket ball covered with a hard green shell and con- 
taining scarlet pips like a pomegranate. The fauna includes 
the lion, leopard, cheetah, elephant, giraffe, rhinoceros, hippo- 
potamus, buffalo, zebra, kudu and many other kinds of antelope, 
wild pig, ostrich and crocodile. Among fish are the barbel, 
bream and African yellow fish. 

Inhabitants. — The great majority of the inhabitants are of 
Bantu-Negro stock with some admixture in the Congo district 
with the pure negro type. In the south-east are various tribes 
of Bushmen. The best-known of the Bantu-Negro tribes are 
the Ba-Kongo (Ba-Fiot), who dwell chiefly in the north, and 
the Abunda (Mbunda, Ba-Bundo), who occupy the central part 
of the province, which takes its name from the Ngola tribe of 
Abunda. Another of these tribes, the Bangala, living on the 
west bank of the upper Kwango, must not be confounded with 
the Bangala of the middle Congo. In the Abunda is a consider- 
able strain of Portuguese blood. The Ba-Lunda inhabit the 
Lunda district. Along the upper Kunene and in other districts 
of the plateau are settlements of Boers, the Boer population 
being about 2000. In the coast towns the majority of the white 
inhabitants are Portuguese. The Mushi-Kongo and other divi- 
sions of the Ba-Kongo retain curious traces of the Christianity 
professed by them in the 16th and 17th centuries and possibly 
later. Crucifixes are used as potent fetish charms or as symbols 
of power passing down from chief to chief; whilst every native 
has a " Santu " or Christian name and is dubbed dom or dona. 
Fetishism is the prevailing religion throughout the province. 
The dwelling-places of the natives are usually small huts of the 
simplest constuction, used chiefly as sleeping apartments; 
the day is spent in an open space in front of the hut protected 
from the sun by a roof of palm or other leaves. 

Chief Towns. — The chief towns are Sao Paulo de Loanda, 
the capital, Kabinda, Benguella and Mossamedes {q.v.). Lobito, 
a little north of Benguella, is a town which dates from 1905 and 
owes its existence to the bay of the same name having been 
chosen as the sea terminus of a railway to the far interior. Noki 
is on the southern bank of the Congo at the head of navigation 
from the sea, and close to the Congo Free State frontier. It 
is available for ships of large tonnage, and through it passes 



the Portuguese portion of the trade of the lower Congo. Ambriz 
— the only seaport of consequence in the Congo district of the 
province — is at the mouth of the Loje river, about 70 m. N. of 
Loanda. Novo Redondo and Egito are small ports between 
Loanda and Benguella. Port Alexander is in the district of 
Mossamedes and S. of the town of that name. 

In the interior Humpata, about 95 m. from Mossamedes, 
is the chief centre of the Boer settlers; otherwise there are none 
but native towns containing from 1000 to 3000 inhabitants 
and often enclosed by a ring of sycamore trees. Ambaca and 
Malanje are the chief places in the fertile agricultural district 
of the middle Kwanza, S.E. of Loanda, with which they are in 
railway communication. Sao Salvador (pop. 1500) is the name 
given by the Portuguese to Bonza Congo, the chief town of the 
'• kingdom of Congo." It stands 1840 ft. above sea-level and 
is about 160 m. inland and 100 S.E. of the river port of Noki, 
in 6° 15' S. Of the cathedral and other stone buildings erected 
in the 16th century, there exist but scanty ruins. The city walls 
were destroyed in the closing years of the 19th century and the 
stone used to build government offices. There is a fort, built 
about 1850, and a small military force is at the disposal of the 
Portuguese resident. Bembe and Encoje are smaller towns in 
the Congo district south of Sao Salvador. Bihe, the capital of 
the plateau district of the same name forming the hinterland of 
Benguella, is a large caravan centre. Kangomba, the residence 
of the king of Bihe, is a large town. Caconda is in the hill 
country S.E. of Benguella. 

Agriculture and Trade. — Angola is rich in both agricultural 
and mineral resources. Amongst the cultivated products are 
mealies and manioc, the sugar-cane and cotton, coffee and tobacco 
plants. The chief exports are coffee, rubber, wax, palm kernels 
and palm-oil, cattle and hides and dried or salt fish. Gold dust, 
cotton, ivory and gum are also exported. The chief imports are 
food-stuffs, cotton and woollen goods and hardware. Consider- 
able quantities of coal come from South Wales. Oxen, intro- 
duced from Europe and from South Africa, flourish. There are 
sugar factories, where rum is also distilled and a few other 
manufactures, but the prosperity of the province depends on 
the " jungle " products obtained through the natives and from 
the plantations owned by Portuguese and worked by indentured 
labour, the labourers being generally " recruited " from the far 
interior. The trade of the province, which had grown from 
about £800,000 in 1870 to about £3,000,000 in 1905, is largely 
with Portugal and in Portuguese bottoms. Between 1893 and 
1904 the percentage of Portuguese as compared with foreign 
goods entering the province increased from 43 to 201 %, a result 
due to the preferential duties in force. 

The minerals found include thick beds of copper at Bembe, 
and deposits on the M'Brije and the Cuvo and in various places 
in the southern part of the province; iron at Ociras (on the 
Lucalla affluent of the Kwanza) and in Bailundo; petroleum 
and asphalt in Dande and Quinzao; gold in Lombije and 
Cassinga; and mineral salt in Quissama. The native black- 
smiths are held in great repute. 

Communications. — There is a regular steamship communication 
between Portugal, England and Germany, and Loanda, which 
port is within sixteen days' steam of Lisbon. There is also a 
regular service between Cape Town, Lobito and Lisbon and 
Southampton. The Portuguese line is subsidized by the govern- 
ment. The railway from Loanda to Ambaca and Malanje is 
known as the Royal Trans-African railway. It is of metre 
gauge, was begun in 1887 and is some 300 m. long. It was in- 
tended to carry the line across the continent to Mozambique, 
but when the line reached Ambaca (225 m.) in 1894 that scheme 
was abandoned. The railway had created a record in being the 
most expensive built in tropical Africa — £8942 per mile. A 
railway from Lobito Bay, 25 m. N. of Benguella, begun in 1904, 
runs towards the Congo-Rhodesia frontier. It is of standard 
African gauge (3 ft. 6 in.) and is worked by an English company. 
It is intended to serve the Katanga copper mines. Besides 
these two main railways, there are other short lines linking 
the seaports to their hinterland. Apart from the railways. 



4Q 



ANGORA 



communication is by ancient caravan routes and by ox-wagon 
tracks in the southern district. Riding-oxen are also used. The 
province is well supplied with telegraphic communication and is 
connected with Europe by submarine cables. 

Government and Revenue. — The administration of the province 
is carried on under a governor-general, resident at Loanda, who 
acts under the direction of the ministry of the colonies at Lisbon. 
At the head of each district is a local governor. Legislative 
powers, save those delegated to the governor-general, are 
exercised by the home government. Revenue is raised chiefly 
from customs, excise duties and direct taxation. The revenue 
(in 1904-1905 about £350,000) is generally insufficient to meet 
expenditure (in 1904-1905 over £490,000) — the balance being 
met by a grant from the mother country. Part of the extra 
expenditure is, however, on railways and other reproductive 
works. 

History. — The Portuguese established themselves on the west 
coast of Africa towards the close of the 1 5th century. The river 
Congo was discovered by Diogo Cam or Cao in 1482. He erected 
a stone pillar at the mouth of the river, which accordingly took 
the title of Rio de Padrao, and established friendly relations 
with the natives, who reported that the country was subject to 
a great monarch, Mwani Congo or lord of Congo, resident at 
Bonza Congo. The Portuguese were not long in making them- 
selves influential in the country. Gongalo de Sousa was 
despatched on a formal embassy in 1490; and the first mis- 
sionaries entered the country in his train. The king was soon 
afterwards baptized and Christianity was nominally established 
as the national religion. In 1534 a cathedral was founded at 
Bonza Congo (renamed Sao Salvador), and in 1560 the Jesuits 
arrived with Paulo Diaz de Novaes. Of the prosperity of the 
country the Portuguese have left the most glowing and indeed 
incredible accounts. It was, however, about this time ravaged 
by cannibal invaders (Bangala) from the interior, and Portuguese 
influence gradually declined. The attention of the Portuguese 
was, moreover, now turned more particularly to the southern 
districts of Angola. In 1627 the bishop's seat was removed to 
Sao Paulo de Loanda and Sao Salvador declined in importance. 
In the 18th century, in spite of hindrances from Holland and 
France, steps were taken towards re-establishing Portuguese 
authority in the northern regions; in 1758 a settlement was 
formed at Encoje; from 1784 to 1789 the Portuguese carried 
on a war against the natives of Mussolo (the district immediately 
south of Ambriz); in 1791 they built a fort at Quincollo on the 
Loje, and for a time they worked the mines of Bembe. Until, 
however, the " scramble for Africa" began in 1884, they possessed 
no fort or settlement on the coast to the north of Ambriz, which 
was first occupied in 1855. At Sao Salvador, however, the 
Portuguese continued to exercise influence. The last of the 
native princes who had real authority was a potentate known 
as Dom Pedro V. He was placed on the throne in 1855 with the 
help of a Portuguese force, and reigned over thirty years. In 
1888 a Portuguese resident was stationed at Salvador, and the 
kings of Congo became pensioners of the government. 

Angola proper, and the whole coast-line of what now con- 
stitutes the province of that name, was discovered by Diogo Cam 
during 1482 and the three following years. The first governor 
sent to Angola was Paulo Diaz, a grandson of Bartholomew Diaz, 
who reduced to submission the region south of the Kwanza nearly 
as far as Benguella. The city of Loanda was founded in 1576, 
Benguella in 1617. From that date the sovereignty of Portugal 
over the coast-line, from its present southern limit as far north 
as Ambriz (7 50' S.) has been undisputed save between 1640 
and 1648, during which time the Dutch attempted to expel the 
Portuguese and held possession of the ports. Whilst the economic 
development of the country was not entirely neglected and many 
useful food products were introduced, the prosperity of the 
province was very largely dependent on the slave trade with 
Brazil, which was not legally abolished until 1830 and in fact 
continued for many years subsequently. 

In 1884 Great Britain, which up to that time had steadily 
refused to acknowledge that Portugal possessed territorial rights 



north of Ambriz, concluded a treaty recognizing Portuguese 
sovereignty over both banks of the lower Congo; but the treaty, 
meeting with opposition in England and Germany, was not 
ratified. Agreements concluded with the Congo Free State, 
Germany and France in 1885-1886 (modified in details by 
subsequent arrangements) fixed the limits of the province, except 
in the S.E., where the frontier between Barotseland (N.W. 
Rhodesia) and Angola was determined by an Anglo-Portuguesa 
agreement of 1891 and the arbitration award of the king of Italy 
in 1 905 (see Africa : History) . Up to the end of the 1 9th century 
the hold of Portugal over the interior of the province was slight, 
though its influence extended to the Congo and Zambezi basins. 
The abolition of the external slave trade proved very injurious 
to the trade of the seaports, but from i860 onward the agricultural 
resources of the country were developed with increasing energy, 
a work in which Brazilian merchants took the lead. After the 
definite partition of Africa among the European powers, Portugal 
applied herself with some seriousness to exploit Angola and her 
other African possessions. Nevertheless, in comparison with its 
natural wealth the development of the country has been slow. 
Slavery and the slave trade continued to flourish in the interior 
in the early years of the 20th century, despite the prohibitions of 
the Portuguese government. The extension of authority over 
the inland tribes proceeded very slowly and was not accomplished 
without occasional reverses. Thus in September 1904 a Portu- 
guese column lost over 300 men killed, including 1 14 Europeans, 
in an encounter with the Kunahamas on the Kunene, not far from 
the German frontier. The Kunahamas are a wild, raiding tribe 
and were probably largely influenced by the revolt of their 
southern neighbours, the Hereros, against the Germans. In 1905 
and again in 1907 there was renewed fighting in the same region. 
Authorities. — E. de Vasconcellos, As Colonias Portuguesas 
(Lisbon, 1896-1897); J. J. Monteiro, Angola and the River Congo 
(2 vols. London, 1875) ; Viscount de Paiva Manso, Historia do Congo 
.... (Documentos) (Lisbon, 1877); A Report of the Kingdom of 
Congo (London, 1881), an English translation, with notes by Mar- 
garite Hutchinson, of Filippo Pigafetta's Relatione del Reame di 
Congo (Rome, 1591), a book founded on the statements and writings 
of Duarte Lopez; Rev. Thos. Lewis, "The Ancient Kingdom of 
Kongo " in Geographical Journal, vol. xix. and vol. xxxi. (London, 
1902 and 1908); The Strange Adventures of Andrew Battell of Leigh 
in Angola and the Adjoining Regions (London, 1901), a volume of 
the Hakluyt Society, edited by E. G. Ravenstein, who gives in 
appendices the history of the country from its discovery to the end 
of the 17th century; J. C. Feo Cardozo, Memorias contendo .... a 
historia dos governadores e capitaens generaes de Angola, desde i£75 
ate 1825 (Paris, 1825); H. W. Nevinson, A Modern Slavery (London, 
1906), an examination of the system of indentured labour and its 
recruitment; Ornithologie d' Angola, by J. V. Barboza du Bocage 
(Lisbon, 1881); " Geologie des Colonies portugaises en Afrique," 
by P. Choffat, in Com. d. service geol. du Portugal. See also the annual 
reports on the Trade of Angola, issued by the British Foreign Office. 

ANGORA, or Enguri. (i) A city of Turkey (anc. Ancyra) in 
Asia, capital of the vilayet of the same name, situated upon a steep, 
rocky hill, which rises 500 ft. above the plain, on the left bank of 
the Enguri Su, a tributary of the Sakaria(Sangarius), about 220 m. 
E.S.E. of Constantinople. The hill is crowned by the ruins of 
the old citadel, which add to the picturesqueness of the view; but 
the town is not well built, its streets being narrow and many of its 
houses constructed of sun-dried mud bricks; there are, however, 
many fine remains of Graeco- Roman and Byzantine architecture, 
the most remarkable being the temple of Rome and Augustus, on 
the walls of which is the famous Monumentum Ancyranum (see 
Ancyra). Ancyra was the centre of the Tectosages, one of the 
three Gaulish tribes which settled in Galatia in the 3rd century 
B.C., and became the capital of the Roman province of Galatia 
when it was formally constituted in 25 B.C. During the Byzan- 
tine period, throughout which it occupied a position of great 
importance, it was captured by Persians and Arabs; then it fell 
into the hands of the Seljuk Turks, was held for eighteen years by 
the Latin Crusaders, and finally passed to the Ottoman Turks in 
1360. In 1402 a great battle was fought in the vicinity of Angora, 
in which the Turkish sultan Bayezid was defeated and made 
prisoner by the Tatar conqueror Timur. In 141 5 it was recovered 
by the Turks under Mahommed L, and since that period has 



ANGOULEME 



41 



belonged to the Ottoman empire. In 1832 it was taken by the 
Egyptians under Ibrahim Pasha. Angora is connected with 
Constantinople by railway, and exports wool, mohair, grain and 
yellow berries. Mohair cloth is manufactured, and the town is 
noted for its honey and fruit. From 1639 to 1768 there was an 
agency of the Levant Company here; there is now a British 
consul. Pop. estimated at 28,000 (Moslems, 18,000; Christians, 
largely Roman Catholic Armenians, about 9400; Jews, 400). 

(2) A Turkish vilayet in north-central Asia Minor, which 
includes most of the ancient Galatia. It is an agricultural 
country, depending for its prosperity on its grain, wool (average 
annual export, 4,400,000 lb), and the mohair obtained from the 
beautiful Angora goats (average annual clip, 3,300,000 lt>). The 
fineness of the hair may perhaps be ascribed to some peculiarity 
in the atmosphere, for it is remarkable that the cats, dogs and 
other animals of the country are to a certain extent affected in 
the same way, and that they all lose much of their distinctive 
beauty when taken from their native districts. The only im- 
portant industry is carpet-weaving at Kir-sheher and Kaisarieh. 
There are mines of silver, copper, lignite and salt, and many hot 
springs, including some of great repute medicinally. Average 
annual exports 1896-1898, £920,762; imports, £411,836. Pop. 
about 900,000 (Moslems, 765,000 to 800,000, the rest being 
Christians, with a few hundred Jews). (J. G. C. A.) 

See C. Ritter, Erdkunde von Asien (vol. xviii., 1837-1839); V. 
Cuinet, La Turquie d'Asie, t. i. (1891); Murray's Handbook to Asia 
Minor (1895) ; and other works mentioned under Ancyra. 

ANGOULEME, CHARLES DE VALOIS, Duke of (1573-1650), 
the natural son of Charles IX. of France and Marie Touchet, was 
born on the 28th of April 1573, at the castle of FayetinDauphine. 
His father dying in the following year, commended him to the 
care and favour of his brother and successor, Henry III., who 
faithfully fulfilled the charge. His mother married Francois de 
Balzac, marquis d'Entragues, and one of her daughters, Henriette, 
marchioness of Verneuil, afterwards became the mistress of 
Henry IV. Charles of Valois, was carefully educated, and was 
destined for the order of Malta. At the early age of sixteen he 
attained one of the highest dignities of the order, being made 
grand prior of France. Shortly after he came into possession of 
large estates left by Catherine de' Medici, from one of which he 
took his title of count of Auvergne. In 1591 he obtained a 
dispensation from the vows of the order of Malta, and married 
Charlotte, daughter of Henry, Marshal d'Amville, afterwards 
duke of Montmorency. In 1 589 Henry III. was assassinated, but 
on his deathbed he commended Charles to the good-will of his 
successor Henry IV. By that monarch he was made colonel of 
horse, and in that capacity served in the campaigns during the 
early part of the reign. But the connexion between the king and 
the marchioness of Verneuil appears to have been very displeasing 
to Auvergne, and in 1601 he engaged in the conspiracy formed by 
the dukes of Savoy, Biron and Bouillon, one of the objects of 
which was to force Henry to repudiate his wife and marry 
the marchioness. The conspiracy was discovered; Biron and 
Auvergne were arrested and Biron was executed. Auvergne 
after a few months' imprisonment was released, chiefly through 
the influence of his half-sister, his aunt, the duchess of Angouleme 
and his father-in-law. He then entered into fresh intrigues with 
the court of Spain, acting in concert with the marchioness of 
Verneuil and her father d'Entragues. In 1604 d'Entragues and 
he were arrested and condemned to death; at the same time the 
marchioness was condemned to perpetual imprisonment in a 
convent. She easily obtained pardon, and the sentence of death 
against the other two was commuted into perpetual imprisonment. 
Auvergne remained in the Bastille for eleven years, from 1605 to 
1616. A decree of the parlement (1606), obtained by Marguerite 
de Valois, deprived him of nearly all his possessions, including 
Auvergne, though he still retained the title. In 1616 he was 
released, was restored to his rank of colonel-general of horse, and 
despatched against one of the disaffected nobles, the duke of 
Longueville, who had taken Peronne. Next year he commanded 
the forces collected in the lie de France, and obtained some 
successes. In 1619 he received by bequest, ratified in 1620 by 



royal grant, the duchy of Angouleme. Soon after he was engaged 
on an important embassy to Germany, the result of which was the 
treaty of Ulm, signed July 1620. In 1627 he commanded the large 
forces assembled at the siege of La Rochelle; and some years after 
in 1635, during the Thirty Years' War, he was general of the 
French army in Lorraine. In 1636 he was made lieutenant- 
general of the army. He appears to have retired from public life 
shortly after the death of Richelieu in 1643. His first wife died 
in 1636, and in 1644 he married Francoise de Narbonne, daughter 
of Charles, baron of Mareuil. She had no children and survived 
her husband until 1713. Angouleme himself died on the 24th oi 
September 1650. By his first wife he had three children: Henri, 
who became insane; Louis Emmanuel, who succeeded his father 
as duke of Angouleme and was colonel-general of light cavalry 
and governor of Provence; and Francois, who died in 1622. 

The duke was the author of the following works: — (i)Memoires, 
from the assassination of Henri III. to the battle of Arques (1589- 
J 593)i published at Paris by Boneau, and reprinted by Buchon in his 
Choix de chroniques (1836) and by Petitot in his Memoir es (1st series, 
vol. xliv.) ; (2) Les Harangues, prononces en assemblee de MM. les 
princes protestants d' Allemagne, par Monseigneur le due d' Angoultme 
(1620); (3) a translation of a Spanish work by Diego de Torres. 
To him has also been ascribed the work, La generate et fideh Relation 
de tout ce qui s'est passe en I' isle de Re, envoyee par le roi d, la royne 
sa mere (Paris, 1627). 

ANGOULEME, a city of south-western France, capital of 
the department of Charente, 83 m. N.N.E. of Bordeaux on the 
railway between Bordeaux and Poitiers. . Pop. (1906) 30,040. 
The town proper occupies an elevated promontory, washed on 
the north by the Charente and on the south and west by the 
Anguienne, a small tributary of that river. The more important 
of the suburbs lie towards the east, where the promontory joins 
the main plateau, of which it forms the north-western extremity. 
The main line of the Orleans railway passes through a tunnel 
beneath the town. In place of its ancient fortifications Angou- 
leme is encircled by boulevards known as the Remparts, from 
which fine views may be obtained in all directions. Within the 
town the streets are often dark and narrow, and, apart from the 
cathedral and the hotel de ville, the architecture is of little 
interest. The cathedral of St Pierre (see Cathedkal), a church 
in the Byzantine-Romanesque style, dates from the nth and 
12 th centuries, but has undergone frequent restoration, and was 
partly rebuilt in the latter half of the 19th century by the 
architect Paul Abadie. The facade, flanked by two towers with 
cupolas, is decorated with arcades filled in with statuary and 
sculpture, the whole representing the Last Judgment. The 
crossing is surmounted by a dome, and the extremity of the 
north transept by a fine square tower over 160 ft. high. The 
hotel de ville, also by Abadie, is a handsome modern structure, 
but preserves two towers of the chateau of the counts of Angou- 
leme, on the site of which it is built. It contains museums of 
paintings and archaeology. Angouleme is the seat of a bishop, 
a prefect, and a court of assizes. Its public institutions include 
tribunals of first instance and of commerce, a council of trade- 
arbitrators, a chamber of commerce and a branch of the Bank 
of France. It also has a lycee, training-colleges, a school of 
artillery, a library and several learned societies. It is a centre 
of the paper-making industry, with which the town has been 
connected since the 14th century. Most of the mills are situated 
on the banks of the watercourses in the neighbourhood of the 
town. The subsidiary industries, such as the manufacture of 
machinery and wire fabric, are of considerable importance. 
Iron and copper founding, brewing, tanning, and the manufacture 
of gunpowder, confectionery, heavy iron goods, gloves, boots 
and shoes and cotton goods are also carried on. Commerce is 
carried on in wine, brandy and building-stone. 

Angouleme (Iculisma) was taken by Clovis from the Visigoths 
in 507, and plundered by the Normans in the 9th century. In 
1360 it was surrendered by the peace of Bretigny to the English; 
they were, however, expelled in 1373 by the troops of Charles V., 
who granted the town numerous privileges. It suffered much 
during the Wars of Religion, especially in 1 568 after its capture 
by the Protestants under Coligny. 



42 



ANGOUMOIS— ANGUILLA 



The countship of Angouleme dated from the 9th century, the 
most important of the early counts being William Taillefer, 
whose descendants held the title till the end of the 12th century. 
Withdrawn from them on more than one occasion by Richard 
Coeur-de-Lion, it passed to King John of England on his marriage 
with Isabel, daughter of Count Adhemar, and by her subsequent 
marriage in 1220 to Hugh X. passed to the Lusignan family, 
counts of Marche. On the death of Hugh XIII. in 1302 without 
issue, his possessions passed to the crown. In 1394 the countship 
came to the house of Orleans, a member of which, Francis I., 
became king of France in 151 5 and raised it to the rank of duchy 
in favour of his mother Louise of Savoy. The duchy afterwards 
changed hands several times, one of its holders being Charles of 
Yalois, natural son of Charles IX. The last duke was Louis- 
Antoine, eldest son of Charles X., who died in 1844. 

See A. F. Lievre, Angouleme: histoire, institutions et monuments 
(Angouleme, 1885). 

ANGOUMOIS, an old province of France, nearly corre- 
sponding to-day to the department of Charente. Its capitr.l 
was Angouleme. 

See Essai d'une bibliotkeque historique de VAngoumois, by E. 
Castaigne (1845). 

ANGRA, or Angra do Heroismo ("Bay -of Heroism," a 
name given it in 1829, to commemorate its successful defence 
against the Miguelist party), the former capital of the Portuguese 
archipelago of the Azores, and chief town of an administrative 
district, comprising the islands of Terceira. St George and 
Graciosa. Pop. (1900) 10,788. Angra is built on the south 
coast of Terceira in 38° 38' N. and in 27° 13' W. It is the 
headquarters of a military command, and the residence of a 
Roman Catholic bishop; its principal buildings are the cathedral, 
military college, arsenal and observatory. The harbour, now of 
little commercial or strategic importance, but formerly a cele- 
brated naval station, is sheltered on the west and south-west by 
the promontory of Mt. Brazil; but it is inferior to the neighbour- 
ing ports of Ponta Delgada and Horta. The foreign trade is net 
large, and consists chiefly in the exportation of pineapples and 
other fruit. Angra served as a refuge for Queen Maria II. cf 
Portugal from 1830 to 1833. 

ANGRA PEQUENA, a bay in German South-West Africa, in 
26° 38' S., 1 5 E., discovered by Bartholomew Diaz in 1487. 
F. A. E. Luderitz, of Bremen, established a trading station here 
in 1883, and his agent concluded treaties with the neighbouring 
chiefs, who ceded large tracts of country to the newcomers. 
On the 24th of April 1884 Luderitz transferred his rights to the 
German imperial government, and on the following 7th of 
August a German protectorate over the district was proclaimed. 
(See Africa, § 5, and German South-West Africa. ) Angra 
Pequena has been renamed by the Germans Luderitz Bay, and 
the adjacent country is sometimes called Liideritzland. The 
harbour is poor. At the head of the bay is a small town, whence 
a railway, begun in 1906, runs east in the direction of Bechuana- 
land. The surrounding country for many miles is absolute 
desert, except after rare but terrible thunderstorms, when the 
dry bed of the Little Fish river is suddenly filled with a turbulent 
stream, the water finding its way into the bay. 

The islands off the coast of Angra Pequena, together with 
others north and south, were annexed to Great Britain in 1867 
and added to Cape Colony in 1874. Seal Island and Penguin 
Island are in the bay; Ichaboe, Mercury, and Hollam's Bird 
islands are to the north; Halifax, Long, Possession, Albatross, 
Pomona, Plumpudding, and Roastbeef islands are to the south. 
On these islands are guano deposits; the most valuable is on 
Ichaboe Island. 

ANGSTROM, ANDERS JONAS (1814-1874), Swedish physicist, 
was born on the 13th of August 1814 at Logdo, Medelpad, 
Sweden. He was educated at Upsala University, where in 
1839 he became prival doccnt in physics. In 1842 he went to 
Stockholm Observatory in order to gain experience in practical 
astronomical work, and in the following year he became observer 
at Upsala Observatory. Becoming interested in terrestrial 
magnetism he made many observations of magnetic intensity 



and declination in various parts of Sweden, and was charged by 
the Stockholm Academy of Sciences with the task, not completed 
till shortly before his death, of working out the magnetic data 
obtained by the Swedish frigate " Eugenie " on her voyage 
round the world in 1851-1853. In 1858 he succeeded Adolph 
Ferdinand Svanberg (1806-1857) in the chair of physics at 
Upsala, and there he died on the 21st of June 1874. His most 
important work was concerned with the conduction of heat and 
with spectroscopy. In his optical researches, Optiska Undersok- 
ningar, presented to the Stockholm Academy in 1853, he not 
only pointed out that the electric spark yields two superposed 
spectra, one from the metal of the electrode and the other from 
the gas in which it passes, but deduced from Euler's theory of 
resonance that an incandescent gas emits luminous rays of the 
same refrangibility as those which it can absorb. This statement, 
as Sir E. Sabine remarked when awarding him the Rumford 
medal of the Royal Society in 1872, contains a fundamental 
principle of spectrum analysis, and though for a number of years 
it was overlooked it entitles him to rank as one of the founders 
of spectroscopy. From 1861 onwards he paid special attention 
to the solar spectrum. He announced the existence of hydrogen, 
among other elements, in the sun's atmosphere in 1862, and in 
1868 published his great map of the normal solar spectrum 
which long remained authoritative in questions of wave-length, 
although his measurements were inexact to the extent of one 
part in 7000 or 8000 owing to the metre which he used as his 
standard having been slightly too short. He was the first, iii 
1867, to examine the spectrum of the aurora borealis, and 
detected and measured the characteristic bright line in its yellow 
green region; but he was mistaken in supposing that this same 
line, which is often called by his name, is also to be seen in the 
zodiacal light. 

His son, Knut Joiian Angstrom, was born at Upsala on the 
12th of January 1857, and studied at the university of that town 
from 1877 to 1884. After spending a short time in Strassburg he 
was appointed lecturer in physics at Stockholm University in 
1885, but in 1891 returned to Upsala, where in 1896 he became 
professor of physics. He especially devoted himself to investiga- 
tions of the radiation of heat from the sun and its absorption by 
the earth's atmosphere, and to that end devised various delicate 
methods and instruments, including his electric compensation 
pyrheliometer, invented in 1893, and apparatus for obtaining a 
photographic representation of the infra-red spectrum (1895). 

ANGUIER, FRANCOIS (c. 1604-1669), and MICHEL (1612- 
1686), French sculptors, were two brothers, natives of Eu in 
Normandy. Their apprenticeship was served in the studio of 
Simon Guillain. The chief works of Francois are the monument 
to Cardinal de Berulle, founder of the Carmelite order, in/ the 
chapel of the oratory at Paris, of which all but the bust has been 
destroyed, and the mausoleum of Henri II., last due de Mont- 
morency, at Moulins. To Michel are due the sculptures of the 
triumphal arch at the Porte St Denis, begun in 1674, to serve 
as a memorial for the conquests of Louis XIV. A marble group 
of the Nativity in the church of Val de Grace was reckoned 
his masterpiece. From 1662 to 1667 he directed the progress of 
the sculpture and decoration in this church, and it was he who 
superintended the decoration of the apartments of Anne of 
Austria in the old Louvre. F. Fouquet also employed him for his 
chateau in Vaux. 

See Henri Stein, Les freres Anguier (1889), with catalogue of works, 
and many references to original sources; Armand Sanson, Deux 
sculpteurs Normands: les freres Anguier (1889). 

ANGUILLA, or Snake, a small island in the British Indies, 
part of the presidency of St Kitts-Nevis, in the colony of the 
Leeward Islands. Pop. (1901) 3890, mostly negroes. It is 
situated in 18° 12' N. and 63° s'"w., about 60 m. N.W. of St 
Kitts, is 16 m. long and has an area of 35 sq.m. The destruction 
of trees by charcoal-burners has resulted in the almost complete 
deforestation of the island. Nearly all the land is in the hands of 
peasant proprietors, who cultivate sweet potatoes, peas, beans, 
corn, &c, and rear sheep and goats. Cattle, phosphate of lime and 
salt, manufactured from a lake in the interior, are the principal 



ANGULATE— ANGUS 



43 



exports, the market for these being the neighbouring island of 
St Thomas. 

ANGULATE (Lat. angulus, an angle), shaped with corners or 
angles; an adjective used in botany and zoology for the shape 
of stems, leaves and wings. 

ANGUS, EARLS OF. Angus was one of the seven original 
earldoms of the Pictish kingdom of Scotland, said to have been 
occupied by seven brothers of whom Angus was the eldest. The 
Celtic line ended with Matilda (fl. 1240), countess of Angus in 
her own right, who married in 1243 Gilbert de Umfravill and 
founded the Norman line of three earls, which ended in 1381, the 
then holder of the title being summoned to the English parlia- 
ment. Meanwhile John Stewart of Bonkyl, co. Berwick, had been 
created earl of Angus in a new line. This third creation ended 
with Margaret Stewart, countess of Angus in her own right, and 
widow of Thomas, 13 th earl of Mar. By an irregular connexion 
with William, 1st earl of Douglas, who had married Mar's sister, 
she became the mother of George Douglas, 1st earl of Angus 
(c. 1380-1403), and secured a charter of her estates for her son, 
to whom in 1389 the title was granted by King Robert II. He 
was taken prisoner at Homildon Hill and died in England. The 
5th earl was his great-grandson. 

Archibald Douglas, 5th earl of Angus (c. 1450-c. 1514), 
the famous " Bell the-Cat," was born about 1450 and succeeded 
his father, George the 4th earl, in 1462 or 1463. In 1481 he was 
made warden of the east marches, but the next year he joined the 
league against James III. and his favourite Robert Cochrane 
at Lauder, where he earned his nickname by offering to bell the 
cat, i.e. to deal with the latter, beginning the attack upon him 
by pulling his gold chain off his neck and causing him with others 
of the king's favourites to be hanged. Subsequently he joined 
Alexander Stewart, duke of Albany, in league with Edward IV. 
of England, on the 1 ith of February 1483, signing the convention 
at Westminster which acknowledged the overlordship of the 
English king. In March however they returned, outwardly at 
least, to their allegiance, and received pardons for their treason. 
Later Angus was one of the leaders in the rebellion against 
James in 1487 and 1488, which ended in the latter's death. He 
was made one of the guardians of the young king James IV. but 
soon lost influence, being superseded by the Homes and Hepburns, 
and the wardenship of the marches was given to Alexander Home. 
Though outwardly on good terms with James, he treacherously 
made a treaty with Henry VII. about 1489 or 1491, by which he 
undertook to govern his relations with James according to 
instructions from England, and to hand over Hermitage Castle, 
commanding the pass through Liddesdale into Scotland, on the 
condition of receiving English estates in compensation. In 
October 1491 he fortified his castle of Tantallon against James, 
but was obliged to submit and exchange his Liddesdale estate 
and Hermitage Castle for the lordship of Both well. In 1493 
he was again in favour, received various grants of lands, and 
was made chancellor, which office he retained till 1498. In 1501 
he was once more in disgrace and confined to Dumbarton 
Castle. After the disaster at Flodden in 15 13, at which he was 
not present, but at which he lost his two eldest sons, Angus was 
appointed one of the counsellors of the queen regent. He died 
at the close of this year, or in 15 14. He was married three times, 
and by his first wife had four sons and several daughters. His 
third son, Gavin Douglas, bishop of Dunkeld, is separately 
noticed. 

Archibald Douglas, the 6th earl (c. 1489-1557), son of 
George, master of Douglas, who was killed at Flodden, succeeded 
on his grandfather's death. In 1509 he had married Margaret 
(d. 1513), daughter of Patrick Hepburn, 1st earl of Bothwell; 
and in 1514 he married the queen dowager Margaret of Scotland, 
widow of James IV., and eldest sister of Henry VIII. By this 
latter act he stirred up the jealousy of the nobles and the opposi- 
tion of the French party, and civil war broke out. He was 
superseded in the government on the arrival of John Stewart, 
duke of Albany, who was made regent. Angus withdrew to his 
estates in Forfarshire, while Albany besieged the queen at 
Stirling and got possession of the royal children; then he joined 



Margaret after her flight at Morpeth, and on her departure for 
London returned and made his peace with Albany in 1516. 
He met her once more at Berwick in June 151 7, when Margaret 
returned to Scotland on Albany's departure in vain hopes of 
regaining the regency. Meanwhile, during Margaret's absence, 
Angus had formed a connexion with a daughter of the laird of 
Traquair. Margaret avenged his neglect of her by refusing to 
support his claims for power and by secretly trying through 
Albany to get a divorce. In Edinburgh Angus held his own 
against the attempts of James Hamilton, ist^earl of Arran, to 
dislodge him. But the return of Albany in 1521, with whom 
Margaret now sided against her husband, deprived him of power. 
The regent took the government into his own hands; Angus was 
charged with high treason in December, and in March 1522 was 
sent practically a prisoner to France, whence he succeeded in 
escaping to London in 1524. He returned to Scotland in 
November with promises of support from Henry VIII., with 
whom he made a close alliance. Margaret, however, refused to 
have anything to do with her husband. On the 23rd, therefore, 
Angus forced his way into Edinburgh, but was fired upon by 
Margaret and retreated to Tantallon. He now organized a large 
party of nobles against Margaret with the support of Henry VIII., 
and in February 1525 they entered Edinburgh and called a 
parliament. Angus was made a lord of the articles, was included 
in the council of regency, bore the king's crown on the opening 
of the session, and with Archbishop Beaton held the chief power. 
In March he was appointed lieutenant of the marches, and 
suppressed the disorder and anarchy on the border. In July 
the guardianship of the king was entrusted to him for a fixed 
period till the 1st of November, but he refused at its close to 
retire, and advancing to Linlithgow put to flight Margaret and 
his opponents. He now with his followers engrossed all the 
power, succeeded in gaining over some of his antagonists, includ- 
ing Arran and the Hamiltons, and filled the public offices with 
Douglases, he himself becoming chancellor. " None that time 
durst strive against a Douglas nor Douglas's man." 1 The young 
king James, now fourteen, was far from content under the 
tutelage of Angus, but he was closely guarded, and several 
attempts to effect his liberation were prevented, Angus com- 
pletely defeating Lennox, who had advanced towards Edinburgh 
with 10,000 men in August, and subsequently taking Stirling. 
His successes were consummated by a pacification with Beaton, 
and in 1527 and 1528 he was busy in restoring order through the 
country. In the latter year, on the nth of March, Margaret 
succeeded in obtaining her divorce from Angus, and about the 
end of the month she and her lover, Henry Stewart, were 
besieged at Stirling. A few weeks later, however, James suc- 
ceeded in escaping from Angus's custody, took refuge with 
Margaret and Arran at Stirling, and immediately proscribed 
Angus and all the Douglases, forbidding them to come within 
seven miles of his person. Angus, having fortified himself in 
Tantallon, was attainted and his lands confiscated. Repeated 
attempts of James to subdue the fortress failed, and on one 
occasion Angus captured the royal artillery, but at length it 
was given up as a condition of the truce between England 
and Scotland, and in May 1529 Angus took refuge with Henry, 
obtained a pension and took an oath of allegiance, Henry 
engaging to make his restoration a condition of peace. Angus 
had been chiefly guided in his intrigues with England by his 
brother, Sir George Douglas of Pittendriech (d. 1552), master of 
Angus, a far cleverer diplomatist than himself. His life and 
lands were also declared forfeit, as were those of his uncle, 
Archibald Douglas of Kilspindie (d. 1535), who had been a friend 
of James and was known by the nickname of " Greysteel." 
These took refuge in exile. James avenged himself on such 
Douglases as lay within his power. Angus's third sister Janet, 
Lady Glamis, was summoned to answer the charge of com- 
municating with her brothers, and on her failure to appear her 
estates were forfeited. In 1537 she was tried for conspiring 
against the king's life. She was found guilty and burnt on the 
Castle Hill, Edinburgh, on the 17th of July 1537. Her innocence 
1 Lindsay of Pitscottie (1814), ii. 314. 



44 



ANGUSSOLA— ANHALT 



has been generally assumed, but Tytler (Hist, of Scotland, iv. 
pp. 433 , 434) considered her guilty. Angus remained in England 
till 1542, joining in the attacks upon his countrymen on the 
border, while James refused all demands from Henry VIII. for 
his restoration, and kept firm to his policy of suppressing and 
extirpating the Douglas faction. On James V.'s death in 1542 
Angus returned to Scotland, with instructions from Henry to 
accomplish the marriage between Mary and Edward. His 
forfeiture was rescinded, his estates restored, and he was made 
a privy councillor and lieutenant-general. In 1543 he negotiated 
the treaty of peace and marriage, and the same year he himself 
married Margaret, daughter of Robert, Lord Maxwell. Shortly 
afterwards strife between Angus and the regent Arran broke out, 
and in April 1544 Angus was taken prisoner. The same year 
Lord Hertford's marauding expedition, which did not spare the 
lands of Angus, made him join the anti-English party. He 
entered into a bond with Arran and others to maintain their 
allegiance to Mary, and gave his support to the mission sent to 
France to offer the latter's hand. In July 1544 he was appointed 
lieutenant of the south of Scotland, and distinguished himself 
on the 27th of February 1545 in the victory over the English at 
Ancrum Moor. He still corresponded with Henry VIII., but 
nevertheless signed in 1546 the act cancelling the marriage and 
peace treaty, and on the 10th of September commanded the van 
in the great defeat of Pinkie, when he again won fame. In 1548 
the attempt by Lennox and Wharton to capture him and punish 
him for his duplicity failed, Angus escaping after his defeat to 
Edinburgh by sea, and Wharton being driven back to Carlisle. 
Under the regency of Mary of Lorraine his restless and ambitious 
character and the number of his retainers gave cause for frequent 
alarms to the government. On the 31st of August 1547 he 
resigned his earldom, obtaining a regrant sibi et suis haeredibus 
masculis et suis assignalis quibuscumque. His career was a long 
struggle for power and for the interests of his family, to which 
national considerations were completely subordinate. He died 
in January 1557. By Margaret Tudor he had Margaret, his only 
surviving legitimate child, who married Matthew, 4th earl of 
Lennox, and was mother of Lord Darnley. He was succeeded 
by bis nephew David, son of Sir George Douglas of Pittendriech. 
Archibald Douglas, 8th earl, and earl of Morton (1555- 
1588), was the son of David, 7 th earl. He succeeded to the title 
and estates in 1558, being brought up by his uncle, the 4th earl 
of Morton, a Presbyterian. In 1573 he was made a privy 
councillor and sheriff of Berwick, in 1574 lieutenant-general 
of Scotland, in 1577 warden of the west marches and steward 
of Fife, and in 1578 lieutenant-general of the realm. He gave 
a strong support to Morton during the attack upon the latter, 
made a vain attempt to rescue him, and was declared guilty of 
high treason on the 2nd of June 1581. He now entered into 
correspondence with the English government for an invasion of 
Scotland to rescue Morton, and on the latter's execution in June 
went to London, where he was welcomed by Elizabeth. After 
the raid of Ruthven in 1582 Angus returned to Scotland and was 
reconciled to James, but soon afterwards the king shook off the 
control of the earls of Mar and Cowrie, and Angus was again 
banished from the court. In 1584 he joined the rebellion of 
Mar and Glamis, but the movement failed, and the insur- 
gents fled to Berwick. Later they took up their residence at 
Newcastle, which became a centre of Presbyterianism and of 
projects against the Scottish government, encouraged by 
Elizabeth, who regarded the banished lords as friends of the 
English and antagonists of the French interest. In February 
1585 they came to London, and cleared themselves of the accusa- 
tion of plotting against James's life; a plan was prepared for 
their restoration and for the overthrow of James Stewart, earl 
of Arran. In October they invaded Scotland and gained an 
easy victory over Arran, captured Stirling Castle with the king 
in November, and secured from James the restoration of their 
estates and the control of the government. In 1586 Angus was 
appointed warden of the marches and lieutenant-general on the 
border, and performed good services in restoring order; but he 
was unable to overcome the king's hostility to the establishment 



of Presbyterian^ government. In January 1586 he was granted 
the earldom of Morton with the lands entailed upon him by his 
uncle. He died on the 4th of August 1 588. He was succeeded in 
the earldom by his cousin William, a descendant of the 5 th earl. 
(For the Morton title, see Morton, James Douglas, 4thEARL or.) 
William Douglas, 10th earl (c. 1554-1611), was the son of 
William, the 9th earl (1533-1591). He studied at St Andrews 
University and joined the household of the earl of Morton. 
Subsequently, while visiting the French court, he became a 
Roman Catholic, and was in consequence, on his return, dis- 
inherited and placed under restraint. Nevertheless he succeeded 
to his father's titles and estates in 1591, and though in 1592 
he was disgraced for his complicity in Lord Bothwell's plot, 
he was soon liberated and performed useful services as the king's 
lieutenant in the north of Scotland. In July 1592, however, 
he was asking for help from Elizabeth in a plot with Erroll and 
other lords against Sir John Maitland, the chancellor, and 
protesting his absolute rejection of Spanish offers, while in 
October he signed the Spanish Blanks (see Erroll, Francis 
Hay, 9th Earl or) and was imprisoned (on the discovery of the 
treason) in Edinburgh Castle on his return in January 1593. 
He succeeded on the 13th in escaping by the help of his countess, 
joining the earls of Huntly and Erroll in the north. They were 
offered an act of "oblivion" or "abolition" provided they 
renounced their religion or quitted Scotland. Declining these 
conditions they were declared traitors and " forfeited." They 
remained in rebellion, and in July 1594 an attack made by them 
on Aberdeen roused James's anger. Huntly and Erroll were 
subdued by James himself in the north, and Angus failed in an 
attempt upon Edinburgh in concert with the earl of Bothwell. 
Subsequently in 1597 they all renounced their religion, declared 
themselves Presbyterians, and were restored to their estates 
and honours. Angus was again included in the privy council, 
and in June 1598 was appointed the king's lieutenant in southern 
Scotland, in which capacity he showed great zeal and conducted 
the " Raid of Dumfries," as the campaign against the Johnstones 
was called. Not long afterwards, Angus, offended at the advance- 
ment of Huntly to a'marquisate, recanted, resisted all the argu- 
ments of the ministers to bring him to a " better mind," and 
was again excommunicated in 1608. In 1609 he withdrew to 
France, and died in Paris on the 3rd of March 1611. He was 
succeeded by his son William, as nth earl of Angus, afterwards 
1 st marquis of Douglas (1580-1660). The title is now held by the 
dukes of Hamilton. 

Authorities. — The Douglas Booh, by Sir W. Fraser (1885); 
History of the House of Douglas and Angus, by D. Hume of Godscroft 
(1748, legendary in some respects) ; History of the House of Douglas, 
by Sir H. Maxwell (1902). 

ANGUSSOLA or Angussciola, SOPHONISBA, Italian portrait 
painter of the latter half of the 16th century, was born at Cremona 
about 1535, and died at Palermo in 1626. In 1560, at the 
invitation of Philip II., she visited the court of Madrid, where 
her portraits elicited great commendation. Vandyck is said 
to have declared that he had derived more knowledge of the true 
principles of his art from her conversation than from any other 
source. She painted several fine portraits of herself, one of which 
is at Althorp. A few specimens of her painting are to be seen 
at Florence and Madrid. She had three sisters, who were also 
celebrated artists. 

ANHALT, a duchy of Germany, and a constituent state of 
the German empire, formed, in 1863, by the amalgamation of 
the two duchies Anhalt-Dessau-Cbthen and Anhalt-Bernburg, 
and comprising all the various Anhalt territories which were 
sundered apart in 1603. The country now known as Anhalt 
consists of two larger portions — Eastern and Western Anhalt, 
separated by the interposition of a part of Prussian Saxony — 
and of five enclaves surrounded by Prussian territory, viz. 
Alsleben, Muhlingen,Dornburg,GMnitz and Tilkerode-Abberode. 
The eastern and larger portion of the duchy is enclosed by the 
Prussian government district of Potsdam (in the Prussian 
province of Brandenburg), and Magdeburg and Merseburg 
(belonging to the Prussian province of Saxony). The western 



ANHALT 



45 



or smaller portion (the so-called Upper Duchy or Ballenstedt) 
is also enclosed by the two latter districts and, for a distance 
of 5 m. on the west, by the duchy of Brunswick. The western 
portion of the territory is undulating and in the extreme south- 
west, where it forms part of the Harz range, mountainous, the 
Ramberg peak attaining a height of 1900 ft. From the Harz 
the country gently shelves down to the Saale; and between this 
river and the Elbe there lies a fine tract of fertile country. The 
portion of the duchy lying east of the Elbe is mostly a fiat 
sandy plain, with extensive pine forests, though interspersed, at 
intervals, by bog-land and rich pastures. The Elbe is the chief 
river, and intersecting the eastern portion of the duchy, from 
east to west, receives at Rosslau the waters of the Mulde. The 
navigable Saale takes a northerly direction through the western 
portion of the eastern part of the territory and receives, on 
the right, the Fuhne and, on the left, the Wipper and the Bode. 
The climate is on the whole mild, though somewhat inclement 
in the higher regions to the south-west. The area of the duchy is 
906 sq. m., and the population in 1905 amounted to 328,007, 
a ratio of about 351 to the square mile. The country is 
divided into the districts of Dessau, Cothen, Zerbst, Bernburg 
and Ballenstedt, of which that of Bernburg is the most, and 
that of Ballenstedt the least, populated. Of the towns, four, 
viz. Dessau, Bernburg, Cothen and Zerbst, have populations 
exceeding 20,000. The inhabitants of the duchy, who mainly 
belong to the upper Saxon race, are, with the exception of about 
12,000 Roman Catholics and 1700 Jews, members of the Evan- 
gelical (Union) Church. The supreme ecclesiastical authority 
is the consistory in Dessau; while a synod of 39 members, 
elected for six years, assembles at periods to deliberate on 
internal matters touching the organization of the church. The 
Roman Catholics are under the bishop of Paderborn. There 
are within the duchy four grammar schools (gymnasia), five 
semi-classical and modern schools, a teachers' seminary and 
four high-grade girls' schools. Of the whole surface, land under 
tillage amounts to about 60, meadowland to 7 and forest 
to 25%. The chief crops are corn (especially wheat), fruit, 
vegetables, potatoes, beet, tobacco, flax, linseed and hops. 
The land is well cultivated, and the husbandry on the royal 
domains and the large estates especially so. The pastures on 
the banks of the Elbe yield cattle of excellent quality. The 
forests are well stocked with game, such as deer and wild boar, 
and the open country is well supplied with partridges. The rivers 
yield abundant fish, salmon (in the Elbe), sturgeon and lampreys. 
The country is rich in lignite, and salt works are abundant. 
Of the manufactures of Anhalt, the chief are its sugar factories, 
distilleries, breweries and chemical works. Commerce is brisk, 
especially in raw products — corn, cattle, timber or wool. Coal 
(lignite), guano, oil and bricks are also articles of export. The 
trade of the country is furthered by its excellent roads, its navig- 
able rivers and its railways (165 m.), which are worked in con- 
nexion with the Frussian system. There is a chamber of 
commerce in Dessau. 

Constitution. — The duchy, by virtue of a fundamental law, 
proclaimed on the 17th of September 1859 and subsequently 
modified by various decrees, is a constitutional monarchy. The 
duke, who bears the title of " Highness," wields the executive 
power while sharing the legislation with the estates. The diet 
(Landtag) is composed of thirty-six members, of whom two are 
appointed by the duke, eight are representatives of landowners 
paying the highest taxes, two of the highest assessed members 
of the commercial and manufacturing classes, fourteen of the 
other electors of the towns and ten of the rural districts. The 
representatives are chosen for six years by indirect vote and 
must have completed their twenty-fifth year. The duke governs 
through a minister of state, who is the praeses of all the depart- 
ments — finance, home affairs, education, public worship and 
statistics. The budget estimates for the financial year 1905- 
1906 placed the expenditure of the estate at £1,323,437. The 
public debt amounted on the 30th of June 1904 to £226,300. 
By convention with Prussia of 1867 the Anhalt troops form a 
contingent of the Prussian army. Appeal from the lower 



courts of the duchy lies to the appeal court at Naumburg in 
Prussian Saxony. 

History. — During the nth century the greater part of Anhalt 
was included in the duchy of Saxony, and in the 12 th century 
it came under the rule of Albert the Bear, margrave of Branden- 
burg. Albert was descended from Albert, count of Ballenstedt, 
whose son Esico (d. 1059 or 1060) appears to have been the first 
to bear the title of count of Anhalt. Esico's grandson, Otto the 
Rich, count of Ballenstedt, was the father of Albert the Bear, 
by whom Anhalt was united with the mark of Brandenburg. 
When Albert died in n 70, his son Bernard, who received the 
title of duke of Saxony in 1 1 80, became count of Anhalt. Bernard 
died in 121 2, and Anhalt, separated from Saxony, passed to his 
son Henry, who in 1218 took the title of prince and was the real 
founder of the house of Anhalt. On Henry's death in 1252 his 
three sons partitioned the principality and founded respectively 
the lines of Aschersleben, Bernburg and Zerbst. The family 
ruling in Aschersleben became extinct in 1315, and this district 
was subsequently incorporated with the neighbouring bishopric of 
Halberstadt. The last prince of the line of Anhalt-Bernburg died 
in 1468 and his lands were inherited by the princes of the sole 
remaining line, that of Anhalt-Zerbst. The territory belonging 
to this branch of the family had been divided in 1396, and after 
the acquisition of Bernburg Prince George I. made a further 
partition of Zerbst. Early in the 16th century, however, owing 
to the death or abdication of several princes, the family had 
become narrowed down to the two branches of Anhalt-Cothen 
and Anhalt-Dessau. Wolfgang, who became prince of Anhalt- 
Cothen in 1508, was a stalwart adherent of the Reformation, 
and after the battle of Muhlberg in 1547 was placed under the 
ban and deprived of his lands by the emperor Charles V. After 
the peace of Passau in 1552 he bought back his principality, 
but as he was childless he surrendered it in 1562 to his kinsmen 
the princes of Anhalt-Dessau. Ernest I. of Anhalt-Dessau 
(d. 1516) left three sons, John II., George III., and Joachim, 
who ruled their lands together for many years, and who, like 
Prince Wolfgang, favoured the reformed doctrines, which thus 
became dominant in Anhalt. About 1546 the three brothers 
divided their principality and founded the lines of Zerbst, 
Plotzkau and Dessau. This division, however, was only 
temporary, as the acquisition of Cothen, and a series of deaths 
among theVuling princes, enabled Joachim Ernest, a son of John 
II., to unite the whole of Anhalt under his rule in 1570. 

Joachim Ernest died in 1586 and his five sons ruled the land 
in common until 1603, when Anhalt was again divided, and the 
lines of Dessau, Bernburg, Plotzkau, Zerbst and Cothen were 
refounded. The principality was ravaged during the Thirty 
Years' War, and in the earlier part of this struggle Christian I. 
of Anhalt-Bernburg took an important part. In 1635 an 
arrangement was made by the various princes of Anhalt, which 
gave a certain authority to the eldest member of the family, 
who was thus able to represent the principality as a whole. This 
proceeding was probably due to the necessity of maintaining 
an appearance of unity in view of the disturbed state of European 
politics. In 1665 the branch of Anhalt-Cothen became extinct, 
and according to a family compact this district was inherited by 
Lebrecht of Anhalt-Plotzkau, who surrendered Plotzkau to Bern- 
burg,and took the title of prince of Anhalt- Cothen. In the same year 
the princes of Anhalt decided that if any branch of the family 
became extinct its lands should be equally divided between the 
remaining branches. This arrangement was carried out after the 
death of Frederick Augustus of Anhalt-Zerbst in 1793, and Zerbst 
was divided between the three remaining princes. During these 
years the policy of the different princes was marked, perhaps 
intentionally, by considerable uniformity. Once or twice 
Calvinism was favoured by a prince, but in general the house was 
loyal to the doctrines of Luther. The growth of Prussia provided 
Anhalt with a formidable neighbour, and the establishment 
and practice of primogeniture by all branches of the family 
prevented further divisions of the principality. In 1806 Alexius 
of Anhalt-Bernburg was created a duke by the emperor Francis II., 
and after the dissolution of the Empire each of the three princes 



4 6 



ANHALT-DESSAU 



took this title. Joining the Confederation of the Rhine in 1807, 
they supported Napoleon until 1813, when they transferred their 
allegiance to the allies; in 181 5 they became members of the 
Germanic Confederation, and in 1828 joined, somewhat reluct- 
antly, the Prussian Zollverein. 

Anhalt-Cothen was ruled without division by a succession of 
princes, prominent among whom was Louis (d. 1650), who was 
both a soldier and a scholar; and after the death of Prince 
Charles at the battle of Semlin in 1789 it passed to his son 
Augustus II. This prince sought to emulate the changes which 
had recently been made in France by dividing Cothen into two 
departments and introducing the Code Napoleon. Owing to his 
extravagance he left a large amount of debt to his nephew and 
successor, Louis II., and on this account the control of the 
finances was transferred from the prince to the estates. Under 
Louis's successor Ferdinand, who was a Roman Catholic and 
brought the Jesuits into Anhalt, the state of the finances grew 
worse and led to the interference of the king of Prussia and to 
the appointment of a Prussian official. When the succeeding 
prince, Henry, died in 1847, this family became extinct, and 
according to an arrangement between the lines of Anhalt-Dessau 
and Anhalt-Bernburg, Cothen was added to Dessau. 

Anhalt-Bernburg had been weakened by partitions, but its 
princes had added several districts to their lands; and in 181 2, 
on the extinction of a cadet branch, it was again united under a 
single ruler. The feeble rule of Alexander Charles, who became 
duke in 1834, and the disturbed state of Europe in the following 
decade, led to considerable unrest, and in 1849 Bernburg was 
occupied by Prussian troops. A number of abortive attempts 
were made to change the government, and as Alexander Charles 
was unlikely to leave any children, Leopold of Anhalt-Dessau 
took some part in the affairs of Bernburg. Eventually in 1859 
a new constitution was established for Bernburg and Dessau 
jointly, and when Alexander Charles died in 1863 both were 
united under the rule of Leopold. 

Anhalt-Dessau had been divided in 1632, but was quickly 
reunited; and in 1693 it came under the rule of Leopold I. 
(see Anhalt-Dessau, Leopold I., Prince of), the famous soldier 
who was generally known as the " Old Dessauer." The sons of 
Leopold's eldest son were excluded from the succession on account 
of the marriage of their father being morganatic, and the princi- 
pality passed in 1747 to his second son, Leopold II. The unrest 
of 1848 spread to Dessau, and led to the interference of the 
Prussians and to the establishment of the new constitution in 
1859. Leopold IV., who reigned from 1817 to 1871, had the 
satisfaction in 1863 of reuniting the whole of Anhalt under his 
rule. He took the title of duke of Anhalt, summoned one 
Landtag for the whole of the duchy, and in 1866 fought for 
Prussia against Austria. Subsequently a quarrel over the posses- 
sion of the ducal estates between the duke and the Landtag 
broke the peace of the duchy, but this was settled in 1872. In 
1 87 1 Anhalt became a state of the German Empire. Leopold IV. 
was followed by his son Frederick I., and on the death of this 
prince in 1904 his son Frederick II. became duke of Anhalt. 

Authorities. — F. Knoke, Anhaltische Geschichte (Dessau, 1893); 
G. Krause, Urkunden, Aktenstilcke und Brief e zur Geschichte 
der anhaltischen Lande und ihrer Fiirsten unter dem Drucke des 
30 jahrigen Krieges (Leipzig, 1861-1866); O. von Heinemann, Codex 
diplomaticus Anhaltinus (Dessau, 1867-1883); Siebigk, Das Her- 
zogthum Anhalt historisch, geographisch und statistisch dargestellt 
(Dessau, 1867). 

ANHALT-DESSAU, LEOPOLD I., Prince of (1676-1747), 
called the "Old Dessauer" (Alter Dessauer), general field marshal 
in the Prussian army, was the only surviving son of John George 
II., prince of Anhalt-Dessau, and was born on the 3rd of July 1676 
at Dessau. From his earliest youth he was devoted to the pro- 
fession of arms, for which he educated himself physically and 
mentally. .He became colonel of a Prussian regiment in 1693, and 
in the same year his father's death placed him at the head of his 
own principality; thereafter, during the whole of his long life, he 
performed the duties of a sovereign prince and a Prussian officer. 
His first campaign was that of 1695 in the Netherlands, in which 
he was present at the siege of Namur. He remained in the field 



to the end of the war of 1697, the affairs of the principality being 
managed chiefly by his mother, Princess Henriette Catherine of 
Orange. In 1698 he married Anna Luise Fose, an apothecary's 
daughter of Dessau, in spite of his mother's long and earnest 
opposition, and subsequently he procured for her the rank of a 
princess from the emperor (1701). Their married life was long 
and happy, and the princess acquired an influence over the stern 
nature of her husband which she never ceased to exert on behalf 
of his subjects, and after the death of Leopold's mother she 
performed the duties of regent when he was absent on campaign. 
Often, too, she accompanied him into the field. Leopold's career 
as a soldier in important commands begins with the outbreak of 
the War of the Spanish Succession. He had made many improve- 
ments in the Prussian army, notably the introduction of the iron 
ramrod about 1700, and he now took the field at the head of a 
Prussian corps on the Rhine, serving at the sieges of Kaiserswerth 
and Venlo. In the following year (1 703) , having obtained the rank 
of lieutenant-general, Leopold took part in the siegeof Bonnand dis- 
tinguished himself very greatly in the battle of Hochstadt, in which 
the Austrians and their allies were defeated by the French under 
Marshal Villars (September 20, 1 703). In the campaign of 1 704 the 
Prussian contingent served under Prince Louis of Baden and sub- 
sequently under Eugene, and Leopold himself won great glory by 
his conduct at Blenheim. In 1703 he was sent with a Prussian 
corps to join Prince Eugene in Italy, and on the 16th of August 
he displayed his bravery at the hard-fought battle of Cassano. 
In the following year he added to his reputation in the battle of 
Turin, where he was the first to enter the hostile entrenchments 
(September 7, 1706). He served in one more campaign in Italy, 
and then wen t with Eugene to join Marlborough in the Netherlands, 
being present in 1709 at the siege of Tournay and the battle of 
Malplaquet. In 17 10 he succeeded to the command of the whole 
Prussian contingent at the front, and in 171 2, at the particular 
desire of the crown prince, Frederick William, who had served 
with him as a volunteer, he was made a general field marshal. 
Shortly before this he had executed a coup de main on the castle 
of Mors, which was held by the Dutch in defiance of the claims of 
the king of Prussia to the possession. The operation was effected 
with absolute precision and the castle was seized without a shot 
being fired. In the earlier part of the reign of Frederick William 
I., the prince of Dessau was one of the most influential members 
of the Prussian governing circle. In the war with Sweden (17 15) 
he accompanied the king to the front, commanded an army of 
40,000 men, and met and defeated Charles XII. in a severe battle 
on the island of Riigen (November 16). His conduct of the siege of 
Stralsund which followed was equally skilf ul,and the great results 
of the war to Prussia were largely to be attributed to his leader- 
ship in the campaign. In the years of peace, and especially after 
a court quarrel (1725) and duel with General von Grumbkow, he 
devoted himself to the training of the Prussian army. The reputa- 
tion it had gained in the wars of 1675 to 1715, though good, gave 
no hint of its coming glory, and it was even in 1740 accounted one 
of the minor armies of Europe. That it proved, when put to the 
test, to be by far the best military force existing, may be taken 
as the summary result of Leopold's work. The "Old Dessauer " 
was one of the sternest disciplinarians in an age of stern discipline, 
and the technical training of the infantry, under his hand, made 
them superior to all others in the proportion of five to three (see 
Austrian Succession, War of the). He was essentially an 
infantry soldier; in his time artillery did not decide battles, but 
he suffered the cavalry service, in which he felt little interest, to 
be comparatively neglected, with results which appeared at 
Mollwitz. Frederick the Great formed the cavalry of Hohenfried- 
berg and Leuthen himself, but had it not been for the incompar- 
able infantry trainedby the "Old Dessauer" he would never have 
had the opportunity of doing so. Thus Leopold, heartily sup- 
ported by Frederick William, who was himself called the great 
drill-master of Europe, turned to good account the twenty years 
following the peace with Sweden. During this time two incidents 
in his career call for special mention: first, his intervention in the 
case of the crown prince Frederick, who was condemned to death 
for desertion, and his continued and finally successful efforts to 



ANHYDRITE— ANILINE 



47 



secure Frederick's reinstatement in the Prussian army; and 
secondly, his part in the War of the Polish Succession on the Rhine, 
where he served under his old chief Eugene and held the office of 
field marshal of the Empire. 

With the death of Frederick William in 1740, Frederick 
succeeded to the Prussian throne, and a few months later took 
place the invasion and conquest of Silesia, the first act in the long 
Silesian wars and the test of the work of the "Old Dessauer's" 
lifetime. The prince himself was not often employed in the 
king's own army, though his sons held high commands under 
Frederick. The king, indeed, found Leopold, who was reputed, 
since the death of Eugene, the greatest of living soldiers, somewhat 
difficult to manage, and the prince spent most of the campaigning 
years up to 1745 in command of an army of observation on the 
Saxon frontier. Early in that year his wife died. He was now 
over seventy, but his last campaign was destined to be the most 
brilliant of his long career. A combined effort of the Austrians 
and Saxons to retrieve the disasters of the summer by a winter 
campaign towards Berlin itself led to a hurried concentration of 
the Prussians. Frederick from Silesia checked the Austrian main 
army and hastened towards Dresden. But before he had 
arrived, Leopold, no longer in observation, had decided the war by 
his overwhelming victory of Kesselsdorf (December 14, 1745). It 
was his habit to pray before battle, for he was a devout Lutheran. 
On this last field his words were, " O Lord God, let me not be 
disgraced in my old days. Or if Thou wilt not help me, do not help 
these scoundrels, but leave us to try it ourselves." With this 
great victory Leopold's career ended. He retired from active 
service, and the short remainder of his life was spent at Dessau, 
where he died on the 7th of April 1747. 

He was succeeded by his son, Leopold II., Maximilian, Prince 
of Anhalt-Dessau (1700-1751), who was one of the best of 
Frederick's subordinate generals, and especially distinguished 
himself by the capture of Glogau in 1741, and his generalship at 
Mollwitz, Chotusitz (where he was made general field marshal on 
the field of battle), Hohenfriedberg and Soor. 

Another son, Prince Dietrich of Anhalt-Dessau (d. 1769), 
was also a distinguished Prussian general. 

But the most famous of the sons was Prince Moritz of 
Anhalt-Dessau (1712-1760), who entered the Prussian army in 
1725, saw his first service as a volunteer in the War of the Polish 
Succession (1734-35), ar >d in the latter years of the reign of 
Frederick William held important commands. In the Silesian 
wars of Frederick II., Moritz, the ablest of the old Leopold's sons, 
greatly distinguished himself, especially at the battle of Hohen- 
friedberg (Striegau), 1745. At Kesselsdorf it was the wing led by 
the young Prince Moritz that carried the Austrian lines and won 
the ''Old Dessauer's" last fight. In the years of peace preceding the 
Seven Years' War, Moritz was employed by Frederick the Great 
in the colonizing of the waste lands of Pomerania and the Oder 
Valley. When the king took the field again in 1756, Moritz was 
in command of one of the columns which hemmed in the Saxon 
army in the lines of Pirna, and he received the surrender of 
Rutowski's force after the failure of the Austrian attempts at 
relief. Next year Moritz underwent changes of fortune. At the 
battle of Kolin he led the left wing, which, through a misunder- 
standing with the king, was prematurely rjrawn into action and 
failed hopelessly. In the disastrous days which followed, Moritz 
was under the cloud of Frederick's displeasure. But the glorious 
victory of Leuthen (December 5, 1757) put an end to this. At the 
close of that day, Frederick rode down the lines and called out to 
General Prince Moritz, "I congratulate you, Herr Feldmarschall!" 
At Zorndorf he again distinguished himself, but at the surprise of 
Hochkirch fell wounded into the hands of the Austrians. Two 
years later, soon after his release, his wound proved mortal. 

Authorities. — Varnhagen von Ense, Preuss. biographische Denk- 
male, vol. ii. (3rd ed., 1872); Militar Konversations-Lexikon, 
vol. ii. (Leipzig, 1833) ; Anon., Fiirst Leopold I. von Anhalt und seine 
Sbhne (Dessau, 1852); G. Pauli, Leben grosser Heiden, vol. vi. ; 
von Orlich, Prim Moritz von Anhalt-Dessau (Berlin, 1842) ; Crousatz, 
Militdrische Denkwiirdigkeiten des Fursten Leopold von Anhalt-Dessau 
(1875); supplements to Militar Wochenblatt (1878 and 1889); 
Siebigk, Selbstbiographie des Fursten Leopold von Anhalt-Dessau 



(Dessau, i860 and 1876); Hosaus, Zur Biographie des Fursten 
Leopold von Anhalt-Dessau (Dessau, 1876); Wiirdig, Des Alten 
Dessauers Leben und Taten (3rd ed., Dessau, 1903); Briefe Kbnig 
Friedrich Wilhelms I. an den Fursten L. (Berlin, 1905). 

ANHYDRITE, a mineral, differing chemically from the more 
commonly occurring gypsum in containing no water of crystal- 
lization, being anhydrous calcium sulphate, CaS04. It crystal- 
lizes in the orthorhombic system, and has three directions of 
perfect cleavage parallel to the three planes of symmetry. It is 
not isomorphous with the orthorhombic barium and strontium 
sulphates, as might be expected from the chemical formulae. 
Distinctly developed crystals are somewhat rare, the mineral 
usually presenting the form of cleavage masses. The hardness 
is 3 1 and the specific gravity 2-9. The colour is white, sometimes 
greyish, bluish or reddish. On the best developed of the three 
cleavages the lustre is pearly, on other surfaces it is of the 
ordinary vitreous type. 

Anhydrite is most frequently found in salt deposits with 
gypsum; it was, for instance, first discovered, in 1794, in a salt 
mine near Hall in Tirol. Other localities which produce typical 
specimens of the mineral, and where the mode of occurrence is 
the same, are Stassfurt in Germany, Aussee in Styria and Bex 
in Switzerland. At all these places it is only met with at some 
depth; nearer the surface of the ground it has been altered to 
gypsum owing to absorption of water. 

From an aqueous solution calcium sulphate is deposited as 
crystals of gypsum, but when the solution contains an excess of 
sodium or potassium chloride anhydrite is deposited. This is 
one of the several methods by which the mineral has been 
prepared artificially, and is identical with its mode of 
origin in nature, the mineral having crystallized out in salt 
basins. 

The name anhydrite was given by A. G. Werner in 1804, 
because of the absence of water, as contrasted with the presence 
of water in gypsum. Other names for the species are muriacite 
and karstenite; the former, an earlier name, being given under 
the impression that the substance was a chloride (muriate). 
A peculiar variety occurring as contorted concretionary masses 
is known as tripe-stone, and a scaly granular variety, from 
Vulpino, near Bergamo, in Lombardy, as vulpinite; the latter is 
cut and polished for ornamental purposes. (L. J. S.) 

ANI (anc. Abnicum), an ancient and ruined Armenian city, in 
Russian Transcaucasia, government Erivan, situated at an 
altitude of 4390 ft., between the Arpa-chai {Harpasus) and a deep 
ravine. In 961 it became the capital of the Bagratid kings of 
Armenia, and when yielded to the Byzantine emperor (1046) it . 
was a populous city, known traditionally as the " city with the 
1 00 1 churches." It was taken eighteen years later by the Seljuk 
Turks, five times by the Georgians between 1125 and 1209, in 
1239 by the Mongols, and its ruin was completed by an earth- 
quake in 1319. It is still surrounded by a double wall partly in 
ruins, and amongst the remains are a " patriarchal " church 
finished in 1010, two other churches, both of the nth century, 
a fourth built in 121 5, and a palace of large size. 

See Brosset, Les Ruines d'Ani (1860-1861). 

ANICETUS, pope c. 154-167. It was during his pontificate 
that St Polycarp visited the Roman Church. 

ANICHINI, LUIGI, Italian engraver of seals and medals, a 
native of Ferrara, lived at Venice about 1550. Michelangelo 
pronounced his " Interview of Alexander the Great with the 
high-priest at Jerusalem," "the perfection of the art." His 
medals of Henry II. of France and Pope Paul III. are greatly 
valued. 

ANILINE, Phenylamine, or Aminobenzene, (CcHsNH;.), an 
organic base first obtained from the destructive distillation of 
indigo in 1826 by O. Unverdorben (Pogg. Ann., 1826, 8, p. 397), 
who named it crystalline. In 1834, F. Runge (Pogg. Ann., 1834, 
31, p. 65; 32, p. 331) isolated from coal-tar a substance which 
produced a beautiful blue colour on treatment with chloride of 
lime; this he named kyanol or cyanol. In 1841, C. J. Fritzsche 
showed that by treating indigo with caustic potash it yielded an 
oil, which he named aniline, from the specific name of one of the 



4 8 



ANIMAL— ANIMAL HEAT 



indigo-yielding plants, Indigofera anil, anil being derived from 
the Sanskrit nila, dark-blue, and nila, the indigo plant. About 
the same time N. N. Zinin found that on reducing nitrobenzene, 
a base was formed which he named benzidam. A. W. von 
Hofmann investigated these variously prepared substances, and 
proved them to be identical, and thenceforth they took their 
place as one body, under the name aniline or phenylamine. 
Pure aniline is a basic substance of an oily consistence, colourless, 
melting at —8° and boiling at 184 C. On exposure to air it 
absorbs oxygen and resinifies, becoming deep brown in colour; 
it ignites readily, burning with a large smoky flame. It possesses 
a somewhat pleasant vinous odour and a burning aromatic 
taste; it is a highly acrid poison. 

Aniline is a weak base and forms salts with the mineral acids. 
Aniline hydrochloride forms large colourless tables, which 
become greenish on exposure; it is the " aniline salt " of com- 
merce. The sulphate forms beautiful white plates. Although 
aniline is but feebly basic, it precipitates zinc, aluminium and 
ferric salts, and on warming expels ammonia from its salts. 
Aniline combines directly with alkyl iodides to form secondary 
and tertiary amines; boiled with carbon disulphide it gives 
sulphocarbanilide (diphenyl thio-urea), CS(NHC 6 H 6 )2, which 
may be decomposed into phenyl mustard-oil, C6H5CNS, and 
triphenyl guanidine, C 6 H 5 N: C(NHC 6 H 5 )2. Sulphuric acid at 
180° gives sulphanilic acid, N^-CeH^SOaH. Anilides, com- 
pounds in which the amino group is substituted by an acid 
radical, are prepared by heating aniline with certain acids; 
antifebrin or acetanilide is thus obtained from acetic acid and 
aniline. The oxidation of aniline has been carefully investigated. 
In alkaline solution azobenzene results, while arsenic acid pro- 
duces the violet-colouring matter violaniline. Chromic acid 
converts it into quinone, while chlorates, in the presence of 
certain metallic salts (especially of vanadium), give aniline black. 
Hydrochloric acid and potassium chlorate give chloranil. Potas- 
sium permanganate in neutral solution oxidizes it to nitro- 
benzene, in alkaline solution to azobenzene, ammonia and oxalic 
acid, in acid solution to aniline black. Hypochlorous acid gives 
para-amino phenol and para-amino diphenylamine (E. Bam- 
berger, Ber., 1898, 31, p. 1522). 

The great commercial value of aniline is due to the readiness 
with which it yields, directly or indirectly, valuable dyestuffs. 
The discovery of mauve in 1858 by Sir W. H. Perkin was the 
first of a series of dyestuffs which are now to be numbered by 
hundreds. Reference should be made to the articles Dyeing, 
Fuchsine, Safranine, Indulines, for more details on this 
subject. In addition to dyestuffs, it is a starting-product for 
the manufacture of many drugs, such as antipyrine, antifebrin, 
&c. Aniline is manufactured by reducing nitrobenzene with 
iron and hydrochloric acid and steam-distilling the product. 
The purity of the product depends upon the quality of the 
benzene from which the nitrobenzene was prepared. In com- 
merce three brands of aniline are distinguished — aniline oil for 
blue, which is pure aniline; aniline oil for red, a mixture of 
equimolecular quantities of aniline and ortho- and para-tolui- 
dines; and aniline oil for safranine, which contains aniline and 
ortho-toluidine, and is obtained from the distillate {Schappis) of 
the fuchsine fusion. Monomethyl and dimethyl aniline are 
colourless liquids prepared by heating aniline, aniline hydro- 
chloride and methyl alcohol in an autoclave at 220°. They are 
of great importance in the colour industry. Monomethyl aniline 
boils at 103-105°; dimethyl aniline at 192°. 

ANIMAL (Lat. animalis, from anima, breath, soul), a term first 
used as a noun or adjective to denote a living thing, but now used 
to designate one branch of living things as opposed to the other 
branch known as plants. Until the discovery of protoplasm, 
and the series of investigations by which it was established that 
the cell was a fundamental structure essentially alike in both 
animals and plants (see Cytology), there was a vague belief 
that plants, if they could really be regarded as animated crea- 
tures, exhibited at the most a lower grade of life. We know now 
that in so far as life and living matter can be investigated by 
science, animals and plants cannot be described as being alive 



in different degrees. Animals and plants are extremely closely 
related organisms, alike in their fundamental characters, and each 
grading into organisms which possess some of the characters of 
both classes or kingdoms (see Protista). The actual boundaries 
between animals and plants are artificial; they are rather due to 
the ingenious analysis of the systematist than actually resident in 
objective nature. The most obvious distinction is that the animal 
cell-wall is either absent or composed of a nitrogenous material, 
whereas the plant cell-wall is composed of a carbohydrate 
material — cellulose. The animal and the plant alike require food 
to repair waste, to build up new tissue and to provide material 
which, by chemical change, may liberate the energy which 
appears in the processes of life. The food is alike in both cases; 
it consists of water, certain inorganic salts, carbohydrate 
material and proteid material. Both animals and plants take 
their water and inorganic salts directly as such. The animal 
c,ell can absorb its carbohydrate and proteid food only in the 
form of carbohydrate and proteid; it is dependent, in fact, on 
the pre-existence of these organic substances, themselves the 
products of living matter, and in this respect the animal is 
essentially a parasite on existing animal and plant life. The 
plant, on the other hand, if it be a green plant, containing chloro- 
phyll, is capable, in the presence of light, of building up both, 
carbohydrate material and proteid material from inorganic 
salts; if it be a fungus, devoid of chlorophyll, whilst it is de- 
pendent on pre-existing carbohydrate material and is capable 
of absorbing, like an animal, proteid material as such, it is able 
to build up its proteid food from material chemically simpler 
than proteid. On these basal differences are founded most of 
the characters which make the higher forms of animal and plant 
life so different. The animal body, if it be composed of many 
cells, follows a different architectural plan; the compact nature 
of its food, and the yielding nature of its cell-walls, result in a 
form of structure consisting essentially of tubular or spherical 
masses of cells arranged concentrically round the food-cavity. 
The relatively rigid nature of the plant cell-wall, and the attenu- 
ated inorganic food-supply of plants, make possible and neces- 
sary a form of growth in which the greatest surface is exposed 
to the exterior, and thus the plant body is composed of flattened 
laminae and elongated branching growths. The distinctions 
between animals and plants are in fact obviously secondary 
and adaptive, and point clearly towards the conception of a 
common origin for the two forms of life, a conception which 
is made still more probable by the existence of many low forms 
in which the primary differences between animals and plants 
fade out. 

An animal may be defined as a living organism, the protoplasm 
of which does not secrete a cellulose cell-wall, and which requires 
for its existence proteid material obtained from the living or 
dead bodies of existing plants or animals. The common use of 
the word animal as the equivalent of mammal, as opposed to 
bird or reptile or fish, is erroneous. 

The classification of the animal kingdom is dealt with in the 
article Zoology. (P. C. M.) 

ANIMAL HEAT. Under this heading is discussed the 
physiology of the temperature of the animal body. 

The higher animals have within their bodies certain sources 
of heat, and also some mechanism by means of which both the 
production and loss of heat can be regulated. This is conclusively 
shown by the fact that both in summer and winter their mean 
temperature remains the same. But it was not until the intro- 
duction of thermometers that any exact data on the temperature 
of animals could be obtained. It was then found that local 
differences were present, since heat production and heat loss 
vary considerably in different parts of the body, although the 
circulation of the blood tends to bring about a mean temperature 
of the internal parts. [Hence it is important to determine the 
temperature of those parts which most nearly approaches to 
that of the internal organs. Also for such results to be compar- 
able they must be made in the same situation. The rectum 
gives most accurately the temperature of internal parts, or in 
women and some animals the vagina, uterus or bladder. 



ANIMAL HEAT 



49 



99-4 



988 



Occasionally that of the urine as it leaves the urethra may be 
of use. More usually the temperature is taken in the mouth, 
axilla or groin. 

Warm and Cold Blooded Animals. — By numerous observations 
upon men and animals, John Hunter showed that the essential 
difference between the so-called warm-blooded and cold-blooded 
animals lies in the constancy of the temperature of the former, 
and the variability of the temperature of the latter. Those 
animals high in the scale of evolution, as hirds and mammals, 
have a high temperature almost constant and independent of 
that of the surrounding air, whereas among the lower animals 
there is much variation of body temperature, dependent entirely 
on their surroundings. There are, however, certain mammals 
which are exceptions, being warm-blooded during the summer, 
but cold-blooded during the winter when they hibernate; such 
are the hedgehog, bat and dormouse. John Hunter suggested 
that two groups should be known as " animals of permanent 
heat at all atmospheres " and " animals of a heat variable with 
every atmosphere," but later Bergmann suggested that they 
should be known as " homoiothermic " and " poikilothermic " 
animals. But it must be re- 
membered there is no hard and 
fast line between the two 
groups. Also, from work re- 
cently done by J. O. Wakelin 
Barratt, it has been shown that 99-6 
under certain pathological con 
ditions a warm-blooded (homoi- 
othermic) animal may become " 2 
for a time cold-blooded (poiki- 99.0 
lothermic). He has shown 
conclusively that this condition 
exists in rabbits suffering from 98-6 
rabies during the last period of 
their life, the rectal temperature 
being then within a few degrees 98 ' 2 
of the room temperature and ^.q 
varying with it. He explains 
this condition by the assump 
tion that the nervous mechan 
ism of heat regulation has 
become paralysed. The re- 
spiration and heart-rate being 97-2 
also retarded during this period, 
the resemblance to the condition 
of hibernation is considerable. Again, Sutherland Simpson has 
shown that during deep anaesthesia a warm-blooded animal tends 
to take the same temperature as that of its. environment. He 
demonstrated that when a monkey is kept deeply anaesthetized 
with ether and is placed in a cold chamber, its temperature gradu- 
ally falls, and that when it has reached a sufficiently low point 
(about 2 5 C. in the monkey) , the employment of an anaesthetic is 
no longer necessary, the animal then being insensible to pain and 
incapable of being roused by any form of stimulus; it is, in fact, 
narcotized by cold, and is in a state of what may be called 
"artificial hibernation." Once again this is explained by the 
fact that the heat-regulating mechanism has been interfered 
with. Similar results have been obtained from experiments on 
cats. These facts — with many others — tend to show that the 
power of maintaining a constant temperature has been a gradual 
development, as Darwin's theory of evolution suggests, and that 
anything that interferes with the due working of the higher 
nerve-centres puts the animal back again, for the time being, on 
to a lower plane of evolution. 

Variations in the Temperature of Man and some other Animals. — 
As stated above, the temperature of warm-blooded animals is 
maintained with but slight variation. In health under normal 
conditions the temperature of man varies between 36 C. and 
38° C, or if the thermometer be placed in the axilla, between 
36-25° C. and 37 -5° C. In the mouth the reading would be from 
•25 C. to 1-5° C. higher than this; and in the rectum some -9° C. 
higher still. The temperature of infants and young children 



has a much greater range than this, and is susceptible of wide 
divergencies from comparatively slight causes. 

Of the lower warm-blooded animals, there are some that 
appear to be cold-blooded at birth. Kittens, rabbits and puppies, 
if removed from their surroundings shortly after birth, lose their 
body heat until their temperature has fallen to within a few 
degrees of that of the surrounding air. But such animals are at 
birth blind, helpless and in some cases naked. Animals who are 
born when in a condition of greater development can maintain 
their temperature fairly constant. In strong, healthy infants 
a day or two old the temperature rises slightly, but in that of 
weakly, ill-developed children it either remains stationary or 
falls. The cause of the variable temperature in infants and 
young immature animals is the imperfect development of the 
nervous regulating mechanism. 

The average temperature falls slightly from infancy to puberty 
and again from puberty to middle age, but after that stage is 
passed the temperature begins to rise again, and by about the 
eightieth year is as high as in infancy. A diurnal variation has 
been observed dependent on the periods of rest and activity, 



Hours of activity and work. 



Hours of rest and sleep. 




98-4 



97 8 



97-6 



the maximum ranging from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., the minimum from 
11 p.m. to 3 a.m. Sutherland Simpson and J. J. Galbraith have 
recently done much work on this subject. In their first experi- 
ments they showed that in a monkey there is a well-marked and 
regular diurnal variation of the body temperature, and that by 
reversing the daily routine this diurnal variation is also reversed. 
The diurnal temperature curve follows the periods of rest and 
activity, and is not dependent on the incidence of day and night; 
in monkeys which are active during the night and resting during 
the day, the body temperature is highest at night and lowest 
through the day. They then made observations on the tempera ^ 
ture of animals and birds of nocturnal habit, where the periods 
of rest and activity are naturally the reverse of the ordinary 
through habit and not from outside interference. They found 
that in nocturnal birds the temperature is highest during the 
natural period of activity (night) and lowest during the period 
of rest (day), but that the mean temperature is lower and the 
range less than in diurnal birds of the same size. That the 
temperature curve of diurnal birds is essentially similar to that 
of man and other homoiothermal animals, except that the 
maximum occurs earlier in the afternoon and the minimum 
earlier in the morning. Also that the curves obtained from 
rabbit, guinea-pig and dog were quite similar to those from man. 
The mean temperature of the female was higher than that of the 
male in all the species examined whose sex had been determined. 
Meals sometimes cause a slight elevation, sometimes a slight 
depression — alcohol seems always to produce a fall. Exercise 



5° 



ANIMAL WORSHIP 



and variations of external temperature within ordinary limits 
cause very slight change, as there are many compensating 
influences at work, which are discussed later. Even from very 
active exercise the temperature does not rise more than one 
degree, and if carried to exhaustion a fall is observed. In 
travelling from very cold to very hot regions a variation of less 
than one degree occurs, and the temperature of those living in 
the tropics is practically identical with those dwelling in the 
Arctic regions. 

Limits compatible with Life. — There are limits both of heat and 
cold that a warm-blooded animal can bear, and other far wider 
limits that a cold-blooded animal may endure and yet live. 
The effect of too extreme a cold is to lessen metabolism, and 
hence to lessen the production of heat. Both katabolic and 
anabolic changes share in the depression, and though less energy 
is used up, still less energy is generated. This diminished 
metabolism tells first on the central nervous system, especially 
the brain and those parts concerned in consciousness. Both 
heart-beat and respiration-number become diminished, drowsiness 
supervenes, becoming steadily deeper until it passes into the 
sleep of death. Occasionally, however, convulsions may set 
in towards the end, and a death somewhat similar to that of 
asphyxia takes place. In some recent experiments on cats 
performed by Sutherland Simpson and Percy T. Herring, they 
found them unable to survive when the rectal temperature 
was reduced below i6° C. At this low temperature respiration 
became increasingly feeble, the heart-impulse usually continued 
after respiration had ceased, the beats becoming very irregular, 
apparently ceasing, then beginning again. Death appeared 
to be mainly due to asphyxia, and the only certain sign that 
it had taken place was the loss of knee jerks. On the other 
hand, too high a temperature hurries on the metabolism of the 
various tissues at such a rate that their capital is soon exhausted. 
Blood that is too warm produces dyspnoea and soon exhausts 
the metabolic capital of the respiratory centre. The rate of 
the heart is quickened, the beats then become irregular and finally 
cease. The central nervous system is also profoundly affected, 
consciousness may be lost, and the patient falls into a comatose 
condition, or delirium and convulsions may set in. All these 
changes can be watched in any patient suffering from an acute 
fever. The lower limit of temperature that man can endure 
depends on many things, but no one can survive a temperature 
of 45 C. (113 F.) or above for very long. Mammalian muscle 
becomes rigid with heat rigor at about 50° C, and obviously should 
this temperature be reached the sudden rigidity of the whole 
body would render life impossible. H. M. Vernon has recently 
done work on the death temperature and paralysis temperature 
(temperature of heat rigor) of various animals. He found that 
animals of the same class of the animal kingdom showed very 
similar temperature values, those from the Amphibia examined 
being 38-5° C, Fishes 30°, Reptilia 45 , and various Molluscs 46 . 
Also in the case of Pelagic animals he showed a relation between 
death temperature and the quantity of solid constituents of 
the body, Cestus having lowest death temperature and least 
amount of solids in its body. But in the higher animals his 
experiments tend to show that there is greater variation in both 
the chemical and physical characters of the protoplasm, and hence 
greater variation in the extreme temperature compatible with life. 

Regulation of Temperature. — The heat of the body is generated 
by the chemical changes — those of oxidation — undergone not 
by any particular substance or in any one place, but by the tissues 
at large. Wherever destructive metabolism (katabolism) is 
going on, heat is being set free. When a muscle does work it 
also gives rise to heat, and if this is estimated it can be shown 
that the muscles alone during their contractions provide far 
more heat than the whole amount given out by the body. Also 
it must be remembered that the heart — also a muscle, — never 
resting, does in the 24 hours no inconsiderable amount of work, 
and hence must give rise to no inconsiderable amount of heat. 
From this it is clear that the larger proportion of total heat of 
the body is supplied by the muscles. These are essentially the 
" thermogenic tissues." Next to the muscles as heat generators 



come the various secretory glands, especially the liver, which 
appears never to rest in this respect. The brain also must be 
a source of heat, since its temperature is higher than that of the 
arterial blood with which it is supplied. Also a certain amount 
of heat is produced by the changes which the food undergoes 
in the alimentary canal before it really enters the body. But 
heat while continually being produced is also continually being 
lost by the skin, lungs, urine and faeces. And it is by the constant 
modification of these two factors, (1) heat production and (2) 
heat loss, that the constant temperature of a warm-blooded 
animal is maintained. Heat is lost to the body through the 
faeces and urine, respiration, conduction and radiation from 
the skin, and by evaporation of perspiration. The following 
are approximately the relative amounts of heat lost through these 
various channels (different authorities give somewhat different 
figures): — faeces and urine about 3, respiration about 20, skin 
(conduction, radiation and evaporation) about 77. Hence it 
is clear the chief means of loss are the skin and the lungs. The 
more air that passes in and out of the lungs in a given time, 
the greater the loss of heat. And in such animals as the dog, 
who do not perspire easily by the skin, respiration becomes 
far more important. 

But for man the great heat regulator is undoubtedly the skin, 
which regulates heat loss by its vasomotor mechanism, and 
also by the nervous mechanism of perspiration. Dilatation oi 
the cutaneous vascular areas leads to a larger flow of blood 
through the skin, and so tends to cool the body, and vice versa. 
Also the special nerves of perspiration can increase or lessen 
heat loss by promoting or diminishing the secretions of the 
skin. There are greater difficulties in the exact determination 
in the amount of heat produced, but there are certain well- 
known facts in connexion with it. A larger living body naturally 
produces more heat than a smaller one of the same nature, but 
the surface of the smaller, being greater in proportion to its 
bulk than that of the larger, loses heat at a more rapid rate. 
Hence to maintain the same constant bodily temperature, the 
smaller animal must produce a relatively larger amount of heat. 
And in the struggle for existence this has become so. 

Food temporarily increases the production of heat, the rate 
of production steadily rising after a meal until a maximum is 
reached from about the 6th to the 9th hour. If sugar be included 
in the meal the maximum is reached earlier; if mainly fat, later. 
Muscular work very largely increases the production of heat, 
and hence the more active the body the greater the production 
of heat. 

But all the arrangements in the animal economy for the pro- 
duction and loss of heat are themselves probably regulated 
by the central nervous system, there being a thermogenic centre 
— situated above the spinal cord, and according to some observers 
in the optic thalamus. 

Authorities. — M.S. Pembrey, "Animal Heat," inSchafer's Text- 
book of Physiology (1898); C. R. Richet, " Chaleur," in Dictionnaire 
de physiologie (Paris, 1898) ; Hale White, Croonian Lectures, Lancet, 
London, 1897; Pembrey and Nicol, Journal of Physiology, vol. 
xxiii., 1898-1899; H. M.Vernon, "Heat Rigor," Journal of Physio- 
logy,'xxiv., 1899; H. M. Vernon, "Death Temperatures," Journal 
of Physiology, xxv., 1899; F. C. Eve, "Temperature on Nerve 
Cells," Journal of Physiology, xxvi., 1900; G. Weiss, Comptes Rendus, 
Soc. de Biol., lii., 1900; Swale Vincent and Thomas Lewis, " Heat 
Rigor of Muscle," Journal of Physiology, 1901 ; Sutherland Simpson 
and Percy Herring, " Cold and Reflex Action," Journal of Physiology, 
1905 ; Sutherland Simpson, Proceedings of Physiological Soc, July 
19, 1902; Sutherland Simpson and J. J. Galbraith, "Diurnal 
Variation of Body Temperature," Journal of Physiology, 1905; 
Transactions Royal Society Edinburgh, 1905; Proc. Physiological 
Society, p. xx., 1903; A. E. Boycott and J. S. Haldane, Effects of 
High Temperatures on Man. 

ANIMAL WORSHIP, an ill-defined term, covering facts 
ranging from the worship of the real divine animal, commonly 
conceived as a " god-body," at one end of the scale, to respect 
for the bones of a slain animal or even the use of a respectful 
name for the living animal at the other end. Added to this, 
in many works on the subject we find reliance placed, especially 
for the African facts, on reports of travellers who were merely 
visitors to the regions on which they wrote. 



ANIMAL WORSHIP 



5 1 



Classification. — Animal cults may be classified in two ways: 
(A) according to their outward form; (B) according to their 
inward meaning, which may of course undergo transformations. 

(A) There are two broad divisions: (i) all animals of a given 
species are sacred, perhaps owing to the impossibility of dis- 
tinguishing the sacred few from the profane crowd; (2) one or 
a fixed number of a species are sacred. It is probable that the 
first of these forms is the primary one and the second in most 
cases a development from it due to (i.) the influence of other 
individual cults, (ii.) anthropomorphic tendencies, (iii.) the 
influence of chieftainship, hereditary and otherwise, (iv.) annual 
sacrifice of the sacred animal and mystical ideas connected 
therewith, (v.) syncretism, due either to unity of function or to 
a philosophic unification, (vi.) the desire to do honour to the 
species in the person of one of its members, and possibly other 
less easily traceable causes. 

(B) Treating cults according to their meaning, which is not 
necessarily identical with the cause which first led to the deifica- 
tion of the animal in question, we can classify them under ten 
specific heads: (i.) pastoral cults; (ii.) hunting cults; (iii.) cults 
of dangerous or noxious animals; (iv.) cults of animals regarded 
as human souls or their embodiment; (v.) totemistic cults; 
(vi.) cults of secret societies, and individual cults of tutelary 
animals; (vii.) cults of tree and vegetation spirits; (-viii.) cults of 
ominous animals; (ix.) cults, probably derivative, of animals 
associated with certain deities; (x.) cults of animals used in 
magic. 

(i.) The pastoral type falls into two sub-types, in which the species 
(a) is spared and (b) sometimes receives special honour at intervals 
in the person of an individual. (See Cattle, Buffalo, below.) 

(ii.) In hunting cults the species is habitually killed, but (a) 
occasionally honoured in the person of a single individual, or (b) 
each slaughtered animal receives divine honours. (See Bear, below.) 

(iii.) The cult of dangerous animals is due (a) to the fear that the 
soul of the slain beast may take vengeance on the hunter, (b) to a 
desire to placate the rest of the species. (See Leopard, below.) 

(iv.) Animals are frequently regarded as the abode, temporary or 
permanent, of the souls of the dead, sometimes as the actual souls of 
the dead. Respect for them is due to two main reasons: (a) the 
kinsmen of the dead desire to preserve the goodwill of their dead 
relatives ; (b) they wish at the same time to secure that their kinsmen 
are not molested and caused to undergo unnecessary suffering. (See 
Serpent, below.) 

(v.) One of the most widely found modes of showing respect to 
animals is known as totemism (see Totem and Totemism), but 
except in decadent forms there is but little positive worship ; in 
Central Australia, however, the rites of the Wollunqua totem group 
are directed towards placating this mythical animal, and cannot be 
termed anything but religious ceremonies. 

(vi.) In secret societies we find bodies of men grouped together 
with a single tutelary animal ; the individual, in the same way, 
acquires the nagual or individual totem, sometimes by ceremonies 
of the nature of the bloodbond. 

(vii.) Spirits of vegetation in ancient and modern Europe and in 
China are conceived in animal form. (See Goat, below.) 

(viii.) The ominous animal or bird may develop into a deity. (See 
Hawk, below.) 

(ix.) It is commonly assumed that the animals associated with 
certain deities are sacred because the god was originally therio- 
morphic; this is doubtless the case in certain instances; but Apollo 
Smintheus, Dionysus Bassareus and other examples seem to show 
that the god may have been appealed to for help and thus become 
associated with the animals from whom he protected the crops, &c. 

(x.) The use of animals in magic may sometimes give rise to a kind 
of respect for them, but this is of a negative nature. See, however, 
articles by Preuss in Globus, vol. lxvii., in which he maintains that 
animals of magical influence are elevated into divinities. 

Bear. — The bear enjoys a large measure of respect from all 
savage races that come in contact with it, which shows itself in 

apologies and in festivals in its honour. The most 
cults. important developments of the cult are in East Asia 

among the Siberian tribes; among the Ainu of Sak- 
halin a young bear is caught at the end of winter and fed for 
some nine months; then after receiving honours it is killed, and 
the people, who previously show marks of grief at its approaching 
fate, dance merrily and feast on its body. Among the Gilyaks a 
similar festival is found, but here it takes the form of a celebration 
in honour of a recently dead kinsman, to whom the spirit of the 
bear is sent. Whether this feature or a cult of the hunting type 



was the primary form, is so far an open question. There is, a 
good deal of evidence to connect the Greek goddess Artemis 
with a cult of the bear; girls danced as "bears" in her honour, 
and might not marry before undergoing this ceremony. The 
bear is traditionally associated with Bern in Switzerland, and in 
1832 a statue of Artio, a bear goddess, was dug up there. 

Buffalo. — The Todas of S. India abstain from the flesh of their 
domestic animal, the buffalo; but once a year they sacrifice a 
bull calf, which is eaten in the forest by the adult males. 

Cattle. — Cattle are respected by many pastoral peoples; they 
live on milk or game, and the killing of an ox is a sacrificial 
function. Conspicuous among Egyptian animal cults was that 
of the bull, Apis. It was distinguished by certain marks, and 
when the old Apis died a new one was sought; the finder was 
rewarded, and the bull underwent four months' education at 
Nilopolis. Its birthday was celebrated once a year; oxen, 
which had to be pure white, were sacrificed to it; women were 
forbidden to approach it when once its education was finished. 
Oracles were obtained from it in various ways. After death it 
was mummified and buried in a rock-tomb. Less widespread 
was the cult of the Mnevis, also consecrated to Osiris. Similar 
observances are found in our own day on the Upper Nile; the 
Nuba and Nuer worship the bull; the Angoni of Central Africa 
and the Sakalava of Madagascar keep sacred bulls. In India 
respect for the cow is widespread, but is of post-Vedic origin; 
there is little actual worship, but the products of the cow are 
important in magic. 

Crow. — The crow is the chief deity of the Thlinkit Indians of 
N. W. America; and all over that region it is the chief figure in a 
group of myths, fulfilling the office of a culture hero who brings 
the light, gives fire to mankind, &c. Together with the eagle- 
hawk the crow plays a great part in the mythology of S.E. 
Australia. 

Dog. — Actual dog- worship is uncommon; the Nosarii of 
western Asia are said to worship a dog; the Kalangs of Java 
had a cult of the red dog, each family keeping one in the house; 
according to one authority the dogs are images of wood which 
are worshipped after the death of a member of the family and 
burnt after a thousand days. In Nepal it is said that dogs are 
worshipped at the festival called Khicha Puja. Among the 
Harranians dogs were sacred, but this was rather as brothers of 
the mystae. 

Elephant. — In Siam it is believed that a white elephant may 
contain the soul of a dead person, perhaps a Buddha; when one 
is taken the capturer is rewarded and the animal brought to the 
king to be kept ever afterwards; it cannot be bought or sold. 
It is baptized and feted and mourned for like a human being at 
its death. In some parts of Indo-China the belief is that the soul 
of the elephant may injure people after death; it is therefore 
feted by a whole village. In Cambodia it is held to bring luck 
to the kingdom. In Sumatra the elephant is regarded as a 
tutelary spirit. The cult of the white elephant is also found at 
Ennarea, southern Abyssinia. 

Fish. — Dagon seems to have been a fish-god with human head 
and hands; his worshippers wore fish-skins. In the temples of 
Apollo and Aphrodite were sacred fish, which may point to a 
fish cult. Atargatis is said to have had sacred fish at Askelon, 
and from Xenophon we read that the fish of the Chalus were 
regarded as gods. 

Goat. — Dionysus was believed to take the form of a goat, 
probably as a divinity of vegetation. Pan, Silenus, the Satyrs 
and. the Fauns were either capriform or had some part of their 
bodies shaped like that of a goat. In northern Europe the wood 
spirit, Ljesche, is believed to have a goat's horns, ears and legs. 
In Africa the Bijagos are said to have a goat as their principal 
divinity. 

Hare. — In North America the Algonquin tribes had as their 
chief deity a " mighty great hare " to whom they went at death. 
According to one account he lived in the east, according to 
another in the north. In his anthropomorphized form he was 
known as Menabosho or Michabo. 

Hawk. — In North Borneo we seem to see the evolution of a 



52 



ANIME 



god in the three stages of the cult of the hawk among the Ken- 
yans, the Kayans and the sea Dyaks. The Kenyahs will not 
kill it, address to it thanks for assistance, and formally consult 
it before leaving home on an expedition; it seems, however, 
to be regarded as the messenger of the supreme god Balli Penya- 
long. The Kayans have a hawk-god, Laki Neho, but seem to 
regard the hawk as the servant of the chief god, Laki Tenangan. 
Singalang Burong, the hawk-god of the Dyaks, is completely 
anthropomorphized. He is god of omens and ruler of the omen 
birds; but the hawk is not his messenger, for he never leaves 
his house; stories are, however, told of his attending feasts in 
human form and flying away in hawk form when all was over. 

Horse. — There is some reason to believe that Poseidon, like 
other water gods, was originally conceived under the form of a 
horse. In the cave of Phigalia Demeter was, according to 
popular tradition, represented with the head and mane of a 
horse, possibly a relic of the time when a non-specialized corn- 
spirit bore this form. Her priests were called Poloi (colts) in 
Laconia. In Gaul we find a horse-goddess, Epona; there are 
also traces of a horse-god, Rudiobus. The Gonds in India 
worship a horse-god, Koda Pen, in the form of a shapeless stone; 
but it is not clear that the horse is regarded as divine. The 
horse or mare is a -common form of the corn-spirit in Europe. 

Leopard. — The cult of the leopard is widely found in West 
Africa. Among the Ewe a man who kills one is liable to be put 
to death; no leopard skin may be exposed to view, but a stuffed 
leopard is worshipped. On the Gold Coast a leopard hunter 
who has killed his victim is carried round the town behind the 
body of the leopard; he may not speak, must besmear himself 
so as to look like a leopard and imitate its movements. In 
Loango a prince's cap is put upon the head of a dead leopard, 
and dances are held in its honour. 

Lion. — The lion was associated with the Egyptian gods Re 
and Horus; there was a lion-god at Baalbek and a lion-headed 
goddess Sekhet. The Arabs had a lion-god, Yaghuth. In 
modern Africa we find a lion-idol among the Balonda. 

Lizard. — The cult of the lizard is most prominent in the 
Pacific, where it appears as an incarnation of Tangaloa. In 
Easter Island a form of the house-god is the lizard; it is also a 
tutelary deity in Madagascar. 

Mantis. — Cagn is a prominent figure in Bushman mythology; 
the mantis and the caterpillar, Ngo, are his incarnations. It was 
called the " Hottentots' god " by early settlers. 

Monkey. — In India the monkey-god, Hanuman, is a prominent 
figure; in orthodox villages monkeys are safe from harm. 
Monkeys are said to be worshipped in Togo. At Porto Novo, in 
French West Africa, twins have tutelary spirits in the shape of 
small monkeys. 

Serpent. — The cult of the serpent is found in many parts of 
the Old World; it is also not unknown in America; in Australia, 
on the other hand, though many species of serpent are found, 
there does not appear to be any species of cult unless we include 
the Warramunga cult of the mythical Wollunqua totem animal, 
whom they seek to placate by rites. In Africa the chief centre 
of serpent worship was Dahomey; but the cult of the python 
seems to have been of exotic origin, dating back to the first 
quarter of the 17th century. By the conquest of Whydah the 
Dahomeyans were brought in contact with a people of serpent 
worshippers, and ended by adopting from them the cult which 
they at first despised. At Whydah, the chief centre, there is a 
serpent temple, tenanted by some fifty snakes; every python 
of the danh-gbi kind must be treated with respect, and death is 
the penalty for killing one, even by accident. Danh-gbi has 
numerous wives, who until 1857 took part in a public procession 
from which the profane crowd was excluded ; a python was 
carried round the town in a hammock, perhaps as a ceremony 
for the expulsion of evils. The rainbow-god of the Ewe was also 
conceived to have the form of a snake; his messenger was said 
to be a small variety of boa; but only certain individuals, not 
the whole species, were sacred. In many parts of Africa the 
serpent is looked upon as the incarnation of deceased relatives; 
among the Amazulu, as among the Bctsilco of Madagascar, 



certain species are assigned as the abode of certain classes; the 
Masai, on the other hand, regard each species as the habitat of a 
particular family of the tribe. 

In America some of the Amerindian tribes reverence the 
rattlesnake as grandfather and king of snakes who is able to 
give fair winds or cause tempest. Among the Hopi (Moqui) of 
Arizona the serpent figures largely in one of the dances. The 
rattlesnake was worshipped in the Natchez temple of the sun; 
and the Aztec deity Quetzalcoatl was a serpent-god. The tribes 
of Peru are said to have adored great snakes in the pre-Inca 
days; and in Chile the Araucanians made a serpent figure in 
their deluge myth. 

Over a large part of India there are carved representations of 
cobras (Nagas) or stones as substitutes; to these human food 
and flowers are offered and lights are burned before the shrines. 
Among the Dravidians a cobra which is accidentally killed is 
burned like a human being; no one would kill one intentionally; 
the serpent-god's image is carried in an annual procession by a 
celibate priestess. 

Serpent cults were well known in ancient Europe; there does 
not, it is true, appear to be much ground for supposing that 
Aesculapius was a serpent-god in spite of his connexion with 
serpents. On the other hand, we learn from Herodotus of the 
great serpent which defended the citadel of Athens; the Roman 
genius loci took the form of a serpent; a snake was kept and 
fed with milk in the temple of Potrimpos, an old Slavonic god. 
To this day there are numerous traces in popular belief, especially 
in Germany, of respect for the snake, which seems to be a survival 
of ancestor worship, such as still exists among the Zulus and 
other savage tribes; the " house-snake," as it is called, cares 
for the cows and the children, and its appearance is an omen of 
death, and the life of a pair of house-snakes is often held to be 
bound up with that of the master -and mistress themselves. 
Tradition says that one of the Gnostic sects known as the 
Ophites caused a tame serpent to coil round the sacramental 
bread and worshipped it as the representative of the Saviour. 
See also Serpent- Worship. 

Sheep. — Only in Africa do we find a sheep-god proper; Ammon 
was the god of Thebes; he was represented as ram-headed; 
his worshippers held the ram to be sacred; it was, however, 
sacrificed once a year, and its fleece formed the clothing of the 
idol. 

Tiger. — The tiger is associated with Siva and Durga, but its 
cult is confined to the wilder tribes; in Nepal the tiger festival 
is known as Bagh Jatra, and the worshippers dance disguised as 
tigers. The Waralis worship Waghia the lord of tigers in the 
form of a shapeless stone. In Hanoi and Manchuria tiger-gods 
are also found. 

Wolf. — Both Zeus and Apollo were associated with the wolf 
by the Greeks; but it is not clear that this implies a previous 
cult of the wolf. It is frequently found among the tutelary 
deities of North American dancing or secret societies. The 
Thlinkits had a god, Khanukh, whose name means " wolf," and 
worshipped a wolf-headed image. 

Authorities. — For a fuller discussion and full references to these 
and other cults, that of the serpent excepted, see N. W. Thomas in 
Hastings' Dictionary of Religions; Frazer, Golden Bough; Camp- 
bell's Spirit Basis of Belief and Custom; Maclennan's Studies (series 
2) ; V. Gennep, Tabou et totemisme a. Madagascar. For the serpent, 
see Ellis, Ewe-speaking Peoples, p. 54; Internat. Archiv, xvii. 113; 
Tylor, Primitive Culture, ii. 239; Fergusson, Tree and Serpent 
Worship; Mahly, Die Schlange im Mythus; Staniland Wake, 
Serpent Worship, &c; j6th Annual Report of the American Bureau 
of Ethnology, p. 273, and bibliography, p. 312. For the bull, &c, in 
Egypt, see Egypt: Religion. (N. W. T.) 

ANIMfi, an oleo-resin (said to be so called because in its 
natural state it is infested with insects) which is exuded from the 
locust tree, Hymenaea coumaril, and other species of Hymenaea 
growing in tropical South America. It is of a pale brown colour, 
transparent, brittle, and in consequence of its agreeable odour 
is used for fumigation and in perfumery. Its specific gravity 
varies from 1-054 to 1-057. It melts readily over the fire, and 
softens even with the heat of the mouth; it is insoluble in 
water, and nearly so in cold alcohol. It is allied to copal in its 



ANIMISM 



S3 



nature and appearance, and is much used by varnish-makers. 
The name is also given to Zanzibar copal (q.v.). 

ANIMISM (from animus, or anima, mind or soul), according 
to the definition of Dr E. B. Tylor, the doctrine of spiritual beings, 
including human souls; in practice, however,, the term is often 
extended to include panthelism or animatism, the doctrine that 
a great part, if not the whole, of the inanimate kingdom, as well 
as all animated beings, are endowed with reason, intelligence 
and volition, identical with that of man. This latter theory, 
which in many cases is equivalent to personification, though it 
may be, like animism, a feature of the philosophy of peoples of 
low culture, should not be confused with it. But it is difficult 
in practice to distinguish the two phases of thought and no clear 
account of animatism can yet be given, largely on the ground 
that no people has yet been discovered which has not already 
developed to a greater or less extent an animistic philosophy. 
On theoretical grounds it is probable that animatism preceded 
animism; but savage thought is no more consistent than that 
of civilized man; and it may well be that animisti* and panthe- 
istic doctrines are held simultaneously by the same person. In 
like manner one portion of the savage explanation of nature may 
have been originally animistic, another part animatistic. 

Origin. — Animism may have arisen out of or simultaneously 
with animatism as a primitive explanation of many different 
phenomena; if animatism was originally applied to non-human 
or inanimate objects, animism may from the outset have been in 
vogue as a theory of the nature of man. Lists of phenomena 
from the contemplation of which the savage was led to believe 
in animism have been given by Dr Tylor, Herbert Spencer, 
Mr Andrew Lang and others; an animated controversy arose 
between the former as to the priority of their respective lists. 
Among these phenomena are: trance (q.v.) and unconsciousness, 
sickness, death, clairvoyance (q.v.), dreams (q.v.), apparitions 
(q.v.) of the dead, wraiths, hallucinations (q.v.), echoes, shadows 
and reflections. 

Primitive ideas on the subject of the soul, and at the same time 
the origin of them, are best illustrated by an analysis of the terms 
applied to it. Readers of Dante know the idea that the dead 
have no shadows; this was no invention of the poet's but a 
piece of traditionary lore; at the present day among the Basutos 
it is held that a man walking by the brink of a river may lose 
his life if his shadow falls on the water, for a crocodile may seize 
it and draw him in; in Tasmania, North and South America 
and classical Europe is found the conception that the soul — auk, 
umbra — is somehow identical with the shadow of a man. More 
familiar to the Anglo-Saxon race is the connexion between the 
soul and the breath ; this identification is found both in Aryan and 
Semitic languages; in Latin we have spirilus, in Greek pneuma, 
in Hebrew ruach; and the idea is found extending downwards 
to the lowest planes of culture in Australia, America and Asia. 
For some of the Red Indians the Roman custom of receiving the 
breath of a dying man was no mere pious duty but a means of 
ensuring that his soul was transferred to a new body. Other 
familiar conceptions identify the soul with the liver (see Omen) 
or the heart, with the reflected figure seen in the pupil of the eye, 
and with the blood. Although the soul is often distinguished from 
the vital principle, there are many cases in which a state of 
unconsciousness is explained as due to the absence of the soul; 
in South Australia wilyamarraba (without soul) is the word used 
for insensible. So too the autohypnotic trance of the magician 
or shaman is regarded as due to his visit to distant regions or the 
nether world, of which he brings back an account. Telepathy or 
clairvoyance (q.v.), with or without trance, must have operated 
powerfully to produce a conviction of the dual nature of man, 
for it seems probable that facts unknown to the automatist are 
sometimes discovered by means of crystal-gazing (q.v.), which 
is widely found among savages, as among civilized peoples. 
Sickness is often explained as due to the absence of the soul; 
and means are sometimes taken to lure back the wandering soul; 
when a Chinese is at the point of death and his soul is supposed 
to have already left his body, the patient's coat is held up on a 
long bamboo while a priest endeavours to bringthe departed spirit 



back into the coat by means of incantations. If the bamboo 
begins to turn round in the hands of the relative who is deputed 
to hold it, it is regarded as a sign that the soul of the moribund 
has returned (see Automatism). More important perhaps than 
all these phenomena, because more regular and normal, was the 
daily period of sleep with its frequent concomitant of fitful and 
incoherent ideas and images. The mere immobility of the body 
was sufficient to show that its state was not identical with that 
of waking; when, in addition, the sleeper awoke to give an 
account of visits to distant lands, from which, as modern 
psychical investigations suggest, he may even have brought back 
veridical details, the conclusion must have been irresistible 
that in sleep something journeyed forth, which was not the body. 
In a minor degree revival of memory during sleep and similar 
phenomena of the sub-conscious life may have contributed to 
the same result. Dreams are sometimes explained by savages 
as journeys performed by the sleeper, sometimes as visits paid 
by other persons, by animals or objects to him; hallucinations, 
possibly more frequent in the lower stages of culture, must have 
contributed to fortify this interpretation, and the animistic 
theory in general. Seeing the phantasmic figures of friends at 
the moment when they were, whether at the point of death or 
in good health, many miles distant, must have led the savage 
irresistibly to the dualistic theory. But hallucinatory figures, 
both in dreams and waking life, are not necessarily those of the 
living; from the reappearance of dead friends or enemies 
primitive man was inevitably led to the belief that there existed 
an incorporeal part of man which survived the dissolution of the 
body. The soul was conceived to be a facsimile of the body, 
sometimes no less material, sometimes more subtle but yet 
material, sometimes altogether impalpable and intangible. 

Animism and Eschatology. — The psychological side of animism 
has already been dealt with; almost equally important in 
primitive creeds is the eschatological aspect. In many parts of 
the world it is held that the human body is the seat of more than 
one soul; in the island of Nias four are distinguished, the shadow 
and the intelligence, which die with the body, a tutelary spirit, 
termed begoe, and a second which is carried on the head. Similar 
ideas are found among the Euahlayi of S.E. Australia, the 
Dakotas and many other tribes. Just as in Europe the ghost 
of a dead person is held to haunt the churchyard or the place of 
death, although more orthodox ideas may be held and enunciated 
by the same person as to the nature of a future life, so the savage, 
more consistently, assigns different abodes to the multiple souls 
with which he credits man. Of the four souls of a Dakota, one 
is held to stay with the corpse, another in the village, a third goes 
into the air, while the fourth goes to the land of souls, where its 
lot may depend on its rank in this life, its sex, mode of death 
or sepulture, on the due observance of funeral ritual, or manyother 
points (see Eschatology) . From the belief in the survival of the 
dead arose the practice of offering food, lighting fires, &c, at the 
grave, at first, maybe, as an act of friendship or filial piety, 
later as an act of worship (see Ancestor Worship) . The simple 
offering of food or shedding of blood at the grave develops into 
an elaborate system of sacrifice; even where ancestor- worship 
is not found, the desire to provide the dead with comforts in the 
future life may lead to the sacrifice of wives, slaves, animals, &c, 
to the breaking or burning of objects at the grave or to the 
provision of the ferryman's toll, a coin put in the mouth of the 
corpse to pay the travelling expenses of the soul. But all is not 
finished with the passage of the soul to the land of the dead ; 
the soul may return to avenge its death by helping to discover 
the murderer, or to wreak vengeance for itself; there is a wide- 
spread belief that those who die a violent death become malignant 
spirits and endanger the lives of those who come near the haunted 
spot; the woman who dies in child-birth becomes a pontianak, 
and threatens the life of human beings; and man resorts to 
magical or religious means of repelling his spiritual dangers. 

Development of Animism. — If the phenomena of dreams were, 
as suggested above, of great importance for the development of 
animism, the belief, which must originally have been a doctrine 
of human psychology, cannot have failed to expand speedily into 



54 



ANIMISM 



a general philosophy of nature. Not only human beings but 
animals and objects are seen in dreams; and the conclusion 
would be that they too have souls; the same conclusion may have 
been reached by another line of argument; primitive psychology 
posited a spirit in a man to account, amongst other things, for his 
actions; a natural explanation of the changes in the external 
world would be that they are due to the queries and volitions
of spirits. 

Animal Souls. — But apart from considerations of this sort, it is 
probable that animals must, early in the history of animistic 
beliefs, have been regarded as possessing souls. Education has 
brought with it a sense of the great gulf between man and animals ; 
but in the lower stages of culture this distinction is not adequately 
recognized, if indeed it is recognized at all. The savage attributes 
to animals the same ideas, the same mental processes as himself, 
and at the same time vastly greater power and cunning. The dead 
animal is credited with a knowledge of how its remains are treated 
and sometimes with a power of taking vengeance on the fortunate 
hunter. Powers of reasoning are not denied to animals nor even 
speech; the silence of the brute creation may be put down to 
their superior cunning. We may assume that man attributed a 
soul to the beasts of the field almost as soon as he claimed one for 
himself. It is therefore not surprising to find that many peoples 
on the lower planes of culture respect and even worship animals 
(see Totem; Animal Worship); though we need not attribute 
an animistic origin to all the develooments, it is clear that the 
widespread respect paid to animals as the abode of dead ancestors, 
and much of the cult of dangerous animals, is traceable to this 
principle. With the rise of species, deities and the cult of in- 
dividual animals, the path towards anthropomorphization and 
polytheism is opened and the respect paid to animals tends to lose 
its strict animistic character. 

Plant Souls. — Just as human souls are assigned to animals, so 
primitive man often credits trees and plants with souls in both 
human or animal form. All over the world agricultural peoples 
practise elaborate ceremonies explicable, as Mannhardt has 
shown, on animistic principles. In Europe the corn spirit some- 
times immanent in the crop, sometimes a presiding deity whose 
life does not depend on that of the growing corn, is conceived in 
some districts in the form of an ox, hare or cock, in others as an 
old man or woman ; in the East Indies and America the rice or 
maize mother is a corresponding figure ;-in classical Europe and 
the East we have in Ceres and Demeter, Adonis and Dionysus, 
and other deities, vegetation gods whose origin we can readily 
trace back to the rustic corn spirit. Forest trees, no less than 
cereals, have their indwelling spirits; the fauns and satyrs of 
classical literature were goat-footed and the tree spirit of the 
Russian peasantry takes the form of a goat; in Bengal and the 
East Indies wood-cutters endeavour to propitiate the spirit of the 
tree which they cut down ; and in many parts of the world trees 
are regarded as the abode of the spirits of the dead. Just as a 
process of syncretism has given rise to cults of animal gods, tree 
spirits tend to become detached from the trees, which are thence- 
forward only their abodes; and here again animism has begun to 
pass into polytheism. 

Object Souls. — We distinguish between animate and inanimate 
nature, but this classification has no meaning for the savage. The 
river speeding on its course to the sea, the sun and moon, if not 
the stars also, on their never-ceasing daily round, the lightning, 
fire, the wind, the sea, all are in motion and therefore animate; 
but the savage does not stop short here; mountains and lakes, 
stones and manufactured articles, are for him alike endowed with 
souls like his own; he deposits in the tomb weapons and food, 
clothes and implements, broken, it may be, in order to set free 
their souls; or he attains the same result by burning them, and 
thus sending them to the Other World for the use of the dead man. 
Here again, though to a less extent than in tree cults, the 
theriomorphic aspect recurs; in the north of Europe, in ancient 
Greece, in China, the water or river spirit is horse or bull-shaped; 
the water monster in serpent shape is even more widely found, 
but it is less strictly the spirit of the water. The spirit of syn- 
cretism manifests itself in this department of animism too; the 



immanent spirit of the earlier period becomes the presiding genius 
or local god of later times, and with the rise of the doctrine of 
separable souls we again reach the confines of animism pure and 
simple. 

Spirits in Genera/.— Side by side with the doctrine of separable 
souls with which we have so far been concerned, exists the belief 
in a great host of unattached spirits; these are not immanent souls 
which have become detached from their abodes, but have every 
appearance of independent spirits. Thus, anirriism is in some 
directions little developed, so far as we can see, among the 
Australian aborigines; but from those who know them best we 
learn that they believe in innumerable spirits and bush bogies, 
which wander, especially at night, and can be held at bay by 
means of fire; with this belief may be compared the ascription 
in European folk belief of prophylactic properties to iron. These 
spirits are at first mainly malevolent; and side by side with them 
we find the spirits of the dead as hostile beings. At a higher stage 
the spirits of dead kinsmen are no longer unfriendly, nor yet all 
non -human spirits; as fetishes (see Fetishism), naguals (see 
Totem) , familiars, gods or demi-gods (for which and the general 
question see Demonology), they enter into relations with man. 
On the other hand there still subsists a belief in innumerable evil 
spirits, which manifest themselves in the phenomena of possession 
(q.v.), lycanthropy (q.v.), disease, &c. The fear of evil spirits has 
given rise to ceremonies of expulsion of evils (see Exorcism), 
designed to banish them from the community. 

Animism and Religion. — Animism is commonly described as 
the most primitive form of religion; but properly speaking it is 
not a religion at all, for religion implies, at any rate, some form of 
emotion (see Religion), and animism is in the first instance an 
explanation of phenomena rather than an attitude of mind toward 
the cause of them, a philosophy rather than a religion. The term 
may, however, be conveniently used to describe the early stage 
of religion in which man endeavours to set up relations between 
himself and the unseen powers, conceived as spirits, but differing 
in many particulars from the gods of polytheism. As an example 
of this stage in one of its aspects may be taken the European belief 
in the corn spirit, which is, however, the object of magical rather 
than religious rites; Dr Frazer has thus defined the character of 
the animistic pantheon, " they are restricted in their queries
to definite departments of nature; their names are general, not 
proper; their attributes are generic rather than individual; in 
other words, there is an indefinite number of spirits of each class, 
and the individuals of a class are much alike; they have no 
definitely marked individuality; no accepted traditions are 
current as to their origin, life and character." This stage of 
religion is well illustrated by the Red Indian custom of offering 
sacrifice to certain rocks, or whirlpools, or to the indwelling spirits 
connected with them; the rite is only performed in the neighbour- 
hood of the object, it is an incident of a canoe or other voyage, and 
is not intended to secure any benefits beyond a safe passage past 
the object in question ; the spirit to be propitiated has a purely 
local sphere of influence, and powers of a very limited nature. 
Animistic in many of their features too are the temporary gods of 
fetishism (q.v.), naguals or familiars, genii and even the dead who 
receive a cult. With the rise of a belief in departmental gods 
comes the age of polytheism ; the belief in elemental spirits may 
still persist, but they fall into the background and receive no cult. 

Animism and the Origin of Religion. — Two animistic theories of 
the origin of religion have been put forward, the one, often termed 
the " ghost theory," mainly associated with the name of Herbert 
Spencer, but also maintained by Grant Allen, refers the beginning 
of religion to the cult of dead human beings; the other, put 
forward by Dr E. B. Tylor, makes the foundation of all religion 
animistic, but recognizes the non-human character of polytheistic 
gods. Although ancestor-worship, or, more broadly, the cult of 
the dead, has in many cases overshadowed other cults or even 
extinguished them, we have no warrant, even in these cases, for 
asserting its priority, but rather. the reverse; not only so, but 
in the majority of cases the pantheon is made up by a multitude 
of spirits in human, sometimes in animal form, which bear no signs 
of ever having been incarnate; sun gods and moon goddesses, 



ANIMUCCIA— ANJOU 



55 



gods of fire, wind and water, gods of the sea, and above all gods of 
the sky, show no signs of having been ghost gods at any period 
in their history. They may, it is true, be associated with ghost 
gods, but in Australia it cannot even be asserted that the gods 
are spirits at all, much less that they are the spirits of dead men; 
they are simply magnified magicians, super-men who have never 
died; we have no ground, therefore, for regarding the cult of the 
dead as the origin of religion in this area; this conclusion is the 
more probable, as ancestor-worship and the cult of the dead 
generally cannot be said to exist in Australia. 

The more general view that polytheistic and other gods are the 
elemental and other spirits of the later stages of animistic creeds, 
is equally inapplicable to Australia, where the belief seems to be 
neither animistic nor even animatistic in character. But we are 
hardly justified in arguing from the case of Australia to a general 
conclusion as to the origin of religious ideas in all other parts of 
the world. It is perhaps safest to say that the science of religions 
has no data on which to go, in formulating conclusions as to the 
original form of the objects of religious emotion; in this connexion 
it must be remembered that not only is it very difficult to get 
precise information of the subject of the religious ideas of people 
of low culture, perhaps for the simple reason that the ideas 
themselves are far from precise, but also that, as has been pointed 
out above, the conception of spiritual often approximates very 
closely to that of material. Where the soul is regarded as no 
more than a finer sort of matter, it will obviously be far from easy 
to decide whether the gods are spiritual or material. Even, 
therefore, if we can say that at the present day the gods are 
entirely spiritual, it is clearly possible to maintain that they 
have been spiritualized pari passu with the increasing importance 
of the animistic view of nature and of the greater prominence of 
eschatological beliefs. The animistic origin of religion is therefore 
not proven. 

Animism and Mythology. — But little need be said on the 
relation of animism and mythology (q.v.). While a large part 
of mythology has an animistic basis, it is possible to believe, 
e.g. in a sky world, peopled by corporeal beings, as well as by 
spirits of the dead; the latter may even be entirely absent; 
the mythology of the Australians relates largely to corporeal, 
non-spiritual beings; stories of transformation, deluge and 
doom myths, or myths of the origin of death, have not necessarily 
any animistic basis. At the same time, with the rise of ideas as 
to a future life and spiritual beings, this field of mythology is 
immensely widened, though it cannot be said that a rich mytho- 
logy is necessarily genetically associated with or combined with 
belief in many spiritual beings. 

Animism in Philosophy. — The term " animism " has been 
applied to many different philosophical systems. It is used to 
describe Aristotle's view of the relation of soul and body held 
also by the Stoics and Scholastics. On the other hand 
monadology (Leibnitz) has also been termed animistic. The 
name is most commonly applied to vitalism, a view mainly 
associated with G. E. Stahl and revived by F. Bouillier (1813- 
1899), which makes life, or life and mind, the directive principle 
in evolution and growth, holding that all cannot be traced back 
to chemical and mechanical processes, but that there is a directive 
force which guides energy without altering its amount. An 
entirely different class of ideas, also termed animistic, is the 
belief in the world soul, held by Plato, Schelling and others. 

Bibliography. — Tylor, Primitive Culture; Frazer, Golden Bough; 
Id. on Burial Customs in /. A. I. xv. ; Mannhardt, Baumkultus; 
G. A. Wilken, Het Animisme; Koch on the animism of S. America 
in Internationales Archiv, xiii., Suppl. ; Andrew Lang, Making of 
Religion; Skeat, Malay Magic; Sir G. Campbell, "Spirit Basis of 
Belief and Custom," in Indian Antiquary, xxiii. and succeeding 
volumes; Folklore, iii. 289. xi. 162; Spencer, Principles of Socio- 
logy; Mind (1877), 141, 415 et seq. For animism in philosophy, 
Stahl, Theoria ; Bouillier, Du Principe vital. (N. W. T.) 

ANIMUCCIA, GIOVANNI, Italian musical composer, was born 
at Florence in the last years of the 1 5th century. At the request 
of St Filippo Neri he composed a number of Laudi, or hymns 
of praise, to be sung after sermon time, which have given him 
an accidental prominence in musical history, since their per- 



formance in St Filippo's Oratory eventually gave rise (on the 
disruption of 16th century schools of composition) to those early 
forms of " oratorio " that are not traceable to the Gregorian- 
polyphonic " Passions." St Filippo admired Animuccia s>o 
warmly that he declared he had seen the soul of his friend fly 
upwards towards heaven. In 1555 Animuccia was appointed 
maestro di capella at St Peter's, an office which he held until his 
death in 1571. He was succeeded by Palestrina, who had been 
his friend and probably his pupil. The manuscript of many of 
Animuccia's compositions is still preserved in the Vatican 
Library. His chief published works were Madrigali e Motetti a 
quattro e cinque voci (Ven. 1548) and 77 primo Libro di Messe 
(Rom. 1567). From the latter Padre Martini has taken two 
specimens for his Saggio di Contrapunto. A mass from the 
Primo Libro di Messe on the canto fermo of the hymn Condilor 
alme siderum is published in modern notation in the Anthologie 
des maitres religieux primitifs of the Chanteurs de Saint Gervais. 
It is solemn and noble in conception, and would be a great work 
but for a roughness which is more careless than archaic. 

Paolo Animuccia, a brother of Giovanni, was also celebrated 
as a composer; he is said by Fetis to have been maestro di 
capella at S. Giovanni in Laterano from the middle of January 
1550 until 1552, and to have died in 1563. 

ANISE (Pimpinella Anisum), an umbelliferous plant found in 
Egypt and the Levant, and cultivated on the continent of Europe 
for medicinal purposes. The officinal part of the plant is the 
fruit, which consists of two united carpels, called a cremocarp. 
It is known by the' name of aniseed, and has a strong aromatic 
taste and a powerful odour. By distillation the fruit yields the 
volatile oil of anise, which is useful in the treatment of flatulence 
and colic in children. It may be given as Aqua Anisi, in doses of 
one or more ounces, or as the Spiritus Anisi, in doses of 5-20 
minims. The main constituent of the oil (up to 90 %) is anethol, 
C, H 12 O or CsHji^KOCHsXCHiCH-CIL.) It- also contains 
methyl chavicol, anisic aldehyde, anisic acid, and' a terpene. 
Most of the oil of commerce, however, of which anethol is also 
the chief constituent , comes from Jllicium verum (order Magno- 
liaceae, sub-order Wintereae), indigenous in N.E. China, the 
star-anise of liqueur makers. It receives its name from its 
flavour, and from its fruit spreading out like a star. The anise of 
the Bible (Matt, xxiii. 23) is Anethum or Peucedanum graveolens, 
i.e. dill (q.v.). 

ANJAR, a fortified town of India, and the capital of a district 
of the same name in the native state of Cutch, in the presidency 
of Bombay. The country is dry and sandy, and entirely depends 
on well irrigation for its water supply. The town is situated 
nearly 10 miles from the Gulf of Cutch. It suffered severely 
from an earthquake in 181 9, which destroyed a large number of 
houses, and occasioned the loss of several lives. In 1901 the 
population was 18,014. The town and district of Anjar were 
both ceded to the British in 1816, but in 1822 they were again 
transferred to the Cutch government in consideration of an 
annual money payment. Subsequently it was discovered that 
this obligation pressed heavily upon the resources of the native 
state, and in 1832 the pecuniary equivalent for Anjar, both 
prospectively and inclusive of the arrears which had accrued to 
that date, was wholly remitted by the British government. 

ANJOU, the old name of a French territory, the political 
origin of which is traced to the ancient Gallic state of the Andes, 
on the lines of which was organized, after the conquest by 
Julius Caesar, the Roman civitas of the Andecavi. This was 
afterwards preserved as an administrative district under the 
Franks with the name first of pagus, then of comitatus, or count- 
ship of Anjou. This countship, the extent of which seems to 
have been practically identical with that of the ecclesiastical 
diocese of Angers, occupied the greater part of what is now the 
department of Maine-et-Loire, further embracing, to the north, 
Craon, Bazouges (Chateau-Gontier), Le Lude, and to the east, 
Chateau-la- Valliere and Bourgueil, while to the south, on the 
other hand, it included neither the present town of Montreuil- 
Bellay, nor Vihiers, Cholet, Beaupreau, nor the whole district 
lying to the west of the Ironne and Thouet, on the left bank of 



5^ 



ANJOU 



the Loire, which formed the territory of the Mauges. It was 
bounded on the north by the countship of Maine, on the east 
by that of Touraine, on the south by that of Poitiers and by 
the Mauges, on the west by the countship of Nantes. 

From the outset of the reign of Charles the Bald, the integrity 
of Anjou was seriously menaced by a two-fold danger: from 
Brittany and from Normandy. Lambert, a former count of 
Nantes, after devastating Anjou in concert with Nominoe, duke 
of Brittany, had by the end of the year 851 succeeded in occupy- 
ing all the western part as far as the Mayenne. The principality, 
which he thus carved out for himself, was occupied, on his death, 
by Erispoe, duke of Brittany; by him it was handed down to 
his successors, in whose hands it remained till the beginning 
of the 10th century. All this time the Normans had not ceased 
ravaging the country; a brave man was needed to defend it, 
and finally towards 861, Charles the Bald entrusted it to Robert 
the Strong (q.v.), but he unfortunately met with his death in 
866 in a battle against the Normans at Brissarthe. Hugh 
the Abbot succeeded him in the countship of Anjou as in most 
of his other duties, and on his death (886) it passed to Odo (q.v.), 
the eldest son of Robert the Strong, who, on his accession to 
the throne of France (888) , probably handed it over to his brother 
Robert. In any case, during the last years of the 9th century, 
in Anjou as elsewhere the power was delegated to a viscount, 
Fulk the Red (mentioned under this title after 898), son of a 
certain Ingelgerius. 

In the second quarter of the 10th century Fulk the Red 
had already usurped the title of count, which his descendants 
kept for three centuries. He was succeeded first by his son 
Fulk II. the Good (941 or 942-c. 960), and then by the son of 
the latter, Geoffrey I. Grisegonelle (Grey tunic) (c. 960-2 1st of 
July 987), who inaugurated a policy of expansion, having as 
its objects the extension of the boundaries of the ancient count- 
ship and the -reconquest of those parts of it which had been 
annexed by the neighbouring states; for, though western Anjou 
had been recovered from the dukes of Brittany since the begin- 
ning of the 10th century, in the east all the district of Saumur 
had already by that time fallen into the hands of the counts 
of Blois and Tours. Geoffrey Greytunic succeeded in making 
the count of Nantes his vassal, and in obtaining from the duke 
of Aquitaine the concession in fief of the district of Loudun. 
Moreover, in the wars of king Lothaire against the Normans 
and against the emperor Otto II. he distinguished himself by 
feats of arms which the epic poets were quick to celebrate. His 
son Fulk III. Nerra (q.v.) (21st of July 98 7- 21st of June 1040) 
found himself confronted on his accession with a coalition of 
Odo I., count of Blois, and ConanI.,count of Rennes. The latter 
having seized upon Nantes, of which the counts of Anjou held 
themselves to be suzerains, Fulk Nerra came and laid siege to it, 
routing Conan's army at Conquereuil (27th of June 992) and 
re-establishing Nantes under his own suzerainty. Then turning 
his attention to the count of Blois, he proceeded to establish 
a fortress at Langeais, a few miles from Tours, from which, 
thanks to the intervention of the king Hugh Capet, Odo failed 
to oust him. On the death of Odo I., Fulk seized Tours (996); 
but King Robert the Pious turned against him and took the town 
again (997). In 1016 a fresh struggle arose between Fulk and 
Odo II., the new count of Blois. Odo II. was utterly defeated 
at Pontlevoy (6th of July 1016), and a few years later, while 
Odo was besieging Montboyau, Fulk surprised and took Saumur 
(1026). Finally, the victory gained by Geoffrey Martel (q.v.) 
(21st of June i040-i4th of November 1060), the son and successor 
of Fulk, over Theobald III., count of Blois, at Nouy (21st of 
August 1044), assured to the Angevins the possession of the 
countship of Touraine. At the same time, continuing in this 
quarter also the work of his father (who in 1025 took prisoner 
Herbert Wake-Dog and only set him free on condition of his 
doing him homage), Geoffrey succeeded in reducing the countship 
of Maine to complete dependence on himself. During his father's 
life-time he had been beaten by Gervais, bishop of Le Mans 
(1038), but now (1047 or 1048) succeeded in taking the latter 
prisoner, for which he was excommunicated by Pope Leo IX. 



at the council of Reims (October 1049). In spite, however, 
of the concerted attacks of William the Bastard (the Conqueror), 
duke of Normandy, and Henry I., king of France, he was able 
in 105 1 to force Maine to recognize his authority, though failing 
to revenge himself on William. 

On the death of Geoffrey Martel (14th of November 1060) there 
was a dispute as to the succession. Geoffrey Martel, having no 
children, had bequeathed the countship to his eldest nephew, 
Geoffrey III. the Bearded, son of Geoffrey, count of Gatinais, 
and of Ermengarde, daughter of Fulk Nerra. But Fulk le 
Rechin (the Cross-looking), brother of Geoffrey the Bearded, 
who had at first been contented with an appanage consisting of 
Saintonge and the chdlcllenie of Vihiers, having allowed Saintonge 
to be taken in 1062 by the duke of Aquitaine, took advantage 
of the general discontent aroused in the countship by the unskilful 
policy of Geoffrey to make himself master of Saumur (25th of 
February 1067) and Angers (4th of April), and cast Geoffrey 
into prison at Sable. Compelled by the papal authority to release 
him after a short interval and to restore the countship to him, 
he soon renewed the struggle, beat Geoffrey near Brissac and 
shut him up in the castle of Chinon (1068). In order, however, 
to obtain his recognition as count, Fulk IV. Rechin (io68-i4th 
of April 1 109) had to carry on a long struggle with his barons, 
to cede Gatinais to King Philip I., and to do homage to the count 
of Blois for Touraine. On the other hand, he was successful 
on the whole in pursuing the policy of Geoffrey Martel in Maine: 
after destroying La Fleche, by the peace of Blanchelande (1081), 
he received the homage of Robert " Courteheuse " (" Curthose "), 
son of William the Conqueror, for Maine. Later, he upheld Elias, 
lord of La Fleche, against William Rufus, king of England, 
and on the recognition of Elias as count of Maine in 1100, 
obtained for Fulk the Young, his son by Bertrade de Montfort, 
the hand of Eremburge, Elias's daughter and sole heiress. 

Fulk V. the Young (14th of April 1109-1129) succeeded to the 
countship of Maine on the death of Elias (nth of July mo); 
but this increase of Angevin territory came into such direct 
collision with the interests of Henry I., king of England, who was 
also duke of Normandy, that a struggle between the two powers 
became inevitable. In 1 1 1 2 it broke out, and Fulk, being unable 
to prevent Henry I. from taking Alencon and making Robert, 
lord of Belleme, prisoner, was forced, at the treaty of Pierre 
Pecoulee, near Alencon (23rd of February 1113), to do homage 
to Henry for Maine. In revenge for this, while Louis VI. was 
overrunning the Vexin in n 18, he routed Henry's army at 
Alencon (November), and in May n 19 Henry demanded a peace, 
which was sealed in June by the marriage of his eldest son, 
William the Aetheling, with Matilda, Fulk's daughter. William 
the Aetheling having perished in the wreck of the " White 
Ship " (25th of November 1120), Fulk, on his return from a 
pilgrimage to the Holy Land (1120-1121), married his second 
daughter Sibyl, at the instigation of Louis VI., to William Clito, 
son of Robert Courteheuse, and a claimant to the duchy of 
Normandy, giving her Maine for a dowry (n 22 or 1123). Henry 
I. managed to have the marriage annulled, on the plea of kinship 
between the parties (1123 or 1124). But in 11 27 a new alliance 
was made, and on the 22nd of May at Rouen, Henry I. betrothed 
his daughter Matilda, widow of the emperor Henry V., to 
Geoffrey the Handsome, son of Fulk, the marriage being cele- 
brated at Le Mans on the 2nd of June 1 1 29. Shortly after, on 
the invitation of Baldwin II., king of Jerusalem, Fulk departed 
to the Holy Land for good, married Melisinda, Baldwin's daughter 
and heiress, and succeeded to the throne of Jerusalem (14th of 
September 1131). His eldest son, Geoffrey IV. the Handsome 
or " Plantagenet," succeeded him as count of Anjou (n 29- 
7th of September 1151). From the first he tried to profit by his 
marriage, and after the death of Henry I. (1st of December 1135), 
laid the foundation of the conquest of Normandy by a series of 
campaigns: about the end of 113 5 or the beginning of n 36 he 
entered that country and rejoined his wife, the countess "Blatilda, 
who had received the submission of Argentan, Domfront and 
Exmes. Having been abruptly recalled into Anjou by a revolt 
of his barons, he returned to the charge in September 1136 witha 



ANJOU 



57 



strong army, including in its ranks William, duke of Aquitaine, 
Geoffrey, count of Vendome, and William Talvas, count of 
Ponthieu, but after a few successes was wounded in the foot at 
the siege of Le Sap (October i) and had to fall back. In May 
1137 began a fresh campaign in which he devastated the district 
of Hiemois (round Exmes) and burnt Bazoches. In June 1138, 
with the aid of Robert of Gloucester, Geoffrey obtained the 
submission of Bayeux and Caen; in October he devastated the 
neighbourhood of Falaise; finally, in March 1 141, on hearing of 
his wife's success in England, he again entered Normandy, when 
he made a triumphal procession through the country. Town 
after town surrendered: in 1141, Verneuil, Nonancourt, Lisieux, 
Falaise; in 1142, Mortain, Saint-Hilaire, Pontorson; in 1143, 
Avranches, Saint-L6, Cerences, Coutances, Cherbourg; in the 
beginning of 1144 he entered Rouen, and on the 19th of January 
received the ducal crown in its cathedral. Finally, in 1149, after 
crushing a last attempt at revolt, he handed over the duchy to 
his son Henry " Curtmantel," who received the investiture at the 
hands of the king of France. 

All the while that Fulk the Young and Geoffrey the Handsome 
were carrying on the work of extending the countship of Anjou, 
they did not neglect to strengthen their authority at home, to 
which the unruliness of the barons was a menace. As regards 
Fulk the Young we know only a few isolated facts and dates: 
about 1109 Doue and L'lle Bouchard were taken; in 1112 
Brissac was besieged, and about the same time Eschivard of 
Preuilly subdued; in n 14 there was a general war against the 
barons who were in revolt, and in rn8 a fresh rising, which was 
put down after the siege of Montbazon; in n 23 the lord of Doue 
revolted, and in n 24 Montreuil-Bellay was taken after a siege 
of nine weeks. Geoffrey the Handsome, with his indefatigable 
energy, was eminently fitted to suppress the coalitions of his 
vassals, the most formidable of which was formed in n 29. 
Among those who revolted were Guy of Laval, Giraud of Mon- 
treuil-Bellay, the viscount of Thouars, the lords of Mirebeau, 
Amboise, Partbenay and Sable. Geoffrey succeeded in beating 
them one after another, razed the keep of Thouars and occupied 
Mirebeau. Another rising was crushed in 1 134 by the destruction 
of Cande and the taking of L'lle Bouchard. In 1136, while the 
count was in Normandy, Robert of Sable put himself at the head 
of the movement, to which Geoffrey responded by destroying 
Briollay and occupying La Suze, and Robert of Sable himself 
was forced to beg humbly for pardon through the intercession of 
the bishop of Angers. In 1 1391 Geoffrey took Mirebeau, and in 
1 142 Champtoceaux, but in ri45 a new revolt broke out, this 
time under the leadership of Elias, the count's own brother, 
who, again with the assistance of Robert of Sable, laid claim to 
the countship of Maine. Geoffrey took Elias prisoner, forced 
Robert of Sable to beat a retreat, and reduced the other barons 
to reason. In 1147 he destroyed Doue and Blaison. Finally 
in 1 1 50 he was checked by the revolt of Giraud, lord of 
Montreuil-Bellay: for a year he besieged the place till it had to 
surrender; he then took Giraud prisoner and only released him 
on the mediation of the king of France. 

Thus, on the death of Geoffrey the Handsome (7th of Sep- 
tember 1 1 51), his son Henry found himself heir to a great 
empire, strong and consolidated, to which his marriage with 
Eleanor of Aquitaine (May 1152) further added Aquitaine. 

At length on the death of King Stephen, Henry was recognised 
as king of England (19th of December 1154). But then his 
brother Geoffrey, who had received as appanage the three 
fortresses of Chinon, Loudun and Mirebeau, tried to seize upon 
Anjou, on the pretext that, by the will of their father, Geoffrey 
the Handsome, all the paternal inheritance ought to descend to 
him, if Henry succeeded in obtaining possession of the maternal 
inheritance. On hearing of this, Henry, although he had sworn 
• to observe this will, had himself released from his oath by the 
pope, and hurriedly marched against his brother, from whom in 
the beginning of 1 1 56 he succeeded in taking Chinon and Mire- 
beau; and in July he forced Geoffrey to give up even his three 
fortresses in return for an annual pension. Henceforward Henry 
succeeded in keeping the countship of Anjou all his life; for 



though he granted it in 1168 to his son Henry "of the Short 
Mantle," when the latter became old enough to govern it, he 
absolutely refused to allow him to enjoy his power. After 
Henry II. 's death in 1189 the countship, together with the rest 
of his dominions, passed to his son Richard I. of England, but 
on the death of the latter in 1199, Arthur of Brittany (born in 
1 187) laid claim to the inheritance, which ought, according to 
him, to have fallen to his father Geoffrey, fourth son of Henry II., 
in accordance with the custom by which " the son of the eldest 
brother should succeed to his father's patrimony." He therefore 
set himself up in rivalry with John Lackland, youngest son of 
Henry II., and supported by Philip Augustus of France, and 
aided by William des Roches, seneschal of Anjou, he managed 
to enter Angers (18th of April 1199) and there have himself 
recognized as count of the three countships of Anjou, Maine and 
Touraine, for which he did homage to the king of France. King 
John soon regained the upper hand, for Philip Augustus having 
deserted Arthur by the treaty of Le Goulet (22nd of May 1200), 
John made his way into Anjou; and on the 18th of June 1200 
was recognized as count at Angers. In 1202 he refused to do 
homage to Philip Augustus, who, in consequence, confiscated 
all his continental possessions, including Anjou, which was 
allotted by the king of France to Arthur. The defeat of the 
latter, who was taken prisoner at Mirebeau on the 1st of August 
1202, seemed to ensure John's success, but he was abandoned 
by William des Roches, who in 1 203 assisted Philip Augustus in 
subduing the whole of Anjou. A last effort on the part of John 
to possess himself of it, in 1214, led to the taking of Angers (17th 
of June) , but broke down lamentably at the battle of La Roche- 
aux-Moines (2nd of July), and the countship was attached to the 
crown of France. 

Shortly afterwards it was separated from it again, when in 
August 1246 King Louis IX. gave it as an appanage to his son 
Charles, count of Provence, soon to become king of Naples and 
Sicily (see Naples) . Charles I. of Anjou, engrossed with his other 
dominions, gave little thought to Anjou, nor did his son Charles IL 
the Lame, who succeeded him on the 7th of January 1285. On 
the 1 6th of August 1 290, the latter married his daughter Margaret 
to Charles of Valois, son of Philip III. the Bold, giving her Anjou 
and Maine for dowry, in exchange for the kingdoms of Aragon 
and Valentia and the countship of Barcelona given up by Charles. 
Charles of Valois at once entered into possession of the countship 
of Anjou, to which Philip IV. the Fair, in September 1297, 
attached a peerage of France. On the 16th of December 1325, 
Charles died, leaving Anjou to his eldest son Philip of Valois, 
on whose recognition as king of France (Philip VI.) on the 1st of 
April 1328, the countship of Anjou was again united to the crown. 
On the 17th of February 1332, Philip VI. bestowed it on his son 
John the Good, who, when he became king in turn (22nd of 
August 1350), gave the countship to his second son Louis I., 
raising it to a duchy in the peerage of France by letters patent 
of the 25th of October 1360. Louis I., who became in time 
count of Provence and king of Naples (see Louis I . , king of Naples,) 
died in 1384, and was succeeded by his son Louis II., who devoted 
most of his energies to his kingdom of Naples, and left the ad- 
ministration of Anjou almost entirely in the hands of his wife, 
Yolande of Aragon. On his death (29th of April 1417) she took 
upon herself the guardianship of their young son Louis III., 
and in her capacity of regent defended the duchy against the 
English. Louis III., who also succeeded his father as king of 
Naples, died on the 15th of November 1434, leaving no children. 
The duchy of Anjou then passed to his cousin Rene, second son 
of Louis II. and Yolande of Aragon, and king of Naples and 
Sicily (see Naples). 

Unlike his predecessors, who had rarely stayed long in Anjou, 
Rene from 1443 onwards paid long visits to it, and his court at 
Angers became one of the most brilliant in the kingdom of 
France. But after the sudden death of his son John in December 
1470, Rene, for reasons which are not altogether clear, decided 
to move his residence to Provence and leave Anjou for good. 
After making an inventory of all his possessions, he left the duchy 
in October 1471, taking with him the most valuable of his 



58 



ANKERITE— ANKYLOSTOMIASIS 



treasures. On .the 22nd of July 1474 he drew up a will by which 
he divided the succession between his grandson Rene II. of 
Lorraine and his nephew Charles II., count of Maine. On hearing 
this, King Louis XL, who was the son of one of King Rene's 
sisters, seeing that his expectations were thus completely 
frustrated, seized the duchy of Anjou. He did not keep it very 
long, but became reconciled to Rene in 1476 and restored it to 
him, on condition, probably, that Rene should bequeath it to 
him. However that may be, on the death of the latter (10th 
of July 14S0) he again added Anjou to the royal domain. 

Later, King Francis I. again gave the duchy as an appanage 
to his mother, Louise of Savoy, by letters patent of the 4th of 
February 151 5. On her death, in September 1531, the duchy 
returned into the king's possession. In 1552 it was given as 
an appanage by Henry II. to his son Henry of Valois, who, on 
becoming king in 1574, with the title of Henry III., conceded it 
to his brother Francis, duke of Alencon, at the treaty of Beaulieu 
near Loches (6th of May 1576). Francis died on the 10th of June 
1584, and the vacant appanage definitively became part of the 
royal domain. 

At first Anjou was included in the gouvemement (or military 
command) of Orleanais, but in the 17th century was made into 
a separate one. Saumur, however, and the Saumurois, for which 
King Henry IV. had in 1589 created an independent military 
governor-generalship in favour of Duplessis-Mornay, continued 
till the Revolution to form a separate gouvemement, which in- 
cluded, besides Anjou, portions of Poitou and Mirebalais. 
Attached to the generalite (administrative circumscription) of 
Tours, Anjou on the eve of the Revolution comprised five 
elections (judicial districts) : — Angers, Beauge, Saumur, Chateau- 
Gontier, Montreuil-Bellay and part of the elections of La Fleche 
and Richelieu. Financially it formed part of the so-called pays 
de grande gabelle (see Gabelle), and comprised sixteen special 
tribunals, or greniers a sel (salt warehouses) : — Angers, Beauge, 
Beaufort, Bourgueil, Cande, Chateau-Gontier, Cholet, Craon, 
La Fleche, Saint-Florent-le-Vieil, Ingrandes, Le Lude, Pouance, 
Saint-Remy-la-Varenne, Richelieu, Saumur. From the point 
of view of purely judicial administration, Anjou was subject 
to the parlement of Paris; Angers was the seat of a presidial 
court, of which the jurisdiction comprised the sen&chaussecs 
of Angers, Saumur, Beauge, Beaufort and the duchy of Richelieu; 
there were besides presidial courts at Chateau-Gontier and La 
Fleche. When the Constituent Assembly, on the 26th of 
February 1790, decreed the division of France into departments, 
Anjou and the Saumurois, with the exception of certain territories, 
formed the department of Maine-et-Loire, as at present con- 
stituted. 

Authorities. — (1) Principal Svurces : The history of Anjou may 
be told partly with the aid of the chroniclers of the neighbouring 
provinces, especially those of Normandy (William of Poitiers, 
William of Jumieges, Ordericus Vitalis) and of Maine (especially 
Actus pontificum Cenomannis in urbe degentium). For the loth, 
nth and 12th centuries especially, there are some important texts 
dealing entirely with Anjou. The most important is the chronicle 
called Gesta consilium Andegavorum, of which only a poor edition 
exists {Chroniques des comtes d' Anjou, published by Marchegay and 
Salmon, with an introduction by E. Mabille, Paris, 1856-1871, 
collection of the Societe de Vhistoire de France). See also with refer- 
ence to this text Louis Halphen, £,tude sur les chroniques des comtes 
d' Anjou el des seigneurs d'Amboise (Paris, 1906). The above may be 
supplemented by some valuable annals published by Louis Halphen, 
Recueil d'annales angevines et vendomoises (Paris, 1903), (in the 
series Collection de textes pour semir & V etude et a I'enseignement de 
I'histoire). For further details see Auguste Molinier, Les Sources de 
I'hiiloirc de France (Paris, 1902), ii. 1276-1310, and the book of 
Louis Halphen mentioned below. 

(2) Works: The Art de verifier les dates contains a history of 
Anjou which is very much out of date, but has not been treated 
elsewhere as a whole. The nth centuty only has been treated in 
detail by Louis Halphen, in Le Comte d Anjou au XI' siecle (Paris, 
1906), which has a preface with bibliography and an introduction 
dealing with the history of Anjou in the 10th century. For the 10th, 
nth and 12th centuries, a good summary will be found in Kate 
Norgate. England under the Angevin Kings (2 vols., London, 1887). 
On Rene of Anjou, there is a book by A. Lecoy de la Marche, Le Roi 
Rene (2 vols., Paris, 1875). Lastly, the work of Celestin Port, 
Dictionnaire historique, geographique et biographique de Maine-et- 
Loire (3 vols.. Paris and Angers, 1874-1878), and its small volume of 



Preliminaires (including a summary of the history of Anjou), contain, 
in addition to the biographies of the chief counts of Anjou, a mass 
of information concerning everything connected with Angevin 
ruV.ory. * (L. H.*) 

ANKERITE, a member of the mineral group of rhombohedral 
carbonates. In composition it is closely related to dolomite, 
but differs from this in having magnesia replaced by varying 
amounts of ferrous and manganous oxides, the general formula 
being Ca(Mg,Fe,Mn)(CO;,) 2 . Normal ankerite is Ca 2 MgFe(C0 3 )4. 
The crystallographic and physical characters resemble those 
of dolomite and chalybite. The angle between the perfect 
rhombohedral cleavages is 73 48', the hardness 3! to 4, and the 
specific gravity 2-9 to 3-1; but these will vary slightly with the 
chemical composition. The colour is white, grey or reddish. 

Ankerite occurs with chalybite in deposits of iron-ore. It 
is one of the minerals of the dolomite-chalybite series, to which 
the terms brown-spar, pearl-spar and bitter-spar are loosely 
applied. It was first recognized as a distinct species by W. von 
Haidinger in 1825, and named by him after M. J. Anker of 
Styria. (L. J. S) 

ANKLAM, or Anclam, a town of Germany in the Prussian 
province of Pomerania, on the Peene, 5 m. from its mouth in the 
Kleines Haff, and 53 m. N.W. of Stettin, by the railway to 
Stralsund. Pop. (1900) 14,602. The fortifications of Anklam 
were dismantled in 1762 and have not since been restored, al- 
though the old walls are still standing; formerly, however, it was 
a town of considerable military importance, which suffered 
severely during the Thirty Years' and the Seven Years' Wars; 
and this fact, together with the repeated ravages of fire and of the 
plague, has made its history more eventful than is usually the case 
with towns of the same size. It does not possess any remarkable 
buildings, although it contains several, private as well as public, 
that are of a quaint and picturesque style of architecture. The 
church of St Mary (12th century) has a modern tower, 335 ft. 
high. The industries consist of iron-foundries and factories for 
sugar and soap; and there is a military school. The Peene is 
navigable up to the town, which has a considerable trade in its 
own manufactures, as well as in the produce of the surrounding 
country, while some shipbuilding is carried on in wharves on the 
river. 

Anklam, formerly Tanglim, was originally a Slav fortress; it 
obtained civic rights in 1 244 and joined the Hanseatic league. In 
1648 it passed to Sweden, but in 1676 was retaken by Frederick 
William I. of Brandenburg, and after being plundered by the 
Russians in 17 13 was ceded to Prussia by the peace of Stockholm 
in 1720. 

ANKLE, or Ancle (a word common, in various forms, to 
Teutonic languages, probably connected in origin with the Lat. 
angulus, or Gr. ayidi\os, bent), the joint which connects the 
foot with the leg (see Joints). 

ANKOBER, a town in, and at one time capital of, the kingdom 
of Shoa, Abyssinia, 90 m. N.E. of Adis Ababa, in 9° 34' N., 39 54' 
E., on a mountain about 8500 ft. above the sea. Ankober was 
made (c. 1890) by Menelek II. the place of detention of political 
prisoners. Pop. about 2000. , 

ANKYLOSIS, or Anchylosis (from Gr. ayKvXos, bent, 
crooked) , a stiffness of a joint, the result of injury or disease. The 
rigidity may be complete or partial and may be due to inflamma- 
tion of the tendinous or muscular structures outside the joint or 
of the tissues of the joint itself. When the structures outside the 
joint are affected, the term " false " ankylosis has been used in 
contradistinction to " true " ankylosis, in which the disease is 
within the joint. When inflammation has caused the joint-ends of 
the bones to be fused together the ankylosis is termed osseous or 
complete. Excision of a completely ankylosed shoulder or elbow 
may restore free mobility and usefulness to the limb. " Anky- 
losis " is also used as an anatomical term, bones being said to 
ankylose (or anchylose) when, from being originally distinct, they 
coalesce, or become so joined together that no motion can take 
place between them. 

ANKYLOSTOMIASIS, or Ankylostomiasis (also called 
helminthiasis, "miners' anaemia," and in Germany Wurmkrank- 



ANNA— ANNA COMNENA 



59 



heit), a disease to which in recent years much attention has been 
paid, from its prevalence in the mining industry in England, 
France, Germany, Belgium, North Queensland and elsewhere. 
This disease (apparently known in Egypt even in very ancient 
times) caused a great mortality among the negroes in the West 
Indies towards the end of the 18th century; and through 
descriptions sent from Brazil and various other tropical and 
sub-tropical regions, it was subsequently identified, chiefly 
through the labours of Bilharz and Griesinger in Egypt (1854), as 
being due to the presence in the intestine of nematoid worms 
(A nkylostoma duodenalis) from one-third to half an inch long. The 
symptoms, as first observed among the negroes, were pain in the 
stomach, capricious appetite, pica (or dirt-eating), obstinate 
constipation followed by diarrhoea, palpitations, small and 
unsteady pulse, coldness of the skin, pallor of the skin and mucous 
membranes, diminution of the secretions, loss of strength and, 
in cases running a fatal course, dysentery, haemorrhages and 
dropsies. The parasites, which cling to the intestinal mucous 
membrane, draw their nourishment from the blood-vessels of 
their host, and as they are found in hundreds in the body after 
death, the disorders of digestion, the increasing anaemia and the 
consequent dropsies and other cachectic symptoms are easily 
explained. The disease was first known in Europe among the 
Italian workmen employed on the St Gotthard tunnel. In 1896, 
though previously unreported in Germany, 107 cases were 
registered there, and the number rose to 295 in 1900, and 1030 in 
1901. In England an outbreak at the Dolcoath mine, Cornwall, 
in 1902, led to an investigation for the home officeby Dr Haldane 
F.R.S. (see especially the Parliamentary Paper, numbered Cd. 
1843), and since then discussions and inquiries have been frequent. 
A committee of the British Association in 1904 issued a valuable 
report on the subject. After the Spanish- American War American 
physicians had also given it their attention, with valuable results; 
see Stiles {Hygienic Laboratory Bulletin, No. 10, Washington, 
1903). The American parasite described by Stiles, and called 
Uncinaria americana (whence the name Uncinariasis for this 
disease) differs slightly from the Ankylostoma. The parasites 
thrive in an environment of dirt, and the main lines of precaution 
are those dictated by sanitary science. Malefern, santonine, 
thymol and other anthelmintic remedies are prescribed. 

ANNA, BALDASARRE, a painter who flourished during part 
of the 16th and 1 7th centuries. He was born at Venice, probably 
about 1 560, and is said to have been of Flemish descent. The date 
of his death is uncertain, but he seems to have been alive in 1639. 
For a number of years he studied under Leonardo Corona, and on 
the death of that painter completed several works left unfinished 
by him. His own activity seems to have been confined to the 
production of pieces for several of the churches and a few private 
houses in Venice, and the old guide-books and descriptions of the 
city notice a considerable number of paintings by him. Scarcely 
any of these, however, have survived. 

ANNA (Hindustani ana), an Indian penny, the sixteenth part 
of a rupee. The term belongs to the Mahommedan mone- 
tary system (see Rupee). There is no coin of one anna, but 
there are half-annas of copper and two-anna pieces of silver. 
The term anna is frequently used to express a fraction. Thus an 
Anglo-Indian speaks of two annas of dark blood (an octoroon), 
a four-anna (quarter) crop, an eight-anna (half) gallop. 

ANNA AMALIA (1739-1807), duchess of Saxe-Weimar, 
daughter of Charles I., duke of Brunswick-Wolfenbilttel, was 
born at Wolfenbiittel on the 24th of October 1739, and married 
Ernest, duke of Saxe-Weimar, 1756. Her husband died in 1758, 
leaving her regent for their infant son, Charles Augustus. During 
the protracted minority she administered the affairs of the 
duchy with the greatest prudence, strengthening its resources 
and improving its position in spite of the troubles of the Seven 
Years' War. She was a patroness of art and literature, and 
attracted to Weimar many of the most eminent men in Germany. 
Wieland was appointed tutor to her son; and the names of 
Herder, Goethe and Schiller shed an undying lustre on her court. 
In 1775 she retired into private life, her son having attained his 
majority. In 1788 she set out on a lengthened tour through 



Italy, accompanied by Goethe. She died on the 10th of April 
1807. A memorial of the duchess is included in Goethe's works 
under the title Zum Andcnken der Furstin Anna-Amalia. 

See F. Bornhak, A nna Amalia Herzogin von Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach 
(Berlin. 1892). 

ANNABERG, a town of Germany, in the kingdom of Saxony, 
in the Erzgebirge, 1894 ft. above the sea, 6 m. from the Bohemian 
frontier, 18J m. S. by E. from Chemnitz by rail. Pop. (1905) 
16,811. It has three Evangelical churches, among them that of 
St Anne, built 1499-1525, a Roman Catholic church, several 
public monuments, among them those of Luther, of the famous 
arithmetician Adam Riese, and of Barbara Uttmann. Anna- 
berg, together with the neighbouring suburb, Buchholz, is the 
chief seat of the braid and lace-making industry in Germany, 
introduced here by Barbara Uttmann in 1561, and further 
developed by Belgian refugees, who, driven from their country 
by the duke of Alva, settled here in 1 590. The mining industry, 
for which the town was formerly also famous and which embraced 
tin, silver and cobalt, has now ceased. Annaberg has technical 
schools for lace-making, commerce and agriculture, in addition 
to high grade public schools for boys and girls. 

ANNABER6ITE, a mineral consisting of a hydrous nickel 
arsenate, Nis(As04)2+8H 2 0, crystallizing in the monoclinic 
system and isomorphous with vivianite and erythrite. Crystals 
are minute and capillary and rarely met with, the mineral 
occurring usually as soft earthy masses and encrustations. A 
fine apple-green colour is its characteristic feature. It was long 
known (since 1758) under the name nickel-ochre; the name 
annabergite was proposed by H. J. Brooke and W H. Miller in 
1852, from Annaberg in Saxony, one of the localities of the 
mineral. It occurs with ores of nickel, of which it is a product 
of alteration. A variety, from Creetown in Kirkcudbrightshire, 
in which a portion of the nickel is replaced by calcium, has been 
called dudgeonite, after P. Dudgeon, who found it. (L. J. S.) 

ANNA COMNENA, daughter of the emperor Alexius I. 
Comnenus, the first woman historian, was born on the 1st of 
December 1083. She was her father's favourite and was care- 
fully trained in the study of poetry, science and Greek philosophy. 
But, though learned and studious, she was intriguing and 
ambitious, and ready to go to any lengths to gratify her longing 
for power. Having married an accomplished young nobleman, 
Nicephorus Bryennius, she united with the empress Irene in 
a vain attempt to prevail upon her father during his last illness 
to disinherit his son and give the crown to her husband. Still 
undeterred, she entered into a conspiracy to depose her brother 
after his accession; and when her husband refused to join in the 
enterprise, she exclaimed that " nature had mistaken their 
sexes, for he ought to have been the woman." The plot being 
discovered, Anna forfeited her property and fowtune, though, by 
the clemency of her brother, she escaped with her life. Shortly 
afterwards, she retired into a convent and employed her leisure 
in writing the Alexiad — a history, in Greek, of her father's life 
and reign (1081-1118), supplementing the historical work of her 
husband. It is rather a family panegyric than a scientific history, 
in which the affection of the daughter and the vanity of the 
author stand out prominently. Trifling acts of her father are 
described at length in exaggerated terms, while little notice is 
taken of important constitutional matters. A determined 
opponent of the Latin church and an enthusiastic admirer of the 
Byzantine empire, Anna Comnena regards the Crusades as a 
danger both political and religious. Her models are Thucydides, 
Polybius and Xenophon, and her style exhibits the striving after 
Atticism characteristic of the period, with the result that the 
language is highly artificial. Her chronology especially isdefective. 
Editions in Bonn Corpus Scriptorum Hist. Byz., by J. Schopen 
and A. Reifferscheid (1 839-1 878), with Du Cange's valuable com- 
mentary; and Teubrier series, by A. Reifferscheid (1884). See also 
C. Krumbacher, Geschichte der byzantinischen Literatur (2nd ed. 
1897) ; C. Neumann, Griechische Geschichtschreiber im 12 Jahrhunderte 
(1888); E. Oster, Anna Komnena (Rastatt, 1868-1871); Gibbon, 
Decline and. Fall, ch. 48; Finlay, Hist, of Greece, iii. pp. 53, 128 
(1877); P. Adam, Princesses byzantines (1893); Sir Walter Scott, 
Count Robert of Paris; L. du Sommerard, Anne Comnine . . . Agnes 
de France (1907); C. Diehl, Figures byzantines (1906). 



6o 



ANNA LEOPOLDOVNA— ANNALISTS 



ANNA LEOPOLDOVNA, sometimes called Anna Carlovna 
(1718-1746), regent of Russia for a few months during the 
minority of her son Ivan, was the daughter of Catherine, sister 
of the empress Anne, and Charles Leopold, duke of Mecklenburg- 
Schwerin. In 1739 she married Anton Ulrich (d. 1775), son of 
Ferdinand Albert, duke of Brunswick, and their son Ivan was 
adopted in 1740 by the empress and proclaimed heir to the 
Russian throne. A few days after this proclamation the empress 
died, leaving directions regarding the succession, and appointing 
her favourite Ernest Biren, duke of Courland, as regent. Biren, 
however, had made himself an object of detestation to the 
Russian people, and Anna had little difficulty in overthrowing 
his power, She then assumed the regency, and took the title of 
grand-duchess, but she knew little of the character of the people 
with whom she had to deal, was utterly ignorant of the approved 
Russian mode of government, and speedily quarrelled with her 
principal supporters. In December 1741, Elizabeth, daughter 
of Peter the Great, who, from her habits, was a favourite with 
the soldiers, excited the guards to revolt, overcame the slight 
opposition that was offered, and was proclaimed empress. Ivan 
was thrown into prison, where he soon afterwards perished. 
Anna and her husband were banished to a small island in the 
river Dvina, where on the 18th of March 1746 she died in 
childbed. 

ANNALISTS (from Lat. annus, year; hence annates, sc. 
libri, annual records), the name given to a class of writers on 
Roman history, the period of whose literary activity lasted from 
the time of the Second Punic War to that of Sulla. They wrote 
the history of Rome from the earliest times (in most cases) down 
to their own days, the events of which were treated in much 
greater detail. For the earlier period their authorities were 
state and family records — above all, the annales maximi (or 
annales pontificum) , the official chronicle of Rome, in which the 
notable occurrences of each year from the foundation of the city 
were set down by the pontifex maximus. Although these annals 
were no doubt destroyed at the time of the burning of Rome by 
the Gauls, they were restored as far as possible and continued 
until the pontificate of P. Mucius Scaevola, by whom they were 
finally published in eighty books. Two generations of these 
annalists have been distinguished — an older and a younger. 
The older, which extends to 150 i.e., set forth, in bald, un- 
attractive language, without any pretensions to style, but with 
a certain amount of trustworthiness, the most important events 
of each successive year. Cicero (DeOratore, ii. 12. 53), comparing 
these writers with the old Ionic logographers, says that they 
paid no attention to ornament, and considered the only merits 
of a writer to be intelligibility and conciseness. Their annals 
were a mere compilation of facts. The younger generation, in 
view of the requirements and criticism of a reading public, 
cultivated the art of composition and rhetorical embellishment. 
As a general rule the annalists wrote in a spirit of uncritical 
patriotism, which led them to minimize or gloss over such 
disasters as the conquest of Rome by Porsenaand the compulsory 
payment of ransom to the Gauls, and to flatter the people by 
exaggerated accounts of Roman prowess, dressed up in fanciful 
language. At first they wrote in Greek, partly because a national 
style was not yet formed, and partly because Greek was the 
fashionable language amongst the educated, although Latin 
versions were probably published as well. The first of the 
annalists, the father of Roman history, as he has been called, 
was Q. Fabius Pictor (see Fabius Pictor); contemporary 
with him was L. Cincius Alimentus, who flourished during 
the Hannibalic war. 1 Like Fabius Pictor, he wrote in Greek. 
He was taken prisoner by Hannibal (Livy xxi. 38), who is said 
to have given him details of the crossing of the Alps. His work 
embraced the history of Rome from its foundation down to his 
own days. With M. Porcius Cato (q.v.) historical composition 

1 He is not to be confused with L. Cincius, the author of various 
political and antiquarian treatises (de Fastis, de Comitiis, de Priscis 
Verbis), who lived in the Augustan age, to which period Mommsen, 
considering them a later fabrication, refers the Greek annals of 
L. Cincius Alimentus. 



in Latin began, and a livelier interest was awakened in the 
history of Rome. Among the principal writers of this class who 
succeeded Cato, the following may be mentioned. L. Cassius 
Hemina (about 146), in the fourth book of his Annals, wrote on 
the Second Punic War. His researches went back to very early 
times; Pliny {Nat. Hist. xiii. 13 [27]) calls him vetustissimus 
auctor annalium. L. Calpurnius Piso, surnamed Frugi (see 
under Piso), wrote seven books of annals, relating the history 
of the city from its foundation down to his own times. Livy 
regards him as a less trustworthy authority than Fabius Pictor, 
and Niebuhr considers him the first to introduce systematic 
forgeries into Roman history. Q. Claudius Quadrigarius 
(about 80 B.C.) wrote a history, in at least twenty-three books, 
which began with the conquest of Rome by the Gauls and went 
down to the death of Sulla or perhaps later. He was freely used 
by Livy in part of his work (from the sixth book onwards). A 
long fragment is preserved in Aulus Gellius (ix. 13), giving an 
account of the single combat between Manlius Torquatus and 
the Gaul. His language was antiquated and his style dry, but 
his work was considered important. Valerius Antias, a 
younger contemporary of Quadrigarius, wrote the history of 
Rome from the earliest times, in a voluminous work consisting 
of seventy-five books. He is notorious for his wilful exaggera- 
tion, both in narrative and numerical statements. For instance, 
he asserts the number of the Sabine virgins to have been exactly 
527; again, in a certain year when no Greek or Latin writers 
mention any important campaign, Antias speaks of a big battle 
with enormous casualties. Nevertheless, Livy at first made use 
of him as one of his chief authorities, until he became convinced 
of his untrustworthiness. C. Licinius Macer (died 66), who 
has been called the last of the annalists, wrote a voluminous 
work, which, although he paid great attention to the study of 
his authorities, was too rhetorical, and exaggerated the achieve- 
ments of his own family. Having been convicted of extortion, 
he committed suicide (Cicero, De Legibus, i. 2, Brutus, 67; 
Plutarch, Cicero, 9). 

The writers mentioned dealt with Roman history as a whole; 
some of the annalists, however, confined themselves to shorter 
periods. Thus, L. Caelius Antipater (about 1 20) limited 
himself to the Second Punic War. His work was overloaded with 
rhetorical embellishment, which he was the first to introduce 
into Roman history. He was regarded as the most careful 
writer on the war with Hannibal, and one who did not allow 
himself to be blinded by partiality in considering the evidence 
of other writers (Cicero, De Oratore, ii. 12). Livy made great 
use of him in his third decade. Sempronius Asellio (about 
100 B.C.), military tribune of Scipio Africanus at the siege of 
Numantia, composed Rerum Gestarum Libri in at least fourteen 
books. As he himself took part in the events he describes, his 
work was a kind of memoirs. He was the first of his class who 
endeavoured to trace the causes of events, instead of contenting 
himself with a bare statement of facts. L. Cornelius Sisenna 
(119-67), legate of Pompey in the war against the pirates, lost 
his life in an expedition against Crete. He wrote twenty-three 
books on the period between the Social War and the dictatorship 
of Sulla. His work was commended by Sallust (Jugurtha, 95), 
who, however, blames him for not speaking out sufficiently. 
Cicero remarks upon his fondness for archaisms (Brutus, 74. 
259). Sisenna also translated the tales of Aristides of Miletus, 
and is supposed by some to have written a cemmentary on 
Plautus. The autobiography of Sulla may also be mentioned. 

See C. W. Nitzsch, Die rbmische Annalistik (1873) ; H. Peter, Zur 
Kritik der Quellen der alteren romischen Geschichte (1879); L. O. 
Brocker, Moderne Quellenforscher und antike Geschichtschreiber 
(1882); fragments in H. Peter, Historicorum Romanorum Reliquiae 
(1870, 1906), and Historicorum Romanorum Fragmenta (1883); also 
articles Rome, History (ancient) ad fin., section " Authorities," and 
Livy, where the use made of the annalists by the historian is 
discussed; Pauly-Wissowa, Realencyclopadie, art. "Annales"; 
the histories of Roman Literature by M. Schanz and Teuffel- 
Schwabe; Mommsen, Hist, of Rome (Eng. tr.), bk. ii. ch. 9, bk. iii. 
ch. 14, bk. iv. ch. 13, bk. v. ch. 12; C. Wachsmuth, Einleitung in 
das Studium der alten Geschichte (1895); H. Peter, bibliography of 
the subject in Bursian's Jahresbericht, exxvi. (1906). (J. H. F.) 



ANNALS— ANNAM 



61 



ANNALS (Annates, from annus, a year), a concise historical 
record in which events are arranged chronologically, year by 
year. The chief sources of information in regard to the annals 
of ancient Rome are two passages in Cicero (De Oralore, ii. 12. 
52) and in Servius (ad Aen. i. 373) which have been the subject 
of much discussion. Cicero states that from the earliest period 
down to the pontificate of Publius Mucius Scaevola (c. 131 B.C.), 
it was usual for the pontifex maximus to record on a white tablet 
(album), which was exhibited in an open place at his house, so 
that the people might read it, first, the name of the consuls and 
other magistrates, and then the noteworthy events that had 
occurred during the year (per singulos dies, as Servius says). 
These records were called in Cicero's time the Annates Maximi. 
After the pontificate of Publius, the practice of compiling annals 
was carried on by various unofficial writers, of whom Cicero 
names Cato, Pictor and Piso. The Annates have been generally 
regarded as the same with the Commentarii Pontificum cited by 
Livy, but there seems reason to believe that the two were dis- 
tinct, the Commentarii being fuller and more circumstantial. 
The nature of the distinction between annals and history is a 
subject that has received more attention from critics than its 
intrinsic importance deserves. The basis of discussion is fur- 
nished chiefly by the above-quoted passage from Cicero, and by 
the common division of the work of Tacitus into Annates and 
Historiae. Aulus Gellius, in the Nodes Alticae (v. 18), quotes the 
grammarian Verrius Flaccus, to the effect that history, according 
to its etymology (Urroptiv, inspicere, to inquire in person), is a 
record of events that have come under the author's own observa- 
tion, while annals are a record of the events of earlier times 
arranged according to years. This view of the distinction seems 
to be borne out by the division of the work of Tacitus into the 
Historiae, relating the events of his own time, and the Annates, 
containing the history of earlier periods. It is more than 
questionable, however, whether Tacitus himself divided his 
work under these titles. The probability is, either that he called 
the whole Annates, or that he used neither designation. (See 
Tacitus, Cornelius.) 

In the middle ages, when the order of the liturgical feasts was 
partly determined by the date of Easter, the custom wa3 early 
established in the Western Church of drawing up tables to 
indicate that date for a certain number of years or even 
centuries. These Paschal tables were thin books in which each 
annual date was separated from the next by a more or less con- 
siderable blank space. In these spaces certain monks briefly 
noted the important events of the year. It was at the end 
of the 7th century and among the Anglo-Saxons that the 
compiling of these Annals was first begun. Introduced by 
missionaries on the continent, they were re-copied, augmented 
and continued, especially in the kingdom of Austrasia. In the 
9th century, during the great movement termed the Carolingian 
Renaissance, these Annals became the usual form of contem- 
porary history; it suffices- to mention the Annates Einhardi, the 
Annates Laureshamcnses (or " of Lorsch "), and the Annates S. 
Berlini, officially compiled in order to preserve the memory of 
the more interesting acts of Charlemagne, his ancestors and 
his successors. Arrived at this stage of development, the 
Annals now began to lose their primitive character, and 
henceforward became more and more indistinguishable from the 
Chronicles. 

In modern literature the title annals has been given to a 
large number of standard works which adhere more or less strictly 
to the order of years. The best known are the Annates Eccle- 
siastici, written by Cardinal Baronius as a rejoinder to and 
refutation of the Historia ecclesiaslica or " Centuries " of the 
Protestant theologians of Magdeburg (12 vols., published at 
Rome from 1788 to 1793; Baronius's work stops at the year 
1 197). In the 19th century the annalistic form was once more 
employed, either to preserve year by year the memory of passing 
events (Annual Register , Annuaire de la Revue des deux tnondes, 
&c.) or in writing the history of obscure medieval periods 
(Jahrbiicher der deutschen Geschichte, Jahrbucher des deutschen 
Reiches, Richter's Reichsannalen, &c). (C. B.*) 



ANNAM, or Anam, a country of south-eastern Asia, now 
forming a French protectorate, part of the peninsula of Indo- 
China. (See Indo-China, French) . It is bounded N. by Tong- 
king, E. and S.E. by the China Sea, S.W. by Cochin-China, and 
W. by Cambodia and Laos. It comprises a sinuous strip of 
territory measuring between 750 and 800 m. in length, with an 
approximate area of 52,000 sq. m. The population is estimated 
at about 6,124,000 

The country consists chiefly of a range of plateaus and wooded 
mountains, running north and south and declining on the coast 
to a narrow band of plain varying between 12 and 50 m. in 
breadth. The mountains are cut transversely by short narrow 
valleys, through which run rivers, most of which are dry in 
summer and torrential in winter.' The Song-Ma and the Song- 
Ca in the north, and the Song-Ba, Don-Nai and Se-Bang-Khan in 
the south, are alone of any size. The chief harbour is that afforded 
by the bay of Tourane at the centre of the coast-line. South of 
this point the coast curves outwards and is broken by peninsulas 
and indentations; to the north it is concave and bordered in 
many places by dunes and lagoons. 

Climate. — In Annam the rainy season begins during September 
and lasts for three or four months, corresponding with the north- 
east monsoon and also with a period of typhoons. During the 
rains the temperature varies from 59 or even lower to 75 F. 
June, July and August are the hottest months, the thermometer 
often reaching 85 or 90°, though the heat of the day is to some 
degree compensated by the freshness of the nights. The south- 
west monsoon which brings rain in Cochin-China coincides with 
the dry season in Annam, the reason probably being that the 
mountains and lofty plateaus separating the two countries 
retain the precipitation. 

Ethnography. — The Annamese, or, to use the native term, the 
Giao-chi, are the predominant people not only in Annam but in 
the lowland and cultivated parts of Tongking and in Cochin- 
China and southern Cambodia. According to their own annals 
and traditions they once inhabited southern China, a theory 
which is confirmed by many of their habits and physical character- 
istics; the race has, however, been modified by crossings with 
the Chams and other of the previous inhabitants of Indo-China. 

The Annamese is the worst-built and. ugliest of all the Indo- 
Chinese who belong to the Mongolian race. He is scarcely of 
middle height and is shorter and less vigorous than his neighbours. 
His complexion is tawny, darker than that of the Chinese, but 
clearer than that of the Cambodian; his hair is black, coarse 
and long; his skin is thick; his forehead low; his skull slightly 
depressed at the top, but well developed at the sides. His face is 
flat, with highly protruding cheek-bones, and is lozenge-shaped 
or eurygnathous to a degree that is nowhere exceeded. His nose 
is not only the flattest, but also the smallest among the Indo- 
Chinese; his eyes are rarely oblique; his mouth is large and 
his lips thick; his teeth are blackened and his gums destroyed 
by the constant use of the betel-nut, the areca-nut and lime. 
His neck is short, his shoulders slope greatly, his body is thick-set 
and wanting in suppleness. Another peculiarity is a separation 
of the big toe from the rest, greater than is found in any other 
people, and sufficiently general and well marked to serve as an 
ethnographic test. The Annamese of Cochin-China are weaker 
and smaller than those of Tongking, probably as a result of 
living amid marshy rice-fields. The Annamese of both sexes 
wear wide trousers, a long, usually black tunic with narrow 
sleeves and a dark-coloured turban, or in the case of the lower 
classes, a wide straw hat; they either go bare-foot or wear sandals 
or Chinese boots. The typical Annamese dwelling is open to the 
gaze of the passer-by during the day; at night a sort of partition 
of bamboo is let down. The roof is supported on wooden pillars 
and walls are provided only at the sides. The house consists 
principally of one large room opening on the front verandah 
and containing the altar of the family's ancestors, a table in the 
centre and couches placed against the wall. The chief elements 
of the native diet are rice, fish and poultry; vegetables and pork 
are also eaten. The family is the base of the social system 
in Annam and is ruled by its head, who is also priest and judge. 



62 



ANNAM 



Polygamy is permitted but rarely practised, and the wife enjoys 
a position of some freedom. 

Though fond of ease the Annamese are more industrious than 
the neighbouring peoples. Theatrical and musical entertainments 
are popular among them. They show much outward respect 
for superiors and parents, but they are insincere and incapable 
of deep emotion. They cherish great love of their native soil 
and native village and cannot remain long, from home. A 
proneness to gambling and opium-smoking, and a tinge of vanity 
and deceitfulness, are their less estimable traits. On the whole 
they are mild and easy-going and even apathetic, but the 
facility with which they learn is remarkable. Like their neighbours 
the Cambodians and the Chinese, the Annamese have a great 
respect for the dead, and ancestor worship constitutes the national 
religion. The learned hold the doctrine of Confucius, and 
Buddhism, alloyed with much popular superstition, has some 
influence. Like the Chinese the Annamese bury their dead. 

Among the savage tribes of the interior there is scarcely any 
idea of God and their superstitious practices can scarcely be 
considered as the expression of a definite religious idea. Roman 
Catholics number about 420,000. In the midst of the Annamese 
live Cambodians and immigrant Chinese, the latter associated 
together according to the districts from which they come and 
carrying on nearly all the commerce of the country. In the 
forests and mountains dwell tribes of savages, chiefly of 
Indonesian origin, classed by the Annamese under the name 
Mots or " savages." Some of these tribes show traces of 
Malay ancestry. Of greater historical interest are the Chams, 
who are to be found for the most Dart in southern Annam and in 
Cambodia, and who, judging from the numerous remains found 
there, appear to have been the masters of the coast region of 
Cochin-China and Annam till they succumbed before the pressure 
of the Khmers of Cambodia and the Annamese. They are taller, 
more muscular, and more supple than the Annamese. Their 
language is derived from Malay, and while some of the Chams 
are Mussulmans, the dominant religion is Brahmanism, and more 
especially the worship of Siva. Their women have a high 
reputation for virtue, which, combined with the general bright 
and honest character of the whole people, differentiates them from 
the surrounding nations. 

Evidently derived from the Chinese, of which it appears to be 
a very ancient dialect, the Annamese language is composed of 
monosyllables, of slightly varied articulation, expressing different 
ideas according to the tone in which they are pronounced. It is 
quite impossible to connect with our musical system the utterance 
of the sounds of which the Chinese and Annamese languages are 
composed. What is understood by a" tone " in this language 
is distinguished in reality, not by the number of sonorous 
vibrations which belong to it, but rather by a use of the vocal 
apparatus special to each. Thus, the sense will to a native be 
completely changed according as the sound is the result of an 
aspiration or of a simple utterance of the voice. Thence the 
difficulty of substituting our phonetic alphabet for the ideo- 
graphic characters of the Chinese, as well as for the ideophonetic 
writing partly borrowed by the Annamese from the letters of the 
celestial empire. To the Jesuit missionaries is due the intro- 
duction of an ingenious though very complicated system, which 
has caused remarkable progress to be made in the employment of 
phonetic characters. By means of six accents, one bar and a 
crotchet it is possible to note with sufficient precision the indica- 
tions of tone without which the Annamese words have no sense 
for the natives. 

Agriculture and other Industries. — The cultivation of rice, 
which is grown mainly in the small deltas along the coast and 
in some districts gives two crops annually, and fishing, together 
with fish-salting and the preparation of nuoc-mam, a sauce 
made from decaying fish, constitute the chief industries of 
Annam. 

Silk spinning and weaving are carried on on antiquated lines, 
and silkworms are reared in a desultory fashion. Besides rice, 
theproductsof the countryinclude tea, tobacco, cotton, cinnamon, 
precious woods and rubber; coffee, pepper, sugar-canes and 



jute are cultivated to a minor extent. Trie exports (total value 
in 1905 £237,010) comprise tea, raw silk and small quantities of 
cotton, rice and sugar-cane. The imports (£284,824 in 1905) 
include rice, iron goods, flour, wine, opium and cotton goods. 
There are coal-mines at Nong-Son, near Tourane, and gold, 
silver, lead, iron and other metals occur in the mountains. 
Trade, which is in the hands of the Chinese, is for the most part 
carried on by sea, the chief ports being Tourane and Qui-Nhon, 
which are open to European commerce. 

Administration. — Annam is ruled in theory by its emperor, 
assisted by the " comat " or secret council, composed of the heads 
of the six ministerial departments of the interior, finance, war, 
ritual, justice and public works, who are nominated by himself. 
The resident superior, stationed at Hue, is the representative of 
France and the virtual ruler of the country. He presides over 
a council (Conseil de Protectorat) composed of the chiefs of the 
French services in Annam, together with two members of the 
' ' comat " ; this body deliberates on questions of taxation affecting 
the budget of Annam and on local public works. A native 
governor (tong-doc or tuan-phu), assisted by a native staff, 
administers each of the provinces into which the country is 
divided, and native officials of lower rank govern the areas 
into which these provinces are subdivided. The governors 
take their orders from the imperial government, but they are 
under the eye of French residents. Native officials are appointed 
by the court, but the resident superior has power to annul an 
appointment. The mandarinate or official class is recruited 
from all ranks of the people by competitive examination. In 
the province of Tourane, a French tribunal alone exercises 
jurisdiction, but it administers native law where natives are 
concerned. Outside this territory the native tribunals 
survive. The Annamese village is self-governing. It has its 
council of notables, forming a sort of oligarchy which, 
through the medium of a mayor and two subordinates, directs 
the interior affairs of the community — policing, recruiting, the 
assignment and collection of taxes, &c. — and has judicial power 
in less important suits and crimes. More serious cases come 
within the purview of the an-sat, a judicial auxiliary of the 
governor. An assembly of notables from villages grouped 
together in a canton chooses a cantonal representative, who is 
the mouthpiece of the people and the intermediary between the 
government and its subjects. The direct taxes, which go to the 
local budget of Annam, consist primarily of a poll-tax levied 
on all males over eighteen and below sixty years of age, and of 
a land-tax levied according to the quality and the produce of the 
holding. 

The following table summarizes the local budget of Annam 
for the years 1899 and 1904: — 



— 


Receipts. 


Expenditure. 


1899 
1904 


£203,082 (direct taxes, £171,160) 
£247,435 ( „ „ £219,841) 


£i75-H7 
£232,480 



In 1904 the sum allocated to the expenses of the court, the 
royal family and the native administration, the members of 
which are paid by the crown, was £85,000, the chief remaining 
heads of expenditure being the government house and residencies 
(£39,709), the native guard (£32,609) and public works (£24,898). 

Education is available to every person in the community. 
The primary school, in which the pupils learn only Chinese 
writing and the precepts of Confucius, stands at the base of this 
system. Next above this is the school of the district capital, 
where a half-yearly examination takes place, by means of which 
are selected those eligible for the course of higher education 
given at the capital of the province in a school under the direction 
of a doc-hoc, or inspector of studies. Finally a great triennial 
competition decides the elections. The candidate whose work 
is notified as Ires bien is admitted to the examinations at Hue, 
which qualify for the title of doctor and the holding of administra- 
tive offices. The education of a mandarin includes local history, 
cognizance of the administrative rites, customs, laws and 
prescriptions of the country, the ethics of Confucius, the rules 



ANNAN— ANNAPOLIS 



63 



01 good breeding, the ceremonial of official and social life, 
and the practical acquirements necessary to the conduct of public 
or private business. Annamese learning goes no farther. It 
includes no scientific idea, no knowledge of the natural sciences, 
and neglects even the most rudimentary instruction conveyed 
in a European education. The complications of Chinese writing 
greatly hamper education. The Annamese mandarin must be 
acquainted with Chinese, since he writes in Chinese characters. 
But the character being ideographic, the words which express 
them are dissimilar in the two languages, and official text is 
read in Chinese by a Chinese, in Annamese by an Annamese. 

The chief towns of Annam are Hue (pop. about 42,000), seat 
both of the French and native governments, Tourane (pop. about 
4000), Phan-Thiet (pop. about 20,000) in the extreme south, 
Qui-Nhon, and Fai-Fo, a commercial centre to the south of 
Tourane. A road following the coast from Cochin-China to 
Tongking, and known as the " Mandarin road," passes through or 
near the chief towns of the provinces and forms the chief artery 
of communication in the country apart from the railways 
(see Indo-China, French). 

History. — The ancient tribe of the Giao-chi, who dwelt on 
the confines of S. China, and in what is now Tongking and 
northern Annam, are regarded by the Annamese as their 
ancestors, and tradition ascribes to their first rulers descent 
from the Chinese imperial family. These sovereigns were suc- 
ceeded by another dynasty, under which, at the end of the 
3rd century B.C., the Chinese invaded the country, and eventually 
established there a supremacy destined to last, with little 
intermission, till the 10th century a.d. In 968 Dinh-Bo-Lanh 
succeeded in ousting the Chinese and founded an independent 
dynasty of Dinh. Till this period the greater part of Annam 
had been occupied by the Chams, a nation of Hindu civilization, 
which has left many monuments to testify to its greatness, but 
the encroachment of the Annamese during the next six centuries 
at last left to it only a small territory in the south of the country. 
Three lines of sovereigns followed that of Dinh, under the last 
of which, about 1407, Annam again fell under the Chinese yoke. 
In 1428 an Annamese general Le-Loi succeeded in freeing the 
country once more, and founded a dynasty which lasted till 
the end of the 18th century. During the greater part of this 
period, however, the titular sovereigns were mere puppets, 
the reality of power being in the hands of the family of Trinh 
in Tongking and that of Nguyen in southern Annam, which 
in 1 568 became a separate principality under the name of Cochin- 
China. Towards the end of the 18th century a rebellion over- 
threw the Nguyen, but one of its members, Gia-long, by the aid 
of a French force, in 1801 acquired sway over the whole of Annam, 
Tongking and Cochin-China. This force was procured for him 
by Pigneau de Behalne, bishop of Adran, who saw in the political 
condition of Annam a means of establishing French influence 
in Indo-China and counterbalancing the English power in India. 
Before this, in 1787, Gia-long had concluded a treaty with 
Louis XVI., whereby in return for a promise of aid he ceded 
Tourane and Pulo-Condore to the French. That treaty marks 
the beginning of French influence in Indo-China. 

See also Legrand de la Liraye, Notes historiques sur la nation 
annamite (Pans, 1866?); C. Gosselin, V Empire d' Annam (Paris, 
1904) ; E. Sombsthay, Cours de legislation et d' administration 
annamites (Paris, i~ 



ANNAN, a royal, municipal and police burgh of Dumfriesshire, 
Scotland, on the Annan, nearly 2 m. from its mouth, 15 m. from 
Dumfries by the Glasgow & South-Western railway. It has a 
station also on the Caledonian railway company's branch line 
from Kirtlebridge to Brayton (Cumberland), which crosses the 
Solway Firth at Seafield by a viaduct, ij m. long, constructed of 
iron pillars girded together by poles, driven through the sand and 
gravel into the underlying bed of sandstone. Annan is a well- 
built town, red sandstone being the material mainly used. Among 
its public buildings is the excellent academy of which Thomas 
Carlyle was a pupil. The river Annan is crossed by a stone bridge 
of three arches dating from 1824, and by a railway bridge. The 
Harbour Trust, constituted in 1897, improved the shipping 



accommodation, and vessels of 300 tons approach close to the 
town. The principal industries include cotton and rope manu- 
factures, bacon-curing, distilling, tanning, shipbuilding, sand- 
stone quarrying, nursery-gardening and salmon-fishing. Large 
marine engineering works are in the vicinity. Annan is a burgh 
of considerable afttiquity. Roman remains exist in the neighbour- 
hood, and the Bruces, lords of Annandale, the Baliols, and the 
Douglases were more or less closely associated with it. During 
the period of the Border lawlessness the inhabitants suffered 
repeatedly at the hands of moss-troopers and through the feuds of 
rival families, in addition to the losses caused by the English and 
Scots wars. Edward Irving was a native of the town. With 
Dumfries, Kirkcudbright, Lochmaben and Sanquhar, Annan 
unites in sending one member to parliament. Annan Hill com- 
mands a beautiful prospect. Population (1901) 5805. 

ANNA PERENNA, an old Roman deity of the circle or " ring " 
of the year, as the name (per annum) clearly indicates. Her 
festival fell on the full moon of the first month (March 15), and 
was held at the grove of the goddess at the first milestone on the 
Via Flaminia. It was much frequented by the city plebs, and 
Ovid describes vividly the revelry and licentiousness of the 
occasion (Fasti, \i\. 523 foil.). From Macrobius we learn (Sat.i. 12. 
6) that sacrifice was made to her " ut annare perannareque com- 
mode liccat," i.e. that the circle of the year may be completed 
happily. This is all we know for certain about the goddess and 
her cult; but the name naturally suggested myth-making, and 
Anna became a figure in stories which may be read in Ovid (I.e.) 
and in Silius Italicus (8.50 foil.). The coarse myth told by Ovid, 
in which Anna plays a trick on Mars when in love with Minerva, 
is probably an old Italian folk-tale, poetically applied to the 
persons of these deities when they became partially anthropo- 
morphized under Greek influence. (W. W. F.*) 

ANNAPOLIS, a city and seaport of Maryland, U.S.A., the 
capital of the state, the county seat of Anne Arundel county, and 
the seat of the United States Naval Academy; situated on the 
Severn river about 2 m. from its entrance into Chesapeake Bay, 
26 m. S. by E. from Baltimore and about the same distance E. by 
N. from Washington. Pop. (1890) 7604; (1900) 8525, of whom 
3002 were negroes; (1910 census) 8609. Annapolis is served 
by the Washington, Baltimore & Annapolis (electric) and the 
Maryland Electric railways, and by the Baltimore & Annapolis 
steamship line. On an elevation near the centre of the city stands 
the state house (the corner stone of which was laid in 1772), with 
its lofty white dome (200 ft.) and pillared portico. Close by are 
the state treasury building, erected late in the 17th century for 
the House of Delegates; Saint Anne's Protestant Episcopal 
church, in later colonial days a state church, a statue of Roger B. 
Taney (by W.H. Rinehart) , and a statue of Baron Johann de Kalb. 
There are a number of residences of 18th century architecture, and 
the names of several of the streets — such as King George's, Prince 
George's, Hanover, and Duke of Gloucester — recall the colonial 
days. The United States Naval Academy was founded here in 
1845. Annapolis is the seat of Saint John's College, a non- 
sectarian institution supported in part by the state; it was opened 
in 1789 as the successor of King William's School, which was 
founded by an act of the Maryland legislature in 1696 and was 
opened in 1701. Its principal building, McDowell Hall, was 
originally intended for a governor's mansion; although £4000 
current money was appropriated for its erection in 1742, it was 
not completed until after the War of Independence. In 1907 the 
college became the school of arts and sciences of the university 
of Maryland. 

Annapolis, at first called Providence, was settled in 1649 by 
Puritan exiles from Virginia. Later it bore in succession the 
names of Town at Proctor's, Town at the Severn, Anne Arundel 
Town, and finally in 1694, Annapolis, in honour of Princess Anne, 
who at the time was heir to the throne of Great Britain. In 1694 
also, soon after the overthrow of the Catholic government of the 
lord proprietor, it was made the seat of the new government as 
well as a port of entry, and it has since remained the capital of 
Maryland; but it was not until 1708 that it was incorporated as 
a city. From the middle of the 18th century until the War of 



6 4 



ANNAPOLIS— ANNATES 



Independence, Annapolis was noted for its wealthy and cultivated 
society. The Maryland Gazette, which became an important 
weekly journal, was founded by Jonas Green in 1745; in 1769 a 
theatre was opened; during this period also the commerce was 
considerable, but declined rapidly after Baltimore, in 1780, was 
made a port of entry, and now oyster-packing is the city's only im- 
portant industry. Congress was in session in the state house here 
from the 26th of November 1783 to the 3rd of June 1784, and it 
was here on the 23rd of December 1783 that General Washington 
resigned his commission as commander-in-chief of the Continental 
Army. In 1786 a convention, to which delegates from all the 
states of the Union were invited, was called to meet in Annapolis 
to consider measures for the better regulation of commerce (see 
Alexandria, Va.) ; but delegates came from only five states 
(New York, Pennsylvania, Virginia, New Jersey, and Delaware), 
and the convention — known afterward as the " Annapolis Con- 
vention," — without proceeding to the business for which it had 
met, passed a resolution calling for another convention to meet 
at Philadelphia in the following year to amend the articles of 
confederation; by this Philadelphia convention the present 
Constitution of the United States was framed. 

See D. Ridgely, Annals of Annapolis from 1649 until the War of 
1812 (Baltimore, 1841); S. A. Shafer, "Annapolis, Ye Ancient 
City," in L. P. Powell's Historic Towns of the Southern States (New 
York, 1900); and W. Eddis, Letters from America (London, 1792). 

ANNAPOLIS, a town of Nova Scotia, capital of Annapolis 
county and up to 1750 of the entire peninsula of Nova Scotia; 
situated on an arm of the Bay of Fundy, at the mouth of the 
Annapolis river, 95 m. W. of Halifax; and the terminus of the 
Windsor & Annapolis railway. Pop. (1901) 1019. It is one of 
the oldest settlements in North America, having been founded in 
1604 by the French, who called it Port Royal. It was captured 
by the British in 17 10, and ceded to them by the treaty of Utrecht 
in 1 7 13, when the name was changed in honour of Queen Anne. 
It possesses a good harbour, and the beauty of the surrounding 
country makes it a favourite summer resort. The town is 
surrounded by apple orchards and in May miles of blossoming 
trees make a beautiful sight. The fruit, which is excellent in 
quality, is the principal export of the region. 

ANN ARBOR, a city and the county-seat of Washtenaw 
county, Michigan, U.S.A., on the Huron river, about 38 m. 
W. of Detroit. Pop. (1890) 9431; (1900) 14,509, of whom 
2329 were foreign-born; (1910) 14,817. It is served by the 
Michigan Central and the Ann Arbor railways, and by an 
electric line running from Detroit to Jackson and connecting 
with various other lines. Ann Arbor is. best known as the seat of 
the university of Michigan, opened in 1837. The city has many 
attractive residences, and the residential districts, especially in 
the east and south-east parts of the city, command picturesque 
views of the Huron valley. Ann Arbor is situated in a productive 
agricultural and fruit-growing region. The river provides good 
water-power, and among the manufactures are agricultural 
implements, carriages, furniture (including sectional book-cases), 
pianos and organs, pottery and flour. In 1824 Ann Arbor was 
settled, laid out as a town, chosen for the county-seat, and 
named in honour of Mrs Ann Allen and Mrs Ann Rumsey, the 
wives of two of the founders. It was incorporated as a village in 
1833, and was first chartered as a city in 1851. 

ANNATES (Lat. annatae, from annus, " year "), also known 
as '' first-fruits " (Lat. primitiae), in the strictest sense of the 
word, the whole of the first year's profits of a spiritual benefice 
which, in all countries of the Roman obedience, were formerly 
paid into the papal treasury. This custom was only of gradual 
growth. The jus deportuum, annalia or annatae, was originally 
the right of the bishop to claim the first year's profits of the 
living from a newly inducted incumbent, of which the first 
mention is found under Pope Honorius (d. 1227), but which had 
its origin in a custom, dating from the 6th century, by which 
those ordained to ecclesiastical offices paid a fee or tax to the 
ordaining bishop. The earliest records show the annata to have 
been, sometimes a privilege conceded to the bishop for a term of 
years, sometimes a right based on immemorial precedent. In 



course of time the popes, under stress of financial crises, claimed 
the privilege for themselves, though at first only temporarily. 
Thus, in 1305, Clement V. claimed the first-fruits of all vacant 
benefices in England, and in 13 19 John XXII. those of all 
Christendom vacated within the next two years. In those cases 
the rights of the bishops were frankly usurped by the Holy See, 
now regarded as the ultimate source of the episcopal jurisdic- 
tion; the more usual custom' was for the pope to claim the 
first-fruits only of those benefices of which he had reserved the 
patronage to himself. It was from these claims that the papal 
annates, in the strict sense, in course of time developed. 

These annates may be divided broadly into three classes, 
though the chief features are common to all: (1) the servilia 
communia or servitia Camerae Papae, i.e. the payment into the 
papal treasury by every abbot and bishop, on his induction, 01 
one year's revenue of his new benefice. The servitia communia 
are traceable to the oblatio paid to the pope when consecrating 
bishops as metropolitan or patriarch. When, in the middle of 
the 13th century, the consecration of bishops became established 
as the sole right of the pope, the oblations of all bishops of the 
West were received by him and, by the close of the 14th century, 
these became fixed at one year's revenue. 1 A small additional 
payment, as a kind of notarial fee^was added (servilia minula). 
(2) The jus deportuum, fructus medii temporis, or annalia, i.e. 
the annates due to the bishop, but in the case of " reserved " 
benefices paid by him to the Holy See. (3) The quindennia, i.e. 
annates payable, under a bull of Paul II. (1469), by benefices 
attached to a corporation, every fifteen years and not at every 
presentation. 

The system of annates was at no time worked with absolute 
uniformity and completeness throughout the various parts of 
the church owning obedience to the Holy See, and it was never 
willingly submitted to by the clergy. Disagreements and dis- 
putes were continual, and the easy expedient of rewarding the 
officials of the Curia and increasing the papal revenue by " re- 
serving " more and more benefices was met by repeated protests, 
such as that of the bishops and barons of England (the chief 
sufferers), headed by Robert Grossetesteof Lincoln, at the council 
of Lyons in 1245. 2 The subject, indeed, frequently became one 
of national interest, on account of the alarming amount of specie 
which was thus drained away, and hence numerous enactments 
exist in regard to it by the various national governments. In 
England the collection and payment of annates to the pope was 
prohibited in 1531 by statute. At that time the sum amounted 
to about £3000 a year. In 1534 the annates were, along with the 
supremacy over the church in England, bestowed on the crown; 
but in February 1 704 they were appropriated by Queen Anne to 
the assistance of the poorer clergy, and thus form what has since 
been known as " Queen Anne's Bounty " (q.i).). The amount to 
be paid was originally regulated by a valuation made under the 
direction of Pope Innocent IV. by Walter, bishop of Norwich, in 
1254, later by one instituted under commission from Nicholas 
III. in 1292, which in turn was superseded in 1535 by the valua- 
tion, made by commissioners appointed by Henry VIII., known 
as the King's Books, which was confirmed on the accession of 
Elizabeth and is still that by which the clergy are rated. In 
France, in spite of royal edicts — like those of Charles VI., Charles 
VII., Louis XL, and Henry II. — and even denunciations of the 
Sorbonne, at least the custom of paying the servilia communia 
held its ground.till the famous decree of the 4th of August during 
the Revolution of 1789. In Germany it was decided by the 
concordat of Constance, in 1418, that bishoprics and abbacies 
should pay the servitia according to the valuation of the Roman 
chancery in two half-yearly instalments. Those reserved bene- 
fices only were to pay the annalia which were rated above twenty- 
four gold florins; and as none were so rated, whatever their 
annual value may have been, the annalia fell into disuse. A 

1 For cases see du Cange, Glossarium, s. Servitium Camerae Papae ; 
J. C. L. Gieseler, Eccles. Hist., vol. iii. div. iii., notes to p. 181, &c. 
(Eng. trans., Edinburgh, 1853). 

2 Durandus (Guillaume Durand), in his de modo generalis concilii 
celebrandi, represents contemporary clerical hostile opinion and 
attacks the corruptions of the officials of the Curia. 



ANNE, QUEEN 



65 



similar convenient fiction also led to their practical abrogation in 
France, Spain and Belgium. The council of Basel (1431-1443) 
wished to abolish the servitia, but the concordat of Vienna (1448) 
confirmed the Constance decision, which, in spite of the efforts 
of the congress of Ems (1786) to alter it, still remains nominally 
in force. As a matter of fact, however, the revolution caused by 
the secularization of the ecclesiastical states in 1803 practically 
put an end to the system, and the servitia have either been 
commuted via gratiae to a moderate fixed sum under particular 
concordats, or are the subject of separate negotiation with each 
bishop on his appointment. In Prussia, where the bishops 
receive salaries as state officials, the payment is made by the 
government. 

In Scotland annat or ann is half a year's stipend allowed by 
the Act 1672, c. 13, to the executors of a minister of the Church of 
Scotland above what was due to him at the time of his death. 
This is neither assignable by the clergyman during his life, nor 
can it be seized by his creditors. 

ANNE (1665-1714), queen of Great Britain and Ireland, second 
daughter of James, duke of York, afterwards James II., and of 
Anne Hyde, daughter of the 1st earl of Clarendon, was born 
on the 6th of February 1665. She suffered as a child from an 
affection of the eyes, and was sent to France for medical treat- 
ment, residing with her grandmother, Henrietta Maria, and on 
the latter's death with her aunt, the duchess of Orleans, and 
returning to England in 1670. She was brought up, together 
with her sister Mary, by the direction of Charles II., as a strict 
Protestant, and as a child she made the friendship of Sarah 
Jennings (afterwards duchess of Marlborough), thus beginning 
life under the two influences which were to prove the most 
powerful in her future career. In 1678 she accompanied Mary of 
Modena to Holland, and in 1679 joined her parents abroad and 
afterwards in Scotland. On the 28th of July 1683 she married 
Prince George of Denmark, brother of King Christian V., an 
unpopular union because of the French proclivities of the 
bridegroom's country, but one of great domestic happiness, 
the prince and princess being conformable in temper and both 
preferring retirement and quiet to life in the great world. Sarah 
Churchill became Anne's lady of the bedchamber, and, by the 
latter's desire to mark their mutual intimacy and affection, all 
deference due to her rank was abandoned and the two ladies 
called each other Mrs Morley and Mrs Freeman. 

On the 6th of February 1685 James became king of England. 
In 1687 a project of settling the crown on the princess, to the 
exclusion of Mary, on the condition of Anne's embracing Roman 
Catholicism, was rendered futile by her pronounced attachment 
to the Church of England, and beyond sending her books and 
papers James appears to have made no attempt to coerce his 
daughter into a change of faith, 1 and to have treated her with 
kindness, while the birth of his son on the 10th of June 1688 
made the religion of his daughters a matter of less political 
importance. Anne was not present on the occasion, having gone 
to Bath, and this gave rise to a belief that the child was spurious; 
but it is most probable that James's desire to exclude all 
Protestants from affairs of state was the real cause. " I shall never 
now be satisfied," Anne wrote to Mary, " whether the child be true 
or false. It may be it is our brother, but God only knows . . . 
one cannot help having a thousand fears and melancholy thoughts, 
but whatever changes may happen you shall ever find me firm 
to my religion and faithfully yours." 2 In later years, however, 
she had no doubt that the Old Pretender was her brother. 
During the events immediately preceding the Revolution Anne 
kept in seclusion. Her ultimate conduct was probably influenced 
by the Churchills ; and though forbidden by James, to pay Mary 
a projected visit in the spring of 1688, she corresponded with her; 
and was no doubt aware of William's plans. Her position was 
now a very critical and painful one. She refused to show any 
sympathy with the king after William had landed in November, 
and wrote, with the advice of the Churchills, to the prince, 

1 See also Hist. MSS. Comm., MSS. of Duke of Rutland at Belvoir, 
ii. 109. 

2 Dalrymple's Memoirs, ii. 175. 

II. 3 



declaring her approval of his action. 3 Churchill abandoned the 
king on the 24th, Prince George on the 25th, and when James 
returned to London on the 26th he found that Anne and her 
lady-in-waiting had during the previous night followed their 
husbands' examples. Escaping from Whitehall by a back 
staircase they put themselves under the care of the bishop of 
London, spent one night in his house, and subsequently arrived 
on the 1st of December at Nottingham, where the princess first 
made herself known and appointed a council. Thence she 
passed through Leicester, Coventry and Warwick, finally entering 
Oxford, where she met Prince George, in triumph, escorted by 
a large company. Like Mary, she was reproached for showing 
no concern at the news of the king's flight, but her justification 
was that " she never loved to do anything that looked like an 
affected constraint." She returned to London on the 19th of 
December, when she was at once visited by William. Subse- 
quently the Declaration of Rights settled the succession of the 
crown upon her after William and Mary and their children. 

Meanwhile Anne had suffered a series of maternal disappoint- 
ments. Between 1684 and 1688 she had miscarried' four times 
and given birth to two children who died infants. On the 24th 
of July 1689, however, the birth, of a son, William, created duke 
of Gloucester, who survived his infancy, gave hopes that heirs 
to the throne under the Bill of Rights might be forthcoming. 
But Anne's happiness was soon troubled by quarrels with the 
king and queen. According to the duchess of Marlborough the 
two sisters, who had lived hitherto while apart on extremely 
affectionate terms, found no enjoyment in each other's society. 
Mary talked too much for Anne's comfort, and Anne too little 
for Mary's satisfaction. But money appears to have been the 
first and real cause of ill-feeling. The granting away by William 
of the private estate of James, amounting to £22,000 a year, to 
which Anne had some claim, was made a grievance, and a 
factious motion brought forward in the House to increase her 
civil list pension of £30,000, which she enjoyed in addition to 
£20,000 under her marriage settlement, greatly displeased 
William and Mary, who regarded it as a plot to make Anne 
independent and the chief of a separate interest in the state, 
while their resentment was increased by the refusal of Anne to 
restrain the action of her friends, and by its success. The 
Marlboroughs had been active in the affair and had benefited by 
it, the countess (as she then was) receiving a pension of £1000, 
and their conduct was noticed at court. The promised Garter 
was withheld from Marlborough, and the incensed " Mrs Morley" 
in her letters to " Mrs Freeman " styled the king " Caliban " 
or the " Dutch Monster." At the close of 1691 Anne had 
declared her approval of the naval expedition in favour of her 
father, and expressed grief at its failure. 4 According to the 
doubtful Life of James, she wrote to him on the 1st of December 
a " most penitential and dutiful " letter, and henceforward kept 
up with him a "fair correspondence." 5 The same year the 
breach between the royal sisters was made final by the dismissal 
of Marlborough, justly suspected of Jacobite intrigues, from all 
his appointments. Anne took the part of her favourites with 
great zeal against the court, though in all probability unaware 
of Marlborough's treason; and on the dismissal of the countess 
from her household by the king and queen she refused to part 
with her, and retired with Lady Marlborough to the duke of 
Somerset's residence at Sion House. Anne was now in disgrace. 
She was deprived of her guard of honour, and Prince George, on 
entering Kensington Palace, received no salute, though the 
drums beat loudly on his departure. 6 Instructions were given 
that the court expected no one to pay his respects, and no 
attention in the provinces was to be shown to their rank. In 
May, Marlborough was arrested on a charge of high treason which 
subsequently broke down, and Anne persisted in regarding his 
disgrace as a personal injury to herself. In August 1 693 , however, 

3 Dalrymple's Memoirs, ii. 249. 

4 Lord Ailesbury's Memoirs, 293. 

6 Macpherson i. 241 ; Clarke's Life of James II., ii. 476. The 
letter, which is only printed in fragments, is not in Anne's style, 
and if genuine was probably dictated by the Churchills. 

e Luttrell ii. 366, 376. 



66 



ANNE, QUEEN 



the two sisters were temporarily reconciled, and on the occasion 
of Mary's last illness and death Anne showed an affectionate 
consideration. 

The death of Mary weakened William's position and made 
it necessary to cultivate good relations with the princess. She 
was now treated with every honour and civility, and finally 
established with her own court at St James's Palace. At the 
same time William kept her in the background and refrained 
from appointing her regent during his absence. In March 1695 
Marlborough was allowed to kiss the king's hands, and subse- 
quently was made the duke of Gloucester's governor and restored 
to his employments. In return Anne gave her support to 
William's government, though about this time, in 1606 — according 
to James, in consequence of the near prospect of the throne — 
she wrote to her father asking for his leave to wear the crown 
at William's death, and promising its restoration at a convenient 
opportunity. 1 The unfounded rumour that William contem- 
plated settling the succession after his death on James's son, 
provided he were educated a Protestant in England, may possibly 
have alarmed her. 2 Meanwhile, since the birth of the duke of 
Gloucester, the princess had experienced six more miscarriages, 
and had given birth to two children who only survived a few 
hours, and the last maternal hope flickered out on the death of 
the young prince on the 29th of July 1700. Henceforth Anne 
signs herself in her letters to Lady Marlborough as " your poor 
unfortunate " as well as " faithful Morley." In default of her 
own issue, Anne's personal choice would probably have inclined 
at this time to her own family at St Germains, but the necessity 
of maintaining the Protestant succession caused the enactment 
of the Act of Settlement in 1701, and the substitution of the 
Hanoverian branch. She wore mourning for her father in 1701, 
and before his death James is said to have written to his daughter 
asking for her protection for his family; but the recognition of his 
son by Louis XIV. as king of England effectually prevented any 
good offices to which her feelings might have inclined her. 

On the 8th of March 1702 Anne became, by King William's 
death, queen of Great Britain, being crowned on the 23rd of 
April. Her reign was destined to be one of the most brilliant 
in the annals of England. Splendid military triumphs crushed 
the hereditary national foe. The Act of Union with Scotland 
constituted one of the strongest foundations of the future 
empire. Art arid literature found a fresh renascence. 

In her first speech to parliament, like George III. afterwards, 
Anne declared her " heart to be entirely English," words which 
were resented by some as a reflection on the late king. A 
ministry, mostly Tory, with Godolphin at its head,was established. 
She obtained a grant of £700,000 a year, and hastened to bestow 
a pension of £100,000 on her husband, whom she created general- 
issimo of her forces and lord high admiral, while Marlborough 
obtained the Garter', with the captain-generalship and other 
prizes, including a dukedom, and the duchess was made mistress 
of the robes with the control of the privy purse. The queen 
showed from the first a strong interest in church matters, and 
declared her intention to keep church appointments in her own 
hands. She detested equally Roman Catholics and dissenters, 
showed a strong leaning towards the high-church party, and gave 
zealous support to the bill forbidding occasional conformity. 
In 1 704 she announced to the Commons her intention of granting 
to the church the crown revenues, amounting to about £16,000 or 
£17,000 a year, from tenths and first-fruits (paid originally by 
the clergy to the pope, but appropriated by the crown in 1534), 
for the increase of poor livings; her gift, under the name of 
" Queen Anne's Bounty," still remaining as a testimony of her 
piety. This devotion to the church, the strongest of all motives 
in Anne's conduct, dictated her hesitating attitude towards 
the two great parties in the state. The Tories had for this reason 
her personal preference, while the Whigs, who included her power- 
ful favourites the Marlboroughs, identified their interests with 

1 Macpherson i. 257 ; Clarke's James II., ii. 559. See also 
Shrewsbury's anonymous correspondent in Hist. MSS. Comm. Ser.; 
MSS. Duke of Buccleugh at Montagu House, ii. 169. 

• Macaulay iv. 799 note 



the war and its glorious successes, the queen slowly and un- 
willingly, but inevitably, gravitating towards the latter. 

In December, the archduke Charles visited Anne at Windsor 
and was welcomed as the king of Spain. In 1 704 Anne acquiesced 
in the resignation of Lord Nottingham, the leader of the high 
Tory party. In the same year the great victory of Blenheim 
further consolidated the power of the Whigs and increased the 
influence of Marlborough, upon whom Anne now conferred the 
manor of Woodstock. Nevertheless, she declared in November 
to the duchess that whenever things leaned towards the Whigs, 
" I shall think the church is beginning to be in danger." Next 
year she supported the election of the Whig speaker, John Smith, 
but long resisted the influence and claims of the Junto, as the 
Whig leaders, Sorhers, Halifax, Orford, Wharton and Sunderland, 
were named. In October she was obliged to appoint Cowper, 
a Whig, lord chancellor, with all the ecclesiastical patronage 
belonging to the office. Marlborough's successive victories, 
and especially the factious conduct of the Tories, who in 
November 1705 moved in parliament that the electress Sophia 
should be invited to England, drove Anne farther to the side 
of the Whigs. But she opposed for some time the inclusion in 
the government of Sunderland, whom she especially disliked, only 
consenting at Marlborough's intercession in December 1706, 
when various other offices and rewards were bestowed upon 
Whigs, and Nottingham with other Tories was removed from the 
council. She yielded, after a struggle, also to the appointment 
of Whigs to bishoprics, the most mortifying submission of all. 
In 1708 she was forced to dismiss Harley, who, with the aid of 
Mrs Masham, had been intriguing against the government and 
projecting the creation of a third party. Abigail Hill, Mrs 
Masham, a cousin of the duchess of Marlborough, had been 
introduced by the latter as a poor relation into Anne's service, 
while still princess of Denmark. The queen found relief in the 
quiet and respectful demeanour of her attendant, and gradually 
came to prefer her society to that of the termagant and tem- 
pestuous duchess. Abigail, however, soon ventured to talk 
" business," and in the summer of 1707 the duchess discovered 
to her indignation that her protegee had already undermined 
her influence with the queen and had become the medium of 
Harley's intrigue. The strength of the Whigs at this time and 
the necessities of the war caused the retirement of Harley, 
but he remained Anne's secret adviser and supporter against 
the faction, urging upon her " the dangers to the crown as well 
as to the church and monarchy itself from their counsels and 
actions," 3 while the duchess never regained her former influence. 
The inclusion in the cabinet of Somers, whom she especially 
disliked as the hostile critic of Prince George's admiralty 
administration, was the subject of another prolonged struggle, 
ending again in the queen's submission after a futile appeal 
to Marlborough in October 1708, to which she brought herself 
only to avoid a motion from the Whigs for the removal of the 
prince, then actually on his deathbed. His death on the 28th of 
October was felt deeply by the queen, and opened the way for 
the inclusion of more Whigs. But no reconciliation with the 
duchess took place, and in 1 709 a further dispute led to an angry 
correspondence, the queen finally informing the duchess of the 
termination of their friendship, and the latter drawing up a 
long narrative of her services, which she forwarded to Anne 
together with suitable passages on the subject of friendship 
and charity transcribed from the Prayer Book, the Whole Duty 
of Man and from Jeremy Taylor. 4 Next year Anne's desire 
to give a regiment to Hill, Mrs Masham's brother, led to another 
ineffectual attempt in retaliation to displace the new favourite, 
and the queen showed her antagonism to the Whig administra- 
tion on the occasion of the prosecution of Sacheverell. She was 
present at his trial and was publicly acclaimed by the mob as 
his supporter, while the Tory divine was consoled immediately 
on the expiration of his sentence with the living of St Andrew's, 
Holborn. Subsequently the duchess, in a final interview which 
she had forced upon the queen, found her tedrs and reproaches 

3 Swift's Mem. on the Change of the Ministry. 

4 Conduct of the Duchess of Marlborough, p. 225. 



ANNE, QUEEN 



6 7 , 



unavailing. In her anger she had told the queen she wished for 
no answer, and she was now met by a stony and exasperating 
silence, broken only by the words constantly repeated, "You 
desired no answer and you shall have none." 

The fall of the Whigs, now no longer necessary on account of 
the successful issue of the war, to accomplish which Harley had 
long been preparing and intriguing, followed; and their attempt 
to prolong hostilities from party motives failed. A friend of 
Harley, the duke of Shrewsbury, was first appointed to office, 
and subsequently the great body of the Whigs were displaced 
by Tories, Harley being made chancellor of the exchequer and 
Henry St John secretary of state. The queen was rejoiced 
at being freed from what she called a long captivity, and the 
new parliament was returned with a Tory majority. On the 
17th of January 1711, in spite of Marlborough's efforts to ward 
off the blow, the duchess was compelled to give up her key of 
office. The queen was now able once more to indulge in her 
favourite patronage of the church, and by her influence an act 
was passed in 171 2 for building fifty new churches in London. 
Later, in 1 7 14, she approved of the Schism Bill. She gave strong 
support to Harley, now earl of Oxford and lord treasurer, in 
the intrigues and negotiations for peace. Owing to the alliance 
between the Tory Lord Nottingham and the Whigs, on the 
condition of the support by the latter of the bill against occasional 
conformity passed in December 1711, the defeated Whigs 
maintained a majority in the Lords, who declared against any 
peace which left Spain to the Bourbons. To break down this 
opposition Marlborough was dismissed on the 31st from all his 
employments, while the House of Lords was " swamped " by 
Anne's creation of twelve peers, 1 including Mrs Masham's 
husband. The queen's conduct was generally approved, for the 
nation was now violently adverse to the Whigs and war party; 
and the peace of Utrecht was finally signed on the 31st of March 
1 713, and proclaimed on the 5th of May in London. 

As the queen's reign drew to its close, rumours were rife on the 
great subject of the succession to the throne. Various Jacobite 
appointments excited suspicion. Both Oxford and Bolingbroke 
were in communication with the Pretender's party, and on the 
27th of July Oxford, who had gradually lost influence and 
quarrelled with Bolingbroke, resigned, leaving the supreme 
power in the hands of the latter. Anne herself had a natural 
feeling for her brother, and had shown great solicitude concerning 
his treatment when a price had been set on his head at the 
time of the Scottish expedition in 1708. On the 3rd of March 
1 7 14 James wrote to Anne, Oxford and Bolingbroke, urging the 
necessity of taking steps to secure his succession, and promising, 
on the condition of his recognition, to make no further attempts 
against the queen's government; and in April a report was 
circulated in Holland that Anne had secretly determined to 
associate James with her in the government. The wish expressed 
by the Whigs, that a member of the electoral family should be 
invited to England, had already aroused the queen's indignation 
in 1708; and now, in 1714, a writ of summons for the electoral 
prince as duke of Cambridge having been obtained, Anne forbade 
the Hanoverian envoy, Baron Schutz, her presence, and declared 
all who supported the project her enemies; while to a memorial 
on the same subject from the electress Sophia and her grandson 
in May, Anne replied in an angry letter, which is said to have 
caused the death of the electress on the 8th of June, requesting 
them not to trouble the peace of her realm or diminish her 
authority. 

These demonstrations, however, were the outcome not of any 
returning partiality for her own family, but of her intense dislike, 
in which she resembled Queen Elizabeth, of any " successor," 
" it being a thing I cannot bear to have any successor here 
though but for a week "; and in spite of some appearances to 
the contrary, it is certain that religion and political wisdom 
kept Anne firm to the Protestant succession. 2 She had main- 
tained a friendly correspondence with the court of Hanover since 

1 For their names see Hume and Smollett's Hist. (Hughes, 1854) 
viil. no. 

2 See also Hist. MSS. Comm. Ser. Rep. vii. App. 246b. 



1705, and in 1706 had bestowed the Garter on the electoral 
prince and created him duke of Cambridge; while the Regency 
Act provided for the declaration of the legal heir to the crown 
by the council immediately on the queen's death, and a further 
enactment naturalized the electress and her issue. In 1708, on 
the occasion of the Scottish expedition, notwithstanding her 
solicitude for his safety, she had styled James in her speech 
closing the session of parliament as " a popish pretender bred 
up in the principles of the most arbitrary government." The 
duchess of Marlborough stated in 17 13 that all the time she had 
known "that thing" (as she now called the queen) , "she had never 
heard her speak a favourable word of him." 3 No answer appears 
to have been sent to James's letter in 17 14; on the contrary, a 
proclamation was issued (June 23) for his apprehension in case 
of his arrival in England. On the 27th of April Anne gave a 
solemn assurance of her fidelity to the Hanoverian succession 
to Sir William Dawes, archbishop of York; in June she sent 
Lord Clarendon to Hanover to satisfy the elector. 

The sudden illness and death of the queen now frustrated any 
schemes which Bolingbroke, or others might have been contem- 
plating. On the 27th, the day of Oxford's resignation, the 
discussions concerning his successor detained the council sitting 
in the queen's presence till two o'clock in the morning, and on 
retiring Anne was instantly seized with fatal illness. Her ad- 
herence to William in 1688 had been a principal cause of the 
success of the Revolution, and now the final act of her life was 
to secure the Revolution settlement and the Protestant succes- 
sion. During a last moment of returning consciousness, and by 
the advice of the whole council, who had been joined on their 
own initiative by the Whig dukes Argyll and Somerset, she placed 
the lord treasurer's staff in the hands of the Whig duke of 
Shrewsbury, and measures were immediately taken for assuring 
the succession of the elector. Her death took place on the 1st 
of August, and the security felt by the public, and perhaps the 
sense of perils escaped by the termination of the queen's life, 
were shown by a considerable rise in the national stocks. She 
was buried on the south side of Henry VII.'s chapel in West- 
minster Abbey, in the same tomb as her husband and children. 
The elector of Hanover, George Louis, son of the electress 
Sophia (daughter of Elizabeth, daughter of James I.), peacefully 
succeeded to the throne as George I. (q.v.). 

According to her physician Arbuthnot, Anne's life was 
shortened by the " scene of contention among her servants. I 
believe sleep was never more welcome to a weary traveller than 
death was to her." By character and temperament unfitted to 
stand alone, her life had been unhappy and tragical from its 
isolation. Separated in early years from her parents and sister, 
her one great friendship had proved only baneful and ensnaring. 
Marriage had only brought a mournful series of infant funerals. 
Constant ill-health and suffering had darkened her career. The 
claims of family attachment, of religion, of duty, of patriotism 
and of interest, had dragged her in opposite directions, and her 
whole life had been a prey to jealousies and factions which closed 
around her at her accession to the throne, and surged to their 
height when she lay on her deathbed. The modern theory of the 
relations between the sovereign and the parties, by which the 
former identifies himself with the faction for the time in power 
while maintaining his detachment from all, had not then been 
invented; and Anne, like her Hanoverian successors, maintained 
the struggle, though without success, to rule independently, 
finding support in Harley. During the first year of her reign 
she made known that she was " resolved not to follow the 
example of her predecessor in making use of a few of her subjects 
to oppress the rest. She will be queen of all her subjects, and 
would have all the parties and distinctions of former reigns ended 
and buried in hers." 4 Her motive for getting rid of the Whigs 
was not any real dislike of their administration, but the wish to 
escape from the domination of the party, 5 and on the advent 

3 Ibid. Portland MSS. v. 338. 

4 Sir J. Leveson-Gower to Lord Rutland, Hist. MSS. Comm., 
Duke of Rutland's MSS. ii. 173. 

6 See Bolingbroke's Letter to Sir W. Wyndham. 



68 



ANNE, EMPRESS 



to power of the Tories she carefully left some Whigs in their 
employments, with the aim of breaking up the party system and 
acting upon what was called " a moderate scheme." She 
attended debates in the Lords and endeavoured to influence 
votes. Her struggles to free herself from the influence of factions 
only involved her deeper; she was always under the domination 
of some person or some party, and she could not rise above them 
and show herself the leader of the nation like Elizabeth. 

Anne was a women of small ability, of dull mind, and of that 
kind of obstinacy which accompanies weakness of character. 
According to the duchess she had " a certain knack of sticking 
to what had been dictated to her to a degree often very dis- 
agreeable, and without the least sign of understanding or judg- 
ment." l " I desire you would not have so ill an opinion of me," 
Anne writes to Oxford, " as to think when I have determined 
anything in my mind I will alter it." 2 Burnet considered that 
" she laid down the splendour of a court too much," which was 
" as it were abandoned." She dined alone after her husband's 
death, but it was reported by no means abstemiously, the royal 
family being characterized in the lines: — 
" King William thinks all. 

Queen Mary talks all, 

Prince George drinks all, 

And Princess Anne eats all." 3 

She took no interest in the art, the drama or the literature of 
her day. But she possessed the homely virtues; she was deeply 
religious, attached to the Church of England and concerned for 
the efficiency of the ministry. One of the first acts of her reign 
was a proclamation against vice, and Lord Chesterfield regretted 
the strict morality of her court. Instances abound of her kind- 
ness and consideration for others. Her moderation towards 
the Jacobites in Scotland, after the Pretender's expedition in 
1708, was much praised by Saint Simon. She showed great 
forbearance and generosity towards the duchess of Marlborough 
in the face of unexampled provocation, and her character was 
unduly disparaged by the latter, who with her violent and coarse 
nature could not understand the queen's self-restraint in sorrow, 
and describes her as " very hard " and as " not apt to cry." 
According to her small ability she served the state well, and was 
zealous and conscientious in the fulfilment of public' duties, in 
which may be included touching for the king's evil, which she 
revived. Marlborough testifies to her energy in finding money 
for the war. She surrendered £ 1 0,000 a year for public purposes, 
and in 1706 she presented £30,000 to the officers and soldiers 
who had lost their horses. Her contemporaries almost unani- 
mously record her excellence and womanly virtues; and by 
Dean Swift, no mild critic, she is invariably spoken of with 
respect, and named in his will as of " ever glorious, immortal 
and truly pious memory, the real nursing-mother of her king- 
doms." She deserves her appellation of " Good Queen Anne," 
and notwithstanding her failings must be included among the 
chief authors and upholders of the great Revolution settlement. 
Her person was described by Spanheim, the Prussian ambassador, 
as handsome though inclining to stoutness, with black hair, blue 
eyes and good features, and of grave aspect. 

Anne's husband, Prince George- (1653-1708), was the second 
son of Frederick III., king of Denmark. Before marrying Anne 
he had been a candidate for the throne of Poland. He was 
created earl of Kendal and duke of Cumberland in 1689. 
Some censure, which was directed against the prince in his 
capacity as lord high admiral, was terminated by his death. 
In religion George remained a Lutheran, and in general his 
qualities tended to make him a good husband rather than a 
soldier or a statesman. 

Bibliography.— Diet, of Nat. Biography (Dr A. W. Ward); 
A. Strickland, Lives of the Queens of England (1852), somewhat 
uncritical; an excellent account written by Spanheim for the king 
of Prussia, printed in the Eng. Hist. Rev. ii. 757; histories of Stan- 
hope, Lecky, Ranke, Macaulay, Boyes, Burnet, Wyon, and Somer- 
ville; F. E. Morris, The Age of Anne (London, 1877) ; Correspondence 

1 Private Correspondence, ii. 120. ' 

s Hist. MSS. Comm., MSS. of Marq. of Bath at Longleat; i. 237. 

3 Notes and Queries, xi. 254. ' 



and Diary of Lord Clarendon (1828) ; Hatton Correspondence (Camden 
Soc, 1878); Evelyn's Diary; Sir J. Dalrymple's Memoirs (1790); 
N. Lutfrell's Brief Hist. Relation (1857); Wentworth Papers (1883); 
W.'Coxe, Mem. of the Duke of Marlborough (1847); Conduct of the 
Dowager Duchess of Marlborough (1742) ; Ralph, The other Side of the 
Question (1742) ; Private Correspondence of Sarah Duchess of Marl- 
borough (1838) ; A. T, Thomson, Mem. of the Duchess and the. Court of 
Queen Anne (1839); J. S. Clarke's Life of James II. (1816); J. 
Macpherson's Original Papers (1775); Swift's Some Considerations 
upon the Consequences from the Death of the Queen, An Inquiry into 
the Behaviour of the Queen's last Ministry, Hist, of the Four 
Last Years of Queen Anne, and Journals and Letters; The Lockhart 
Papers (1817), i.;.F. Salomon, Geschichte des letzien 'Minislrriums 
Kbnigin Annas (1894); Marchmont Papers, Hi. (1831); W. Sichel 
Life of Bolingbroke (190H902) ; Mem. of Thomas Earl of Ailesbury 
(Roxburghe Club, 1890); Eng. Hist, Rev. i. 470, 756, viii. 740 ; 
Royal Hist. Soc. Trans. N.S. xiv. 69; Col. of Slate Papers; 
Treasury; Hist. MSS. Comm. Series, MSS. of Duke of Portland, 
including the Harley Papers, Duke of Buccleugh at Montagu House, 
Lord Kenyon, Marq. of Bath at Longleat; Various Collections, ii. 146, 
Duke Of Rutland at Belvoir, ph Rep. app., and H. M. the King {Stuart 
Papers, i.); Stowe MSS. in Brit. Museum; Sir J. Mackintosh's 
Transcripts, Add. MSS. in Brit. Museum, 34, 487-526; Edinburgh 
Rev.; October 1835, p. 1; Notes and Queries, vii. ser. iii. 178, viii. 
ser. i. 72, xii. 368, ix, ser. iv. 282, xi, 254; C. Hodgson, An Account 
of the Augmentation of Small Livings by the Bounty of Queen Anne 
(1845) ; Observations of the Governors of Queen Anne's Bounty (1867) ; 
Sbmers Tracts, xii. xiii. (1814-1815) ; H. Paul, Queen Anne (London, 
1907). (P C. Y.) 

ANNE (1693-1740), empress of Russia, second daughter of Tsar 
Ivan V., Peter the Great's imbecile brother, and Praskovia 
Saltuikova. Her girlhood was passed at Ismailovo near Moscow, 
with her mother, an ignorant, bigoted tsaritsa of the old school, 
who neglected and even hated her daughters. Peter acted as a 
second father to the Ivanovs, as Praskovia and her family were 
called. In 1 7 10 he married Anne to Frederick William, duke of 
Courland, who died of surfeit on his journey home from St 
Petersburg. The reluctant young widow was ordered to proceed 
on her way to Mittau to take over the government of Courland, 
with the Russian resident, Count Peter Bestuzhev, as her adviser. 
He was subsequently her lover, till supplanted by Biren (q.v.). 
Anne's residence at Mittau was embittered by the utter inadequacy 
of her revenue, which she keenly felt. It was therefore with joy 
that she at once accepted the Russian crown, as the ,next heir, 
after the death of Peter II. (January 30, 1730), when it was offered 
to her by the members of the supreme privy council, even going 
so far as to subscribe previously nine articles which would have 
reduced her from an absolute to a very limited monarch. On 
the 26th of February she made her public entry into Moscow under 
strict surveillance. On the 8th of March a coup d'etat, engineered 
by a party of her personal friends, overthrew the supreme privy 
council and she was hailed as autocrat. Her government, on the 
whole, was prudent, beneficial and even glorious; but it was 
undoubtedly severe and became at last universally unpopular. 
This was due in the main to the outrageous insolence of her all- 
powerful favourite Biren, who hated the Russian nobility and 
trampled upon them mercilessly. Fortunately, Biren was 
sufficiently prudent not to meddle with foreign affairs or with the 
army, and these departments in the able hands of two Other 
foreigners, who thoroughly identified themselves with Russia, 
Andrei Osterman {q.v.) and Burkhardt Munnich (q.v.) did great 
things in the reign of Anne. The chief political events of the 
period were the War of the Polish Succession and the second { 
Crimean War. The former was caused by the reappearance of 
Stanislaus Leszczynski as a candidate for the Polish throne after 
the death of Augustus II. (February 1, 1733). The interests of 
Russia would not permit her to recognize a candidate dependent 
directly on France and indirectly upon Sweden and Turkey, all 
three powers being at that time opposed to Russia's "system." 
She accordingly united with Austria to support the candidature of 
the late king's son, Augustus of Saxony. So far as Russia was con- 
cerned, the War of the Polish Succession was quickly over. Much 
more important was the Crimean War of .1 736-39. This war marks 
the beginning of that systematic struggle on the part of Russia to 
recover her natural and legitimate southern boundaries. It lasted 

4 Vasily Golltsuin's expedition under the regency of Sophia was 
the first Crimean War (1687-89). 



ANNE OF BRITTANY^-ANNE OF DENMARK 



69 



four years and a half, and cost her a hundred thousand men and 
millions of roubles; and though invariably successful, she had to 
be content with the acquisition of a single city (Azov) with a small 
district at the mouth of the Don. Yet more had been gained than 
was immediately apparent. In the first place, this was the only 
war hitherto waged by Russia against Turkey which had not ended 
in crushing disaster. Munnich had at least dissipated the illusion 
of Ottoman invincibility, and taught the Russian soldier that 
100,000 janissaries and spahis were no match, in a fair field, for 
half that number of grenadiers and hussars. In the second place 
the Tatar hordes had been well nigh exterminated. In the third 
place Russia's signal and unexpected successes in the Steppe had 
immensely increased her prestige on the continent. " This court 
begins to have a great deal to say in the affairs of Europe," 
remarked the English minister, SirClaudius Rondeau, a year later. 

The last days of Anne were absorbed by the endeavour to 
strengthen the position of the heir to the throne, the baby 
cesarevich Ivan, afterwards Ivan VI., the son of the empress's 
niece, Anna Leopoldovna, against the superior claims of her 
cousin the cesarevna Elizabeth. The empress herself died three 
months later (28th of October 1740). Her last act was to 
appoint Biren regent during the infancy of her great-nephew. 

Anne was a grim, sullen woman, frankly sensual, but as Well- 
meaning as ignorance and vindictiveness would allow her to be. 
But she had much natural good sense, was a true friend and, in 
her more cheerful moments, an amiable companion. Lady 
Rondeau's portrait of the empress shows her to the best advan- 
tage. She is described as a large woman, towering above all the 
cavaliers of her court, but very well shaped for her size, easy and 
graceful in her person, of a majestic bearing, but with an awful- 
negs in her countenance which revolted those who disliked her. 

See R. Nisbet Bain, The Pupils of Peter the Great (London, 1897) ; 
Letters from a lady who resided some years in Russia (i.e. Lady 
Rondeau) (London, 1775); Christoph Hermann .Manstein, Mimoires 
sur la Russie (Amsterdam, 1771 ; English edition, London, 1856); 
Gerhard Anton von Wa\em,Lebensschreibung des Feldm.B. C.Graf en von 
Munnich (Oldenburg, 1 803) ; Claudius Rondeau,DiplomaticDespatches 
from Russia, 1728-1739 (St Petersburg, 1889-1892). (R. N. B.) 

ANNE OF BRITTANY (1477-1514), daughter of Francis II., 
duke of Brittany, and Marguerite de Foix. She was scarcely 
twelve years old when she succeeded her father as duchess on 
the 9th of September 1488. Charles VIII. aimed at establishing 
his authority over her; Alain d'Albret wished to marry her; 
Jean de Rohan claimed the duchy ; and her guardian, the marshal 
de Rieux, was soon in open revolt against his sovereign. In 1489 
the French army invaded Brittany. In order to protect her 
independence,' Anne concluded an alliance with Maximilian of 
Austria, and soon married him by proxy (December 1489). But 
Maximilian was incapable of defending her, and in 1491 the young 
duchess found herself compelled to treat with Charles VIII. and 
to marry him. The two sovereigns made a reciprocal arrangement 
as to their rights and pretensions to the crown of Brittany, but 
in the event of Charles predeceasing her, Anne undertook to marry 
the heir to the throne. Nevertheless, in 1492, after the conspiracy 
of Jean de Rohan, who had endeavoured to hand over the duchj 
to the king of England, Charles VIII. confirmed the privileges of 
Brittany, and in particular guaranteed to the Bretons the right of 
paying only those taxes to which the assembly of estates consented, 
After the death of Charles VIII. in 1498, without any children, 
Anne exercised the sovereignty in Brittany, and in January 1499 
she married Louis XII., who had just repudiated Joan of France. 
The marriage contract was ostensibly directed in favour of the 
independence of Brittany, for it declared that Brittany should 
revert to the second son or to the eldest daughter of the two 
sovereigns, and, failing issue, to the natural heirs of the duchess. 
Until her death Anne occupied herself personally with the 
administration of the duchy. In 1504 she caused the treaty of 
Blois to be concluded, which assured the hand of her daughter, 
Claude of France, to Charles of Austria (the future emperor, 
CharlesV.),andpromised him thepossession of Brittany ,Burgundy 
and the county of Blois. But this unpopular treaty was broken, 
and the queen had to consent to the betrothal of Claude to Francis 



of Angouleme, who in 1515 became king of France as Francis I. 
Thus the definitive reunion of Brittany and France was prepared. 

See A. de la Borderie, Choix de documents inedits sur le regne de la 
duchesse Anne en Bretagne (Rennes, 1866 and 1902) — extracts from 
the Memoires de la Societe Archeologique du departement a" Ille-et- 
Vildine, vols. iv. and vi. (1866 and 1868) ; Leroux de Lincy, Vie de la 
reine Anne de Bretagne (1860-1861); A. Dupuy, La Reunion de la 
Bretagne ita France (1880); A. de la Borderie, La Bretagne aux 
demiers siecles du moyen age (1893), and La Bretagne aux temps 
modernes (1894). (H. Se.) 

ANNE OF CLEVES (1515-1557), fourth wife of Henry VIII., 
king of England, daughter of John, duke of Cleves, and Mary, 
only daughter of William, duke of Juliers, was born on the 22nd 
of September 1515. Her father was the leader of the German 
Protestants, and the princess, after the death of Jane Seymour, 
was regarded by Cromwell as a suitable wife for Henry VIII. 
She had been brought up in a narrow retirement, could speak no 
language but her own, had no looks, no accomplishments and no 
dowry, her only recommendations being her proficiency in 
needlework, and her meek and gentle temper. Nevertheless her 
picture, painted by Holbein by the king's command (now in the 
Louvre, a modern copy at Windsor), pleased Henry and the 
marriage was arranged, the treaty being signed on the 24th of 
September 1539. The princess landed at Deal on the 27th of 
December; Henry met her at Rochester on the 1st of January 
1540, and was so much abashed at her appearance as to forget 
to present the gift he had brought for her, but nevertheless 
controlled himself sufficiently to treat her with courtesy. The 
next day he expressed openly his dissatisfaction at her looks; 
" she was no better than a Flanders mare." The attempt to 
prove a pre-contract with the son of the duke of Lorraine broke 
down, and Henry was forced to resign himself to the sacrifice. 
On the wedding morning, however, the 6th of January 1540, he 
declared that no earthly thing would have induced him to marry 
her but the fear of driving the duke of Cleves into the arms of 
the emperor. Shortly afterwards Henry had reason to regret 
the policy which had identified him so closely with the German 
Protestantism, and denied reconciliation with the emperor. 
Cromwell's fall was the result, and the chief obstacle to the 
repudiation of his wife being thus removed, Henry declared the 
marriage had not been and could not be consummated; and did 
not scruple to cast doubts on his wife's honour. On the 9th of 
July the marriage was declared null and void by convocation, 
and an act of parliament to the same effect was passed immedi- 
ately. Henry soon afterwards married Catherine Howard. On 
first hearing of the king's intentions, Anne swooned away, but on 
recovering, while declaring her case a very hard and sorrowful 
one from the great love which she bore to the king, acquiesced 
quietly in the arrangements made for her by Henry, by which 
she received lands to the value of £4000 a year, renounced the 
title of queen for that of the king's sister, and undertook not to 
leave the kingdom. In a letter to her brother, drawn up by 
Gardiner by the king's direction, she acknowledged the unreality 
of the marriage and the king's kindness and generosity. Anne 
spent the rest of her life happily in England at Richmond or 
Bletchingley, occasionally visiting the court, and being described 
as joyous as ever, and wearing new dresses every day! An 
attempt to procure her reinstalment on the disgrace of Catherine 
Howard failed, and there was no foundation for the report that 
she had given birth to a child of which Henry was the reputed 
father. She was present at the marriage of Henry with Catherine 
Parr and at the coronation of Mary. She died on the 28th of 
July 1557 at Chelsea, and was buried in Westminster Abbey. 

See Lives of the Queens of England, by A. Strickland, iii. (1851); 
The Wives of Henry VIII., by M. Hume (1905); Henry VIII., by 
A. F. Pollard (1905) '; Four Original Documents relating to the 
Marriage of Henry VIII. to Anne of Cleves, ed. by E. and G. Goldsmid 
(1886); for the pseudo Anne of Cleves see Allgemeine deutsche 
Biographie, i. 467. (P. C. Y.) 

ANNE OF DENMARK (1574-1619), queen of James I. of 
England and VI. of Scotland, daughter of King Frederick II. of 
Denmark and Norway and of Sophia, daughter of Ulric III., duke 
of Mecklenburg, was born on the 1 2th of December 1 574. On the 
20th of August 1589, in spite of Queen Elizabeth's opposition, 



7° 



ANNE OF FRANCE— ANNEALING 



she was married by proxy to King James, without dower, the 
alliance, however, settling definitely the Scottish claims to 
the Orkney and Shetland Islands. Her voyage to Scotland was 
interrupted by a violent storm — for the raising of which several 
Danish and Scottish witches were burned or executed — which 
drove her on the coast of Norway, whither the impatient James 
came to meet her, the marriage taking place at Opslo (now 
Christiania) on the 23rd of November. The royal couple, after 
visiting Denmark, arrived in Scotland in May 1 590. The position 
of queen consort to a Scottish king was a difficult and perilous 
one, and Anne was attacked in connexion with various scandals 
and deeds of violence, her share in which, however, is supported 
by no evidence. The birth of an heir to the throne (Prince 
Henry) in 1504 strengthened her position and influence; but 
the young prince, much to her indignation, was immediately 
withdrawn from her care and entrusted to the keeping of the 
earl and countess of Mar at Stirling Castle; in 1595 James gave 
a written command, forbidding them in case of his death to give 
up the prince to the queen till he reached the age of eighteen. 
The king's intention was, no doubt, to secure himself and the 
prince against the unruly nobles, though the queen's Roman 
Catholic tendencies were probably another reason for his decision. 
Brought up a Lutheran, and fond of pleasure, she had shown 
no liking for Scottish Calvinism, and soon incurred rebukes on 
account of her religion, " vanity," absence from church, " night 
waking and balling." She had become secretly inclined to 
Roman Catholicism, and attended mass with the king's conniv- 
ance. On the death of Queen Elizabeth, on the 24th of March 
1603, James preceded her to London. Anne took advantage 
of his absence to demand possession of the prince, and, on the 
" flat refusal " of the countess of Mar, fell into a passion, the 
violence of which occasioned a miscarriage and endangered her 
life. In June she followed the king to England (after distributing 
all her effects in Edinburgh among her ladies) with the prince 
and the coffin containing the body of her dead infant, and 
reached Windsor on the 2nd of July, where amidst other forms 
of good fortune she entered into the possession of Queen 
Elizabeth's 6000 dresses. 

On the 24th of July Anne was crowned with the king, when her 
refusal to take the sacrament according to the Anglican use 
created some sensation. She communicated on one occasion 
subsequently and attended Anglican service occasionally; but 
she received consecrated objects from Pope Clement VIII., 
continued to hear mass, and, according to Galluzzi, supported 
the schemes for the conversion of the prince of Wales and of 
England, and for the prince's marriage with a Roman Catholic 
princess, which collapsed on his death in 161 2. She was claimed 
as a convert by the Jesuits. 1 Nevertheless on her deathbed, 
when she was attended by the archbishop of Canterbury and the 
bishop of London, she used expressions which were construed 
as a declaration of Protestantism. Notwithstanding religious 
differences she lived in great harmony and affection with the 
king, latterly, however, residing mostly apart. She helped to 
raise Buckingham to power in the place of Somerset, maintained 
friendly relations with him, and approved of his guidance and 
control of the king. In spite of her birth and family she was at 
first favourably inclined to Spain, disapproved of her daughter 
Elizabeth's marriage with the elector palatine, and supported 
the Spanish marriages for her sons, but subsequently veered 
round towards France. She used all her influence in favour of 
the unfortunate Raleigh, answering his petition to her for 
protection with a personal letter of appeal to Buckingham to save 
his life. " She carrieth no sway in state matters," however, it 
was said of her in 1605, " and, praeter rem iixoriam, hath'no great 
reach in other affairs." " She does not mix herself up in affairs, 
though the king tells her anything she chooses to ask, and loves 
and esteems her." 2 Her interest in state matters was only 
occasional, and secondary to the pre-occupations of court 
festivities, masks, progresses, dresses, jewels, which she much 
enjoyed; the court being, says Wilson — whose severity cannot 

1 Fasti S. J., by P. Joannis Drews (pub. 1723), p. 160. 
2 Cal. of St. Pap. — Venetian, x. 513. 



entirely suppress his admiration — " a continued maskarado, 
where she and her ladies, like so many nymphs or Nereides, 
appeared ... to the ravishment of the beholders," and " made 
the night more glorious than the day." Occasionally she even 
joined in the king's sports, though here her only recorded exploit 
was her accidental shooting of James's " most principal and 
special hound," Jewel. Her extravagant expenditure, returned 
by Salisbury in 1605 at more than £50,000 and by Chamberlain 
at her death at more than £84,000, was unfavourably contrasted 
with the economy of Queen Elizabeth ; in spite of large allowances 
and grants of estates which included Oatlands, Greenwich House 
and Nonsuch, it greatly exceeded her income, her debts in 1616 
being reckoned at nearly £10,000, while her jewelry and her 
plate were valued at her death at nearly half a million. Anne 
died after a long illness on the 2nd of March 1619, and was buried 
in Westminster Abbey. She was generally regretted. The 
severe Wilson, while rebuking her gaieties, allows that she was 
" a good woman," and that her character would stand the most 
prying investigation. She was intelligent and tactful, a faithful 
wife, a devoted mother and a staunch friend. Besides several 
children who died in infancy she had Henry, prince of Wales, 
who- died in 161 2, Charles, afterwards King Charles I., and 
Elizabeth, electress palatine and queen of Bohemia. 

Bibliography.— See Dr A. W. Ward's article in the Diet, of Nat. 
Biography, with authorities; Lives of the Queens of England, by 
A. Strickland (I844), vii.; " Life and Reign of King James I.," by 
A. Wilson, in History of England (1706); Isloria del Granducato di 
Toscana, by R. Galluzzi (1781), lib. vi. cap. ii. ; Cal. of State Papers- 
Domestic and Venetian; Hist. MSS. Comtn. Series, MSS. of Marq. 
of Salisbury, iii. 420, 438, 454, ix. 54; Harleian MSS. 5176, art. 22, 
293, art. 106. Also see bibliography to the article on James I. 

(P. C. Y.) 

ANNE OF FRANCE (1460-1522), dame de Beaujeu, was the 
eldest daughter of Louis XI. and Charlotte of Savoy. Louis XL 
betrothed her at first to Nicholas of Anjou, and afterwards 
offered her hand successively to Charles the Bold, to the duke 
of Brittany, and even to his own brother, Charles of France. 
Finally she married Pierre de Beaujeu, a younger brother of 
the duke of Bourbon. Before his death Louis XI. entrusted 
to Pierre de Beaujeu and Anne the entire charge of his son, 
Charles VIII., a lad of thirteen; and from 1483 to 1492 the 
Beaujeus exercised a virtual regency. Anne was a true daughter 
of Louis XL Energetic, obstinate, cunning and unscrupulous, 
she inherited, too, her father's avarice and rapacity. Although 
they made some concessions, the Beaujeus succeeded in main- 
taining the results of the previous reign, and in triumphing over 
the feudal intrigues and coalitions, as was seen from the meeting 
of the estates general in 1484, and the results # of the " Mad 
War " (1485) and the war with Brittany (1488)*; and in spite 
of the efforts of Maximilian of Austria they concluded the marriage 
of Charles VIII. and Anne, duchess of Brittany (1491). But a 
short time afterwards the king disengaged himself completely 
from their tutelage, to the great detriment of the kingdom. 
In 1488 Pierre de Beaujeu had succeeded to the Bourbonnais, 
the last great fief of France. He died in 1503, but Anne survived 
him twenty years. From her establishments at Moulins and 
Chan telle in the Bourbonnais she continued henceforth vigorously 
to defend the Bourbon cause against the royal family. Anne's 
only daughter, Suzanne, had married in 1505 her cousin, Charles 
of Bourbon, count of Montpensier, the future constable; and 
the question of the succession of Suzanne, who died in 1521, 
was the determining factor of the treason of the constable 
de Bourbon (1523). Anne had died some months before, on 
the 14th of November 1522. 

See P. Pelicier, Essai sur le gouvernement de la Dame de Beaujeu 
(Chartres, 1882). (J. I.) 

ANNEALING, HARDENING AND TEMPERING. Annealing 

(from the prefix an, and the old English aelan, to burn or bake; 

the meaning has probably also been modified from the French 

nieler, to enamel black on gold or silver, from the med. Lat. 

nigellare, to make black; cf. niello) is a process of treating a 

metal or alloy by heat with the object of imparting to it a certain 

condition of ductility, extensibility, or a certain grade of softness 

or hardness, with all that is involved in and follows from those 



ANNEALING 



Conditions. The effect may be mechanical only, or a chemical 
change may take place also. Sometimes the causes are obvious, 
in other cases they are more or less obscure. But of the actual 
facts, and the immense importance of this operation as well as 
of the related ones of tempering and hardening in shop processes, 
there is no question. 

When the treatment is of a mechanical character only, there 
can be no reasonable doubt that the common belief is correct, 
namely, that the metallic crystals or fibres undergo a molecular 
rearrangement of some kind. When it is of a chemical character, 
the process is one of cementation, due to the occlusion of gases 
in the molecules of the metals. 

Numerous examples of annealing due to molecular rearrange- 
ment might be selected from the extensive range of workshop 
queries. The following are a few only: — when a boiler-
maker bends the edges of a plate of steel or iron by hammer 
blows (flanging), he does so in successive stages (heats), at each 
of which the plate has to be reheated, with inevitable cooling 
down during the time work is being done upon it. The result 
is that the plate becomes brittle over the parts which have 
been subjected to this treatment; and this brittleness is not 
uniformly distributed, but is localized, and is a source of weakness, 
inducing a liability to crack. If, however, the plate when 
finished is raised to a full red heat, and allowed to cool down 
away from access of cool air, as in a furnace, or underneath wood 
ashes, it resumes its old ductility. The plate has been annealed, 
and is as safe as it was before it was flanged. Again, when a 
sheet of thin metal is forced to assume a shape very widely 
different from its original plane aspect, as by hammering, or by 
drawing out in a press — a cartridge case being a familiar ex- 
ample — it is necessary to anneal it several times during the 
progress of the operation. Without such annealing it would 
never arrive at the final stage desired, but would become torn 
asunder by the extension of its metallic fibres. Cutting tools 
are made of steel having sufficient carbon to afford capacity 
for hardening. Before the process is performed, the condition 
in which the carbon is present renders the steel so hard and tough 
as to render the preliminary turning or shaping necessary in 
many cases (e.g. in milling cutters) a tedious operation. To lessen 
this labour, the steel is first annealed. In this case it is brought 
to a low red heat, and allowed to cool away from the air. It 
can then be machined with comparative ease and be subsequently 
hardened or tempered. When a metallic structure has endured 
long service a state of fatigue results. Annealing is, where 
practicable, resorted to in order to restore the original strength. 
A familiar illustration is that of chains which are specially liable 
to succumb to constant overstrain if continued for only a year 
or two. This is so well known that the practice is regularly 
adopted of annealing the chains at regular intervals.' They 
are put into a clear hot furnace and raised to a low red heat, 
continued for a few hours, and then allowed to cool down in the 
furnace after the withdrawal of the source of heat. Before the 
annealing the fracture of a link would be more crystalline than 
afterwards. 

In these examples, and others of which these are typical, 
two conditions are essential, one being the grade of temperature, 
the other the cooling. The temperature must never be so high 
as to cause the metal to become overheated, with risk of burning, 
nor so low as to prevent the penetration of the substance with 
a good volume of heat. It must also be continued for sufficient 
time. More than this cannot be said. Each particular piece 
of work requires its own treatment and period, and nothing 
but experience of similar work will help the craftsman. The 
cooling must always be gradual, such as that which results 
from removing the source of heat, as by drawing a furnace fire, 
or covering with non-conducting substances. 

The chemical kind of annealing is specifically that employed 
in the manufacture of malleable cast iron. In this process, 
castings are made of white iron, — a brittle quality which has 
its carbon wholly in the combined state. These castings, when 
subjected to heat for a period of ten days or a fortnight, in closed 
boxes, in the presence of substances containing oxygen, become 



highly ductile. This change is due to the absorption of the carbon 
by the oxygen in the cementing material, a comparatively pure 
soft iron being left behind. The result is that the originally 
hard, brittle castings after this treatment may be cut with a 
knife, and be bent double and twisted into spirals without 
fracturing. 

The distinction between hardening and tempering is one of 
degree only, and both are of an opposite character to annealing. 
Hardening, in the shop sense, signifies the making of a piece 
of steel about as hard as it can be made — " glass hard " — while 
tempering indicates some stage in an infinite range between 
thi fully hardened and the annealed or softened condition. 
As a matter of convenience only, hardening is usually a stage 
in the work of tempering. It is easier to harden first, and " let 
down " to the temper required, than to secure the exact heat 
for tempering by raising the material to it. This is partly due 
to the long established practice of estimating temperature by 
colour tints; but this is being rapidly invaded by new methods 
in which the temper heat is obtained in furnaces provided with 
pyrometers, by means of which exact heat regulation is readily 
secured, and in which the heating up is done gradually. Such 
furnaces are used for hardening balls for bearings, cams, small 
toothed wheels and similar work, as well as for tempering 
springs, milling cutters and other- kinds of cutting tools. But 
fOr the cutting tools having single edges, as used in engineers' 
shops, the colour test is still generally retained. 

In the practice of hardening and tempering tools by colour, 
experience is the only safe guide. Colour tints vary with degrees 
of light; steels of different brands require different treatment 
in regard to temperature and quenching; and steels even of 
identical chemical composition do not always behave alike when 
tempered. Every fresh brand of steel has, therefore, to be 
treated at first in a tentative and experimental fashion in order 
to secure the best possible results. The larger the -masses of 
steel, and the greater the disparity in dimensions of adjacent 
parts, the greater is the risk of cracking and distortion. Ex- 
cessive length and the presence of keen angles increase the 
difficulties of hardening. The following points have to be 
observed in the work of hardening and tempering. 

A grade of steel must be selected of suitable quality for the 
purpose for which it has to be used. There are a number of such 
grades, ranging from about if to J % content of carbon, and 
each having its special utility: Overheating must be avoided, 
as that burns the steel and injures or ruins it. A safe rule is never 
to heat any grade of steel to a temperature higher than that at 
which experience proves it will take the temper required. Heat- 
ing must be regular and thorough throughout, and must therefor^ 
be slowly done when dealing with thick masses. Contact with 
sulphurous fuel must be avoided. Baths of molten alloys of lead 
and tin are used when very exact temperatures are required, 
and when articles have thick and thin parts adjacent. But the 
gas furnaces have the same advantages in a more handy form. 
Quenching is done in water, oil, or in various hardening mixtures, 
and sometimes in solids. Rain water is the principal hardening 
agent, but various saline compounds are often added to intensify 
its action. Water that has been long in use is preferred to fresh. 
Water is generally used cold, but in many cases it is warmed to 
about 80° F., as for milling cutters and taps, warmed water 
being less liable to crack the cutters than cold. Oil is preferred 
to water for small springs, for guns and for many cutters. Mer- 
cury hardens most intensely, because it does not evaporate, and 
so does lead or wax for the same reason; water evaporates, 
and in the spheroidal state, as steam, leaves contact with the 
steel. This is the reason why long and large objects are moved 
vertically about in the water during quenching, to bring them 
into contact with fresh cold water. 

There is a good deal of mystery affected by many of the 
hardeners, who are very particular about the composition of 
their baths, various oils and salts being used in an infinity of 
combinations. Many of these are the result of long and successful 
experience, some are of the nature of " fads." A change of bath 
may involve injury to the steel. The most difficult articles to 



72 



ANNECY— ANNELIDA 



harden are springs, milling cutters, taps, reamers. It would be 
easy to give scores of hardening compositions. 

Hardening is performed the more efficiently the more rapidly 
the quenching is done. In the case of thick objects, however, 
especially milling cutters, there is risk of cracking, due to the 
difference of temperature on the outside and in the central body 
of metal. Rapid hardening is impracticable in such objects. 
This is the cause of the distortion of long taps and reamers, and 
of their cracking, and explains why their teeth are often protected 
with soft soap and other substances. 

The presence of the body of heat in a tool is taken advantage 
of in the work of tempering. The tool, say a chisel, is dipped, 
a length of 2 in. or more being thus hardened and blackened. 
It is then removed, and a small area rubbed rapidly with a bit of 
grindstone, observations being made of the changing tints which 
gradually appear as the heat is communicated from the hot 
shank to the cooled end. The heat becomes equalized, and at 
the same time the approximate temperature for quenching for 
temper is estimated by the appearance of a certain tint; at that 
instant the article is plunged and allowed to remain until quite 
cold. For every different class of tool a different tint is required. 

" Blazing off " is a particular method of hardening applied to 
small springs. The springs are heated and plunged in oils, fats, 
or tallow, which is burned off previous to cooling in air, or in the 
ashes of the forge, or in oil, or water usually. They are hardened, 
reheated and tempered, and the tempering by blazing off is 
repeated for heavy springs. The practice varies almost infinitely 
with dimensions, quality of steel, and purpose to which the 
springs have to be applied. 

The range of temper for most cutting tools lies between a pale 
straw or yellow, and a light purple or plum colour. The corres- 
ponding range of temperatures is about 430 F. to 530° F., 
respectively. " Spring temper " is higher, from dark purple to 
blue, or 550° F. to 630 F. In many fine tools the range of 
temperature possible between good and poor results lies within 
from 5 to 10° F. 

There is another kind of hardening which is of a superficial 
character only — " case hardening." It is employed in cases 
where toughness has to be combined with durability of surface. 
It is a cementation process, practised on wrought iron and mild 
steel, and applied to the link motions of engines, to many pins 
and studs, eyes of levers, &c. The articles are hermetically luted 
in an iron box, packed with nitrogenous and saline substances 
such as potash, bone dust, leather cuttings, and salt. The box is 
placed in a furnace, and allowed to remain for periods of from 
twelve to thirty-six hours, during which period the surface of the 
metal, to a depth of ^j to ^ in., is penetrated by the cement- 
ing materials, and converted into steel. The work is then thrown 
into water and quenched. 

A muffle furnace, employed for annealing, hardening and 
tempering is shown in fig. 1 ; the heat being obtained by means 




Fig. 1. — Automatic Oil Muffle Furnace. 

of petroleum, which is contained in the tank A, and is kept under 
pressure by pumping at intervals with the wooden handle, so 
that when the valve B is opened the oil is vaporized by passing 
through a heating coil at the furnace entrance, and when ignited 
burns fiercely as a gas flame. This passes into the furnace 
through the two holes, C, C, and plays under and up around the 



muffle D, standing on a fireclay slab. The doorway is closed by 
two fireclay blocks at E. A temperature of over 2000 F. can be 
obtained in furnaces of this class, and the heat is of course under 
perfect control. 

A reverberatory type of gas furnace, shown in fig. 2, differs 
from the oil furnace in having the flames brought down through 
the roof, by pipes A,A,A, playing on work laid on the fireclay 
slab B, thence passing under this and out through the elbow- 




Fig. 2. — Reverberatory Furnace, 

pipe C. The hinged doors, D, give a full opening to the interior 
of the furnace. It will be noticed in both these furnaces (by 
Messrs Fletcher, Russell & Co., Ltd.) that the iron casing is a 
mere shell, enclosing very thick firebrick linings, to retain the 
heat effectively. (J. G. H.) 

ANNECY, the chief town of the department of Haute Savoie 
in France. Pop. (1906) 10,763. It is situated at a height of 
1470 ft., at the northern end of the lake of Annecy, and is 25 m. 
by rail N.E. of Aix les Bains. The surrounding country presents 
many scenes of beauty. The town itself is a pleasant residence, 
and contains a 16th century cathedral church, an 18th century 
bishop's palace, a 14th-! 6th century castle (formerly the resi- 
dence of the counts of the Genevois), and the reconstructed 
convent of the Visitation, wherein now reposes the body of St 
Francois de Sales (born at the castle of Sales, close by, in 1 567 ; 
died at Lyons in 1622), who held the see from 1602 to 1622. 
There is also a public library, with 20,000 volumes, and various 
scientific collections, and a public garden, with a statue of the 
chemist Berthollet (1748-1822), who was born not far off. The 
bishop's see of Geneva was transferred hither in 1535, after the 
Reformation, but suppressed in 1801, though revived in 1822. 
There are factories of linen and cotton goods, and of felt hats, 
paper mills, and a celebrated bell foundry at Annecy le Vieux. 
This last-named place existed in Roman times. Annecy itself 
was in the 10th century the capital of the counts of the Genevois, 
from whom it passed in 1401 to the counts of Savoy, and became 
French in i860 on the annexation of Savoy. 

The Lake of Annecy is about 9 m. in length by a m. in 
breadth, its surface being 1465 ft. above the level of the sea. 
It discharges its waters, by means of the Thioux canal, into the 
Fier, a tributary of the Rhone. (W. A. B. C.) 

ANNELIDA, a name derived from J. B. P. Lamarck's term 
AnnMides, now used to denote a major phylum or division of 
coelomate invertebrate animals. Annelids are segmented worms, 
and differ from the Arthropoda (q.v.), which they closely resemble 
in many respects, by the possession of a portion of the coelom 
traversed by the alimentary canal. In the latter respect, and ir* 
the fact that they frequently develop by a metamorphosis, they 
approach the Mollusca (q.v.), but they differ from that group 
notably in the occurrence of metameric segmentation affecting 
many of the systems of organs. The body- wall is highly muscular 
and, except in a few probably specialized cases, possesses 
chitinous spines, the setae, which are secreted by the ectoderm 
and are embedded in pits of the skin. They possess a modi- 
fied anterior end, frequently with special sense organs, forming 
a head, a segmented nervous system, consisting of a pair 
of anterior, dorsally-placed ganglia, a ring surrounding the 



ANNET— ANNEXATION 



73 



alimentary canal, and a double ventral ganglionated chain, a 
definite vascular system, an excretory system consisting of 
nephridia, and paired generative organs formed from the coelomic 
epithelium. They are divided as follows: (i) Haplodrili (q.v.) 
or Archiannelida; (2) Chaetopoda (q.v.); (3) Myzostomida (q.v.), 
probably degenerate Polychaeta; (4) Hirudinea (see Chaetopoda 
and Leech); (5) Echiuroidea (q.v.). (P. CM.) 

ANNET, PETER (1693-1769), English deist,issaid to have been 
born at Liverpool. A schoolmaster by profession, he became 
prominent owing to his attacks on orthodox theologians, and his 
membership of a semi-theologkal debating society, the Robin 
Hood Society, which met at the " Robin Hood and Little John " 
in Butcher Row. To him has been attributed a work called A 
History of theManafterGod'sownHeart (1 761), intended to show 
that George II. was insulted by a current comparison with David. 
The book is said to have inspired Voltaire's Saul. It is also 
attributed to one John Noorthouck (Noorthook) . In 1 763 he was 
condemned for blasphemous libel in his paper called the Free 
Enquirer (nine numbers only). After his release he kept a small 
school in Lambeth, one of his pupils being James Stephen (1758- 
1832), who became master in Chancery. Annet died on the 18th 
of January 1769. He stands between the earlier philosophic 
deists and the later propagandists of Paine's school, and " seems 
to have been the first freethought lecturer " (J. M. Robertson) ; 
his essays (A Collection of the Tracts of a certain Free Enquirer, 
1 739-1 745) are forcible but lack refinement. He invented a 
system of shorthand (2nd ed., with a copy of verses by Joseph 
Priestley). 

ANNEXATION (Lat. ad, to, and nexus, joining), in interna- 
tional law, the act by which a state adds territory to its dominions ; 
the term is also used generally as a synonym for acquisition. The 
assumption of a protectorate over another state, or of a sphere of 
influence, is not strictly annexation, the latter implying the 
complete displacement in the annexed territory of the government 
or state by which it was previously ruled. Annexation, may be 
the consequence of a voluntary cession from one state to another, 
or of conversion from a protectorate or sphere of influence, or of 
mere occupation in uncivilized regions, or of conquest. The 
cession of Alsace-Lorraine to Germany by France, although 
brought about by the war of 1870, was for the purposes of interna- 
tional law a voluntary cession. Under the treaty of the 17th of 
December 1885, between the French republic and the queen of 
Madagascar, a French protectorate was established over this 
island. In 1896 this protectorate was converted by France into 
an annexation, and Madagascar then became " French territory." 
The formal annexation of Bosnia-Herzegovina by Austria (Oct. 5, 
1908) was an unauthorized conversion of an " occupation " 
authorized by the Treaty of Berlin (1878), which had, however, 
for years operated as a de facto annexation. A recent case of 
conquest was that effected by the South African War of 1899- 
1902, in which the Transvaal republic and the Orange Free 
State were extinguished, first de facto by occupation of the whole 
of their territory, and then dejure by terms of surrender entered 
into by the Boer generals acting as a government. 

By annexation, as between civilized peoples, the annexing state 
takes over the whole succession with the rights and obligations 
attaching to the ceded territory, subject only to any modifying 
conditions contained in the treaty of cession. These, however, 
are binding only as between the parties to them. In the case of 
the annexation of the territories of the Transvaal republic and 
Orange Free State, a rather complicated situation arose out of 
the facts, on the one hand, that the ceding states closed their own 
existence and left no recourse to third parties against the previous 
ruling authority, and, on the other, that, having no means owing 
to the de facto British occupation, of raising money by taxation, 
the dispossessed governments raised money by selling certain 
securities, more especially a large holding of shares in the South 
African Railway Company, to neutral purchasers. The British 
government repudiated these sales as having been made by a 
government which the British government had already displaced. 
The question of at what point, in a war of conquest, the state 
succession becomes operative is one of great delicacy. As early 



as the 6th of January 1900, the high commissioner at Cape Town 
issued a proclamation giving notice that H. M. government would 
" not recognize as valid or effectual " any conveyance, transfer 
or transmission of any property made by the government of the 
Transvaal republic or Orange Free State subsequently to the 10th 
of October 1899, the date of the commencement of the war. A 
proclamation forbidding transactions with a state which might 
still be capable of maintaining its independence could obviously 
bind only those subject to the authority of the state issuing it. 
Like paper blockades (see Blockade) and fictitious occupations 
of territory, such premature proclamations are viewed by interna- 
tional jurists as not being jure gentium. The proclamation was 
succeeded, on the 9th of March 1900, by another of the high 
commissioner at Cape Town, reiterating the notice, but confining 
it to " lands, railways, mines or mining rights." And on the 1st 
of September 1900 Lord Roberts proclaimed at Pretoria the 
annexation of the territories of the Transvaal republic to the 
British dominions. That the war continued for nearly two years 
after this proclamation shows how fictitious the claim of annexa- 
tion was. The difficulty which arose out of the transfer of the 
South African Railway shares held by the Transvaal government 
was satisfactorily terminated by the purchase by the British 
government of the total capital of the company from the different 
groups of shareholders (see on this case, Sir Thomas Barclay, Law 
Quarterly Review, July 1905; and Professor Westlake, in the same 
Review, October 1905). 

In a judgment of the judicial committee of the privy council in 
1899 (Coote v. Sprigg, A.C. 572), Lord Chancellor Halsbury made 
an important distinction as regards the obligations of state 
succession. The case in question was a claim of title against the 
crown, represented by the government of Cape Colony. It was 
made by persons holding a concession of certain rights in eastern 
Pondoland from a native chief. Before the grantees had taken up 
their grant by acts of possession, Pondoland was annexed to Cape 
Colony. The colonial government refused to recognize the grant 
on different grounds, the chief of them being that the concession 
conferred no legal rights before the annexation and therefore 
could confer none afterwards, a sufficiently good ground in itself. 
The judicial committee, however, rested its decision chiefly on the 
allegation that the acquisition of the territory was an act of state 
and that " no municipal court had authority to enforce such an 
obligation " as the duty of the new government to respect existing 
titles. " It is no answer," said Lord Halsbury, " to say that by 
the ordinary principles of international law private property is 
respected by the sovereign which accepts the cession and assumes 
the duties and legal obligations of the former sovereign with 
respect to such private property within the ceded territory. All 
that can be meant by such a proposition is that according to the 
well-understood rules of international law a change of sovereignty 
by cession ought not to affect private property, but no municipal 
tribunal has authority to enforce such an obligation. And if 
there is either an express or a well-understood bargain between 
the ceding potentate and the government to which the cession is 
made that private property shall be respected, that is only a 
bargain which can be enforced by sovereign against sovereign in 
the ordinary course of diplomatic pressure." In an editorial note 
on this case the Law Quarterly Review of Jan. 1900 (p. 1), 
dissenting from the view of the judicial committee that "no 
municipal tribunal has authority to enforce such an obligation," 
the writer observes that "we can read this only as meant to lay 
down that, on the annexation of territory even by peaceable 
cession, there is a total abeyance of justice until the will of the 
annexing power is expressly made known; and that, although 
the will of that power is commonly to respect existing private 
rights, there is no rule or presumption to that effect of which any 
court must or indeed can take notice." So construed the doctrine 
is not only contrary to international law, but according to so 
authoritative an exponent of the common law as Sir F. Pollock, 
there is no warrant for it in English common law. 

An interesting point of American constitutional law has arisen 
out of the cession of the Philippines to the United States, through 
the fact that the federal constitution does not lend itself to the 



74 



ANNIC£ltIS-k/\NNONA 



exercise by the federal congress of unlimited powers, such as are 
vested in the British parliament. The sole authority for the 
powers of the federal congress is a written constitution with 
defined 'powers. Anything done in excess of those powers is null 
and void. The Supreme Court of the United States, on the other 
hand, has declared that, by the constitution, a government is 
ordained and established " for the United States of America " 
and not for countries Outside their limits (Ross's Case, 140 U.S. 
453, 464), and that no such power to legislate for annexed 
territories as that vested in the British crown in council is enjoyed 
by the president of the United States (Field v. Clark, 143 U.S. 640, 
692). Every detail connected with the administration of the 
territories acquired from Spain Under the treaty of Paris 
(December 10, 1898) has given rise to minute discussion. 

See Carman F. Randolph, Law and Policy of Annexation (New York 
and London, 1901); Charles Henry Butler, Treaty-making Power of 
the United States (New York, 1902), voL.i. p. 79 et seq. (T. Ba.) 

> ANNICERIS, a Greek philosopher of the Cyrenaic school. 
There is no certain information as to his date, but from the 
statement that he was a disciple of Paraebates it seems likely 
that he was a contemporary of Alexander the Great. A follower of 
Aristippus, he denied that pleasure is the general end of human 
life. To each separate action there is a particular end, namely 
the pleasure which actually results from it Secondly, pleasure 
is not merely the negation of pain, inasmuch as death ends all 
pain and yet cannot be regarded as pleasure. There is, however, 
an absolute pleasure in certain virtues such as belong to the love 
of country, parents and friends. In these relations a man will 
have pleasure, even though it may result in painful and even 
fatal consequences. Friendship is not merely for the satisfaction 
of our needs, but is in itself a source of pleasure. He maintains 
further, in opposition to most of the Cyrenaic school, that 
wisdom or prudence alone is an insufficient guarantee against 
error. The wise man is he who has acquired a habit of wise 
action; human wisdom is liable to lapses at any moment. 
Diogenes Laertius says that Anniceris ransomed Plato from 
Dionysius, tyrant of Syracuse, for twenty minas. If we are 
right in placing Anniceris in the latter half of the 4th century, 
it is clear that the reference here is to an earlier Anniceris, who, 
according to Aelian, was a celebrated charioteer. 

ANNING, MARY (1 799-1847), English fossil-collector, the 
daughter of Richard Anning, a cabinet-maker, was born at Lyme 
Regis in May 1 799. Her father was one of the earliest collectors 
and dealers in fossils, obtained chiefly from the Lower Lias in that 
famous locality. When but a child in 181 1 she discovered the 
first specimen of Ichthyosaurus which was brought into scientific 
notice; in 1821 she found remains of a new saurian, the 
Plesiosaurus, and in 1828 she procured, for the first time in England, 
remains of a pterodactyl (Dimorphodon) . She died on the 9th 
of March 1S47. 

ANNISTON, a city and the county seat of Calhoun county, 
Alabama, U.S.A., in the north-eastern part of the state, about 
63 m. E. by N. of Birmingham. Pop. (1890) 9998; (1900), 
9695, of whom 3669 were of negro descent: dcjio census) 
12,794. Anniston is served by the Southern, the Seaboard 
Air Line, and the Louisville & Nashville railways. The city is 
situated on the slope of Blue Mountain, a chain of the Blue 
Ridge, and is a health resort. It is the seat of the Noble Institute 
(for girls), established in 1886 by Samuel Noble (1834-1888), a 
wealthy iron-founder, and of the Alabama Presbyterian College 
for Men (1905). There are vast quantities of iron ore in the 
vicinity of the city, the Coosa coal-fields being only 25 m. distant. 
Anniston is an important manufacturing city, the principal 
industries being the manufacture of iron, steei and cotton. In 
1905 the city's factory products were valued at $2,525,455. 
An iron furnace was established on the site of Anniston during the 
Civil War, but it was destroyed by the federal troops in 1865; 
and in 1872 it was rebuilt on a much larger scale. The city was 
founded in 1 8 7 2 as a private enterprise, by the Woodstock Iron 
Company, organized by Samuel Noble and Gen. Daniel Tyler 
(1799-1882); but it was not opened for general settlement until 
twelve years later. It was chartered as a city in 1879. 



ANNO, or HannO, SAINT (e. 1010-1075), archbishop of Cologne, 
belonged to a Swabian family, and was educated at Bamberg. 
He became confessor to the emperor Henry III., who appointed 
him archbishop of Cologne in 1056. He took a prominent part in 
thegovernmentof Germany during the minority of King Henry IV., 
and was the leader of the party which in 1062 seized the person 
of Henry, and deprived his mother, the empress Agnes, of 
power. For a short time Anno exercised the chief authority in 
the kingdom, but he was soon obliged to share this with Adalbert, 
archbishop of Bremen, retaining for himself the supervision of 
Henry's education and the title of magister. The office of 
chancellor of the kingdom of Italy was at this period regarded as 
an appanage of the archbishopric of CoIogne,and this was probably 
the reason why Anno had a considerable share in settling the 
papal dispute in 1064. He declared Alexander II. to be the 
rightful pope at a synod held at Mantua in May 1064, and took 
other steps to secure his recognition. Returning to Germany, 
he found the chief power in the hands of Adalbert, and as he was 
disliked by the young king, he left the court but returned and 
regained some of his former influence when Adalbert fell from 
power in 1066. He succeeded in putting down a rising against 
his authority in Cologne in 1074, and it was reported he had 
allied himself with William the Conqueror, king of England, 
against the emperor. Having cleared himself of this charge, 
Anno took no further part in public business, and died at Cologne 
on the 4th of December 1075. He was buried in the monastery of 
Siegburg and was canonized in n 83 by Pope Lucius III. He 
was a founder of monasteries and a builder of churches, advocated 
clerical celibacy and was a strict disciplinarian. He was a man 
of great energy and ability, whose action in recognizing Alexander 
II. was of the utmost consequence for Henry IV. and for 
Germany. 

There is a Vita Annonis, written about 1100, by a monk of Sieg- 
burg, but this is of slight value, it appears in the Monumenta 
Germaniae historica: Scriptores, Bd. xi. (Hanover and Berlin, 
1 826-1892). There is an "Epistola ad monachos Malmundarienses" 
by Anno in the Neues Archiv der Gesellschaft fur alter e deutsche 
Geschichtskunde, Bd. xiv. (Hanover, 1876 seq.). See also the 
Annolied, or Incerti poetae Teutonics rhythmus de S. Anndne, written 
about 1 180, and edited by J. Kehrein (Frankfort, 1865); Th. 
Lindner, Anno II. der Heilige, Erzbischof von Koln (Leipzig, 1869). 

ANNOBON, or Anno Bom, an island in the Gulf of Guinea, in 
1° 24' S. and 5 35' E., belonging to Spain. It is no m. S.W. of 
St Thomas. Its length is about 4 m., its breadth 2, and its 
area 6f sq. m. Rising in some parts nearly 3000 ft. above 
the sea, it presents a succession of beautiful valleys and 
steep mountains, covered with rich woods and luxuriant 
vegetation. The inhabitants, some 3000 in number, are negroes 
and profess belief in the Roman Catholic faith. The 
chief town and residence of the governor is called St Antony 
(San Antonio de Praia). The roadstead is tolerably safe, and 
passing vessels take advantage of it in order to obtain water 
and fresh provisions, of which Annobon contains an abundant 
supply. The island was discovered by the Portuguese on the 
1st of January 1473, from which circumstance it received its 
name ( = New Year). Annobon, together with Fernando Po, was 
ceded to Spain by the Portuguese in 1 7 78. The islanders revolted 
against their new masters and a state of anarchy ensued, leading, 
it is averred, to an arrangement by which the island was adminis- 
tered by a body of five natives, each of whom held the office of 
governor during the period that elapsed till ten ships touched at 
the island. In the latter part of the 19th century the authority 
of Spain was re-established. 

ANNONA (from Lat. annus, year), in Roman mythology, the 
personification of the produce of the year. She is represented 
in works of art, often together with Ceres, with a cornucopia 
(horn of plenty) in her arm, and a ship's prow in the back- 
ground, indicating the transport of grain over the sea. She 
frequently occurs on coins of the empire, standing between a 
modius (corn-measure) and the prow of a galley, with ears of corn 
in one liand and a cornucopia in the other; sometimes she holds 
a rudder or an anchor. The Latin word itself has various mean- 
ings: (1) the produce of the year's harvest; (2) all means of 



ANNONAY— ANNUITY 



75 



subsistence, especially grain stored in the public granaries for 
provisioning the city; (3) the market-price of commodities, 
especially corn; (4) a direct tax in kind, levied in republican 
times in several provinces, chiefly employed in imperial times 
for distribution amongst officials and the support of the soldiery. 

In order to ensure a supply of corn sufficient to enable it to be 
sold at a very low price, it was procured in large quantities from 
Umbria, Etruria and Sicily. Almost down to the times of the 
empire, the care of the corn-supply formed part of the aedile's 
duties, although in 440 B.C. (if the statement in Livy iv. 12, 13 
is correct, which is doubtful) the senate appointed a special 
officer, called praefectus annonae, with greatly extended powers. 
As a consequence of the second Punic War, Roman agriculture 
was at a standstill; accordingly, recourse was had to Sicily and 
Sardinia (the first two Roman provinces) in order to keep up the 
supply of corn; a tax of one- tenth was imposed on it, and its 
export to any country except Italy forbidden. The price at 
which the corn was sold was always moderate; the corn law of 
Gracchus (123 B.C.) made it absurdly low, and Clodius (58 B.C.) 
bestowed it gratuitously. The number of the recipients of this 
free gift grew so enormously, that both Caesar and Augustus were 
obliged to reduce it. From the time of Augustus to the end of 
the empire the number of those who were entitled to receive a 
monthly allowance of corn on presenting a ticket was 200,000. 
In the 3rd century, bread formed the dole. A praefectus annonae 
was appointed by Augustus to superintend the corn-supply; he 
was assisted by a large staff in Rome and the provinces, and had 
jurisdiction in all matters connected with the corn-market. The 
office lasted till the latest times of the empire. 

ANNONAY, a town of south-eastern France, in the north of the 
department of Ardeche, 50 m. S. of Lyons by the Paris-Lyons 
railway. Pop. (1006) 15,403. Annonay is built on the hill 
overlooking the meeting of the deep gorges of the Deome and the 
Cance, the waters of which supply power to the factories of the 
town. By means of a dam across the Ternay, an affluent of the 
Deome, to the north-west of the town, a reservoir is provided, 
in which an additional supply of water, for both industrial and 
domestic purposes, is stored. At Annonay there is an obelisk 
in honour of the brothers Montgolfier, inventors of the balloon, 
who were natives of the place. A tribunal of commerce, a board 
of trade-arbitrators, a branch of the Bank of France, and 
chambers of commerce and of arts and manufactures are among 
the public institutions. Annonay is the principal industrial 
centre of its department, the chief manufactures being those of 
leather, especially for gloves, paper, silk and silk goods, and 
flour. Chemical manures, glue, gelatine, brushes, chocolate and 
candles are also produced. 

ANNOY (like the French ennui, a word traced by etymologists 
to a Lat. phrase, in odio esse, to be " in hatred " or hateful of 
someone), to vex or affect with irritation. In the sense of 
'' nuisance," the noun " annoyance," apart from its obvious 
meaning, is found in the English " Jury of Annoyance " 
appointed by an act of 17 54 to report upon obstructions in the 
highways. 

ANNUITY (from Lat. annus, a year), a periodical payment, 
made annually, or at more frequent intervals, either for a fixed 
term of years, or during the continuance of a given life, or a com- 
bination of lives. In technical language an annuity is said to be 
payable for an assigned status, this being a general word chosen 
in preference to such words as " time," " term " or " period," 
because it may include more readily either a term of years 
certain, or a life or combination of lives. The magnitude of the 
annuity is the sum to be paid (and received) in the course of each 
year. Thus, if £100 is to be received each year by a person, he is 
said to have " an annuity of £100." If the payments are made 
half-yearly, it is sometimes said that he has " a half-yearly 
annuity of £100 "; but to avoid ambiguity, it is more commonly 
said he has an annuity of £100, payable by half-yearly instal- 
ments. The former expression, if clearly understood, is prefer- 
able on account of its brevity. So we may have quarterly, 
monthly, weekly, daily annuities, when the annuity is payable 
by quarterly, monthly, weekly or daily instalments. An annuity- 



is considered as accruing during each instant of the status for 
which it is enjoyed, although it is only payable at fixed intervals. 
If the enjoyment of an annuity is postponed until after the lapse 
of a certain number of years, the annuity is said to be deferred. 
If an annuity, instead of being payable at the end of each year, 
half-year, &c, is payable in advance, it is called an annuity-due. 

If an annuity is payable for a term of years independent of 
any contingency, it is called an annuity certain; if it is to con- 
tinue for ever, it is called a perpetuity; and if in. the latter case 
it is not to commence until after a term of years, it is called a 
deferred perpetuity. An annuity depending on the continuance 
of an assigned life or lives, is sometimes called a life annuity; 
but more commonly the simple term " annuity " is understood 
to mean a life annuity, unless the . contrary is stated. A life 
annuity, to cease in any event after a certain term of years, is 
called a temporary annuity. The holder of an annuity is called 
an annuitant, and the person on whose life the annuity depends 
is called the nominee. 

If not otherwise stated, it is always understood that an annuity 
is payable yearly, and that the annual payment (or rent, as it is 
sometimes called) is £1. It is, however, customary to consider 
the annual payment to be, not £1, but simply 1, the reader 
supplying whatever monetary unit he pleases, whether pound, 
dollar, franc, Thaler, &c. 

The annuity is the totality of the payments to be made (and 
received), and is so understood by all writers on the subject; 
but some have also used the word to denote an individual 
payment (or rent), speaking, for instance, of the first or second 
year's annuity, — a practice which is calculated to introduce 
confusion and should therefore be carefully avoided. 

Instances of perpetuities are the dividends upon the public 
stocks in England, France and some other countries. Thus, 
although it is usual to speak of £100 consols, the reality is the 
yearly dividend which the government pays by quarterly instal- 
ments. The practice of the French in this, as in many other 
matters, is more logical. In speaking of their public funds {rentes) 
they do not mention the ideal capital sum, but speak of the 
annuity or annual payment that is received by the public 
creditor. Other instances of perpetuities are the incomes derived 
from the debenture stocks of railway companies, also the feu- 
duties commonly payable on house property in Scotland. The 
number of years' purchase which the perpetual annuities granted 
by a government or a railway company realize in the open 
market, forms a very simple test of the credit of the various 
governments or railways. 

Terminable Annuities are employed in the system of British 
public finance as a means of reducing the National Debt (q.v.). 
This result is attained by substituting for a perpetual annual 
charge (or one lasting until the capital which it represents can 
be paid off en bloc), an annual charge of a larger amount, but 
lasting for a short term. The latter is so calculated as to pay off, 
during its existence, the capital which it replaces, with interest 
at an assumed or agreed rate, and under specified conditions. 
The practical effect of the substitution of a terminable annuity 
for an obligation of longer currency is to bind the present genera- 
tion of citizens to increase its own obligations in the present and 
near future in order to diminish those of its successors. This 
end might be attained in other ways; for instance,, by setting 
aside out of revenue a fixed annual sum for the purchase and 
cancellation of debt (Pitt's method, in intention), or by fixing 
the annual debt charge at a figure sufficient to provide a margin 
for reduction of the principal of the debt beyond the amount 
required for interest (Sir Stafford Northcote's method), or by 
providing an annual surplus of revenue over expenditure (the 
" Old Sinking Fund "), available for the same purpose. All 
these methods have been tried in the course of British financial 
history, and the second and third of them are still employed; 
but on the whole the method of terminable annuities has been 
the one preferred by chancellors of the exchequer and by parlia- 
ment. 

Terminable annuities, as employed by the British government, 
fall under two heads: — (a) Those issued to, or held by private 



76 



ANNUITY 



persons; (6) those held by government departments or by funds 
under government control. The important difference between 
these two classes is that an annuity under (a), once created, 
cannot be modified except with the holder's consent, i.e. is 
practically unalterable without a breach of public faith; whereas 
an annuity under (b) can, if necessary, be altered by inter- 
departmental arrangement under the authority of parliament. 
Thus annuities of class (a) fulfil most perfectly the object of the 
system as explained above; while those of class (b) have the 
advantage that in times of emergency their operation can be 
suspended without any inconvenience or breach of faith, with 
the result that the resources of government can on such occasions 
be materially increased, apart from any additional taxation. 
For this purpose it is only necessary to retain as a charge on the 
income of the year a sum equal to the (smaller) perpetual charge 
which was originally replaced by the (larger) terminable charge, 
whereupon the difference between the two amounts is temporarily 
released, while ultimately the increased charge is extended for 
a period equal to that for which it is suspended. Annuities of 
class (a) were first instituted in 1808, but are at present mainly 
regulated by an act of 1829. They may be granted either for 
a specified life, or two lives, or for an arbitrary term of years; 
and the consideration for them may take the form either of cash 
or of government stock, the latter being cancelled when the 
annuity is set up. Annuities (b) held by government departments 
date from 1863. They have been created in exchange for per- 
manent debt surrendered for cancellation, the principal opera- 
tions having been effected in 1863, 1867, 1870, 1874, 1883 and 
1899. Annuities of this class do not affect the public at all, 
except of course in their effect on the market for government 
securities. They are merely financial queries between the
government, in its capacity as the banker of savings banks and 
other funds, and itself, in the capacity of custodian of the national 
finances. Savings bank depositors are not concerned with the 
manner in which government invests their money, their rights 
being confined to the receipt of interest and the repayment of 
deposits upon specified conditions. The case is, however, 
different as regards forty millions of consols (included in the 
above figures), belonging to suitors in chancery, which were 
cancelled and replaced by a terminable annuity in 1883. As the 
liability to the suitors in that case was for a specified amount of 
stock, special arrangements were made to ensure the ultimate 
replacement of the precise amount of stock cancelled. 

Annuity Calculations— The mathematical theory of life 
annuities is based upon a knowledge of the rate of mortality 
among mankind in general, or among the particular class of 
persons on whose lives the annuities depend. It involves a 
mathematical treatment too complicated to be dealt with fully 
in this place, and in practice it has been reduced to the form of 
tables, which vary in different places, but which are easily 
accessible. The history of the subject may, however, be sketched. 
Abraham Demoivre, in his Annuities on Lives, propounded a very 
simple law of mortality which is to the effect that, out of 86 
children born alive, 1 will die every year until the last dies 
between the ages of 85 and 86. This law agreed sufficiently well 
at the middle ages of life with the mortality deduced from the 
best observations of his time; but, as observations became more 
exact, the approximation was found to be not sufficiently close. 
This was particularly the case when it was desired to obtain the 
value of joint life, contingent or other complicated benefits. 
Therefore Demoivre's law is entirely devoid of practical utility. 
No simple formula has yet been discovered that will represent 
the rate of mortality with sufficient accuracy. 

The rate of mortality at each age is, therefore, in practice 
usually determined by a series of figures deduced from observa- 
tion ; and the value of an annuity at any age is found from these 
numbers by means of a series of arithmetical calculations. The 
mortality table here given is an example of modern use. 

The first writer who is known to have attempted to obtain, on 
correct mathematical principles, the value of a life annuity, was 
Jan De Witt, grand pensionary of Holland and West Friesland. 
Our knowledge of his writings on the subject is derived from two 



papers contributed by Frederick Hendriks to the Assurance 
Magazine, vol. ii. p. 222, and vol. iii. p. 93. The former of these 
contains a translation of De Witt's report upon the value of life 
annuities, which was prepared in consequence of the resolution 
passed by the states-general, on the 25th of April 1671, to nego- 
tiate funds by life annuities, and which was distributed to the 
members on the 30th of July 1671. The latter contains the 
translation of a number of letters addressed by De Witt td 
Burgomaster Johan Hudde, bearing dates from September 1670 
to October 167 1. The existence of De Witt's report was well 
known among his contemporaries, and Hendriks collected a 
number of extracts from various authors referring to it; but the 

Table of Mortality— Hm, Healthy Lives — Male. 

Number Living and Dying at each Age, out of 10,000 
entering at Age 10. 



Age. 


Living. 


Dying. 


Age. 


Living. 


Dying. 


10 


1 0,000 


79 


54 


6791 


129 


11 


9,921 





55 


6662 


153 


12 


9,921 


40 


56 


6509 


150 


13 


9,881 


35 


57 


6359 


152 


14 


9,846 


40 


58 


6207 


156 


15 


9,806 


22 


59 


6051 


153 


16 


9.7 8 4 





60 


5898 


184 


17 


9.784 


41 


61 


5714 


186 


18 


9,743 


59 


62 


5528 


191 


19 


9,684 


68 


63 


5337 


200 


20 


9,616 


56 


64 


5137 


206 


21 


9,56o 


67 


65 


4931 


215 


22 


9,493 


59 


66 


4716 


220 


23 


9,434 


73 


67 


4496 


220 


24 


9,36i 


64 


68 


4276 


237 


25 


9,297 


48 


69 


4039 


246 


26 


9,249 


64 


70 


3793 


213 


27 


9,i85 


60 


71 


358o 


222 


28 


9,125 


71 


72 


3358 


268 


29 


9,o54 


67 


73 


3090 


243 


3° 


8,987 


74- 


74 


2847 


300 


3 1 


8,913 


65 


75 


2547 


241 


3 2 


8,848 


74 


76 


2306 


245 


33 


8,774 


73 


77 


2061 


224 


34 


8,701 . 


76 


78 


1837 


226 


35 


8,625 


71 


79 


1611 


219 


36 


8,554 


75 


80 


1392 


I96 


37 


8,479 


81 


81 


1 196 


191 


38 


8,398 


87 


82 


1005 


173 


39 


8,311 


88 


83 


832 


172 


40 


8,223 


81 


84 


660 


119 


4 1 


8,142 


85, 


85 


54i 


"7 , 


4 2 


8,057 


87 


86 


424 


92 


43 


7,97° 


84 


87 


332 


72 


44 


7,886 


93 


88 


260 


74 ; ' 


45 


7,793 


97 


89 


186 


36 


46 


7,696 


96 


.90 


150 


34 


47 


7,600 


107 


91 


116 


36 


48 


7,493 


106 


92 


80 


36 


49 


7,387 


"3 


93 


44 


29 


50 


7,274 


120 


94 


15 





51 


7,154 


124 


95 


15 


5 


52 


7,030 


120 


96 


10 


10 


53 


6,910 


119 









report is not contained in any collection of his works extant, and 
had been entirely lost for 180 years, until Hendriks discovered it 
among the state archives of Holland in company with the letters 
to Hudde. It is a document of extreme interest, and (notwith- 
standing some inaccuracies in the reasoning) of very great merit, 
more especially considering that it was the very first document 
on the subject that was ever written. 

It appears that it had long been the practice in Holland for 
life annuities to be granted to nominees of any age, in the con- 
stant proportion of double the rate of interest allowed on stock; 
that is to say, if the towns were borrowing money at 6 %, they 
would be willing to grant a life annuity at 12 %, and so on. 
De Witt states that " annuities have been sold, even in the 
present century, first at six years' purchase, then at seven and 
eight; and that the majority of all life annuities now current 
at the country's expense were obtained at nine years' purchase "; 
but that the price had been increased in the course of a few 
years from eleven years' purchase to twelve, and from twelve to 



ANNUITY 



77 



fourteen. He also states that the rate of interest had been 
successively reduced from 6| to 5 %, and then to 4 %. The 
principal object of his report is to prove that, taking interest at 
4%, a life annuity was worth at least sixteen years' purchase; 
and, in fact, that an annuitant purchasing an annuity for the 
life of a young and healthy nominee at sixteen years' purchase, 
made an excellent bargain. It may be mentioned that he argues 
that it is more to the advantage, both of the country and of the 
private investor, that the public loans should be raised by way of 
grant of life annuities rather than perpetual annuities. It appears 
conclusively from De Witt's correspondence with Hudde, that 
the rate of mortality assumed as the basis of his calculations 
was deduced from careful examination of the mortality that had 
actually prevailed among the nominees on whose lives annuities 
had been granted in former years. De Witt appears to have 
come to the conclusion that the probability of death is the 
same in any half-year from the age of 3 to 53 inclusive; that 
in the next ten years, from 53 to 63, the probability is greater 
in the ratio of 3 to 2; that in the next ten years, from 63 to 73, 
it is greater in the ratio of 2 to 1 ; and in the next seven years, 
from 73 to 80, it is greater in the ratio of 3 to 1 ; and he places 
the limit of human life at 80. If a mortality table of the usual 
form is deduced from these suppositions, out of 212 persons 
alive at the age of 3, 2 will die every year up to 53, 3 in each of 
the ten years from 53 to 63, 4 in each of the next ten years from 
63 t0 73) an d 6 in each of the next seven years from 73 to 80, 
when all will be dead. 

De Witt calculates the value of an annuity in the following 
way. Assume that annuities on 10,000 lives each ten years of 
age, which satisfy the Hm mortality table, have been purchased. 
Of these nominees 79 will die before attaining the age of n, 
and no annuity payment will be made in respect of them; none 
will die between the ages of n and 12, so that annuities will be 
paid for one year on 0921 lives; 40 attain the age of 12 and 
die before 13, so that two payments will be made with respect 
to these lives. Reasoning in this way we see that the annuities 
on 35 of the nominees will be payable for three years; on 40 
for four years, and so on. Proceeding thus to the end of the 
table, 15 nominees attain the age of 95, 5 of whom die before 
the age of 96, so that 8s payments will be paid in respect of 
these 5 lives. Of the survivors all die before attaining the age 
of 97, so that the annuities on these lives will be payable for 86 
years. Having previously calculated a table of the values of 
annuities certain for every number of years up to 86, the value 
of all the annuities on the 10,000 nominees will be found by 
taking 40 times the value of an annuity for 2 years, 35 times 
the value of an annuity for 3 years, and so on — the last term 
being the value of 10 annuities for 86 years — and adding them 
together; and the value of an annuity on one of the nominees 
will then be found by dividing by 10,000. Before leaving the 
subject of De Witt, we may mention that we find in the corre- 
spondence a distinct suggestion of the law of mortality that 
bears the name of Demoivre. In De Witt's letter, dated the 
27th of October 1671 (Ass. Mag. vol. iii. p. 107), he speaks of a 
" provisional hypothesis " suggested by Hudde, that out of 
80 young lives (who, from the context, may be taken as of the 
age 6) about 1 dies annually. In strictness, therefore, the law 
in question might be more correctly termed Hudde's than 
Demoivre's. 

De Witt's report being thus of the nature of an unpublished 
state paper, although it contributed to its author's reputation, 
did not contribute to advance the exact knowledge of the 
subject; and the author to whom the credit must be given of 
first showing how to calculate the value of an annuity on correct 
principles is Edmund Halley. He gave the first approximately 
correct mortality table (deduced from the records of the numbers 
of deaths and baptisms in the city of Breslau), and showed how 
it might be employed to calculate the value of an annuity on 
the life of a nominee of any age (see Phil. Trans. 1693; Ass. 
Mag. vol. xviii.). 

Previously to Halley's time, and apparently for many years 
Subsequently, all dealings with life annuities were based upon 



mere conjectural estimates. The earliest known reference to 
any estimate of the value of life annuities rose out of the require- 
ments of the Falcidian law, which (40 B.C.) was adopted in the 
Roman empire, and which declared that a testator should not 
give more than three-fourths of his property in legacies, so that 
at least one-fourth must go to his legal representatives. It is 
easy to see how it would occasionally become necessary, while 
this law was in force, to value life annuities charged upon a 
testator's estate. Aemilius Macer (a.d. 230) states that the 
method which had been in common use at that time was as 
follows: — From the earliest age until 30 take 30 years' purchase, 
and for each age after 30 deduct 1 year. It is obvious that no 
consideration of compound interest can have entered into this 
estimate; and it is easy to see that it is equivalent to assuming 
that all persons who attain the age of 30 will certainly live to 
the age of 60, and then certainly die. Compared with this esti- 
mate, that which was propounded by the praetorian prefect 
Ulpian was a great improvement. His table is as follows: — 





Years' 




Years' 


Age. 


Purchase. 


Age. 


Purchase. 


Birth to 20 , 


30 


45 to 46 


14 


20 „ 25 


28 


46 „ 47 


13 


25 - 30 


25 


47 ., 48 . 


12 


30 „ 35 


22 


48 „ 49 


11 


35 .. 40 


20 


49 - 50 


10 


40 „ 41 


19 


50 „ 55 


9 


41 .- 42 


18 


55 .. 6o 


7 


42 „ 43 


17 


60 and 1 
upwards t 


5 


43 -. 44 


16 


44 .. 45 


15 







Here also we have no reason to suppose that the element of 
interest was taken into consideration; and the assumption, 
that between the ages of 40 and 50 each addition of a year to the 
nominee's age diminishes the value of the annuity by one year's 
purchase, is equivalent to assuming that there is no probability 
of the nominee dying between the ages of 40 and 50. Con- 
sidered, however, simply as a table of the average duration of 
life, the values are fairly accurate. At all events, no more 
correct estimate appears to have been arrived at until the close 
of the 17 th century. 

The mathematics of annuities has been very fully treated in 
Demoivre's Treatise on Annuities (1725); Simpson's Doctrine of 
Annuities and Reversions (1742); P. Gray, Tables and Formulae; 
Baily's Doctrine of Life Annuities; there are also innumerable 
compilations of Valuation Tables and Interest Tables, by means of 
which the value of an annuity at any age and any rate of interest 
may be found. See also the article Interest, and especially that on 
Insurance. 

Commutation tables, aptly so named in 1840 by Augustus 
De Morgan (see his paper " On the Calculation of Single Life 
Contingencies," Assurance Magazine, xii. 328), show the propor- 
tion in which a benefit due at one age ought to be changed, 
so as to retain the same value and be due at another age. The 
earliest known specimen of a commutation table is contained 
in William Dale's Introduction to the Study of the Doctrine of 
Annuities, published in 1772. A full account of this work is 
given by F. Hendriks in the second number of the Assurance 
Magazine, pp. 15-17. William Morgan's Treatise on Assurances, 
1779, also contains a commutation table. Morgan gives the 
table as furnishing a convenient means of checking the correct- 
ness of the values of annuities found by the ordinary process. 
It may be assumed that he was aware that the table might be 
used for the direct calculation of annuities; but he appears to 
have been ignorant of its other uses. 

The first author who fully developed the powers of the table 
was John Nicholas Tetens, a native of Schleswig, who in 1785, 
while professor of philosophy and mathematics at Kiel, published 
in the German language an Introduction to the Calculation of 
Life Annuities and Assurances. This work appears to have been 
quite unknown in England until E. Hendriks gave, in the first 
number of the Assurance Magazine, pp. 1-20 (Sept. 1850), an 
account of it, with a translation of the passages describing the 
construction and use of the commutation table, and a sketch 



7 8 



ANNULAR^-ANNUNZIO 



of the author's life and writings, to which we refer the reader 
who desires fuller information. It may be mentioned here that 
Tetens also gave only a specimen table, apparently not imagining 
that persons using his work would find it extremely useful to 
have a series of commutation tables, calculated and printed 
ready for use. 

The use of the commutation table was independently developed 
in England— apparently between the years 1788 and 181 1 — 
by George Barrett, of Petworth, Sussex, who was the son of a 
yeoman farmer, and was himself a village schoolmaster, and 
afterwards farm steward or bailiff. It has been usual to consider 
Barrett as the originator in England of the method of calculating 
the values of annuities by means of a commutation table, and 
this method is accordingly sometimes called Barrett's method. 
(It is also called the commutation method and the columnar 
method.) Barrett's method of calculating annuities was ex- 
plained by him to Francis Baily in the year 181 1, and was first 
made known to the wdrld in a paper written by the latter and 
read before the Royal Society in 181 2. 

By what has been universally considered an unfortunate 
error of judgment, this paper was not recommended by the 
council of the Royal Society to be printed, but it was given by 
Baily as an appendix to the second issue (in 18 13) of his work 
on life annuities and assurances., Barrett had calculated exten- 
sive tables, and with Baily's aid attempted to get them published 
by subscription, but without success; and the only printed 
tables calculated according to his manner, besides the specimen 
tables given by Baily, are the tables contained hi Babbage's 
Comparative View of the various Institutions for the Assurance of 
Lives, 1826. 

In the year 1825 Griffith Davies published his Tables of Life 
Contingencies , a work which contains, among others, two tables, 
which are confessedly derived from Baily's explanation of 
Barrett's tables. 

Those who desire to pursue the subject further can refer to the 
appendix to Baily's Life Annuities and Assurances, De Morgan's 
paper " On the Calculation of Single Life Contingencies," Assurance 
Magazine, xii. 348-349; Gray's Tables and Formulae, chap, viii.; 
the preface to Davies's Treatise on Annuities; also' Hendriks's 
papers in the Assurance Magazine, No. 1, p. I, and No. 2, p. 12; 
and in particular De Morgan's " Account of a Correspondence 
between Mr George Barrett and Mr Francis Baily," in the Assurance 
Magazine, vol. iv. p. 185. 

The principal commutation tables published in England are 
contained in the following works: — David Jones, Value of Annuities 
and Reversionary Payments, issued in parts by the Useful Knowledge 
Society, completed in 1843; Jenkin Jones, New Rate of Mortality, 
1843'; G. Davies, Treatise on Annuities, 1825 (issued 1855); David 
Chisholm, Commutation Tables, 1858; Nelson's Contributions to 
Vital Statistics, 1857; Jardine Henry, Government Life Annuity 
Commutation Tables, 1866 and 1873; Institute of Actuaries Life 
Tables, 1872; R. P. Hardy, Valuation Tables, 1873; and Dr William 
Farr's contributions to the sixth (1844), twelfth (1849), and twentieth 
(1857) Reports of the Registrar General in England (English Tables, 
I. 2), and to the English Life Table, 1864. 

The theory of annuities may be further studied in the discussions 
in the English Journal of the Institute of Actuaries. The institute 
was founded in the year 1,848, the first sessional meeting being held 
in January 1849. Its establishment has contributed in various ways 
to promote the study of the theory of life contingencies. Among 
these may be specified the following: — Before it was formed, students 
of the subject worked for the most part alone, and without any 
concert ; and when any person had made an improvement in the 
theory, it had little chance of becoming publicly known unless he 
wrote a format treatise on the whole subject. But the formation of 
the institute led to much greater interchange of opinion among 
actuaries, and afforded them a ready means of making known to 
their professional associates any improvements, real or supposed, 
that they thought they had made. Again, the discussions which 
follow the reading of papers before the institute have often served, 
first, to bring out into bold relief differences of opinion that, were 
previously unsuspected, and afterwards to soften down those differ- 
ences, — to correct extreme opinions in every direction, and to bring 
about a greater agreement of opinion on many important subjects. 
In no way, probably, have the objects of the institute been so 
effectually advanced as by the publication of its Journal. The first 
number of this work, which was originally called the Assurance 
Magazine, appeared in September 1850, and it has been continued 
quarterly down to the present time. It was originated by the public 
gpirit of two well-known actuaries (Mr Charles Jellicoe and Mr 
Samuel Brown), and was adopted as the organ of the Institute of 



Actuaries in the year 18.52, and called the Assurance Magazine and 
Journal of the Institute of Actuaries, Mr Jellicoe continuing to be trie 
editor, — a post he held until the year 1867, when he was succeeded 
by Mr T. B. Spragiie (who contributed to the 9th edition of this 
Encyclopaedia an elaborate article on " Annuities," on which the 
above account is based). The name was again changed in 1866, the 
words " Assurance Magazine " being dropped; but in the following 
year it was considered desirable to resume these, for the purpose of 
showing the continuity of the publication, and it is now called the 
Journal of the Institute of Actuaries and Assurance Magazine. This 
work contains not only the papers read before the institute (to which 
have been appended of late years short abstracts of the discussions on 
them), and many original papers which were unsuitable for reading, 
together with correspondence, but also reprints of many papers 
published elsewhere, which from various causes had become difficult 
of access to the ordinary reader, among which may be specified 
various papers which originally appeared in the Philosophical 
Transactions , the Philosophical Magazine, the Mechanics' Magazine, 
and 1 the Companion to the Almanac; also translations of various 
papers from the French, German, and Danish. Among the useful 
objects which the continuous publication of the Journal of the 
institute has served, we may specify in particular two: — that any 
supposed improvement in the theory was effectually submitted to 
the criticisms of the whole actuarial profession, and its real value 
speedily discovered; and that any real improvement, whether 
great or small, being placed on record, successive writers have been 
able, one after the other, to take it up and develop it, each com- 
mencing where the previous one Had left off. 

ANNULAR, ANNULATE, &c. (Lat. annulus, a ring), ringed, 
"Annulate" is used in botany and zoology in connexion with 
certain plants, worms, &c. (see Annelida), either marked with 
rings or composed of ring-like segments. The word " annulated " 
is also used in, heraldry and architecture. An annulated cross 
is one with the points ending in an "annulet " (an heraldic ring, 
supposed to be taken from a coat of mail), while the annulet in 
architecture is a small fillet round a column, which encircles the 
lower part of the Doric capital immediately above the neck or 
trachelium. The word " annulus " (f or " ring ") is itself used tech- 
nically ingeometry, astronomy, &c, and the adjective " annular " 
corresponds, An annular space is that between an inner and outer 
ring. The annular finger is the ring finger. An annular eclipse is 
an eclipse of the sun in which the visible part of the latter com- 
pletely encircles the dark body of the moon; for this to happen, 
the centres, of the sun and moon, and the point on the earth 
where the observer is situated, must be collinear. Certain 
nebulae having the form of a ring are also called "annular." 

ANNUNCIATION, the announcement made by the angel 
Gabriel to the Virgin Mary of the incarnation of Christ (Luke i, 
26-38). The Feast of the Annunciation in the Christian Church 
is celebrated on the 25 th of March. The first authentic allusions 
to it are in a canon, of the council of Toledo (656), and another 
of the council of Constantinople " in Trullo " (692), forbidding 
the celebration. of all festivals in Lent, excepting the Lord's day 
and the Feast of the Annunciation. An earlier origin has been 
claimed for it on the ground that it is mentioned in sermons of 
Athanasius and of Gregory Thaumaturgus, but both of these 
documents are now admitted to be spurious. A synod held at 
Worcester, England (1240), forbade all servile work on this 
feast day. See further Lady, Day. 

ANNUNZIO, GABRIELE D' (1863 ;, Italian novelist and 

poet, of Dalmatian extraction, was born at Pescara (Abruzzi) in 
1863. The first years of his youth were spent in the freedom of 
the open fields; at sixteen he was sent to school in Tuscany. 
While still at school he published a small volume of verses called 
Primo Vere (1879), in which, side by side with some almost 
brutal imitations of Lorenzo Stecchetti, the then fashionable 
poet of Postuma, were some translations from the Latin, dis- 
tinguished by such agile grace that Giuseppe Chiarini on reading 
them brought the unknown youth before the public in an enthusi? 
astic article. The young poet then went to Rome, where Lc 
was received as one of their own by the Cronaca Bizantina group 
(see Carducci). Here he published Canto Nuovo (1882), Terra 
Vergine (1882), V Intermezzo di Rime (1883), // Libro delle 
Vergini (1884), and the greater part of the short stories that were 
afterwards collected under the general title of San Pantaleone 
(1886). In Canto Nuovo ws have admirable poems full of 
pulsating youth and the picmise of power, some descriptive 



ANOA— ANOINTING 



79 



of the sea and some of the Abruzzi landscape, commented on 
and completed in prose by Terra Vergine, the latter a collection 
of short stories dealing in radiant language with the peasant life 
of the author's native province. With the Intermezzo di Rime we 
have the beginning of d'Annunzio's second and characteristic 
manner. His conception of style was new, and he chose to 
express all the most subtle vibrations of voluptuous life. Both 
style and contents began to startle his critics; some who had 
greeted him as an enfant prodige — Chiarini amongst others — 
rejected him as a perverter of public morals, whilst others 
hailed him as one bringing a current of fresh air and the impulse 
of a new vitality into the somewhat prim, lifeless work hitherto 
produced. 

Meanwhile the Review of Angelo Sommaruga perished in the 
midst of scandal, and his group of young authors found itself 
dispersed. Some entered the teaching career and were lost to 
literature, others threw themselves into journalism. Gabriele 
d' Annunzio took this latter course, and joined the staff of the 
Tribuna. For this paper, under the pseudonym of " Duca 
Minimo," he did some of his most brilliant work, and the articles 
he wrote during that period of originality and exuberance would 
well repay being collected. To this period of greater maturity and 
deeper culture belongs 77 Libro d' Isotla (1886), a love poem, in 
which for the first time he drew inspiration adapted to modern 
sentiments and passions from the rich colours of the Renaissance. 
II Libro d' Isotta is interesting also, because in it we find most 
of the germs of his future work, just as in Intermezzo melico and 
in certain ballads and sonnets we find descriptions and emotions 
which later went to form the aesthetic contents of II Piacere, II 
Trionfo della Morte, and Elegie Romane (1892). 

D' Annunzio's first novel II Piacere (1889) — translated into 
English as The Child of Pleasure — was followed in 1891 by 
L' Innocente {The Intruder), and in 1892 by Giovanni Episcopo. 
These three novels created a profound impression. 77 Innocente, 
admirably translated into French by Georges Herelle, brought 
its author the notice and applause of foreign critics. His next 
work, II Trionfo della Morte {The Triumph of Death) (1894), 
was followed at a short distance by Le Vergini della Roccio 
(1896) and // Fuoco (1900), which in its descriptions of Venice 
is perhaps the most ardent glorification of a city existing in any 
language. 

D' Annunzio's poetic work of this period, in most respects 
his finest, is represented by II Poema Paradisiaco (1893), the 
Odi Navali (1893), a superb attempt at civic poetry, and Laudi 
(1900). 

A later phase of d' Annunzio's work is his dramatic production, 
represented by II Sogno di un mattino di primavera (1897), a 
lyrical fantasia in one act; his Cilia Morta (1898), written for 
Sarah Bernhardt, which is certainly among the most daring 
and original of modern tragedies, and the only one which by its 
unity, persistent purpose, and sense of fate seems to continue 
in a measure the traditions of the Greek theatre. In 1S98 
he wrote his Sogno di un Pomeriggio d' Aulunno and La 
Gioconda; in the succeeding year La Gloria, an attempt at 
contemporary political tragedy which met with no success, 
probably through the audacity of the personal and political 
allusions in some of its scenes; and then Francesca da Rimini 
(1901), a perfect reconstruction of medieval atmosphere 
and emotion, magnificent in style, and declared by one of the 
most authoritative Italian critics — -Edoardo Boutet — to be the 
first real although not perfect tragedy which has ever been given 
to the Italian theatre. 

The work of d' Annunzio, although by many of the younger 
generation injudiciously and extravagantly admired, is almost 
the most important literary work given to Italy since the days 
when the great classics welded her varying dialects into a fixed 
language. The psychological inspiration of his novels has come 
to him from many sources — French, Russian, Scandinavian, 
German — and in much of his earlier work there is little 
fundamental originality. His creative power is intense and 
searching, but narrow and personal; his heroes and heroines are 
little more than one same type monotonously facing a different 



problem at a different phase of life. But the faultlessness of his 
style and the wealth of his language have been approached by 
none of his contemporaries, whom his genius has somewhat 
paralysed. In his later work, when he begins drawing his inspira- 
tion from the traditions of bygone Italy in her glorious centuries, 
a current of real life seems to run through the veins of his 
personages. And the lasting merit of d' Annunzio, his real value 
to the literature of his country, consists precisely in that he opened 
up the closed mine of its former life as a source of inspiration 
for the present and of hope for the future, and created a language, 
neither pompous nor vulgar, drawn from every source and district 
suited to the requirements of modern thought, yet absolutely 
classical, borrowed from none, and, independently of the thought 
it may be used to express, a thing of intrinsic beauty. As 
his sight became clearer and his purpose strengthened, as ex- 
aggerations, affectations, and moods dropped away from his con- 
ceptions, his work became more and more typical Latin work, 
upheld by the ideal of an Italian Renaissance. 

ANOA, the native name of the small wild buffalo of Celebes, 
Bos {Bubalus) depressicornis, which stands but little over a 
yard at the shoulder, and is the most diminutive of all wild 
cattle. It is nearly allied to the larger Asiatic buffaloes, showing 
the same reversal of the direction of the hair on the back. The 
horns are peculiar for their upright direction and comparative 
straightness, although they have the same triangular section as 
in other buffaloes. White spots are sometimes present below 
the eyes, arid there may be white markings on the legs and 
back; and the absence or presence of these white markings 
may be indicative of distinct races. The horns of the cows are 
very small. The nearest allies of the anoa appear to be certain 
extinct buffaloes, of which the remains are found in the Siwalik 
Hills of northern India. In habits the animal appears to 
resemble the Indian buffalo. 

ANODYNE (from Gr. av-, privative, and oSwt;, pain), a cause 
which relieves pain. The term is commonly applied to medicines 
which lessen the sensibility of the brain or nervous system, such 
as morphia, &c. 

ANOINTING, or greasing with oil, fat, or melted butter, a 
process employed ritually in all religions and among all races, 
civilized or savage, partly as a mode of ridding persons and 
things of dangerous influences and diseases, especially of the 
demons (Persian drug, Greek /ojpes, Armenian dev) which are or 
cause those diseases; and partly as a means of introducing into 
things and persons a sacramental or divine influence, a holy 
emanation, spirit or power. The riddance of an evil influence is 
often synonymous with the introduction of the good principle, 
and therefore it is best to consider first the use of anointing in 
consecrations. 

The Australian natives believed that the virtues of one killed 
could be transferred to survivors if the latter rubbed themselves 
with his caul-fat. So the Arabs of East Africa anoint themselves 
with lion's fat in order to gain courage and inspire the animals 
with awe of themselves. Such rites are often associated with the 
actual eating of the victim whose virtues are coveted. Human 
fat is a powerful charm all over the world; for, as R. Smith 
points out, after the blood the fat was- peculiarly the vehicle 
and seat of life. This is why fat of a victim was smeared on a 
sacred stone, not only in acts of homage paid to it, but in the 
actual consecration thereof. In such cases the influence of the 
god, communicated to the victim, passed with the unguent into 
the stone. But the divinity could by anointing be transferred 
into men no less than into stones; and from immemorial an- 
tiquity, among the Jews as among other races, kings were 
anointed or greased, doubtless with the fat of the victims which, 
like the blood, was too holy to be eaten by the common votaries. 

Butter made from the milk of the cow, the most sacred of 
animals, is used for anointing in the Hindu religion. A newly- 
built house is smeared with it, so are demoniacs, care being taken 
to smear the latter downwards from head to foot. 

In the Christian religion, especially where animal sacrifices, 
together with the cult of totem or holy animals, have been given 
up, it is usual to hallow the oil used in ritual anointings with 



8o 



ANOMALY^ANQUETIL DUPERRON 



special prayers and exorcisms; oil from the lamps lit before the 
altar has a peculiar virtue of its own, perhaps because it can be 
burned to give light, and disappears to heaven in doing so. In 
any case oil has ever been regarded as the aptest symbol and 
vehicle of the holy and illuminating spirit. For this reason the 
catechumens are anointed with holy oil both before and after 
baptism; the one act (of eastern origin) assists the expulsion 
of the evil spirits, the other (of western origin), taken in con- 
junction with imposition of hands, conveys the spirit and 
retains it in the person of the baptized. In the postbaptismal 
anointing the oil was applied to the organs of sense, to the head, 
heart, and midriff. Such ritual use of oil as a a<j>payis or seal 
may have been suggested in old religions by the practice of 
keeping wine fresh in jars and amphorae by pouring on a top 
layer of oil; for the spoiling of wine was attributed to the action 
of demons of corruption, against whom many ancient formulae 
of aversion or exorcism still exist. 

The holy oil, chrism, or nvpov, as the Easterns call it, was 
prepared and consecrated on Maundy Thursday, and in the 
Gelasian sacramentary the formula used runs thus: " Send 
forth, O Lord, we beseech thee, thy Holy Spirit the Paraclete 
from heaven into this fatness of oil, which thou hast deigned to 
bring forth out of the green wood for the refreshing of mind and 
body; and through thy holy benediction may it be for all who 
anoint with it, taste it, touch it, a safeguard of mind and body, 
of soul and spirit, for the expulsion of all pains, of every infirmity, 
of every sickness of mind and body. For with the same thou 
hast anointed priests, kings, and prophets and martyrs with this 
thy chrism, perfected by thee, O Lord, blessed, abiding within 
our bowels in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ." 

In various churches the dead are anointed with holy oil, to 
guard them against the vampires or ghouls which ever threaten 
to take possession of dead bodies and live in them. In the 
Armenian church, as formerly in many Greek churches, a cross 
is not holy until the Spirit has been formally led into it by means 
of prayer and anointing with holy oil. A new church is anointed 
at its four corners, and also the altar round which it is built; 
similarly tombs, church gongs, and all other instruments and 
utensils dedicated to cultual uses. In churches of the Greek 
rite a little of the old year's chrism is left in the jar to communicate 
its sanctity to that of the new. (F. C. C.) 

ANOMALY (from Gr. dvco/iaXia, unevenness, derived from 
&.P-, privative, and o/xaKos, even), a deviation from the common 
rule. In astronomy the word denotes the angular distance of a 
body from the pericentre of the orbit in which it is moving. 
Let AB be the major axis of the orbit, B the pericentre, F the 
focus or centre of motion, P the position of the body. The 
anomaly is then the angle BFP which the radius vector makes 
with the major axis. This is the actual or true anomaly. Mean 

anomaly is the anomaly which the 
body would have if it moved from 
the pericentre around F with a 
uniform angular motion such that 
its revolution would be completed 
in its actual time (see Orbit) - 
Eccentric anomaly is defined thus: — 
Draw the circumscribing circle of 
the elliptic orbit around the centre C 
of the orbit. Drop the perpendicular 
RPQ through P, the position of 
the planet, upon the major axis. 
Join CR; the angle CRQ is then the eccentric anomaly. 

In the ancient astronomy the anomaly was taken as the 
angular distance of the planet from the point of the farthest 
recession from the earth. 

Kepler's Problem, namely, that of finding the co-ordinates of a 
planet at a given time, which is equivalent — given the mean 
anomaly — to that of determining the true anomaly, was solved 
approximately by Kepler, and more completely by Wallis, 
Newton and others. 

The anomalistic revolution of a planet or other heavenly body 
is the revolution between two consecutive passages through the 





pericentre. Starting from the pericentre, it is completed on the 
return to the pericentre. If the pericentre is fixed, this is an 
actual revolution; but if it moves the anomalistic revolution 
is greater or less than a complete circumference. 

An Anomalistic year is the time (365 days, 6 hours, 13 minutes, 
48 seconds) in which the earth (and similarly for any other 
planet) passes from perihelion to perihelion, or from any given 
value of the anomaly to the same again. Owing to the precession 
of the equinoxes it is longer than a tropical or sidereal year by 
25 minutes and 2-3 seconds. An Anomalistic month is the time 
in which the moon passes from perigee to perigee, &c. 

For the mathematics of Kepler's problem see E. W. Brown, 
Lunar Theory (Cambridge 1896), or the work of Watson or of 
Bauschinger on Theoretical Astronomy. 

ANORTHITE, an important mineral of the felspar group, being 
one of the end members of the plagioclase (q.v.) series. It is a 
calcium and aluminium silicate, CaAlaSisOg, and crystallizes 
in the anorthic system. Like all the felspars, it possesses two 
cleavages, one perfect and the other less so, here inclined to one 
another at an angle of 85° 50'. The colour is white, greyish or 
reddish, and the crystals are trans- 
parent to translucent. The hard- 
ness is 6— 6§, and the specific gravity 
2-75. 

Anorthite is an essential con- 
stituent of many basic igneous 
rocks, such as gabbro and basalt, 
also of some meteoric stones. The 
best developed crystals are those 
which accompany mica, augite, 
sanidine, &c, in the ejected blocks 

of metamorphosed limestone from . 

Monte Somma, the ancient portion . 

of Mount Vesuvius; these are Anorthite. 

perfectly colourless and transparent, and are bounded by 
numerous brilliant faces. Distinctly developed crystals are 
also met with in the basalts of Japan, but are usually rare at 
other localities. 

The name anorthite was given to the Vesuvian mineral by 
G. Rose in 1823, on account of its anorthic crystallization. The 
species had, however, been earlier described by the comte de 
Bournon under the name indianite, this name being applied to a 
greyish or reddish granular mineral forming the matrix of corun- 
dum from the Carnatic in India. Several unimportant varieties 
have been distinguished. (L. J, S.) 

ANQUETIL, LOUIS PIERRE (1723-1808), French historian, 
was born in Paris, on the 21st of February 1723. He entered the 
congregation of Sainte-Genevieve, where he took holy orders and 
became professor of theology and literature. Later, he became 
director of the seminary at Reims, where he wrote his Histoire 
civile et politique de Reims (3 vols., 1756-1757), perhaps his best 
work. He was then director of the college of Serdis, where he 
composed his Esprit de la Ligue ou histoire politique des troubles 
de la Fronde pendant le XVI" et le XVII s siecles (1767). During 
the Reign of Terror he was imprisoned at St Lazare; there he 
began his Pricis de Vhistoire universelle, afterwards published in 
nine volumes. On the establishment of the national institute he 
was elected a meriiber of the second group (moral and political 
sciences), and was soon afterwards employed in the office of the 
ministry of foreign affairs, profiting by his experience to write his 
Motifs des guerreset des traites de paix sous Louis XI V ., Louis X V, 
et Louis XVI. He is said to have been asked by Napoleon to 
write his Histoire de France (14 vols., 1805), a mediocre compila- 
tion at second or third hand, with the assistance of de Mezeray 
andof Paul Francois Velly (1700-1750). This work, nevertheless, 
passed through numerous editions, and by it his name is remem- 
bered. He died on the 6th of September 1808. 

ANQUETIL DUPERRON, ABRAHAM HYACINTHS (-1731- 
1805), French orientalist, brother of Louis Pierre Anquetil, the 
historian, was born in Paris on the 7th of December 1731. He 
was educated for the priesthood in Paris and Utrecht* but his taste 
for Hebrew,. Arabic, Persian, and other languages of the East 



ANSA-^ANSELM 



81 



developed into a passion, and he discontinued his theological 
course to devote himself entirely to them. His diligent attend- 
ance at the Royal Library attracted the attention of the keeper 
of the manuscripts, the Abbe Sallier, whose influence procured 
for him a small salary as student of the oriental languages. He 
had lighted on some fragments of the Vendidad Sade, and formed 
the project of a voyage to India to discover the works of Zoroaster. 
With this end in view he enlisted as a private soldier, on the 2nd 
of November 1754, in the Indian expedition which was about to 
start from the port of L 'Orient. His friends procured his dis- 
charge, and he was granted a free passage, a seat at the captain's 
table, and a salary, the amount of which was to be fixed by the 
governor of the French settlement in India. After a passage of 
six months, Anquetil landed, on the 10th of August 1755^ at 
Pondicherry. Here he remained a short time to master modern 
Persian, and then hastened to Chandernagore to acquire Sanskrit. 
Just then war was declared between France and England; 
Chandernagore was taken, and Anquetil returned to Pondicherry 
by land. He found one of his brothers at Pondicherry, and 
embarked with him for Surat; but, with a view of exploring the 
country, he landed at Mah6 and proceeded on foot. At Surat he 
succeeded, by perseverance and address in his intercourse with 
the native priests, in acquiring a sufficient knowledge of the Zend 
and Pahlavi languages to translate the liturgy called the Vendidad 
Sade and some other works. Thence he proposed going to 
Benares, to study the language, antiquities, and sacred laws of 
the Hindus; but the capture of Pondicherry obliged him to quit 
India. Returning to Europe in an English vessel, he spent some 
time in London and Oxford, and then set out for France. He 
arrived in Paris on the 14th of March 1762 in possession of one 
hundred and eighty oriental manuscripts, besides other curiosities. 
The Abbe Barthelemy procured for him a pension, with the 
appointment of interpreter of oriental languages at the Royal 
Library. In 1763 he was elected an associate of the Academy of 
Inscriptions, and began to arrange for the publication of the 
materials he had collected during his eastern travels. In 1771 he 
published his Zend-Avesta (3 vols.), containing collections from 
the sacred writings of the fire-worshippers, a life of Zoroaster, and 
fragments of works ascribed to him. In 1778 -he published at 
Amsterdam his Legislation orientate, in which he endeavoured to 
prove that the nature of oriental despotism had been greatly 
misrepresented. His Recherches hisloriques et geographiques sur 
I'Inde appeared in 1786, and formed part of Thieffenthaler's 
Geography of India. The Revolution seems to have greatly 
affected him. During that period he abandoned society, and 
lived in voluntary poverty on a few pence a day. In 1798 he 
published L'Inde en rapport avec I' Europe (Hamburg, 2 vols.), 
which contained much invective against the English, and numerous 
misrepresentations. In 1802-1804 he published a Latin transla- 
tion (2 vols.) from the Persian of the Oupnek'hat or Upanishada. 
It is a curious mixture of Latin, Greek, Persian, Arabic, and 
Sanskrit. He died in Paris on the 17th of January 1805. 

See Biographie universelle; Sir William Jones, Works (vol. x., 
1807); and the Miscellanies of the Philobiblon Society (vol. iii., 
1856-1857). For a list of his scattered writings see Querard, La 
France litteraire. 

ANSA (from Lat. ansa, a handle), in astronomy, one of the 
apparent ends of the rings of Saturn as seen in perspective from 
the earth: so-called because, in the earlier telescopes, they looked 
like handles projecting from the planet. In anatomy the word 
is applied to nervous structures which resemble loops. In 
archaeology it is used for the engraved and ornamented handle 
of a vase, which has often survived when the vase itself, being less 
durable, has disappeared. 

ANSBACH, or Anspach, originally Onohbach, a town of 
Germany, in the kingdom of Bavaria, on the Rezat, 27 m. by rail 
S.W. of Nuremberg, and 00 m. N. of Munich. Pop. (1900) 
17,555- It contains a palace, once the residence of the margraves 
of Anspach, with fine gardens; several churches, the finest of 
which are those dedicated to St John, containing the vault of 
the former margraves, and St Gumbert; a gymnasium; a 
picture gallery; a municipal museum and a special technical 



school. Ansbach possesses monuments to the poets August, 
Count von Platen-Hailermund, and Johann Peter Uz, who were 
born here, and to Kaspar Hauser, who died here. The chief 
manufactures are machinery, toys, woollen, cotton, and half-silk 
stuffs, embroideries, earthenware, tobacco, cutlery and playing 
cards. There is considerable trade in grain, wool and flax. In 
1 79 1 the last margrave of Anspach sold his principality to 
Frederick William II., king of Prussia; it was transferred by 
Napoleon to Bavaria in 1806, an act which was confirmed by the 
congress of Vienna in 1815. 

ANSDELL, RICHARD (1815-1885), English painter, was 
born in Liverpool, and first exhibited at the Royal Academy 
in 1840. He was a painter of genre, chiefly animal and sporting 
pictures, and he became very popular, being elected A.R.A. in 
1861 and R.A. in 1870. His " Stag at Bay " (1846), " The 
Combat " (1847), and " Battle of the Standard " (1848), repre- 
sent his best work, in which he showed himself a notable follower 
of Landseen 

ANSELM (c. 1033-1109), archbishop of Canterbury, was born 
at Aosta in Piedmont. His family was accounted noble, and 
was possessed of considerable property. Gundulph, his father, 
was by birth a Lombard, and seems to have been a man of harsh 
and violent temper; his mother, Ermenberga, was a prudent and 
virtuous woman, from whose careful religious training the young 
Anselm derived much benefit. At the age of fifteen he desired 
to enter a convent, but he could not obtain his father's consent. 
Disappointment brought on an illness, on his recovery from 
which he seems for a time to have given up his studies, and to 
have plunged into the gay life of the world. During this time his 
mother died, and his father's harshness became unbearable. 
He left home, and with only one attendant crossed the Alps, 
and wandered through Burgundy and France. Attracted by 
the fame of his countryman, Lanfranc, then prior of Bee, he 
entered Normandy, and, after spending some time at Avranches, 
settled at the monastery of Bee. There, at the age of twenty- 
seven, he became a monk; three years later, when Lanfranc 
was promoted to the abbacy of Caen, he was elected prior. 
This office he held for fifteen years, and then, in 1078, on the 
death of Herlwin, the warrior monk who had founded the 
monastery, he was made abbot. Under his rule Bee became the 
first seat of learning in Europe, a result due not more to his 
intellectual powers than to the great moral influence of his 
noble character and kindly discipline. It was during these quiet 
years at Bee that Anselm wrote his first philosophical and re- 
ligious works, the dialogues on Truth and Freewill, and the two 
celebrated treatises, the Monologion and Proslogion. 

Meanwhile the convent had been growing in wealth, as well 
as in reputation, and had acquired considerable property in 
England, which it became the duty of Anselm occasionally to 
visit. By his mildness of temper and unswerving rectitude, 
he so endeared himself to the English that he was looked upon 
and desired as the natural successor to Lanfranc, then archbishop 
of Canterbury. But on the death of that great man, the ruling 
sovereign', William Rufus, seized the possessions and revenues 
of the see, and made no new appointment. About four years 
after, in 1092, on the invitation of Hugh, earl of Chester, Anselm 
with some reluctance, for he feared to be made archbishop, 
crossed to England. He was detained by business for nearly 
four months, and when about to return, was refused permission 
by the king. In the following year William fell ill, and thought 
his death was at hand. Eager to make atonement for his sin 
with regard to the archbishopric, he nominated Anselm to the 
vacant see, and after a great struggle compelled him to accept 
the pastoral staff of office. After obtaining dispensation from 
his duties in Normandy, Anselm was consecrated in 1093. He 
demanded of the king, as the conditions of his retaining office, 
that he should give up all the possessions of the see, accept his 
spiritual counsel, and acknowledge Urban as pope in opposition 
to the anti-pope, Clement. He only obtained a partial consent 
to the first of these, and the last involved him in a serious difficulty 
with the king. It was a rule of the church that the consecration 
of metropolitans could not be completed without their receiving 



82 



ANSELM 



the pallium from the hands of the pope. Anselm, accordingly, 
insisted that he must proceed to Rome to receive the pall. But 
William would not permit this; he had not acknowledged Urban, 
and he maintained his right to prevent any pope being acknow- 
ledged by an English subject without his permission. A great 
council of churchmen and nobles, held to settle the matter, 
advised Anselm to submit to the king, but failed to overcome 
his mild and patient firmness. The matter was postponed, 
and William meanwhile privately sent messengers to Rome, 
who acknowledged Urban and prevailed on him to send a legate 
to the king bearing the archiepiscopal pall. A partial recon- 
ciliation was then effected, and the matter of the pall was com- 
promised. It was not given by the king, but was laid on the 
altar at Canterbury, whence Anselm took it. 

Little more than a year after, fresh trouble arose with the king, 
and Anselm resolved to proceed to Rome and seek the counsel 
of his spiritual father. With great difficulty he obtained a 
reluctant permission to leave, and in October 1097 he set out 
for Rome. William immediately seized on the revenues of the 
see, and retained them to his death. Anselm was received with 
high honour by Urban, and at a great council held at Bari, he 
was put forward to defend the doctrine of the procession of the 
Holy Ghost against the representatives of the Greek Church. 
But Urban was too politic to embroil himself with the king of 
England, and Anselm found that he could obtain no substantial 
result. He withdrew from Rome, and spent some time at the 
little village of Schiavi, where he finished his treatise on the 
atonement, Cur Deus homo, and then retired to Lyons. 

In 1 100 William was killed, and Plenry, his successor, at once 
recalled Anselm. But Henry demanded that he should again 
receive from him in person investiture in his office of archbishop, 
thus making the dignity entirely dependent on the royal 
authority. Now, the papal rule in the matter was plain; all 
homage and lay investiture were strictly prohibited. Anselm 
represented this to the king; but Henry would not relinquish 
a privilege possessed by his predecessors, and proposed that the 
matter should be laid before the Holy See. The answer of the 
pope reaffirmed the law as to investiture. A second ejnbassy 
was sent, with a similar result. Henry, however, remained 
firm, and at last, in 1103, Anselm and an envoy from the king 
set out for Rome. The pope, Paschal, reaffirmed strongly the 
rule of investiture, and passed sentence of excommunication 
against all who had infringed the law, except Henry. Practically 
this left matters as they were, and Anselm, who had received 
a message forbidding him to return to England unless on the 
king's terms, withdrew to Lyons, where he waited to see if 
Paschal would not take stronger measures. At last, in 1105, 
he resolved himself to excommunicate Henry. His intention 
was made known to the king through his sister, and it seriously 
alarmed him, for it was a critical period in his affairs. A meeting 
was arranged, and a reconciliation between them effected. In 
1 106 Anselm crossed to England, with power from the pope 
to remove the sentence of excommunication from the illegally 
invested churchmen. In 1107 the long dispute as to investiture 
was finally ended by the king resigning his formal rights. The 
remaining two years of Anselm's life were spent in the duties 
of his archbishopric. He died on the 2tst of April 1100. He 
was canonized in 1494 by Alexander VI. 

Anselm may, with some justice, be considered the first scho- 
lastic philosopher and theologian. His only great predecessor, 
Scotus Erigena, had more of the speculative and mystical 
element than is consistent with a schoolman; but in Anselm 
are found that recognition of the relation of reason to revealed 
truth, and that attempt to elaborate a rational system of faith, 
which form the special characteristics of scholastic thought. 
His constant endeavour is to render the contents of the Christian 
consciousness clear to reason, and to develop the intelligible 
truths interwoven with the Christian belief. The necessary 
preliminary for this is the possession of the Christian conscious- 
ness. " He who does not believe will not experience; and he 
who has not experienced will not understand." That faith must 
precede knowledge is reiterated by him. " Na/uc cnitn quaero 



intelligere ut credam, sed credo id intelligam. Nam et hoc credo, 
quia, nisi credidero, non intelligam." (" Nor do I seek to under- 
stand that I may believe, but I believe that I may understand. 
For this too I believe, that unless I first believe, I shall not under- 
stand.") But after the f».ith is held fast, the attempt must be 
made to demonstrate by reason the truth of what we believe. 
It is wrong not to do so. "Negligentiae mihi esse videtyr, si, 
postquam confirmati sumus in fide, non studemus quod credimus, 
intelligere." ("I hold it to be a failure in duty if after we have 
become steadfast in the faith we do not strive to understand 
what we believe.") To such an extent does he carry this demand 
for rational explanation that, at times, it seems as if he claimed 
for unassisted intelligence the power of penetrating even to the 
mysteries of the Christian faith. On the whole, however, the 
qualified statement is his real view; merely rational proofs are 
always, he affirms, to be tested by Scripture. (Cur Deus homo, 
i. 2 and 38; De Fide Trin. 2.) 

The groundwork of his theory of knowledge is contained in 
the tract De Veritate, in which, from the consideration of truth 
as in knowledge, in willing, and in things, he rises to the affirma- 
tion of an absolute truth, in which all other truth participates. 
This absolute truth is God himself, who is therefore the ultimate 
ground or principle both of things and of thought. The notion 
of God comes thus into the foreground of the system; before 
all things it is necessary that it should be made clear to reason, 
that it should be demonstrated to have real existence. This 
demonstration is the substance of the Monologion and Proshgion. 
In the first of these the proof rests on the ordinary grounds of 
realism, and coincides to some extent with the earlier theory of 
Augustine, though it is carried out with singular boldness and 
fulness. Things, he says, are called good in a variety of ways 
and degrees; this would be impossible if there were not some 
absolute standard, some good in itself, in which all relative 
goods participate. Similarly with such predicates as great, 
just; they involve a certain greatness and justice. The very 
existence of things is impossible without some one Being, by 
whom they are. This absolute Being, this goodness, justice, 
greatness, is God. Anselm was not thoroughly satisfied with 
this reasoning; it started from a posteriori grounds, and con- 
tained several converging lines of proof. He desired to have 
some one short demonstration. Such a demonstration he 
presented in the Proslogion; it is his celebrated ontological 
proof. God is that being than whom none greater can '.Be 
conceived. Now, if that than which nothing greater cf n t)e 
conceived existed only in the intellect, it would not be the 
absolutely greatest, for we could add to it existence in reality. 
It follows, then, that the being than whom nothing greater can 
be conceived, i.e. God, necessarily has real existence. This 
reasoning, in which Anselm partially anticipated the Cartesian 
philosophers, has rarely seemed satisfactory. It was opposed 
at the time by the monk Gaunilo, in his Liber pro Insipiente, on 
the ground that we cannot pass from idea to reality. The same 
criticism is made by several of the later schoolmen, among others 
by Aquinas, and is in substance what Kant advances against all 
ontological proof. Anselm replied to the objections of Gaunilo in 
his Liber Apologelicus. The existence of God being thus held 
proved, he proceeds to state the rational grounds of the Christian 
doctrines of creation and of the Trinity. With reference to this 
last, he says we cannot know God from himself, but only after 
the analogy of his creatures; and the special analogy used is 
the self-consciousness of man, its peculiar double nature, with 
the necessary elements, memory and intelligence, representing 
the relation of the Father to the Son. The mutual love of these 
two, proceeding from the relation they hold to one another, 
symbolizes the Holy Spirit. The further theological doctrines of 
man, original sin, free will, are developed, partly in the Mono- 
logion, partly in other mixed treatises. Finally, in his greatest 
work, Cur Deus homo, he undertakes to make plain, even to 
infidels, the rational necessity of the Christian mystery of the 
atonement. The theory rests on three positions: that satisfac- 
tion is necessary on account of God's honour and justice; that 
such satisfaction can be given only by the peculiar oersonalitv 



ANSELM— ANSON 



83 



of the God-man; that such satisfaction is really given by the 
voluntary death of this infinitely valuable person. The demon- 
stration is, in brief, this. All the actions of men are due to the 
furtherance of God's glory; if, then, there be sin, i.e. if God's 
honour be wounded, man of himself can give no satisfaction. 
But the justice of God demands satisfaction; and as an insult 
to infinite honour is in itself infinite, the satisfaction must be 
infinite, i.e. it must outweigh all that is not God. Such a penalty 
can only be paid by God himself, and, as a penalty for man, 
must be paid under the form of man. Satisfaction is only possible 
through the God-man. Now this God-man, as sinless, is exempt 
from the punishment of sin ; His passion is therefore voluntary, 
not given as due. The merit of it is therefore infinite; God's 
justice is thus appeased, and His mercy may extend to man. 
This theory has exercised immense influence on the form of 
church doctrine. It is certainly an advance on the older patristic 
theory, in so far as it substitutes for a contest between God and 
Satan, a contest between the goodness and justice of God; but 
it puts the whole relation on a merely legal footing, gives it no 
ethical bearing, and neglects altogether the consciousness of the 
individual to be redeemed. In this respect it contrasts un- 
favourably with the later theory of Abelard. 

Anselm's speculations did not receive, in the middle ages, 
the respect and attention justly their due. This was probably 
due to their unsystematic character, for they are generally tracts 
or dialogues on detached questions, not elaborate treatises like 
the great works of Albert, Aquinas, and Erigena. They have, 
however, a freshness and philosophical vigour, which more than 
makes up for their want of system, and which raises them far 
above the level of most scholastic writings. 

Bibliography. — The main sources for the history of St Anselm 
and his times are Eadmer's Vita Anselmi and his Historia Novorum, 
edited by M. Rule in Rolls Series (London, 1884); the best modern 
work is by Pere Ragey, Histoire de Saint Anselme (Paris, 1890), and 
Saint Anselme professeur (Paris, 1890). Other appreciations are 
by A. Mohler, Anselm Erzbischof von Canterbury (Regensburg, 1839; 
Eng. trans, by H. Rymer, London, 1842); F. R. Hasse, Anselm von 
Canterbury (2 vols., Leipzig, 1 842-1853) ; C. de Remusat, S. Anselme 
de Cantorbery (Paris, 1853, new ed. 1868) ; R. W. Church, St Anselm, 
first published in Sunday Library (London, 1870; often reprinted); 
Martin Rule, Life and Times of St Anselm (London, 1883). 

Works : The best edition of St Anselm's complete works is that of 
Dom Gerberon (Paris, 1675); reprinted with many notes in 1712; 
incorporated by J. Migne in his Patrologia Latina, tomi clyiii.-clix. 
(Paris. 1853-1854). Migne's reprint contains many errors. The Cur 
Deus homo may be best studied in the editions published by D. Nutt 
(London, 1885) and by Griffith (1898). The Mariale, or poems in 
honour of the Blessed Virgin, has been carefully edited by P. Ragey 
(Tournai, 1885) ; the Monologion and Proslogion, by C. E. Ubaghs 
(Louvain, 1854; Eng. trans, by S. N. Deane, Chicago, 1903); the 
Meditationes, many of which are wrongly attributed to Anselm, have 
been frequently reprinted, and were included in Methuen's Library 
of Devotion (London, 1903). 

The best criticism of Anselm's philosophical works is by J. M. 
Rigg (London, 1896), and Domet de Vorges (Grands Philosophes 
series, Paris, 1901). For a complete bibliography, see A. Vacant's 
Dictionnaire de theologie. 

ANSELM, of Laon (d. 11 17), French theologian, was born of 
very humble parents at Laon before the middle of the nth 
century. He is said to have studied under St Anselm at Bee. 
About 1076 he taught with great success at Paris, where, as the 
associate of William of Champeaux, he upheld the realistic side 
of the scholastic controversy. Later he removed to his native 
place, where his school for theology and exegetics rapidly became 
the most famous in Europe. He died in n 17. His greatest 
work, an interlinear gloss on the Scriptures, was one of the 
great authorities of the middle ages. It has been frequently 
reprinted. Other commentaries apparently by him have been 
ascribed to various writers, principally to the great Anselm. A 
list of them, with notice of Anselm's life, is contained in the 
Histoire litteraire dc la France, x. 170-189. 

The works are collected in Migne's Patrologia Latina, tome 1 62; 
some unpublished Sententiae were edited by G. Lefevre (Milan, 1894), 
on which see Haureau in the Journal des savants for 1895. 

ANSELME (Father Anselme of the Virgin Mary) (1625-1694), 
French genealogist, was born in Paris in 1625. As a layman his 
name was Pierre Guibours. He entered the order of the bare- 
footed Augustinians on the 31st of March 1644, and it was in 



their monastery (called the Couvent des Petits Peres, near the 
church of Notre-Dame des Victoires) that he died, on the 17th 
of January 1694. He devoted his entire life to genealogical 
studies. In 1663 he. published Le Palais de Vhonneur, which 
besides giving the genealogy of the houses of Lorraine and Savoy, 
is a complete treatise on heraldry, and in 1664 Le Palais de la 
gloire, dealing with the genealogy of various illustrious French 
and European families. These books made friends for him, the 
most intimate among whom, Honore Caille, seigneur du Fourny 
(1630-1713), persuaded him to publish his Histoire genealogique 
de la maison royale de France, el des grands officiers de 
la couromte (1674, 2 vols. 4); after Father Anselme's death, 
Honore Caille collected his papers,and brought out a new edition 
of this highly important work in 171 2. The task was taken up 
and continued by two other friars of the Couvent des Petits 
Peres, Father Ange de Sainte-Rosalie (Frangois Raffard, 1655- 
1726), and Father Simplicien (Paul Lucas, 1683-1759), who 
published the first and second volumes of the third edition in 
1726. This edition consists of nine volumes folio; it is a genea- 
logical and chronological history of the royal house of France, 
of the peers, of the great officers of the crown and of the king's 
household, and of the ancient barons of the kingdom. The notes 
were generally compiled from original documents, references 
to which are usually given, so that they remain useful to the 
present day. The work of Father Anselme, his collaborators 
and successors, is even more important for the history of 
France than is Dugdale's Baronage of England for the history 
of England. (C. B.*) 

ANSON, GEORGE ANSON, Baron (1697-1762), British admiral, 
was born on the 23rd- of April 1697. He was the son of 
William Anson of Shugborough in Staffordshire, and his wife 
Isabella Carrier, who was the sister-in-law of Lord Chancellor 
Macclesfield, a relationship which proved very useful to the 
future admiral. George Anson entered the navy in February 
171 2, and by rapid steps became lieutenant in 17 16, commander 
in 1722, and post-captain in 1724. In this rank he served twice 
on the North American station as captain of the " Scarborough " 
and the " Squirrel " from 1724 to 1730 and from 1733 to 1735. 
In 1737 he was appointed to the " Centurion," 60, on the eve of 
war with Spain, and when hostilities had begun he was chosen 
to command as commodore the squadron which was sent to attack 
her possessions in South America in 1740. The original scheme 
was ambitious, and was not carried out. Anson's squadron, 
which sailed later than had been intended, and was very ill-fitted, 
consisted of six ships, which were reduced by successive disasters 
to his flagship the " Centurion." The lateness of the season 
forced him to round Cape Horn in very stormy weather, and the 
navigating instruments of the time did not allow of exact observa- 
tion. Two of his vessels failed to round the Horn, another, the 
" Wager," was wrecked in the Golfo de Panas on the coast of 
Chile. By the time Anson reached the island of Juan Fernandez 
in June 1741, his six ships had been reduced to three, while the 
strength of his crews had fallen from 961 to 335. In the absence 
of any effective Spanish force on the coast he was able to harass 
the enemy, and to capture the town of Paita on the I3th-i5th 
of November 1741. The steady diminution of his crew by sick- 
ness, and the worn-out state of his remaining consorts, compelled 
him at last to collect all the survivors in the " Centurion." He 
rested at the island of Tinian, and then made his way to Macao 
in November 1742. After considerable difficulties with the 
Chinese, he sailed again with his one remaining vessel to cruise 
for one of the richly laden galleons which conducted the trade 
between Mexico and the Philippines. The indomitable per- 
severance he had shown during one of the most arduous voyages 
in the history of sea adventure was rewarded by the capture of 
an immensely rich prize, the " Nuestra Sefiora de Covadonga," 
which was met off Cape Espiritu Santo on the 20th of June 1743. 
Anson took his prize back to Macao, sold her cargo to the Chinese, 
keeping the specie, and sailed for England, which he reached by 
the Cape of Good Hope on the 15th of June 1744. The prize- 
money earned by the capture of the galleon had made him a rich 
man for life, and under the influence of irritatian caused by the 



8 4 



ANSON— ANSTEY 



refusal of the admiralty to confirm a captain's commission he 
had given to one of his officers, Anson refused the rank of rear- 
admiral, and was prepared to leave the service. His fame would 
stand nearly as high as it does if he had done so, but he would be 
a far less important figure in the history of the navy. By the 
world at large he is known as the commander of the voyage of 
circumnavigation, in which success was won by indomitable 
perseverance, unshaken firmness, and infinite resource; But he 
was also the severe and capable administrator who during years 
of hard work at the admiralty did more than any other to raise 
the navy from the state of corruption and indiscipline into 
which it had fallen during the first half of the eighteenth century. 
Great anger had been caused in the country by the condition of 
the fleet as revealed in the first part of the war with France and 
Spain, between 1739 and 1747. The need for reform was strongly 
felt, and the politicians of the day were conscious that it would 
not be safe to neglect the popular demand for it. In 1745 the 
duke of Bedford, the new first lord, invited Anson to join the 
admiralty with the rank of rear-admiral of the white. As 
subordinate under the duke, or Lord Sandwich, and as first lord 
himself, Anson was at the admiralty with one short break from 
1745 till his death in 1762. His chiefs in the earlier years left 
him to take the initiative in all measures of reform, and supported 
him in their own interest. After 17 51 he was himself first lord, 
except for a short time in 1756 and 1757. At his suggestion, or 
with his advice, the naval administration was thoroughly over- 
hauled. The dockyards were brought into far better order, and 
though corruption was not banished, it was much reduced. The 
navy board was compelled to render accounts, a duty it had long 
neglected. A system of regulating promotion to flag rank, which 
has been in the main followed ever since, was introduced. The 
Navy Discipline Act was revised in 1749, and remained unaltered 
till 1865. Courts martial were put on a sound footing. Inspec- 
tions of the fleet and the dockyards were established, and the 
corps of Marines was created in 1 7 5 5 . The progressive improve- 
ment which raised the navy to the high state of efficiency it 
attained in later years dates from Anson's presence at the 
admiralty. In 1747 he, without ceasing to be a member of the 
board, commanded the Channel fleet which on the 3rd of May 
scattered a large French convoy bound to the East, and West 
Indies, in an action off Cape Finisterre. Several men-of-war 
and armed French Indiamen were taken, but the overwhelming 
superiority of Anson's fleet (fourteen men-of-war, to six men-of- 
war and four Indiamen) in the number and weight of ships 
deprives the action of any strong claim to be considered remark- 
able. In society Anson seems to have been cold and taciturn. 
The sneers of Horace Walpole, and the savage attack of Smollett 
in The Adventures of an Atom, are animated by personal or 
political spite. Yet they would not have accused him of defects 
from which he was notoriously free. In political life he may 
sometimes have given too ready assent to the wishes of powerful 
politicians. He married the daughter of Lord Chancellor 
Hardwicke on the 27th of April 1 748. There were no children of 
the marriage. His title of Baron Anson of Soberton was given 
him in 1747, but became extinct on his death. The title of 
Viscount Anson was, however, created in 1806 in favour of his 
great-nephew, the grandson of his sister Janetta and Mr Sam- 
brook Adams, whose father had assumed the name and arms of 
Anson. The earldom of Lichfield was conferred on the family 
in the next generation. A fine portrait of the admiral by 
Reynolds is in the possession of the earl of Lichfield, and there 
are copies in the National Portrait Gallery and at Greenwich. 
Anson's promotions in flag rank were: rear-admiral in 1745, 
vice-admiral in 1746, and admiral in 1748. In 1749 he became 
vice-admiral of Great Britain, and in 1761 admiral of the fleet. 
He died on the 6th of June 1762. 

A life of Lord Anson, inaccurate in some details but valuable and 
interesting, was published by Sir John Barrow in 1839. The 
standard account of his voyage round the world is that by his 
chaplain Richard Walter, 1748, often reprinted. A share in the 
work has been claimed on dubious grounds for Benjamin Robins, 
the mathematician. Another and much inferior account was 
published in 1745 by Pascoe Thomas, the schoolmaster of the 
r ' Centurion." (D. H.) 



ANSON, SIR WILLIAM REYNELL, Bart. (1843- ), 
English jurist, was born on the 14th of November 1843, at 
Walberton, Sussex, son of the second baronet. Educated at 
Eton and Balliol College, Oxford, he took a first class in the final 
classical schools in 1866, and was elected to a fellowship of All 
Souls in the following year. In 1869 he was called to the bar, 
and went the home circuit until 1873, when he succeeded to the 
baronetcy. In 1874 he became Vinerian reader in English 
law at Oxford, a post which he held until he became, in 1881, 
warden of All Souls College. He identified himself both with 
local and university interests; he became an alderman of the 
city of Oxford in 1892, chairman of quarter sessions for the county 
in 1894, was vice-chancellor of the university in 1 898-1 899, 
and chancellor of the diocese of Oxford in 1899. In that year 
he was returned, without opposition, as M.P. for the university 
in the Liberal Unionist interest, and consequently resigned the 
vice-chancellorship. In parliament he preserved an active 
interest in education, being a member of the newly created 
consultative committee of the Board of Education in 1900, 
and in 1902 he became parliamentary secretary. He took an 
active part in the foundation of a school of law at Oxford, 
and his volumes on The Principles of the English Law of Contract 
(1884, nth ed. 1906), and on The Law and Custom of the Constitu- 
tion in two parts, " The Parliament " and " The Crown " (1886- 

1892, 3rd ed. 1907, pt. Lvol. ii.), are standard works. 
ANSONIA, a city of New Haven county, Connecticut, U.S.A., 

coextensive with the township of the same name, on the Nauga- 
tuck river, immediately N. of Derby and about 12 m. N.W. of 
New Haven. It is served by the New York, New Haven & 
Hartford railway, and by interurban electric lines running 
N., S. and E. Pop. (1900) 12,681, of whom 4296 were foreign 
born; (1910 census) 13,152. Land area about 5-4 sq. m. 
The city has extensive manufactures of heavy machinery, 
electric supplies, brass and copper products and silk goods. 
In 1905 the capital invested in manufacturing was $7,625,864, 
and the value of the products was $19,132,455. Ansonia, 
Derby and Shelton form one of the most important industrial 
communities in the state. The city, settled in 1840 and named 
in honour of the merchant and philanthropist, Anson Green 
Phelps (1781-1853), was originally a part of the township of 
Derby; it was chartered as a borough in 1864 and as a city in 

1893, when the township of Ansonia, which had been incorporated 
in 1889, and the city were consolidated. 

ANSTED, DAVID THOMAS (1814-1880), English geologist, 
was born in London on the 5th of February 1814. He was 
educated at Jesus College, Cambridge, and after taking his degree 
of M.A. in 1839 was elected to a fellowship of the college. In- 
spired by the teachings of Adam Sedgwick, his attention was 
given to geology, and in 1840 he was elected professor of geology 
in King's College, London, a post which he held until 1853. 
Meanwhile he became a fellow of the Royal Society in 1844, 
and from that date until 1847 he was vice-secretary of the 
Geological Society and edited its Quarterly Journal. The 
practical side of geology now came to occupy his chief attention, 
and he visited various parts of Europe and the British Islands 
as a consulting geologist and mining engineer. He was also 
in 1868 and for many years examiner in physical geography 
to the science and art department. He died at Melton near 
Woodbridge, on the 13th of May 1880. 

Publications. — Geology, Introductory, Descriptive and Practical 
(2 vols., 1844); The Ionian Islands (1863); The Applications of 
Geology to the Arts and Manufactures (1865); Physical Geography 
(1867); Water and Water Supply (Surface Water) (1878); and The 
Channel Islands (with R. G. Latham) (1862). 

ANSTEY, CHRISTOPHER (1724-1805), English poet, was the 
son of the rector of Brinkley, Cambridgeshire, where he was born 
on the 31st of October 1724. He was educated at Eton and 
King's College, Cambridge, where he distinguished himself for 
his Latin verses. He became a fellow of his college (1745), but 
the degree of M.A. was withheld from him, owing to the offence 
caused by a speech made by him beginning: " Doctores sine 
doctrina, magistri artium sine artibus, et baccalaurei baculo 
potius qiiam lauro digni." In 1754 he succeeded to the family 



ANSTRUTHER— ANT 



85 



estates and left Cambridge; and two years later he married 
the daughter of Felix Calvert of Albury Hall, Herts. For some 
time Anstey published nothing of any note, though he cultivated 
letters as well as his estates. Some visits to Bath, however, 
where later, in 1770, he made his permanent home, resulted in 
1766 in his famous rhymed letters, The New Bath Guide or 
Memoirs of the B . . . r . . . d [Blunderhead] Family . . ., 
which had immediate success, and was enthusiastically praised 
for its original kind of humour by Walpole and Gray. The 
Election Ball, in Poetical Letters from Mr Inkle at Bath to his 
Wife at Gloucester (1776) sustained the reputation won by the 
Guide. Anstey's other productions in verse and prose are now 
forgotten. He died on the 3rd of August 1805. His Poetical 
Works were collected in 1808 (2 vols.) by the author's son John 
(d. 1819), himself author of The Pleader's Guide (1796), in the 
same vein with the New Bath Guide. 

ANSTRUTHER (locally pronounced Anster), a seaport of Fife- 
shire, Scotland. It comprises the royal and police burghs of 
Anstruther Easter (pop. 1190), Anstruther Wester (501) and 
Kilrenny (2542), and lies 9 m. S.S.E. of St Andrews, having a 
station on the North British railway company's branch line from 
Thornton Junction to St Andrews. The chief industries include 
coast and deep-sea fisheries, shipbuilding, tanning, the making 
of cod-liver oil and fish-curing. The harbour was completed in 
1877 at a cost of £80,000. The two Anstruthers are divided 
only by a small stream called Dreel Burn. James Melville 
(1556-1614), nephew of the more celebrated reformer, Andrew 
Melville, who was minister of Kilrenny, has given in his Diary 
a graphic account of the arrival at Anstruther of a weather- 
bound ship of the Armada, and the tradition of the intermixture 
of Spanish and Fifeshire blood still prevails in the district. 
Anstruther fair supplied William Tennant (1784-1848), who 
was born and buried in the town, with the subject of his poem 
of " Anster Fair." Sir James Lumsden, a soldier of fortune 
under Gustavus Adolphus, who distinguished himself in the 
Thirty Years' War, was born in the parish of Kilrenny about 
1598. David Martin (1737-1798), the painter and engraver; 
Thomas Chalmers (1 780-1847), the great divine; and John 
Goodsir (1814-1867), the anatomist, were natives of Anstruther. 
Little more than a mile to the west lies the royal and police 
burgh of Pittenweem (Gaelic, " the hollow of the cave "), a 
quaint old fishing town (pop. 1863), with the remains of a priory. 
About 2 m. still farther westwards is the fishing town of St 
Monans or Abercromby (pop. 1898), with a fine old Gothic church, 
picturesquely perched on the rocky shore. These fisher towns 
on the eastern and south-eastern coasts of Fifeshire furnish 
artists with endless subjects. Archibald Constable (1774-1827), 
Sir Walter Scott's publisher, was born in the parish of Carnbee, 
about 3 m. to the north of Pittenweem. The two Anstruthers, 
Kilrenny and Pittenweem unite with St Andrews, Cupar and 
Crail, in sending one member to parliament. 

ANSWER (derived from and, against, and the same root as 
swar) , originally a solemn assertion in opposition to some one or 
something, and thus generally any counter-statement or defence, 
a reply to a question or objection , or a correct solution of a problem . 
In English law, the " answer " in pleadings was, previous to the 
Judicature Acts 1873-1875, the statement of defence, especially 
as regards the facts and not the law. Its place is now taken by a 
" statement of defence." " Answer " is the term still applied in 
divorce proceedings to the reply of the respondent (see Pleading). 
The famous Latin ResponsaPrudentum (" answers of the learned") 
were the accumulated views of many successive generations of 
Roman lawyers, a body of legal opinion which gradually became 
authoritative. In music an " answer " is the technical name in 
counterpoint for the repetition by one part or instrument of a 
theme proposed by another. 

ANT (O. Eng. aemete, from Teutonic a, privative, and maitan, 
cut or bite off, i.e. " the biter off "; aimete in Middle English 
became differentiated in dialect use to amete, then amte, and so 
ant, and also to emete, whence the synonym " emmet," now only 
used provincially, " ant " being the general literary form). The 
fact that the name of the ant has come down in English from a 



thousand years ago shows that this class of insects impressed the 
old inhabitants of England as they impressed the Hebrews and 
Greeks. The soc"al instincts and industrious habits of ants have 
always made them favourite objects of study, and a vast amount 
of literature has accumulated on the subject of their structure and 
their modes of life. 

Characters. — An ant is easily recognized both by the casual 
observer and by the student of insects. Ants form a distinct and 
natural family (Formicidae) of the great order Hymenoptera, to 
which bees, wasps and sawflies also belong. The insects of this 
order have mandibles adapted for biting, and two pairs of mem- 
branous wings are usually present; the first abdominal segment 
(propodeum) becomes closely associated with the fore-body 
(thorax) , of which it appears to form a part. In all ants the second 
(apparently the first) abdominal segment is very markedly 
constricted at its front and hind edges, so that it forms a " node " 
at the base of the hind-body (fig. -i), and in many ants the third 
abdominal segment is similarly " nodular " in form (fig. 3, b,.c,). 
It is this peculiar " waist " that catches the eye of the observer, 
and makes the insects so easy of recognition. Another con- 
spicuous and well-known feature of ants is the wingless condition 
of the " workers," as the specialized females, with undeveloped 
ovaries, which form the largest proportion of the population of 
ant-communities, are called. Such " workers " are essential to 
the formation of a social community of Hymenoptera, and their 
wingless condition among the ants shows that their specialization 
has been carried further in this family than among the wasps and 
bees. Further, while among wasps and bees we find some solftary 
and some social genera, the ants as a family are social, though some 




1 ' , * 2 

Fig. i.— Wood Ant (Formica rufa). 1, Queen; 2, male; 3, worker. 

aberrant species are dependent on the workers of other ants. It 
is interesting and suggestive that in A few families of digging 
Hymenoptera (such as the Mutillidae), allied to the ants, the 
females are wingless. The perfect female or " queen " ants (figs. 
1, 1, 3, a) often cast their wings (fig. 3,6) after the nuptial flight; 
in a few species the females, and in still fewer the males, never 
develop wings. (For the so-called " white ants,"which belong to 
an order far removed from the Hymenoptera, see Termite.) 

Structure. — The head of an ant carries a pair of elbowed feelers, 
each consisting of a minute basal and an elongate second segment, 
forming the stalk or " scape," while from eight to eleven short 
segments make up the terminal " flagellum." These segments 
are abundantly supplied with elongate tooth-like projections 
connected with nerve-endings probably olfactory in function. 
The brain is well developed and its " mushroom-bodies " are 
exceptionally large. The mandibles, which are frequently used 
for carrying various objects, are situated well to the outside of 
the maxillae, so that they can be opened and shut without 
interfering with the latter. The peculiar form and arrangement 
of the anterior abdominal segments have already been described. 
The fourth abdominal segment is often very large, and forms 
the greater part of the hind-body; this segment is markedly 
constricted at its basal (forward) end, where it is embraced by the 
small third segment. In many of those ants whose third abdom- 
inal segment forms a second " node," the basal dorsal region of 
the fourth segment is traversed by a large number of very fine 
transverse stria tions; over these the sharp hinder edge of the 
third segment can be scraped to and fro, and the result is a 
stridulating organ which gives rise to a note of very high pitch. 
For the appreciation of the sounds made by these stridulators, 
the ants are furnished with delicate organs of hearing (chordotonal 
organs) in the head, in the three thoracic and two of the abdominal 
segments and in the shins of the legs. 



86 



ANT 



The hinder abdominal segments and the stings of the queens 
and workers resemble those of other stinging Hymenoptera. But 
there are several subfamilies of ants whose females have the 
lancets of the sting useless for piercing, although the poison-glands 
are functional, their secretion being ejected by the insect, when 
occasion may arise, from the greatly enlarged reservoir, the 
reduced sting acting as a squirt. 

Nests. — The nests of different kinds of ants are constructed in 
very different situations; many species (Lasius, for example) 
make underground nests; galleries and chambers being hollowed 
out in the soil, and opening by small holes on the surface, or 
protected above by a large stone. The wood ant (Formica rufa, 
fig. i) piles up a heap of leaves, twigs and other vegetable refuse, 
so arranged as to form an orderly series of galleries, though the 
structure appears at first sight a chaotic heap. Species of 
Camponotus and many other ants tunnel in wood. In tropical 
countries ants sometimes make their nests in the hollow thorns 
of trees or on leaves; species with this habit are believed to make 
a return to the tree for the shelter that it affords by protecting it 
from the ravages of other insects, including their own leaf -cutting 
relations. 

Early Stages. — The larvae of ants (fig. 3, e) are legless and 
helpless maggots with very small heads (fig. 3, /), into whose 
mouths the requisite food has to be forced by the assiduous 
' ' nurse ' ' workers. The maggots are tended by these nurses with the 
greatest care, and carried to those parts of the nest most favour- 
able for their health and growth. When fully grown, the maggot 
spins an oval silken cocoon within which it pupates (fig. 3, g). 
These cocoons, which may often be seen carried between the 
mandibles of the workers, are the "ants' eggs" prized as food for 
fish and pheasants. The workers of a Ceylonese ant (Oecophylla 
smaragdina) are stated by D. Sharp to hold the maggots between 
their mandibles and induce them to spin together the leaves of 
trees from which they form their shelters, as the adult ants have 
no silk-producing organs. 

Origin of Societies. — Ant-colonies are founded either by a single 
female or by several in association. The foundress of the nest 
lays eggs and at first feeds and rears the larvae, the earliest of 
which develop into workers. C. Janet observed that in a nest of 
Lasius alienus, established by a single female, the first workers 
emerged from their cocoons on the 102nd day. These workers 
then take on themselves the labour of the colony, some collecting 
food, which they transfer to their comrades within the nest whose 
duty is to tend and feed the larvae. The foundress-queen is now 
.vaited on by the workers, who supply her with food and spare her 
all cares of work, so that henceforth she may devote her whole 
energies to egg-laying. The population of the colony increases 
fast, and a well-grown nest contains several " queens " and males, 
besides a large number of workers. One of the most interesting 
features of ant-societies is the dimorphism or polymorphism that 
may often be seen among the workers, the same species being 
represented by two or more forms. Thus the British " wood ant " 
(Formica rufa) has a smaller and a larger race of workers 
(•' minor " and " major " forms), while in Ponera we find a blind 
race of workers and another race provided with eyes, and in Atla, 
Eciton and other genera, four or five forms of yworkers are produced , 
the largest of which, with huge heads and elongate trenchant 
mandibles, are known as the " soldier " caste. The development 
of such diversely-formed insects as the offspring of the unmodified 
females which show none of their peculiarities raises many points 
of difficulty for students in heredity. It is thought that the 
differences are, in part at least, due to differences in the nature of 
the food supplied to larvae, which are apparently all alike. But 
the ovaries of worker ants are in some cases sufficiently developed 
for the production of eggs, which may give rise parthenogenetic- 
ally to male, queen or worker offspring. 

Food. — Different kinds of ants vary greatly in the substances 
which they use for food. Honey forms the staple nourishment 
of many ants, some of the workers seeking nectar from flowers, 
working it up into honey within their stomachs and regurgitating 
it so as to feed their comrades within the nest, who, in their turn, 
pass it on to the grubs. A curious specialization of certain 



workers in connexion with the transference of honey has been 
demonstrated by H. C. McCook in the American genus Myrme- 
cocystus, and by later observers in Australian and African 
species of Plagiolepis and allied genera. The workers in question 
remain within the nest, suspended by their feet, and serve as 
living honey-pots for the colony, becoming so distended by the 
supplies of honey poured into their mouths by their foraging 
comrades that their abdomens become sub-globular, the pale 
intersegmental membrane being tightly stretched between the 
widely-separated dark sclerites. The " nurse " workers in the 
nest can then draw their supplies from these " honey-pots." 
Very many ants live by preying upon various insects, such as 
the British " red ants " with well-developed stings (Myrmica 
rubra), and the notorious " driver ants " of Africa and America, 
the old-world species of which belong to Dorylus and allied genera, 
and the new-world species to Eciton (fig. 2, 2, 3). In these ants 
the difference between the large, heavy, winged males and females, 
and the small, long-legged, active workers, is so great, that various 
forms of the same species have been often referred to distinct 
genera; in Eciton, for example, the female has a single petiolate 
abdominal segment, the worker two. The workers of these 
ants range over the country in large armies, killing and carrying 
off all the insects and spiders that they find and sometimes 
attacking vertebrates. They have been known to enter 
human dwellings, removing all the verminous insects contained 
therein. These driver ants shelter in temporary nests made in 




Fig. 2. — Leaf-cutting and Foraging Ants. 1, Atta cephalus; 
2, Eciton drepanophora; 3, Eciton erratica. 

hollow trees or similar situations, where the insects may be seen, 
according to T. Belt, " clustered together in a dense mass like 
a great swarm of bees hanging from the roof." 

The harvesting habits of certain ants have long been known,the 
subterranean store-houses of Mediterranean species of Aphaeno- 
gaster having been described by J. T. Moggridge and A. Forel, 
and the complex industries of the Texan Pogonomyrmex barbatus 
by H. C. McCook and W. M. Wheeler. The colonies of Aphaeno- 
gaster occupy nests extending over an area of fifty to a hundred 
square yards several feet below the surface of the ground. Into 
these underground chambers the ants carry seeds of grasses and 
other plants of which they accumulate large stores. The species 
of Pogonomyrmex strip the husks from the seeds and carry them 
out of the nest, making a refuse heap near the entrance. The 
seeds are harvested from various grasses, especially from 
Aristida oligantha, a species known as " ant rice," which often 
grows in quantity close to the site selected for the nest, but the 
statement that the ants deliberately sow this grass is an error, 
due, according to Wheeler, to the sprouting of germinating seeds 
which the ants have turned out of their store-chambers. 

Perhaps no ants have such remarkable habits as those of the 
genus Atta, — the leaf -cutting ants of tropical America (fig. 2,1). 
There are several forms of worker in these species, some with 
enormous heads, which remain in the underground nests, while 
their smaller comrades scour the country in search of suitable 
trees, which they ascend, biting off small circular pieces from the 
leaves, and carrying them off to the nests. Their labour often 
results in the complete defoliation of the tree. The tracks along 
which the ants carry the leaves to their nests are often in part 
subterranean. H. C. McCook describes an almost straight tunnel, 
nearly 450 ft. long, made by Attafervens. 

Within the nest, the leaves are cut into very minute fragments 
and gathered into small spherical heaps forming a spongy mass, 
which — according to the researches of A. Moller — serves as the 
substratum for a special fungus (Rozites gongylophora) , the staple 
food of the ants. The 'insects cultivate their fungus, weeding out 



ANT 



87 



mould and bacterial growths, and causing the appearance, on the 
surface of their " mushroom garden," of numerous small white 
bodies formed by swollen ends of the fungus hyphae. When 
the fungus is grown elsewhere than in the ants' nest it produces 
gonidia instead of the white masses on which the ants feed, 
hence it seems that these masses are indeed produced as the 
result of some unknown cultural process. Other genera of 
South American ants — A pier stigma and Cyphomyrmex — make 
similar fungal cultivations, but they use wood, grain or dung 
as the substratum instead of leaf fragments. Each kind of ant 
is so addicted to its own particular fungal food that it refuses 
disdainfully, even when hungry, the produce of an alien nest. 

Guests of Ants. — Many ants feed largely and some almost 
entirely on the saccharine secretions of other insects, the best 
known of which are the Aphides (plant-lice or " green-fly "). 
This consideration leads us to one of the most remarkable and 
fascinating features of ant-communities — the presence in the 
nests of insects and other small arthropods, which are tended 
and cared for by the ants as their " guests," rendering to the ants 
in return the sweet food which they desire. The relation between 
ants and aphids has often been compared to that between men 
and milch cattle. Sir J. Lubbock (Lord Avebury) states that 
the common British yellow ants (Lasius flavus) collect flocks of 
root-feeding aphids in their underground nests, protect them, 
build earthen shelters over them, and take the greatest 
care of their eggs. Other ants, such as the British black garden 
species (L. niger), go after the aphids that frequent the shoots of 
plants. Many species of aphid migrate from one plant to another 
at certain stages in their life-cycle when their numbers have 
very largely increased, and F. M. Webster has observed ants, 
foreseeing this emigration, to carry aphids from apple trees to 
grasses. It has been shown by M. Btisgen that the sweet secretion 
(honey-dew) of the aphids is not derived, as generally believed, 
from the paired cornicles on the fifth abdominal segment, but 
from the intestine, whence it exudes in drops and is swallowed 
by the ants. 

Besides the aphids, other insects, such as scale insects (Coccidae) , 
caterpillars of blue butterflies (Lycaenidae) , and numerous 
beetles, furnish the ants with nutrient secretions. The number 
of species of beetles that inhabit ants' nests is almost incredibly 
large, and most of these are never found elsewhere, being blind, 
helpless and dependent on the ants' care for protection and 
food; these beetles belong for the most part to the families 
Pselaphidae, Paussidae and Staphylinidae. Spring-tails and 
bristle-tails (order Aptera) of several species also frequent ants' 
nests. While some of these " guest " insects produce secretions 
that furnish the ants with food, some seem to be useless inmates 
of the nest, obtaining food from the ants and giving nothing 
in return. Others again play the part of thieves in the ant 
society; C. Janet observed a small bristle-tail (Lepismima) 
to lurk beneath the heads of two Lasius workers, while one passed 
food to the other, in order to steal the drop of nourishment and 
to make off with it. The same naturalist describes the associa- 
tion with Lasius of small mites (Antennophortis) which are carried 
about by the worker ants, one of which may have a mite beneath 
her mouth, and another on either side of her abdomen. On patting 
their carrier or some passing ant, the mites are supplied with food, 
no service being rendered by them in return for the ants' care. 
Perhaps the ants derive from these seemingly useless guests the 
same satisfaction as we obtain by keeping pet animals. Recent 
advance in our knowledge of the guests and associates of ants is 
due principally to E. Wasmann, who has compiled a list of nearly 
1500 species of insects, arachnids and crustaceans, inhabiting 
ants' nests. The warmth, shelter and abundant food in the 
nests, due both to the fresh supplies brought in by the ants and 
to the large amount of waste matter that accumulates, must 
prove strongly attractive to the various " guests." Some of the 
inmates of ants' nests are here for the purpose of preying upon the 
ants or their larvae, so that we find all kinds of relations between 
the owners of the nests and their companions, from mutual benefit 
to active hostility. 

Among these associations or guests other species of ants are 



not wanting. For example, a minute species (Solenopsis fugax) 
lives in a compound nest with various species of Formica, 
forming narrow galleries which open into the larger galleries 
of its host. The Solenopsis can make its way into the territory 
of the Formica to steal the larvae which serve it as food, but the 
Formica is too large to pursue the thief when it returns to its own 
galleries. 

Slaves. — Several species of ants are found in association with 
another species which stands to them in the relation of slave to 
master. Formica sanguinea is a well-known European slave- 
making ant that inhabits England; its workers raid the nests of 
F. fusca and other species, and carry off to their own nests pupae 
from which workers are developed that live contentedly as 
slaves of their captors. F. sanguinea can live either with or 
without slaves, but another European ant (Polyergus rufescens) 
is so dependent on its slaves— various species of Formica— that 
its workers are themselves unable to feed the larvae. The 
remarkable genus Aner gates has no workers, and its wingless 
males and females are served by communities of Tetramorium 
cespitum (fig. 3). 




Fig. 3. — Ant, Tetramorium cespitum (Linn.), a, Female; 
b, female after loss of wings; c, male; d, worker; e, larva; 
g, pupa; /, head of larva more highly magnified. After Marlatt, 
Bull. 4 (n.s.) Div. Ent. U. S. Depi. Agriculture. 

Senses and Intelligence of Ants. — That ants possess highly 
developed senses and the power of communicating with one 
another has long been known to students of their habits; the 
researches of P. Huber and Sir J. Lubbock (Lord Avebury) on 
these subjects are familiar to all naturalists. The insects are 
guided by light, being very sensitive to ultra-violet rays, and also 
by scent and hearing. Recent experiments by A. M. Fielde 
show that an ant follows her own old track by a scent exercised 
by the tenth segment of the feeler, recognizes other inmates of 
her nest by a sense of smell resident in the eleventh segment, is 
guided to the eggs, maggots and pupae, which she has to tend, 
by sensation through the eighth and ninth segments, and 
appreciates the general smell of the nest itself by means of organs 
in the twelfth segment. Lubbock's experiments of inducing 
ants to seek objects that had been removed show that they are 
guided by scent rather than by sight, and that any disturbance 
of their surroundings often causes great uncertainty in their 
actions. Ants invite one another to work, or ask for food from 



88 



ANTAE— <ANTARA IBN SHADDAD 



one another, by means of pat? with the feelers; and they respond 
to the solicitations of their guest-beetles or mites, who ask for 
food by patting the ants with their feet. In all probability the 
actions of ants are for the most part instinctive or reflex, and some 
observers, such as A. Bethe, deny them all claim to psychical 
qualities. But it seems impossible to doubt that in many cases 
ants behave in a manner that must be considered intelligent, 
that they can learn by experience and that they possess memory. 
Lubbock goes so far as to conclude the account of his experiments 
with the remark that " It is difficult altogether to deny them 
the gift of reason . . . their mental powers differ from those of 
men, not so much in kind as in degree." Wasmann considers 
that ants are neither miniature human beings nor mere reflex 
automata, and most students of their habits will probably accept 
this intermediate position as the most satisfactory. C. L. 
Morgan sums up a discussion on Lubbock's experiments in which 
the ants failed to utilize particles of earth for bridge^making, 
with the suggestive remark that " What these valuable experi- 
ments seem to show is that the ant, probably the most intelligent 
of all insects, has no claim to be regarded as a rational being." 
Nevertheless, ants can teach " rational beings " many valuable 
lessons. 

Bibliography. — The literature on ants is so vast that it is only 
possible to refer the reader to a few of the most important works on 
the family. Pierre Huber's Traite des maiurs desfourmis indigenes 
(Geneve, 1810) is the most famous of the older memoirs. H. W. 
Bates, A Naturalist on the Amazons; T. Belt, A Naturalist in 
Nicaragua; H. C. McCook, Agricultural Ant of Texas (Philadelphia, 
1880); and A. Moller's paper in Botan. Mitt, aus den^Tropen, 
( I 893), contain classical Observations on American species. Sir J. 
Lubbock's (Lord Avebury) Ants, Bees and Wasps (London t 1882), 
dealing with British and European species, has been followed by 
numerous important papers by A. Forel and C. Emery in various 
Swiss and German periodicals, and especially by C. Janet in his 
Etudes sur les fourmis, les guepes et les abeilles (Paris, &c, 1893- 
1904). Forel (Ann. Soc. Ent. Belg. xlvii., 1893, Journ. Bomnay N. H. 
Soc. 1900-1903, and Biologia Cent. Americana) and Enifery (Zool. 
Jahrb. Syst. viii., 1896) have written on the classification of the 
Formicidae. Among recent American writers on habit may be 
mentioned W. M. Wheeler (American Naturalist, 1900-1902) and 
A. M. Fielde (Proc. Acad. Sci. Philadelphia, 1901); E. Wasmann 
(Kritisches Verzeichniss der myrmecophilen und'termitophilen Arthro- 
poden, Berlin, 1894, and 3"" Congres Intern. Zool. 1895) is the great 
authority on ant-guests and associates. D. Sharp's general account 
of ants in the Cambridge Nat. Hist. (vol. vi., 1898) is excellent. For 
discussions on intelligence see A. Bethe, Journ. f. d. ges. Physiol. 
lxx. (1898); Wasmann, Die psychischen Pahigkeiten der Ameisen 
(Stuttgart, 1899) ; C. LI. Morgan, Animal Behaviour (London, 1900.) 

(G. H. C.) 

ANTAE (a Lat. plural word, possibly from ante, before), an 
architectural term given to slightly projecting pilaster strips 
which terminate the winged walls of the naos of a Greek temple. 
They owe their origin to the vertical posts of timber employed 
in the primitive palaces or temples of Greece, as at Tiryns and in 
the Heraeum at Olympia, to carry the roof timbers, as no reliance 
could be placed on the walls built with unburnt brick or in rubble 
masonry with clay mortar. When between these winged walls 
there are columns to carry the architrave, so as to form a porch, 
the latter is said to be in-antis. (See Temple.) 

ANTAEUS, in Greek mythology, a giant of Libya, the son of 
Poseidon and Gaea. He compelled all strangers passing through 
the country to wrestle with him, and as, when thrown, he derived 
fresh strength from each successive contact with his mother 
earth, he proved invincible. With the skulls of those whom he 
had slain he built a temple to his father. Heracles, in combat 
with him, discovered the source of his strength, and lifting him 
up from the earth crushed him to death (Apollodorus ii. 5; 
Hyginus, Fab. 31). The struggle between Antaeus and Heracles 
is a favourite subject in ancient sculpture. 

ANTALCIDAS, Spartan soldier and diplomatist. In 393 (or 
392 B.C.) he was sent to Tiribazus, satrap of Sardis, to undermine 
the friendly relations then existing between Athens and Persia 
by offering to recognize Persian claims to the whole of Asia Minor. 
The Athenians sent an embassy under Conon to counteract his 
efforts. Tiribazus, who was favourable to Sparta, threw Conon 
into prison, but Artaxerxes II. (Mnemon) disapproved and 
recalled his satrap. In 388 Antalcidas, then commander of the 



Spartan fleet, accompanied Tiribazus to the Persian court, and 
secured the active assistance of Persia against Athens. The 
success of his naval queries in the neighbourhood of the
Hellespont was such that Athens was glad to accept terms of 
peace (the " Peace of Antalcidas "), by which (1) the whole of 
Asia Minor, with the islands of Clazomenae and Cyprus, was 
recognized as subject to Persia, (2) all other' Greek cities — so far 
as they were not under Persian rule — were to be independent, 
except Lemnos, Imbros and Scyros, which were to belong, as 
formerly, to the Athenians. The terms were announced to the 
Greek envoys at Sardis in the winter 387-386, and were finally 
accepted by Sparta in 386. Antalcidas continued in favour with 
Artaxerxes, until the annihilation of Spartan supremacy at 
Leuctra diminished his influence. A final mission to Persia, 
probably in 367, was a failure, and Antalcidas, deeply chagrined 
and fearful of the consequences, is said to have starved himself 
to death. ^(See^SPARTA.) 

ANTANANARIVO, i.e. "town of a thousand" (Fr. spelling 
Tananarive), the capital of Madagascar, situated centrally as 
regards the length of the island, but only about 90 m. distant 
from the eastern coast, in 18 55' S., 47° 30' E. It is 135 m. 
W.S.W. of Tamatave, the principal seaport of the island, with 
which it is connected by railway, and for about 60 m. along the 
coast lagoons, a service of small steamers. The city occupies a 
commanding position, being chiefly built on the summit and slopes 
of a long and narrow rocky ridge, which extends north and south 
for about 2J m., dividing to the north in a Y-shape, and rising at 
its highest point to 690 ft. above the extensive rice plain to the 
west, which is itself 4060 ft. above sea-level. For long only the 
principal village of the Hova chiefs, Antananarivo advanced 
in importance as those chiefs made themselves sovereigns of 
the greater part of Madagascar, until it became a town of some 
80,000 inhabitants. Until 1869 all buildings within the city 
proper were of wood or rush, but even then it possessed several 
timber palaces of considerable size, the largest being 120 ft. 
high. These crown the summit of the central portion of the ridge; 
and the largest palace, with its lofty roof and towers, is the most 
conspicuous object from every point of view. Since the intro- 
duction of stone and brick, the whole city has been rebuilt and 
now contains numerous structures of some architectural pre- 
tension, the royal palaces, the houses formerly belonging to the 
prime minister and nobles, the French residency, the Anglican 
and Roman Catholic cathedrals, several stone churches, as well 
as others of brick, colleges, schools, hospitals, courts of justice 
and other government buildings, and hundreds of good dwelling- 
houses. Since the French conquest in 1895 good roads have been 
constructed throughout the city, broad flights of steps connect 
places too steep for the formation of carriage roads, and the 
central space, called Andohalo, has become a handsome place, 
with walks and terraces, flower-beds and trees. A small park has 
been laid out near the residency, and the planting of trees and 
the formation of gardens in various parts of the city give it a 
bright and attractive appearance. Water is obtained from 
springs at the foot of the hill, but it is proposed to bring an 
abundant supply from the river Ikopa, which skirts the capital 
to the south and west. The population, including that of the 
suburbs, is 69,000 (1907). The city is guarded by two forts 
built on hills to the east and south-west respectively. Including 
an Anglican and a Roman Catholic cathedral, there are about 
fifty churches in the city and its suburbs, as well as a Mahom- 
medan mosque. (J. Sl*) 

'ANTARA IBN SHADDAD, Arabian poet and warrior of the 
6th century, was famous both for his poetry and his adventurous 
life. His chief poem is contained in the M o'allakdt. The account 
of his life forms the basis of a long and extravagant romance. 
His father Shaddad was a soldier, his mother Zabuba a negro 
slave. Neglected at first, he soon claimed attention and respect 
for himself, and by his remarkable personal qualities and courage 
in battle he gained his freedom and the acknowledgment of his 
father. He took part in the great war between the related 
tribes of Abs and Dhubyan, which began over a contest of 
horses and was named after them the war of Dahis and Ghabra. 



ANTARCTIC— ANTELOPE 



89 



He died in a fight against the tribe of Tai. His poems, which 
are chiefly concerned with fighting or with his love for Abla, 
are published in W. Ahlwardt's The Diwans of the six ancient 
Arabic Poets (London, 1870); they have also been published 
separately at Beirut (1888). As regards their genuineness, cf. 
W. Ahlwardt's Bemerkungen iiber die Aechtheit der alten arabi- 
schenGedichte (Greifswald, 1872), pp.50 ff. The Romance of ' Antar 
(Sirat 'Antar ibn Shaddad) is a work which was long handed 
down by oral tradition only, has grown to immense proportions 
and has been published in 32 vols, at Cairo, 1307 (a.d. 1889), 
and in 10 vols, at Beirut, 1871. It was partly translated by 
Terrick Hamilton under the title 'Antar, a Bedoueen Romance 
(4 vols., London, 1820). 

For an account of the poet and his works see H. Thorbeckes, 
Antarah, ein vorislamischer Dichter (Leipzig, 1867), and cf. the Book 
of Songs (see Abulfaraj), vol. vii. pp. 148-153. (G. W. T.) 

ANTARCTIC (Gr. iuni, opposite, and ap/cros, the Bear, the 
northern constellation of Ursa Major), the epithet applied to 
the region (including both the ocean and the lands) round the 
South Pole. The Antarctic circle is drawn at 66° 30' S., but 
polar conditions of climate, &c, extend considerably north of 
the area thus enclosed. (See Polar Regions.) 

ANTEATER, a term applied to several mammals, but (zoo- 
logically at any rate) specially indicating the tropical American 
anteaters of the family Myrmecophagidae (see Edentata). 
The typical and largest representative of the group is the great 
anteater or ant-bear {Myrmecophagajubata) , an animal measuring 
4 ft. in length without the tail, and 2 ft. in height at the shoulder. 
Its prevailing colour is grey, with a broad black band, bordered 
with white, commencing on the chest, and passing obliquely 
over the shoulder, diminishing gradually in breadth as it ap- 
proaches the loins, where it ends in a point. It is extensively 
distributed in the tropical parts of South and Central America, 
frequenting low swampy savannas, along the banks of rivers, 
and the depths of the humid forests, but is nowhere abundant. 
Its food consists mainly of termites, to obtain which it opens 
their nests with its powerful sharp anterior claws, and as the 
insects swarm to the damaged part of their dwelling, it draws 
them into its mouth by means of its long, flexible, rapidly 
moving tongue covered with glutinous saliva. The great 
anteater is terrestrial in habits, not burrowing underground like 
armadillos. Though generally an inoffensive animal, when 
attacked it can defend itself vigorously and effectively with its 
sabre-like anterior claws. The female produces a single young 
at a birth. The tamandua anteaters, as typified by Tamandua 
(or Uroleptes) telradaclyla, are much smaller than the great 
anteater, and differ essentially from it in their habits, being 
mainly arboreal. They inhabit the dense primeval forests 
of South and Central America. The usual colour is yellowish- 
white, with a broad black lateral band, covering nearly the whole 
of the side of the body. 

The little or two-toed anteater (Cyclopes or Cycloturus didac- 
tylus) is a native of the hottest parts of South and Central 
America, and about the size of a rat, of a general yellowish colour, 
and exclusively arboreal in its habits. The name scaly anteater 
is applied to the pangolin (q.v.); the banded anteater (Myrme- 
cobius fasciatus) is a marsupial, and the spiny anteater (Echidna) 
is one of the monotremes (see Marsupialia and Monotremata). 

ANTE-CHAPEL, the term given to that portion of a chapel 
which lies on the western side of the choir screen. In some of 
the colleges at Oxford and Cambridge the ante-chapel is carried 
north and south across the west end of the chapel, constituting 
a western transept or narthex. This model, based on Merton 
College chapel (13th century), of which only chancel and tran- 
sept were built though a nave was projected, was followed at 
Wadham, New and Magdalen Colleges, Oxford, in the new 
chapel of St John's College, Cambridge, and in Eton College. 
In Jesus College, Cambridge, the transept and a short nave 
constitute the ante-chapel; in Clare College an octagonal 
vestibule serves the same purpose; and in Christ's, Trinity and 
King's Colleges, Cambridge, the ante-chapel is a portion of the 
main chapel, divided off from the chancel by the choir screen. 



ANTE-CHOIR, the term given to the space enclosed in a 
church between the outer gate or railing of the rood screen and 
the door of the screen; sometimes there is only one rail, gate or 
door, but in Westminster Abbey it is equal in depth to one bay 
of the nave. The ante-choir is also called the "fore choir." 

ANTE-FIXAE (from Lat. antefigere, to fasten before), the 
vertical blocks which terminate the covering tiles of the roof of 
a Greek temple; as spaced they take the place of the cymatium 
and form a cresting along the sides of the temple. The face of 
the ante-fixae was richly carved with the anthemion (q.v.) 
ornament. 

ANTELOPE, a zoological name which, so far as can be deter- 
mined, appears to trace its origin, through the Latin, to Pantholops, 
the old Coptic, and Antholops, the late Greek name of the fabled 
unicorn. Its adoption by the languages of Europe cannot 
apparently be traced farther back than the 4th century of our 
era, at which date it was employed to designate an imaginary 
animal living on the banks of the Euphrates. By the earlier 
English naturalists, and afterwards by Buffon, it was, however, 
applied to the Indian blackbuck, which is thus entitled to rank 
as the antelope. It follows that the subfamily typified by this 
species, in which are included the gazelles, is the one to which 
alone the term antelopes should be applied if it were employed 
in a restricted and definable sense. 

Although most people have a general vague idea of what 
constitutes an " antelope," yet the group of animals thus 
designated is one that does not admit of accurate limitations or 
definition. Some, for instance, may consider that the chamois 
and the so-called white goat of the Rocky Mountains are entitled 
to be included in the group; but this is not the view held by the 
authors of the Book of Antelopes referred to below; and, as a 
matter of fact, the term is only a vague designation for a number 
of more or less distinct groups of hollow-horned ruminants 
which do not come under the designation of cattle, sheep or 
goats; and in reality there ought to be a distinct English group- 
name for each subfamily into which "antelopes" are sub- 
divided. 

The great majority of antelopes, exclusive of the doubtful 
chamois group (which, however, will be included in the present 
article), are African, although the gazelles are to a considerable 
extent an Asiatic group. They include ruminants varying in 
size from a hare to an ox; and comprise about 150 species, 
although this number is subject to considerable variation accord- 
ing to personal views as to the limitations of species and races. 
No true antelopes are American, the prongbuck (Antilocapra), 
which is commonly called " antelope " in the United States, 
representing a distinct group; while, as already mentioned, the 
Rocky Mountain or white goat stands on the borderland between 
antelopes and goats. 

The first group, or Tragelaphinae, is represented by the African 
elands (Taurotragus) , bongo (Boocercus), kudus (Strepsiceros) and 
bushbucks or harnessed antelopes (Tragelaphus) , and the Indian 
nilgai (Boselaphus). Except in the bongo and elands, horns are 
present only in the males, and these are angulated and generally 
spirally twisted, and without rings. The muzzle is naked, small 
glands are present on the face below the eyes, and the tail is 
comparatively long. The colours are often brilliant; white 
spots and stripes being prevalent. The harnessed antelopes, or 
bushbucks, are closely allied to the kudus, from which they chiefly 
differ by the spiral formed by the horns generally having fewer 
turns. They include some of the most brilliantly coloured of all 
antelopes; the ornamentation taking the form of vertical white 
lines and rows of spots. Usually the sexes differ in colour. 
Whereas most of the species have hoofs of normal shape, in some, 
such as the nakong, or situtunga (Tragelaphus spekei), these are 
greatly elongated, in order to be suited for walking in soft mud, 
and these have accordingly been separated as Limnotragus. The 
last-named species spends most of its time in water, where it may 
be observed not infrequently among the reeds with all but its 
head and horns submerged. The true or smaller bushbucks, 
represented by the widely spread Tragelaphus scriptus, with 
several local races (fig. 1) are sometimes separated as Sylvicapra, 



ANTELOPE 



leaving the genus Tragelaphus to be represented by the larger 
T. angasi and its relatives. The genus Strepsiceros is represented 
by the true or great kudu (S. capensis or 5. strepsiceros) , fig. 2, 
ranging from the Cape to Somaliland, and the smaller 5. imberbis 
of North-East Africa, which has no throat-fringe. The large and 
brightly coloured bongo (Boocercus euryceros) of the equatorial 
forest-districts serves in some respects to connect the bushbucks 
with the elands, having horns in both sexes, and a tufted tail, 

but a brilliant orange coat 
with vertical white stripes. Still 
larger are the elands, of which 
the typical Taurolragus oryx of 
the Cape is uniformly sandy- 
coloured, although stripes ap- 
pear in the more northern T. 
0. livingstonei; while the black- 
necked eland (T. derbianus) of 
Senegambia and the Bahr-el- 
Ghazal district is a larger and 
more brilliantly coloured ani- 
mal. The small horns and 
bluish-grey colour of the adult 
bulls serve to distinguish the 
Indian nilgai (q.v.), Boselaphus Iragocamelus, from the other 
members of the subfamily. 

The second group, which is mainly African, but also repre- 
sented in Syria, is that of the Hippotraginae, typified by the 
sable antelope (Hippotragus niger) and roan antelope(i?. equinus) , 
but also including the oryxes (Oryx) and addax. These are for 
the most part large antelopes, with long cylindrical horns, which 
are present in both sexes, hairy muzzles, no face-glands, long 
tufted tails and tall thick molars of the ox-type. In Hippo- 
tragus the stout and thickly ringed horns rise vertically from a 
ridge above the eyes at an obtuse angle to the plane of the lower 
part of the face, and then sweep backwards in a bold curve; 
while theie are tufts of long white hairs near the eyes. The sable 
antelope is a southern species in which both sexes are black or 




Fig. 1. — Female Bushbuck 

{Tragelaphus scriptus) . 




Fig. 2.— Male Kudu (Strepsiceros capensis). 

blackish when adult; while the lighter-coloured and larger roan 
antelope has a much wider distribution. The South African 
blauwbok (H. leucophaeus) is extinct. In the addax (Addax 
nasomaculalus) , which is a distinct species common to North 
Africa and Syria, the ringed horns form an open spiral 
ascending in the plane of the face, and there is long, shaggy, 
dark hair on the fore-quarters in winter. The various species 
of oryx differ from Hippotragus by the absence of the white 
eye-tufts, and by the horns sloping backwards in the plane of 
the face. In the South African gemsbuck (Oryx gazella), fig. 3, 
the East African beisa or true oryx (O. beisa), and the white 
Arabian (0. beatrix) the horns are straight, but in the North 
African white oryx or algazel (O. leucoryx or O. algazal) they are 



scimitar-shaped; the colour of this species being white and 
pale chestnut (see Addax, Oryx, and Sable Antelope). 

The third subfamily is the Antilopinae, the members of which 
have a much wider geographical range than either of the fore- 
going groups. The subfamily is characterized by the narrow 
crowns of the molars, which are similar to those of sheep, and 
the hairy muzzle. Generally there are face-glands below the 
eyes; and the tail is moderate or short. Pits are present in 
the forehead of the skull, and the horns are ringed for part of 
their length, with a compressed base; their form being often lyrate, 
but sometimes spiral. Lateral hoofs are generally present. 

Gazelles (Gazella) , which form by far the largest genus of the 
subfamily, are inhabitants of open and frequently more or less 
desert districts. They are mostly of a sandy colour, with dark 
and light markings on the face, and often a dark band on the 
flanks. The horns are more or less lyrate, and generally developed 
in both sexes; there are frequently brushes of haii on the knees. 
Gazelles may be divided into groups. The one to which the North 
African G. dorcas belongs is characterized by the presence of 




Fig. 3. — Gemsbuck, or Cape Oryx (Oryx gazella). 

lyrate or sub-lyrate horns in both sexes, and by the white of 
the buttocks not extending on to the haunches. Nearly allied 
is the group including the Indian G. bennetti and the Arabian 
G. arabica, in which the horns have a somewhat S-shaped 
curvature in profile. In the group represented by the African 
G. granti, G. thomsoni, G. mohr, &c, the whitcspf the buttocks 
often sends a prolongation on to the flanks, the horns are long 
and the size is large. Lastly, the Central Asian G. gutturosa, 
G. subgutturosd and G. picticaudata form a group in which the 
females are hornless and the face-markings inconspicuous or 
wanting. 

The South African springbuck (Antidorcas euchore) is nearly 
related to the gazelles, from which it is distinguished by the 
presence on the middle line of the loins of an evertible pouch, 
lined with long white hairs capable of erection. It has also one 
premolar tooth less in the lower jaw. Formerly these beautiful 
antelopes existed in countless numbers on the plains of South 
Africa, and were in the habit of migrating in droves which com- 
pletely filled entire valleys. Now they are comparatively rare. 

The dibatag or Clarke's gazelle (Ammodorcas clarkei) , of Somali- 
land, forms a kind of connecting link between the true gazelles 
and the gerenuk, this being especially shown in the skull. The 
face has the ordinary gazelle-markings; but the rather short 
horns— which are wanting in the female — have a peculiar upward 
and forward curvature, unlike that obtaining in the gazelles 



AxMTELOPE 



9 1 



and somewhat resembling that of the reedbuck. The neck is 
longer and more slender than in ordinary gazelles, and the tail 
is likewise relatively long. Although local, these animals are 
fairly common in the interior of Somaliland, where they are 
known by the name of dibatag. In running, the head and neck 
are thrown backwards, while the tail is turned forwards over 
the back. 

The East African gerenuk (q.v.), or Waller's gazelle (Litho- 
cranius walleri), of which two races have been named, is a very 
remarkable ruminant, distinguished not only by its exceedingly 
elongated neck and limbs, but also by the peculiar hooked form 
of the very massive horns of the bucks, the dense structure and 
straight profile of the skull, and the extreme slenderness of the 
lower jaw. 

Astillmoreaberrantgazelle is a small North-East African species 
known as the beira ( Dorcatragus melanotis) , with very short horns, 
large hoofs and a general appearance recalling that of some of the 
members of the subfamily Neotraginae, although in other respects 
gazelle-like. The blackbuck (Anlilope cervicapra or A . bezoartica) 
of India, a species taking its name from the deep black coat 
assumed by the adult bucks, and easily recognized by the graceful, 
spirally twisted horns ornamenting the heads of that sex, is 
now the sole representative of the genus Anlilope, formerly 
taken to embrace the whole of the true antelopes. Large face- 
glands are characteristic of the species, which inhabits the open 
plains of India in large herds. They leap high in the air, like 
the springbuck, when on the move. 

With the palla (q.v.) , or impala(^4 cpyceros melampus) , we reach 
an exclusively African genus, characterized by the lyrate horns 
of the bucks, the absence of lateral hoofs, and the presence of 
a pair of glands with black tufts of hair on the hind-feet. 

The sheep-like saiga (q.v.) , Saiga tatarica, of the Kirghiz steppes 
stands apart from all other antelopes by its curiously puffed 
and trunk-like nose, which can be wrinkled up when the animal 
is feeding and has the nostrils opening downwards. More or 
less nearly related to the saiga is the chiru (q.v.), Pantholops 
hodgsoni. of Tibet, characterized by the long upright black horns 
of the bucks, and the less convex nose, in which the nostrils 
open anteriorly instead of downwards. 

The Neotraginae (or Nanotraginae) form an exclusively 
African group of small-sized antelopes divided into several, 
for the most part nearly related, genera. Almost the only 
characters they possess in common are the short and spike-like 
horns of the bucks, which are ringed at the base, with smooth 
tips, and the large size of the face-gland, which opens by a 
circular aperture. Neotragus is represented by the pigmy royal 
antelope (A r . pygmaeus) of Guinea; Hylarnus includes one species 
from Cameroon and a second from the Semliki forest; while 
Ncsotragus comprises the East African suni antelopes, A r . 
moschatus and A r . livingstonianus. All three might, however, 
well be included in Neotragus. The royal antelope is the smallest 
of the Bovidae. 

The steinbok (Rhaphiceros campestris) and the grysbok (R. 
melanotis) are the best-known representatives of a group char- 
acterized by the vertical direction of the horns and the small 
gland-pit in the skull; lateral hoofs being absent in the first- 
named and present in the second. A bare gland-patch behind 
the ear serves to distinguish the oribis or ourebis, as typified by 
Oribia montana of the Cape; lateral hoofs being present and 
the face-pit large. 

From all the preceding the tiny dik-diks (Madoqua) of North- 
East Africa differ by their hairy noses, expanded in some species 
into short trunks; while the widely spread klipspringer (q.v.), 
Oreotragus saltator, with its several local races, is unfailingly 
distinguishable by its rounded blunt hoofs and thick, brittle, 
golden-flecked hair. 

In some respects connecting the last group with the Cervi- 
caprinae is the rhebok, or vaal-rhebok (Pelea capreolus), a grey 
antelope of the size of a roebuck, with small upright horns in the 
bucks recalling those of the last group, and small lateral hoofs, 
but no face-glands. In size and several structural. features it 
approximates to the more typical Ccrvicaprinac, as represented 



by the reedbuck (Cervicapra), and the waterbucks and kobs 
■(Cobus or Kobus), all of which are likewise African. These are 
medium-sized or large antelopes with naked muzzles, narrow 
sheep-like upper molars, fairly long tails, rudimentary or no 
face-glands, and pits in the frontal bones of the skull. Reedbuck 
(q.v.), or rietbok (Cervicapra), are foxy-red antelopes ranging 
in size from a fallow-deer to a roe, with thick bushy tails, for- 
wardly curving black horns, and a bare patch of glandular skin 
behind each ear. They keep to open country near water. The 
waterbuck (q.v.), Cobus, on the other hand, actually seek refuge 
from pursuit in the water. They have heavily fringed necks, 
tufted tails, long lyrate horns in the bucks (fig. 4) but no glandular 
ear-patches. The true waterbuck (C. ellipsiprymnus) , and the 
defassa or sing-sing (C. defassa), are the two largest species, 
equal in size to red deer, and grey or reddish in colour. Of the 
smaller forms or kobs, C. maria and C. leucotis of the swamps of 
the White Nile are characterized by the black coats of the adult 
bucks; the West African C. cob, and its East African repre- 
sentative C. thomasi,- are wholly red antelopes of the size of 




Fig. 4. — Waterbuck (Cobus ellipsiprymnus). 

roedeer; the lichi or lech we (C. lichi) is characterized by its 
long horns, black fore-legs and superior size; while the puku 
(C. vardoni), which is also a swamp-loving species from South- 
Central Africa, differs from the three preceding species by the 
fore-legs being uniformly foxy. 

The duikers, or duikerboks (Cephalophus) , of Africa, which 
range in size from a large hare to a fallow-deer, typify the sub- 
family Cephalophinae, characterized by the spike-like horns of 
the bucks, the elongated aperture of the face-glands, the naked 
muzzle, the relatively short tail, and the square-crowned upper 
molars; lateral hoofs being present. In the duikers themselves 
the single pair of horns is set in the midst of a tuft of long hairs, 
and the face-gland opens in a long naked line on the side of the 
face above the muzzle. The group is represented in India by the 
chousingha or four-horned antelope (Tetraceros quadricornis), 
generally distinguished by the feature from which it takes its 
name (see Duiker). 

The last section of the true antelopes is the Bubalinae, repre- 
sented by the hartebeest (q.v.), Bubalis, blesbok and sassaby 
(Damaliscus), and the gnu (q.v.) or wildebeest (Connochaetes, also 
called Catoblepas) , all being African with the exception of one or 
two hartebeests which range into Syria. All these are large and 
generally more or less uniformly coloured antelopes with horns 
in both sexes, long and more or less hairy tails, high withers, 
small face-glands, naked muzzles, tall, narrow upper molars, and 
the absence of pits in the frontal bones. The long face, high 
crest for the horns, which are ringed, lyrate and more or less 
strongly angulated, and the moderately long tail, are the 
distinctive features of the hartebeests. They are large red 



9 2 



ANTEMNAE— ANTENOR 



antelopes (fig. 5), often with black markings on the face and limbs. 
In Damaliscus, which includes, among many other species, the 
blesbok and bontebok (D. albifrons and D. pygargus) and the 
sassaby or bastard hartebeest (D. lunatus), the face is shorter, 
and the horns straighter and set on a less elevated crest. The 
colour, too, of these antelopes tends in many cases to purple, 
with white markings. From the hartebeest the gnus (fig. 6) 




Fig. 5. — Cape Hartebeest (Bubalis cama). 

differ by their smooth and outwardly or downwardly directed 
horns, broad bristly muzzles, heavy manes and long horse-like 
tails. There are two chief types, the white-tailed gnu or black 
wildebeest (Connochaetes gnu) of South Africa, now nearly 
extinct (fig. 6), and the brindled gnu, or blue wildebeest (C. 
iaurinus), which, with some local variation, has a large range in 
South and East Africa. 




Fig. 6. — White-tailed Gnu, or Black Wildebeest (Connochaetes gnu) . 

In concluding this survey of living antelopes, reference may 
be made to the subfamily Rupicaprinae (typified by the European 
chamois), the members of which, as already stated, are in some 
respects intermediate between antelopes and goats. They are 
all small or medium-sized mountain ruminants, for the most part 
European and Asiatic, but with one North American repre- 
sentative. They are heavily built ruminants, with horns of 
nearly equal size in both sexes, short tapering tails, large hoofs, 
narrow goat-like upper molars, and usually small face-glands. 



The horns are generally rather small, upright, ringed at the base, 
and more or less curved backwards, but in the takin they are 
gnu-like. The group is represented by the European chamois 
or gemse (Rupicapra tragus or R. rupicapra), broadly distin- 
guished by its well-known hook-like horns, and the Asiatic gorals 
( Urotragus) and serows (Nemorhaedus), which are represented by 
numerous species ranging from Tibet, the Himalaya, and China, 
to the Malay Peninsula and islands, being in the two latter areas 
the sole representatives of both antelopes and goats. In the 
structure of its horns the North American white Rocky Mountain 
goat (Oreamnus) is very like a serow, from which it differs by 
its extremely short cannon-bones. In the latter respect this 
ruminant resembles the takin (Budorcas) of Tibet, which, as 
already mentioned, has horns recalling those of the white-tailed 
gnu. Possibly the Arctic musk-ox (Ovibos) may be connected 
with the takin by means of certain extinct ruminants, such as 
the North American Pleistocene Euceralherium and the European 
Pliocene Criotherium (see Chamois, Goral, Serow, Rocky 
Mountain Goat and Takin). 

Extinct Antelopes s — Only a few lines can be devoted to extinct 
antelopes, the earliest of which apparently date from the Euro- 
pean Miocene. An antelope from the Lower Pliocene of Northern 
India known as Bubalis, or Damaliscus, palaeindicus indicates 
the occurrence of the hartebeest group in that country. Cobus 
also occurs in the same formation, as does likewise Hippotragus. 
Palaeoryx from the corresponding horizon in Greece and Samos 
is to some extent intermediate between Hippotragus and Oryx. 
Gazelles are common in the Miocene and Pliocene of both Europe 
and Asia. Elands and kudus appear to have been represented 
in India during the Pliocene; the European Palaeoreas of the 
same age seems to be intermediate between the two, while 
Protragelaphus is evidently another European representative of 
the group. Helicophora is another spiral-horned European 
Pliocene antelope, but of somewhat doubtful affinity; the same 
being the case with the large Criotherium of the Samos Pliocene, 
in which the short horns are curiously twisted. As already 
stated, there is a possibility of this latter ruminant being allied 
both to the takin and the musk-ox. Palaeotragus and Tragoceros, 
of the Lower Pliocene of Greece, at one time regarded as antelopes, 
are now known to be ancestors of the okapi. 

For antelopes in general, see P. L. Sclater and O. Thomas, The 
Book of Antelopes- (4 vols., London, 1894-1900). (R. L.*) 

ANTEMNAE (Lat. ante amnem, sc. Anienem; Varro, Ling. 
Lot. v. 28), an ancient village of Latium, situated on the W. of 
the Via Salaria, 2 m. N. of Rome, where the Anio falls into the 
Tiber. It is said to have been conquered by Romulus after the 
rape of the Sabine women, and to have assisted the Tarquins. 
Certainly it soon lost its independence, and in Strabo's time was 
a mere village. The site is one of great strength, and is now 
occupied by a fort, in the construction of which traces of the outer 
walls and of huts, and several wells and a cistern, all belonging 
to the primitive village, were discovered, and also the remains 
of a villa of the end of the Republic. 

See T. Ashby in Papers of the British School at Rome, iii. 14. 

ANTENOR, an Athenian sculptor, of the latter part of the 
6th century B.C. He was the author of the group of the tyran- 
nicides Harmodius and Aristogeiton, set up by the Athenians on 
the expulsion of the Peisistratidae, and carried away to Persia 
by Xerxes. A basis with the signature of Antenor, son of 
Eumares, has been shown to belong to one of the dedicated 
female figures of archaic style which have been found on the 
Acropolis of Athens. 

See Greek Art ; and E. A. Gardner's Handbook of Greek Sculpture, 
i. p. 182. 

ANTENOR, in Greek legend, one of the wisest of the Trojan 
elders and counsellors. He advised his fellow-townsmen to send 
Helen back to her husband, and showed himself not unfriendly 
to the Greeks and an advocate of peace. In the later story, 
according to Dares and Dictys, he was said to have treacherously 
opened the gates of Troy to the enemy; in return for which, at 
the general sack of the city, his house, distinguished by a panther's 
skin at the door, was spared by the victors. Afterwards, 



ANTEQUERA— ANTKESTERIA 



93 



according to various versions of the legend, he either rebuilt a 
city on the site of Troy, or settled at Cyrene, or became the 
founder of Patavium. 

Homer, Iliad, iii. 148, vii. 347; Horace, Epp. i. 2. 9; Livy i. 1; 
Pindar, Pythia, v. 83; Virgil, A en. i. 242. 

ANTEQUERA (the ancient Anticaria), a town of southern 
Spain, in the province of Malaga; on the Bobadilla- Granada 
railway. Pop. (1900) 31,609. Antequera overlooks the fertile 
valley bounded on the S. by the Sierra de los Torcales, and on 
the N. by the river Guadalhorce. It occupies a commanding 
position, while the remains of its walls, and of a fine Moorish 
castle on a rock that overhangs the town, show how admirably 
its natural defences were supplemented by art. Besides several 
interesting churches and palaces, it contains a fine arch, erected 
in 1595 in honour of Philip II., and partly constructed of in- 
scribed Roman masonry. In the eastern suburbs there is one of 
the largest grave-mounds in Spain, said to be of prehistoric date* 
and with subterranean chambers excavated to a depth of 65 ft. 
The Pena de los Enamorados, or " Lovers' Peak," is a conspicuous 
crag which owes its name to the romantic legend adapted by 
Robert Southey (1774-1843) in his Laila and Manuel. Woollen 
fabrics are manufactured, and the sugar industry established in 
1890 employs several thousand hands; but the majority of the 
inhabitants are occupied by the trade in grain, fruit, wine and 
oil. Marble is quarried; and at El Torcal, 6 m. south, there is 
a very curious labyrinth of red marble rocks. Antequera was 
captured from the Moors in 1410, and became until 1492 one of 
the most important outposts of the Christian power in Spain. 

See C. Fernandez, Historia de Antequera, desde su fondacion 
(Malaga, 1842). 

ANTEROS, pope for some weeks at the end of the year 235. 
He died on the 3rd of January 236. His original epitaph was 
discovered in the Catacombs. 

ANTHELION (late Gr. dvflijXios, opposite the sun), the 
luminous ring or halo sometimes seen in Alpine or polar regions 
surrounding the shadow of the head of an observer cast upon a 
bank of cloud or mist. The halo diminishes in brightness from 
the centre outwards, and is probably due to the diffraction of 
light. Under favourable 'conditions four concentric rings may 
be seen round the shadow of the observer's head, the outermost, 
which seldom appears, having an angular radius of 40 . 

ANTHEM, derived from the Gr. kvri<i>Uiva, through the Saxon 
antefn, a word which originally had the same meaning as anti- 
phony (g.v.). It is now, however, generally restricted to a form 
of church music, particularly in the service of the Church of 
England, in which it is appointed by the rubrics to follow the 
third collect at both morning and evening prayer, " in choirs and 
places where they sing." It is just as usual in this place to have 
an ordinary hymn as an anthem, which is a more elaborate 
composition than the congregational hymns. Several anthems 
are included in the English coronation service. The words are 
selected from Holy Scripture or in some cases from the Liturgy, 
and the music is generally more elaborate and varied than that 
of psalm or hymn tunes. Anthems may be written for solo 
voices only, for the full choir, or for both, and according to this 
distinction are called respectively Verse, Full, and Full with Verse. 
Though the anthem of the Church of England is analogous to the 
motel of the Roman Catholic and Lutheran Churches, both being 
written for a trained choir and not for the congregation, it is as 
a musical form essentially English in its origin and development. 
The English school of musicians has from the first devoted its 
chief attention to this form, and scarcely a composer of any note 
can be named who has not written several good anthems. Tallis, 
Tye, Byrd, and Farrant in the 1 6th century; Orlando Gibbons, 
Blow, and Purcell in the 17th, and Croft, Boyce, James Kent, 
James Nares, Benjamin Cooke, and Samuel Arnold in the 18th 
were famous composers of anthems, and in more recent times 
the names are too numerous to mention. 

ANTHEMION (from the Gr. &.vdifitov, a flower), the conven- 
tional design of flower or leaf forms which was largely employed 
by the Greeks to decorate (1) the fronts of ante-fixae, (2) the 
upper portion of the stele or vertical tombstones, (3) the necking 



of the Ionic columns of the Erechtheum and its continuation as a 
decorative frieze on the walls of the same, and (4) the cymatium 
of a cornice. Though generally known as the honeysuckle 
ornament, from its resemblance to that flower, its origin will be 
found in the flower of the acanthus plant. 

ANTHEMIUS, Greek mathematician and architect, who pro- 
duced, under the patronage of Justinian (a.d. 532), the original 
and daring plans for the church of St Sophia in Constantinople, 
which strikingly displayed at once his knowledge and his ignore 
ance. He was one of five, brothers — the sons of Stephanus, a 
physician of Tralles — who were all more or less eminent in their 
respective departments. Dioscorus followed his father's pro- 
fession in his native place; Alexander became at Rome one of the 
most celebrated medical men of his time; •Olympius was deeply 
versed in Roman jurisprudence; and Metrodorus was one of the 
distinguished grammarians of the great Eastern capital. It is 
related of Anthemius that, having a quarrel with his next-door 
neighbour Zeno, he annoyed him in two ways. First, he made a 
number of leathern tubes the ends of which he contrived to fix 
among the joists and flooring of a fine upper-room in which Zeno 
entertained his friends, and then subjected it to a miniature 
earthquake by sending steam through the tubes. Secondly, he 
simulated thunder and lightning, the latter by flashing in Zeno's 
eyes an intolerable light from a slightly hollowed mirror. Certain 
it is that he wrote a treatise on burning-glasses. A fragment of 
this was published under the title Hepi Trapa86i;uv iir\x avr \i i ^ r ^>v 
by L. Dupuy in 1777, and also appeared in 1786 in the forty- 
second volume of the Hist, de P Acad, des Inscr.; A. Westermann 
gave a revised edition of it in his napa&j&rypdc^oi (Scriptores 
rerum mirabilium Graeci), 1839. In the course of constructions 
for surfaces to reflect to one and the same point (1) all rays in 
whatever direction passing through another point, (2) a set of 
parallel rays, Anthemius assumes a property of an ellipse not 
found in Apollonius (the equality of the angles subtended at a 
focus by two tangents drawn from a point), and (having given 
the focus and a double ordinate) he uses the focus and directrix to 
obtain any number of points on a parabola — the first instance on 
record of the practical use of the directrix. 

On Anthemius generally, see Procopius, De Aedific. i. 1 ; Agathias, 
Hist. v. 6-9 ; Gibbon's Decline and Fall, cap. xl. (T. L. H-) 

ANTHESTERIA, one of the four Athenian festivals in honour 
of Dionysus, held annually for three days (nth-i3th) in the month 
of Anthesterion (February-March) . The pbject of the festival was 
to celebrate the maturing of the wine stored at the previous 
vintage, and the beginning of spring. On the first day, called 
Pithoigia (opening of the casks), libations were offered from the 
newly opened casks to the god of wine, all the household, includ- 
ing servants and slaves, joining in the festivities. The rooms and 
the drinking vessels in them were adorned with spring flowers, as 
were also the children over three years of age. The second day, 
named Cho'es (feast of beakers) , was a time of merrymaking. The 
people dressed themselves gaily, some in the disguise of the 
mythical personages in the suite of Dionysus, and paid a round of 
visits to their acquaintances. Drinking clubs met to drink off 
matches, the winner being he who drained his cup most rapidly. 
Others poured libations on the tombs of deceased relatives. On 
the 'part of the state this day was the occasion of a peculiarly 
solemn and secret ceremony in one of the sanctuaries of Dionysus 
in the Lenaeum, which for the rest of the year was closed. The 
basilissa (or basilinna), wife of the archon basileus for the time, 
went through a ceremony of marriage to the wine god, in which 
she was assisted by fourteen Athenian matrons, called geraerae, 
chosen by the basileus and sworn to secrecy. The days on which 
the Pithoigia and Choes were celebrated were both regarded as 
airo<t>p&8ts (nefasti) and fuapai (" denied "), necessitating ex- 
piatory libations; on them the souls of the dead came up from 
the underworld and walked abroad; people chewed leaves of 
whitethorn and besmeared their doors with tar to protect them- 
selves from evil. But at least in private circles the festive 
character of the ceremonies predominated. The third day was 
named Chytri (feast of pots, from xvrpoSt a P°t), a festival of the 
dead. Cooked pulse was offered to Hermes, in his capacity of 3 



94 



ANTHIM— ANTHOLOGY 



god of the lower world, and to the souls of the dead. Although 
no performances were allowed at the theatre, a sort of rehearsal 
took place, at which the players for the ensuing dramatic festival 
were selected. 

The name Anthesteria, according to the account of it given 
above, is usually connected with &vdos (" flower," or the 
" bloom " of the grape), but A. W. Verrall (Journal of Hellenic 
Studies, xx., 1900, p. 115) explains it as a feast of " revocation" 
(from avadiffffaadai, to " pray back " or " up "), at which the 
ghosts of the dead were recalled to the land of the living (cp. the 
Roman mundus patel) . J. E. Harrison (ibid. 100,100, and Prolego- 
mena), regarding the Anthesteria as primarily a festival of all 
souls, the object of which was the expulsion of ancestral ghosts 
by means of placation, explains iridoLyla as the feast of the 
opening of the graves (irWos meaning a large urn used for burial 
purposes), xo« as the day of libations, and xurpoi as the day of 
the grave-holes (not " pots," which is xfrrpcu), i n point of 
time really anterior to the nOotyia. E. Rohde and M. P. Nilsson, 
however, take the xvrpot. to mean " water vessels," arid connect 
the ceremony with the Hydrophoria, a libation festival to pro- 
pitiate the dead who had perished in the flood of Deucalion. 

See F. Hiller von Gartringen in Pauly-Wissowa's Realencyclapddie 
(s.v.) ; J. Girard in Daremberg and Saglio, Dictionnaire des antiquites 
(s.v. " Dionysia ") ; and F. A. Voigt in Roscher's Lexikon der 
Mythologie (s.v. " Dionysos ") ; J. E. Harrison, Prolegomena to the 
Study of Greek Religion (1903) ; M. P. Nilsson, Studia de Dionysiis 
Atticis (1900) and Griechische Feste (1906); G. F. Schomann, 
Griechische Alterthilmer, ii. (ed. J. H. Lipsius, 1902), p. 516; A. 
Mommsen, Feste der Stadt Athen (1898) ; E. Rohde, Psyche (4th ed., 
1907), p. 237. 

ANTHIM THE IBERIAN, a notable figure in the ecclesiastical 
history of Rumania. A Georgian by birth, he came to Rumania 
early in the second half of the 17 th century, as a simple monk. 
He became bishop of Ramnicu in 1705, and m 1708 archbishop 
of VValachia. Taking a leading part in the political movements of 
the time, he came into conflict with the newly appointed Greek 
hospodars, and was exiled to Rumelia. But on his crossing the 
Danube in 17 16 he was thrown into the water and drowned, 
as it is alleged, at the instigation of the prince of Walachia. 
He was a man of great talents and spoke and wrote many 
Oriental and European languages. Though a foreigner, he soon 
acquired a thorough knowledge of Rumanian, and was instru- 
mental in helping to introduce that language into the church 
as its official language. He was a master printer and an artist 
of the first order. He cut the wood blocks for the books which 
he printed in Tirgovishtea, Ramnicu, Snagov and Bucharest. 
He was also the first to introduce Oriental founts of type into 
Rumania, and he printed there the first Arabic missal for the 
Christians of the East (R&mnicu, 1702). He also trained 
Georgians in the art of printing, and cut the type with which 
under his pupil Mihail Ishtvanovitch they printed the first 
Georgian Gospels (Tiflis, 1709). A man of great oratorical 
power, Anthim delivered a series of sermons (Didahii), and some 
of his pastoral letters are models of style and of language as 
wejl as of exact and beautiful printing. He also completed a 
whole corpus of lectionaries, missals, gospels, &c. 

See M. Gaster, Chrestomathie roumaine (1881), and " Gesch. 
d. rumanischen Litteratur," in Grober, Grundriss d. rom. Philo- 
logie, vol. ii. (1899); and E. Picot, Notice sur Anthim d'lvir (Paris, 
1886). (M. G.) 

ANTHOLOGY. The term "anthology," literally denoting 
a garland or collection of flowers, is figuratively applied to any 
selection of literary beauties, and especially to that great body 
of fugitive poetry, comprehending about 4500 pieces, by upwards 
of 300 writers, which is commonly known as the Greek Anthology. 

Literary History of the Greek Anthology. — The art of occasional 
poetry had been cultivated in Greece from an early period, — 
less, however, as the vehicle of personal feeling, than as the 
recognized commemoration of remarkable individuals or events, 
on sepulchral monuments and votive offerings: Such com- 
positions were termed epigrams, i.e. inscriptions. The modern 
use of the word is a departure from the original sense, which 
simply indicated that the composition was intended to be en- 
graved or inscribed. Such a composition must necessarily be 



brief, and the restraints attendant upon its publication concurred 
with the simplicity of Greek taste in prescribing conciseness of 
expression, pregnancy of meaning, purity of diction and single- 
ness of thought, as the indispensable conditions of excellence 
in the epigrammatic style. The term was soon extended to 
any piece by which these conditions were fulfilled. The transition 
from the monumental to the purely literary character of the 
epigram was favoured by the exhaustion of more lofty forms of 
poetry, the general increase, from the general diffusion of culture, 
of accomplished writers and tasteful readers, but, above all, 
by the changed political circumstances of the times, which in- 
duced many who would otherwise have engaged in public affairs 
to addict themselves to literary pursuits. These causes came 
into full operation during the Alexandrian era, in which we 
find every description of epigrammatic composition perfectly 
developed. About 60 B.C., the sophist and poet, Meleager of 
Gadara, undertook to combine the choicest effusions of his 
predecessors into a single body of fugitive poetry. Collections 
of monumental inscriptions, or of poems on particular subjects, 
had previously been formed by Polemon Periegetes and others; 
but Meleager first gave the principle a comprehensive application. 
His selection, compiled from forty-six of his predecessors, and 
including numerous contributions of his own, was entitled 
The Garland (Sridyavos) ; and in an introductory poem each poet 
is compared to some flower, fancifully deemed appropriate to 
his genius. The arrangement of his collection was alphabetical, 
according to the initial letter of each epigram. 

In the age of the emperor Tiberius (or Trajan, according to 
others) the work of Meleager was continued by another epigram- 
matist, Philippus of Thessalonica, who first employed the term 
anthology. His collection, which included the compositions of 
thirteen writers subsequent to Meleager, was also arranged 
alphabetically, and contained an introductory poem. It was of 
inferior quality to Meleager's. Somewhat later, under Hadrian, 
another supplement was formed by the sophist Diogenianus 
of Heracleia (2nd century A.D.), and Strato of Saxdis compiled 
his elegant but tainted Movaa UmSikji (Musa Puerilis) from 
his productions and those of earlier writers. No further collection 
from various sources is recorded until the time of Justinian, 
when epigrammatic writing, especially of an amatory character, 
experienced a great revival at the hands of Agathias of Myrina, 
the historian, Paulus Silentiarius, and their circle. Their in- 
genious but mannered productions were collected by Agathias 
into a new anthology, entitled The Circle (KukXos); it was the 
first to be divided into books, and arranged with reference to 
the subjects of the pieces. 

These and other collections made during the middle ages are 
now lost. The partial incorporation of them into a single body, 
classified according to the contents in 1 5 books, was the work 
of a certain Constantinus Cephalas, whose name alone is preserved 
in the single MS. of his compilation extant, but who probably 
lived during the temporary revival of letters under Constantine 
Porphyrogenitus, at the beginning of the 10th century. He 
appears to have merely made excerpts from the existing antho- 
logies, with tne addition of selections from Lucillius, Palladas, 
and other epigrammatists, whose compositions had been published 
separately. His arrangement, to which we shall have to recur,, 
is founded on a principle of classification, and nearly corresponds 
to that adopted by Agathias. His principle of selection is un- 
known; it is only certain that while he omitted much that he 
should have retained, he has preserved much that would other- 
wise have perished. The extent of our obligations may be ascer- 
tained by a comparison between his anthology and that of the 
next editor, the monk Maximus Planudes (a.d. 1320), who has 
not merely grievously mutilated the anthology of Cephalas by 
omissions, but has disfigured it by interpolating verses of his 
own. We are, however, indebted to him for the preservation 
of the epigrams on works of art, which seem to have been 
accidentally omitted from our only transcript of Cephalas. 

The Planudean (in seven books) was the only recension of the 
anthology known at the revival of classical literature, and was first 
published at Florence, by Janus Lascaris, in 1494. It long continued 



ANTHOLOGY 



95 



to be the only accessible collection, for although the Palatine MS., 
the sole extant copy of the anthology of Cephalas, was discovered 
in the Palatine library at Heidelberg, and copied by Saumaise 
(Salmasius) in 1606, it was not published until 1776, when it was 
included in Brunck's Analecta Veterum Poetarum Graecorum. The 
MS. itself had frequently changed its quarters. In 1623, having 
been taken in the sack of Heidelberg in the Thirty Years' War, it 
was sent with the rest of the Palatine Library to Rome as a present 
from Maximilian I. of Bavaria to Gregory XV., who had it divided 
into two parts, the first of which was by far the larger; thence it 
was taken to Paris in 1797. In 1816 it went back to Heidelberg, but 
in an incomplete state, the second part remaining at Paris. It is 
now represented at Heidelberg by a photographic facsimile. Brunck's 
edition was superseded by the standard one of Friedrich Jacobs 
(1794-1814, 13 vols.), the text of which was reprinted in a more 
convenient form in 1813-1817, and occupies three pocket volumes in 
the Tauchnitz series of the classics. The best edition for general 
purposes is perhaps that of Diibner in Didot's Bibliotheca (1864- 
1872), which contains the Palatine Anthology, the epigrams of the 
Planudean Anthology not comprised in the former, an appendix of 
pieces derived from other sources, copious notes selected from all 
quarters, a literal Latin prose translation by Boissonade, Bothe, and 
Lapaume and the metrical Latin versions of Hugo Grotius. A third 
volume, edited by E. Cougny, was published in 1890. The best 
edition of the Planudean Anthology is the splendid one by van 
Bosch and van Lennep (1795-1822). There is also a complete 
edition of the text by Stadtmiiller in the Teuhner series. 

Arrangement. — The Palatine MS., the archetype of the present 
text, was transcribed by different persons at different times, 
and the actual arrangement of the collection 'does not correspond 
with that signalized in the index. It is as follows: Book 1. 
Christian epigrams; 2. Christodorus's description of certain 
statues; 3. Inscriptions in the temple at Cyzicus; 4. The pre- 
faces of Meleager, Philippus, and Agathias to their respective 
collections; 5. Amatory epigrams; 6. Votive inscriptions; 
7. Epitaphs; 8. The epigrams of Gregory of Nazianzus; 9. 
Rhetorical and illustrative epigrams; 10. Ethical pieces; 11. 
Humorous and convivial; 12. Strato's Musa Puerilis; 13. 
Metrical curiosities; 14. Puzzles, enigmas, oracles; 15. Mis- 
cellanies. The epigrams on works of art, as already stated, are 
missing from the Codex Palatinus, and must be sought in an 
appendix of epigrams only occurring in the Planudean Anthology. 
The epigrams hitherto recovered from ancient monuments and 
similar sources form appendices in the second and third volumes 
of Dubner's edition. 

Style and Value. — One of the principal claims of the Anthology 
to attention is derived from its continuity, its existence as a 
living and growing body of poetry throughout all the vicissitudes 
of Greek civilization. More ambitious descriptions of com- 
position speedily ran their course, and having attained their 
complete development became extinct or at best lingered only 
in feeble or conventional imitations. The humbler strains of the 
epigrammatic muse, on the other hand, remained ever fresh and 
animated, ever in intimate union with the spirit of the generation 
that gave them birth. To peruse the entire collection; accord- 
ingly, is as it were to assist at the disinterment of an ancient city, 
where generation has succeeded generation on the same site, and 
each stratum of soil enshrines the vestiges of a distinct epoch, but 
where all epochs, nevertheless, combine to constitute an organic 
whole, and the transition from one to the other is hardly percep- 
tible. Four stages may be indicated : — 1 . The Hellenic proper, of 
which Simonides of Ceos (c. 556-469 B.C.), the author of most of 
the sepulchral inscriptions on those who fell in the Persian wars, 
is the characteristic representative. This is characterized by a' 
simple dignity of phrase, which to a modern taste almost verges 
upon baldness, by a crystalline transparency of diction, and by 
an absolute fidelity to the original conception of the epigram. 
Nearly all the pieces of this era are actual bona fide inscriptions 
or addresses to real personages, whether living or deceased; 
narratives, literary exercises, and sports of fancy are exceedingly 
rare. 2. The epigram received a great development in its second 
or Alexandrian era, when its range was so extended as to include 
anecdote, satire, and amorous longing; when epitaphs and votive 
inscriptions were composed on imaginary persons and things, 
and men of taste successfully attempted the same subjects in 
mutual emulation, or sat down to compose verses as displays of 
their ingenuity. The result was a great gain in richness of style 



and general interest, counterbalanced by a falling off in purity of 
diction and sincerity of treatment. The modification — a perfectly 
legitimate one, the resources of the old style being exhausted — 
had its real source in the transformation of political life, but may 
be said to commence with and to find its best representative in 
the playful and elegant Leonidas of Tarentum, a contemporary 
of Pyrrhus, and to close with Antipater of Sidon, about 140 B.C. 
(or later). It should be noticed, however, that Callimachus, one 
of the most distinguished of the Alexandrian poets, affects the 
sternest simplicity in his epigrams, and copies the austerity of 
Simonides with as much success as an imitator can expect. 

3. By a slight additional modification in the same direction, the 
Alexandrian passes into what, for the sake of preserving the 
parallelism with eras of Greek prose literature, we may call 
the Roman style, although the peculiarities of its principal 
representative are decidedly Oriental. Meleager of Gadara was a 
Syrian; his taste was less severe, and his temperament more 
fervent than those of his Greek predecessors; his pieces are 
usually erotic, and their glowing imagery sometimes reminds us of 
the Song of Solomon. The luxuriance of his fancy occasionally 
betrays him into far-fetched conceits, and the lavishness of his 
epithets is only redeemed by their exquisite felicity. Yet his 
effusions are manifestly the offspring of genuine feeling, and his 
epitaph on himself indicates a great advance on the exclusive- 
ness of antique Greek patriotism, and is perhaps the first clear 
enunciation of the spirit of universal humanity characteristic 
of the later Stoic philosophy. His gaiety and licentiousness 
are imitated and exaggerated by his somewhat later contem- 
porary, the Epicurean Philodemus, perhaps the liveliest of all 
the epigrammatists; his fancy reappears with diminished 
brilliancy in Philodemus's contemporary, Zonas, in Crinagoras, 
who wrote under Augustus, and in Marcus Argentarius, of un- 
certain date; his peculiar gorgeousness of colouring remains 
entirely his own. At a later period of the empire another 
genre, hitherto comparatively in abeyance, was developed, the 
satirical. Lucillius, who flourished under Nero, and Lucian, more 
renowned in other fields of literature, display a remarkable 
talent for shrewd, caustic epigram, frequently embodying moral 
reflexions of great cogency, often lashing vice and folly with 
signal effect, but not seldom indulging in mere trivialities, or 
deformed by scoffs at personal blemishes. This style of com- 
position is not properly Greek, but Roman; it answers to the 
modern definition of epigram, and has hence attained a celebrity 
in excess of its deserts. It is remarkable, however, as an almost 
solitary example of direct Latin influence on Greek literature. 
The same style obtains with Palladas, an Alexandrian gram- 
marian of the 4th century, the last of the strictly classical epi- 
grammatists, and the first to be guilty of downright bad taste. 
His better pieces, however, are characterized by an austere 
ethical ifnpressiveness, and his literary position is very interesting 
as that of an indignant but despairing opponent of Christianity. 

4. The fourth or Byzantine style of epigrammatic composition 
was cultivated by the beaux-esprits of the court of Justinian. To 
a great extent this is merely imitative, but the circumstances 
of the period operated so as to produce a species of originality. 
The peculiarly ornate and rechercM diction of Agathias and his 
compeers is not a merit in itself, but, applied for .the first time, 
it has the effect of revivifying an old form, and many of their 
new locutions are actual enrichments of the language. The 
writers, moreover, were men of genuine poetical feeling, ingenious 
in invention, and capable of expressing emotion with energy 
and liveliness; the colouring of their pieces is sometimes highly 
drama tici 

It wojild be hard to exaggerate the substantial value of the 
Anthology, whether as a storehouse of facts bearing on antique 
manners, customs and ideas, or as one among the influences 
which have contributed to mould the literature of the modern 
world. The multitudinous votive inscriptions, serious and 
sportive, connote the phases of Greek religious sentiment, from 
pious awe to irreverent familiarity and sarcastic scepticism ; the 
moral tone of the nation at various periods is mirrored with cor- 
responding fidelity; the sepulchral inscriptions admit us into 



9 6 



ANTHON— ANTHONY 



the inmost sanctuary of family affection, and reveal a depth and 
tenderness of feeling beyond the province of the historian to 
depict, which we should not have surmised even from the 
dramatists; the general tendency of the collection is to display 
antiquity on its most human side, and to mitigate those contrasts 
with the modern world which more ambitious modes of com- 
position force into relief. The constant reference to the details 
of private life renders the Anthology an inexhaustible treasury 
for the student of archaeology; art, industry and costume 
receive their fullest illustration from its pages. Its influence on 
European literatures will be appreciated in proportion to the 
inquirer's knowledge of each. The further his researches extend, 
the greater will be his astonishment at the extent to which the 
Anthology has been laid under contribution for thoughts which 
have become household words in all cultivated languages, and at 
the beneficial effect of the imitation of its brevity, simplicity, 
and absolute verbal accuracy upon the undisciplined luxuriance 
of modern genius. 

Translations, Imitations, &c. — The best versions of the Anthology 
ever made are the Latin renderings of select epigrams by Hugo 
Grotius. They have not been printed separately, but will be found 
in Bosch and Lennep's edition of the Planudean Anthology, in the 
Didot edition, and in Dr Wellesley's Anthologia Polyglotta. The 
number of more or less professed imitations in modern languages 
is infinite, that of actual translations less considerable. French and 
Italian, indeed, are ill adapted to this purpose, from their incapacity 
of approximating to the form of the original, and their poets have 
usually contented themselves with paraphrases or imitations, often 
exceedingly felicitous. F. D. Deheque's French prose translation, 
however (1863), is most excellent and valuable. The German 
language alone admits of the preservation of the original metre — a 
circumstance advantageous to the German translators, Herder and 
Jacobs, who have not, however, compensated the loss inevitably 
consequent upon a change of idiom by any added beauties of their 
own. Though unfitted to reproduce the precise form, the English 
language, from its superior terseness, is better adapted to preserve 
the spirit of the original than the German; and the comparative 
ill success of many English translators must be chiefly attributed to 
the extremely low standard of fidelity and brevity observed by 
them. Bland, Merivale, and their associates (1806-1813), are often 
intolerably diffuse and feeble, from want, not of ability, but of 
taking pains. Archdeacon Wrangham's too rare versions are much 
more spirited; and John Sterling's translations of the inscriptions 
of Simonides deserve high praise. Professor Wilson (Blackwood's 
Magazine, 1833-1835) collected and commented upon the labours of 
these and other translators, with his accustomed critical insight and 
exuberant geniality, but damaged his essay by burdening it with 
the indifferent attempts of William Hay. In 1849 Dr Wellesley, 
principal of New Inn Hall, Oxford, published his Anthologia Poly- 
glotta, a most valuable collection of the best translations and imita- 
tions in all languages, with the original text. In this appeared some 
admirable versions by Goldwin Smith and Dean Merivale, which, 
with the other English renderings extant at the time, will be found 
accompanying the literal prose translation of the Public School 
Selections, executed by the Rev. George Burges for Bohn's Classical 
Library (1854). This is a useful volume, but the editor's notes are 
worthless. In 1864 Major R. G. Macgregor published an almost 
complete translation of the Anthology, a work whose stupendous 
industry and fidelity almost redeem the general mediocrity of the 
execution. Idylls and Epigrams, by R. Garnett (1869, reprinted 
1892 in the Cameo series), includes about 140 translations or imita- 
tions, with some original compositions in the same style. Recent 
translations (selections) are: J. W. Mackail, Select Epigrams from 
the Greek Anthology (with text, introduction, notes, and prose 
translation), 1890, revised 1906, a most charming volume; Graham 
R. Tomson (Mrs Marriott Watson), Selections from the Greek 
A.nthology (1889); W. H. D. Rouse, Echo of Greek Song (1899); 
L. C. Perry, From the Garden of Hellas (New York, 1891); W. R. 
Paton, Love Epigrams (1898). An agreeable little volume on the 
Anthology, by Lord Neaves, is one of Collins's series of Ancient 
Classics for Modern Readers. The earl of Cromer, with all the cares 
of Egyptian administration upon him, found time to translate and 
publish an elegant volume of selections (1903). ' Two critical con- 
tributions to the subject should be noticed, the Rev. James Davies's 
essay on Epigrams in the Quarterly Review (vol. cxvii.), especially 
valuable for its lucid illustration of the distinction between Greek 
and Latin epigram; and the brilliant disquisition in J. A. Symonds's 
Studies of the Greek Poets (1873; 3rd ed., 1893). 

Latin Anthology. — The Latin Anthology is the appellation 
bestowed upon a collection of fugitive Latin verse, from the age 
of Ennius to about a.d. iooo, formed by Peter Burmann the 
Younger. Nothing corresponding to the Greek anthology is 
known to have existed among the Romans, though professional 



epigrammatists like Martial published their volumes on their 
own account, and detached sayings were excerpted from authors 
like Ennius and Publius Syrus, while the Priapeia were probably 
but one among many collections on special subjects. The first 
general collection of scattered pieces made by a modern scholar 
was Scaliger's Catalecta veterum Poetarum (1573), succeeded by • 
the more ample one of Pithoeus, Epigrammata et Poemata e 
Codicibus et Lapidibus collecta (1590). Numerous additions, 
principally from inscriptions, continued to be made, and in 
I 7S9 _I 773 Burmann digested the whole into his Anthologia 
veterum Latinorum Epigrammatum et Poematum. This, occa- 
sionally reprinted, was the standard edition until 1869, when 
Alexander Riese commenced a new and more critical recension, 
from which many pieces improperly inserted by Burmann are 
rejected, and his classified arrangement is discarded for one 
according to the sources whence the poems have been derived. 
The first volume contains those found in MSS., in the order of 
the importance of these documents; those furnished by inscrip- 
tions following. The first volume (in two parts) appeared in 
1869-1870, a second edition of the first part in 1894, and the 
second volume, Carmina Epigraphica (in two parts), in 1895- 
1897, edited by F. Bucheler. An Anthologiae Latinae Supple- 
menta, in the same series, followed. Having been formed by 
scholars actuated by no aesthetic principles of selection, but 
solely intent on preserving everything they could find, the Latin 
anthology is much more heterogeneous than the Greek, and 
unspeakably inferior. The really beautiful poems of Petronius 
and Apuleius are more properly inserted in the collected editions 
of their writings, and more than half the remainder consists of 
the frigid conceits of pedantic professional exercises of gram- 
marians of a very late period of the empire, relieved by an 
occasional gem, such as the apostrophe of the dying Hadrian to 
his spirit, or the epithalamium of Gallienus. The collection is 
also, for the most part, too recent in date, and too exclusively 
literary in character, to add much to our knowledge of classical 
antiquity. The epitaphs are interesting, but the genuineness of 
many of them is very questionable. (R. G.) 

ANTHON, CHARLES (1797-1867), American classical scholar, 
was born in New York city on the 19th of November 1797. 
After graduating with honours at Columbia College in 1815, he 
began the study of law, and in 1819 was admitted to the bar, 
but never practised. In 1820 he was appointed assistant pro- 
fessor of Greek and Latin in his old college, full professor ten 
years later, and at the same time headmaster of the grammar 
school attached to the college, which post he held until 1864. 
He died at New York on the 29th of July 1867. He produced 
for use in colleges and schools a large number of classical works, 
which enjoyed great popularity, although his editions of classical 
authors were by no means in favour with schoolmasters, owing to 
the large amount of assistance, especially translations, contained 
in the notes. 

ANTHONY, SAINT, the first Christian monk, was born in 
Egypt about 250. At the age of twenty he began to practise an 
ascetical life in the neighbourhood of his native place, and after 
fifteen years of this life he withdrew into solitude to a mountain 
by the Nile, called Pispir, now Der el Memun, opposite Arsinog 
in the Fayum. Here he lived strictly enclosed in an old fort for 
twenty years. At last in the early years of the 4th century he 
emerged from his retreat and set himself to organize the monastic 
life of the crowds of monks who had followed him and taken up 
their abode in the caves around him. After a time, again in 
pursuit of more complete solitude, he withdrew to the mountain 
by the Red Sea, where now stands the monastery that bears his 
name (Der Mar Antonios). Here he died about the middle of 
the 4th century. His Life states that on two occasions he went 
to Alexandria, to strengthen the Christians in the Diocletian 
persecution and to preach against Arianism. Anthony is 
recognized as the first Christian monk and the first organizer 
and father of Christian monachism (seeMoNASTiciSM). Certain 
letters and sermons are attributed to him, but their authenticity 
is more than doubtful. The monastic rule which bears his name 
was not written by him, but was compiled out of these writings 



ANTHONY OF PADUA— ANTHOZOA 



97 



and out of discourses and utterances put into his mouth in the 
Life and the Apophlhegmata Patrum. According to this rule 
live a number of Coptic Syrian and Armenian monks to this day. 
The chief source of information about St Anthony is the Life, 
attributed to St Athanasius. This attribution, as also the 
historical character of the book, and even the very existence of 
St Anthony, were questioned and denied by the sceptical criticism 
of thirty years ago; but such doubts are no longer entertained 
by critical scholars. 

The Greek Vila is among the works of St Athanasius ; the almost 
contemporary Latin translation is among Rosweyd's Vitae Patrum 
(Migne, Patrol. Lat. lxxiii.) ; an English translation is in the Athan- 
asius volume of the " Nicene and Post-Nicene Library." Accounts 
of St Anthony are given by Card. Newman, Church of the Fathers 
(Historical Sketches) and Alban Butler, Lives of the Saints (Jan. 17). 
Discussions of the historical and critical questions raised will be 
found in E. C. Butler's Lausiac History of Palladius (1898, 1904), 
Part I. pp. 197, 215-228; Part II. pp. ix.-xii. (E. C. B.) 

ANTHONY OF PADUA, SAINT (1195-1231), the most cele- 
brated of the followers of Saint Francis of Assisi, was born at 
Lisbon on the 1 5 th of August 1 1 9 5 . In his fifteenth year he entered 
the Augustinian order, and subsequently joined the Franciscans 
in 1220. He wished to devote himself to missionary labours in 
North Africa, but the ship in which he sailed was cast by a storm 
on the coast of Sicily, whence he made his way to Italy. He 
taught theology at Bologna, Toulouse, Montpellier and Padua, 
and won a great reputation as a preacher throughout Italy. He 
was the leader of the rigorous party in the Franciscan order 
against the mitigations introduced by the general Elias. His 
death took place at the convent of Ara Coeli, near Padua, on the 
13th of June 1231. He was canonized by Gregory IX. in the 
following year, and his festival is kept on the 13th of June. He 
is regarded as the patron saint of Padua and of Portugal, and 
is appealed to by devout clients for finding lost objects. The 
meagre accounts of his life which we possess have been supple- 
mented by numerous popular legends, which represent him 
as a continuous worker of miracles, and describe his marvellous 
eloquence by pictures of fishes leaping out of the water to 
hear him. There are many confraternities established in his 
honour throughout Christendom, and the number of "pious" 
biographies devoted to him would fill many volumes. 

The most trustworthy modern works are by A. Lepitre, St Antoine 
de Padoue (Paris, 1902, in Les Saints series: good bibliography; Eng. 
trans, by Edith Guest, London, 1902), and by Leopold de Cherance, 
5/ Antoine de Padoue (Paris, 1895; Eng. trans., London, 1896). His 
works, consisting of sermons and a mystical commentary on the 
Bible, were published in an appendix to those of St Francis, in the 
Annates Minorum of Luke Wadding (Antwerp, 1623), and are also 
reproduced by Horoy, Medii aevi bibliotheca patristica (1880, vi. 
PP- 555 et sqq) ; see art. " Antonius von Padua " in Herzog-Hauck, 
Realencyklopddie. 

ANTHONY, SUSAN BROWNELL (1820-1906), American 
reformer, was born at Adams, Massachusetts, on the 15th of 
February 1820, the daughter of Quakers. Soon after her birth, 
her family moved to the state of New York, and after 1845 she 
lived in Rochester. She received her early education in a school 
maintained by her father for his own and neighbours' children, 
and from the time she was seventeen until she was thirty-two 
she taught in various schools. In the decade preceding the 
outbreak of the Civil War she took a prominent part in the 
anti-slavery and temperance movements in New York, organizing 
in 1852 the first woman's state temperance society in America, and 
in 1856 becoming the agent for New York state of the American 
Anti-slavery Society. After 1854 she devoted herself almost 
exclusively to the agitation for woman's rights, and became 
recognized as one of the ablest and most zealous advocates, 
both as a public speaker and as a writer, of the complete legal 
equality of the two sexes. From 1868 to 1870 she was the 
proprietor of a weekly paper, The Revolution, published in New 
York, edited by Mrs Elizabeth Cady Stanton, a*id having for 
its motto, " The true republic— men, their rights and nothing 
more; women, their rights and nothing less." She was vice- 
president-at-large of the National Woman's Suffrage Association 
from the date of its organization in 1869 until 1892, when she 
became president. For casting a vote in the presidential election 

11. 4 



of 1872, as, she asserted, the Fourteenth Amendment to the 
Federal Constitution entitled her to do, she was arrested and 
fined $100, but she never paid the fine. In collaboration with 
Mrs Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Mrs Matilda Joslyn Gage, and Mrs 
Ida Husted Harper, she published The History of Woman 
Suffrage (4 vols., New York, 1884-1887). She died at Rochester, 
New York, on the 13th of March 1906. 

See Mrs Ida Husted Harper's Life and Work of Susan B. Anthony 
(3 vols., Indianapolis, I898-1908). 

ANTHOZOA (i.e. "flower-animals"), the zoological name 
for a class of marine polyps forming " coral " (?.».). Although 
corals have been familiar objects since the days of antiquity, 
and the variety known as the precious red coral has been for a 
long time an article of commerce in the Mediterranean, it was only 
in the 18th century that their true nature and structure came to 
be understood. By the ancients and the earlier naturalists 
of the Christian era they were regarded either as petrifactions or 
as plants, and many supposed that they occupied a position 
midway between minerals and plants. The discovery of the 
animal nature of red coral is due to J. A. de Peyssonel, a native 
of Marseilles, who obtained living specimens from the coral 
fishers on the coast of Barbary and kept them alive in aquaria. 
He was thus able to see that the so-called " flowers of coral " 
were in fact nothing else than minute polyps resembling sea- 
anemones. His discovery, made in 1727, was rejected by the 
Academy of Sciences of France, but eventually found acceptance 
at the hands of the Royal Society of London, and was published 
by that body in 1751. The structure and classification of polyps, 
however, were at that time very imperfectly understood, and 
it was fully a century before the true anatomical characters 
and systematic position of corals were placed on a secure basis. 

The hard calcareous substance to which the name coral is 
applied is the supporting skeleton of certain members of the 
Anthozoa, one of the classes of the phylum Coelentera. The most 
familiar Anthozoan is the common sea-anemone, Actinia equina, 
L., and it will serve, although it does not form a skeleton or 
corallum, as a good example of the structure of a typical Antho- 
zoan polyp or zooid. The individual animal or zooid of Actinia 
equina has the form of a column fixed by one extremity, called 
the base, to a rock or other object, and bearing at the opposite 
extremity a crown of tentacles. The tentacles surround an area 
known as the peristome, in the middle of which there is an 
elongated mouth-opening surrounded by tumid lips. The mouth 
does not open directly into the general cavity of the body, as 
is the case in a hydrozoan polyp, but into a short tube called 
the stomodaeum, which in its turn opens below into the general 
body-cavity or coelenteron. In Actinia and its allies, and most 
generally, though not invariably, in Anthozoa, the stomodaeum 
is not circular, but is compressed from side to side so as to be 
oval or slit-like in transverse section. At each end of the oval 
there is a groove lined by specially long vibratile cilia. These 
grooves are known as the sulcus and sulculus, and will be more 
particularly described hereafter. The elongation of the mouth 
and stomodaeum confer a bilateral symmetry on the body of the 
zooid, which is extended to other organs of the body. In Actinia, 
as in all Anthozoan zooids, the coelenteron is not a simple cavity, 
as in a Hydroid, but is divided by a number of radial folds or 
curtains of soft tissue into a corresponding number of radial 
chambers. These radial folds are known as mesenteries, and 
their position and relations may be understood by reference 
to figs. 1 and 2. Each mesentery is attached by its upper 
margin to the peristome, by its outer margin to the body-wall, 
and by its lower margin to the basal disk. A certain number of 
mesenteries, known as complete mesenteries, are attached by 
the upper parts of their internal margins to the stomodaeum, 
but below this level their edges hang in the coelenteron. Other 
mesenteries, called incomplete, are not attached to the stomo- 
daeum, and their internal margins are free from the peristome 
to the basal disk. The lower part of the free edge of every 
mesentery, whether complete or incomplete, is thrown into 
numerous puckers or folds, and is furnished with a glandular 
thickening known as a mesenterial filament. The reproductive 

11 



q8 



ANTHOZOA 




Fig. i. — Diagrammatic longitudinal 
section of an Anthozoan zooid. 



in, Mesentery. 

/, Tentacles. 

st, Stomodaeum. 

sc, Sulcus. 

r, Rotteken's muscle. 

s, Stoma. 



Im, Longitudinal 
muscle. 
Diagonal 
muscle. 
Gonads. 



d, 



go 



organs or gonads are borne on the mesenteries, the germinal 
cells being derived from the inner layer or endoderm. 

In common with all Coelenterate animals, the walls of the 
columnar body and also the tentacles and peristome of Actinia 
are composed of three layers of tissue. The external layer, 

or ectoderm, is made up 
of cells, and contains 
also muscular and ner- 
vous elements. The pre- 
ponderating elements of 
the ectodermic layer are 
elongated columnar 
cells, each containing a 
nucleus, and bearing 
cilia at their free ex- 
tremities. Packed in 
among these are gland 
cells, sense cells, and 
cnidoblasts. The last- 
named are specially 
numerous on the ten- 
tacles and on some other 
regions of the body, and 
produce the well-known 
" thread cells," or 
nemalocysts, so char- 
acteristic of the Coe- 
lentera. The inner 
layer or endoderm is also a cellular layer, and is chiefly 
made up of columnar cells, each bearing a cilium at its free ex- 
tremity and terminating internally in a long muscular fibre. 
Such cells, made up of epithelial and musculaT components, are 

known as ©pithelio-mus- 
cular or myo-epithelial 
cells. In Actinians the 
epithelio-muscular cells of 
the endoderm are crowded 
with yellow spherical 
bodies, which are unicellu- 
lar plants or Algae, living 
symbiotically in the 
tissues of the zooid. The 
endoderm contains in 
addition gland cells and 
nervous elements. The 
middle layer or mesogloea 
is not originally a cellular 
layer, but a gelatinoid 
structureless substance, 
secreted by the two cellular 
layers. In the course of 
development, however, 
cells from the ectoderm 
and endoderm may mi- 
grate into it. In Actinia 
equina the mesogloea con- 
sists of fine fibres imbedded 




5' 

Fig. 2. — i, Portion of epithelium 
from the tentacle of an Actinian, 
showing three supporting cells and one in a homogeneous matrix, 
sense cell (sc) ; 2, a cnidoblast with an d between the fibres 
enclosed nematocyst from the same 
specimen; 3 and 4, two forms of 
gland cell from the stomodaeum ; 
50, 56, epithelio-muscular cells from 
the tentacle in different states of con- 
traction; 5c, an epithelio-muscular 
cell from the endoderm, containing a 
symbiotic zooxanthella ; 6, a ganglion 
cell from theectoderm of the peristome. 
(After O. and R. Hertwig.) 

ible into two sub-classes, sharply marked off from one another 
by definite anatomical characters. These are the Alcyonaria 
and the Zoantharia. To the first-named belong the precious 
red coral and its allies, the sea-fans or Gorgoniae; to the 
second belong the white or Madreporarian corals. 



are minute branched or 
spindle-shaped cells. For 
further details of the 
structure of Actinians, 
the reader should consult 
the work of 0. and R. 
Hertwig. 
The Anthozoa are divis- 




Alcyonaria. — In this sub-class the zooid (fig. 3) has very constant 
anatomical characters, differing in some important respects from the 
Actinian zooid, which has been taken as a type. There is only one 
ciliated groove, the sulcus, in the stomodaeum. There are always 
eight tentacles, which are hollow and fringed on their sides, with 
hollow projections or pinnae; and always eight mesenteries, all of 
which are complete, i.e. inserted on the stomodaeum. The mesen- 
teries are provided with well-developed longitudinal retractor 
muscles, supported on longitudinal folds or plaits of the mesogloea, 
so that in cross-section they have a branched appearance. These 
muscle-banners, as they 
are called, have a 
highly characteristic 
arrangement; they are 
all situated on those 
faces of the mesenteries 
which look towards the 
sulcus (fig. 4). Each 
mesentery has a fila- 
ment; but two of them, 
namely, the pair 
farthest from the sul- 
cus, are longer than the 
rest, and have a differ- 
ent form of filament. 
It has been shown that 
these asulcar filaments 
are derived from the 
ectoderm, the re- Q 
mainder from the en- 
doderm. The only 
exceptions to this 
structure are found in 
the arrested or modified 
zooids, which occur in Fig. 3. — An expanded Alcyonarian zooid, 
many of the colonial showing the mouth surrounded by eight 
Alcyonaria. In these pinnate tentacles, st, Stomodaeum in the 
the tentacles are centre of the transparent body; m, mes- 
st tinted or suppressed enteries; asm, asulcar mesenteries; B, 
and the mesenteries are spicules, enlarged. 
ill-developed, but the 

sulcus is unusually large and has long cilia. Such modified zooids are 
called siphonozpoids, their function being to drive currents of fluid 
through the canal-systems of the colonies to which they belong. 
With very few exceptions a calcareous skeleton is present in all 
Alcyonaria ; it usually consists of spicules of carbonate of lime, each 
spicule being formed within an ectodermic cell (fig. 3, B). Most 
commonly the spicule-forming cells pass out of the ectoderm and are 
imbedded in the mesogloea, where they may remain separate from 
one another or may be fused together to form a strong mass. In 
addition to the spicular skeleton an organic horny skeleton is fre- 
quently present, either in 
the form of a horny ex- 
ternal investment (Cor- 
nularia), or an internal 
axis (Gorgonia), or it may 
form a matrix in which 
spicules are imbedded 
(Keroeides, Melitodes). 

Nearly all the Alcyonaria 
are colonial. Four solitary 
species have been de- 
scribed, viz. Haimea 
funebris and H. hyalina, 
Hartea elegans, and Mon- 
oxenia Darwinii; but it is 
doubtful whether these are 
not the young forms of 
colonies. For the present 
the solitary forms may be 
placed in a grade, Protal- 
cyonacea; and the colonial 
forms may be grouped in 
another grade, Synalcyon- 

acea. Every Alcyonarian FlG ,_ T ransverse section of an 
colony is developed by A , cyonari an zooid. mm, Mesenteries; 
budding from a single mb musde banners; sc sulcus . stt 
parent zooid The buds stomodaeum . 
are not direct outgrowths 

of the body-wall, but are formed on the courses of hollow out 
growths of the base or body-wall, called solenia. These form a 
more or less complicated canal system, lined by endoderm, and 
communicating with the cavities of the zooids. The most simple 
form of budding is found in the genus Cornularia, in which the 
mother zooid gives off from its base one or more simple radiciform 
outgrowths. Each outgrowth contains a single tube or solenium, 
and at a longer or shorter distance from the mother zooid a 
daughter zooid is formed as a bud. This gives off new outgrowths, 
and these, branching and anastomosing with one another, may form 
a network, adhering to stones, corals, or other objects, from which 




ANTHOZOA 



99 




0- 

youm 

. st, 



; colony of 
Stolon ; p, 



Fig. 

A, Skeleton of a 
Tubipora purpurea. 
platform. 

B, Diagrammatic longitudinal section 
of a corallite, showing two platforms, 
£,and simple and cup-shaped tabulae, /. 
(After S. J. Hickson.) 



zooids arise at intervals. In Clavularia and its allies each outgrowth 
contains several solenia, and the outgrowths may take .the form of 
flat expansions, composed of a number of solenial tubes felted 
together to form a lamellar surface of attachment. Such outgrowths 
are called stolons, and a stolon may be simple, i.e. contain only one 
solenium, as in Cornularia, or may be complex and built up of many 
solenia, as in Clavularia. Further complications arise when the 
lower walls of the mother zooid become thickened and interpene- 
trated with solenia, from which buds are developed, so that lobose, 

tufted, or branched colonies 
are formed. The chief orders 
of the Synalcyonacea are 
founded upon the different 
architectural features of 
colonies produced by differ- 
ent modes of budding. We 
recognize six orders — the 
Stolonifera, Alcyon- 
acea,pseudaxonia, axif- 
era, Stelechotokea, and 

COENOTHECALIA. 

In the order Stolonifera 
the zooids spring at intervals 
from branching or lamellar 
stolons, and are usually free 
from one another, except at 
their bases, but in some t ases 
horizontal solenia arising 
at various heights from 
the body-wall may place 
the more distal portions 
of the zooids in commu- 
nication with one another. 
In the genus Tubipora these 
horizontal solenia unite to' 
form a series of horizontal 
platforms (fig. 5). The order 
comprises the families Cor- 
nulariidae, Syringoporidae, 
Tubiporidae, and Favosi- 
tidae. In the first-named 
the zooids are united only by 
their bases and the skeleton 
consists of loose spicules. In the Tubiporidae the spicules of the 
proximal part of the body-wall are fused together to form a firm 
tube, the corallite, into which the distal part of the zooid can be 
retracted. The corallites are connected at intervals by horizontal 
platforms containing solenia, and at the level of each platform the 
cavity of the corallite is divided by a transverse calcareous partition, 
either flat or cup-shaped, called a tabula. Formerly all corals in 
which tabulae are present were classed together as Tabulata, but 
Tubipora is an undoubted Alcyonarian with a lamellar stolon, and 
the structure of the fossil genus Syringopora, which has vertical 
corallites united by horizontal solenia, clearly shows its affinity to 

_,. Tubipora. The Favosi- 
;)t^"i tidae, a fossil family from 
the Silurian and Devonian, 
have a massive corallum 
composed of numerous 
polygonal corallites closely 
packed together. The 
cavities of adjacent coral- 
lites communicate by 
means of numerous per- 
forations, which appear to 
represent solenia, and 
numerous transverse tab- 
ulae are also present. In 
Favosites hemisphaerica a 
number of radial spines, 
projecting into the cavity 
Fig. 6.— Portion of a colony of Coral- of the corallite, give it the 
Hum rubrum, showing expanded and appearance of a madrepor- 
contracted zooids. In the lower part of arian coral, 
the figure the cortex has been cut away I n th ^ order Alcyon- 
to show the axis, ax, and the longi- ACEA tne colony consists 
tudinal canals, Ic, surrounding it. of . bunches of elongate 

cylindrical zooids, whose 
proximal portions are united by solenia and compacted, by fusion 
of their own walls and those of the solenia, into a fleshy mass 
called the coenenchyma. Thus the coenenchyma forms a stem, 
sometimes branched, from the surface of which the free portions of 
the zooids project. The skeleton of the Alcyonacea consists of 
separate calcareous spicules, which are often, especially in the 
Nephthyidae, so abundant and so closely interlocked as to form a 
tolerably firm and hard armour. The order comprises the families 
Xeniidae, Alcyonidae and Nephthyidae. Alcyonium digitatum, a pink 
digitate form popularly known as " dead men's fingers," is common 
in 10-20 fathoms of water off the English coasts. 

In the order Pseudaxoma the colonies are upright and branched, 




consisting of a number of short zooids whose proximal ends are im- 
bedded in a coenenchyma containing numerous ramifying solenia 
and spicules. The coenenchyma is further differentiated into a 
medullary portion and a cortex. The latter contains the proximal 
moieties of the zooids and numerous but separate spicules. The 
medullary portion is densely crowded with spicules of different 
shape from those in the 
cortex, and in some forms 
the spicules are cemented 
together to form a hard 
supporting axis. There are 
four families of Pseud- 
axonia — the Briareidae, 
Sclerogorgidae, Melitodidae, 
and Corallidae. In the 
first-named the medulla is 
penetrated by solenia and 
forms an indistinct axis; 
in the remainder the me- 
dulla is devoid of solenia, 
and in the Melitodidae and 
Corallidae it forms a dense 
axis, which in the Melito- 
didae consists of alternate 
calcareous andhornyjoints. 
The precious red coral of 
commerce, Corallium rub- 
rum (fig. 6), a member of 
the family Corallidae, is 
found at depths varying 
from 15 to 120 fathoms in 




Fig. 7.- 



The sea-fan (Gorgonia 
cavolinii) . 
the Mediterranean Sea, chiefly on the African coast. It owes its 
commercial value to the beauty of its hard red calcareous axis which 
in life is covered by a cortex in which the proximal moieties of the 
zooids are imbedded. Corallium rubrum has been the subject of a 
beautifully-illustrated memoir by de Lacaze-Duthiers, which should 
be consulted for details of anatomy. 

The Axifera comprise those corals that have a horny or calcified 
axis, which in position corre- 
sponds to the axis of the 
Pseudaxonia, but, unlike it, 
is never formed of fused 
spicules; the most familiar 
example is the pink sea-fan, 
Gorgonia cavolinii, which is 
found in abundance in 10-25 
fathoms of water off the 
English coasts . (fig. 7). In 
this order the axis is formed 
as an ingrowth of the ecto- 
derm of the base of the 
mother zooid of the colony, 
the cavity of the ingrowth 
being filled by a horny sub- 
stance secreted by the ecto- 
derm. In Gorgonia the axis 
remains horny throughout 
life, but in many forms it is 
further strengthened by a 
deposit of calcareous matter. 
In the family Isidinae the 
axis consists of alternate 
segments of horny and cal- 
careous substance, the latter 
being amorphous. The 
order contains six families — 
the Dasygorgidae, Isidae, 
Primnoidae, Muriceidae, 
Plexauridae, and Gorgonidae. 
In the order Stelecho- 
tokea the colony consists of 
a stem formed by a greatly- 
elongated mother zooid, and 
the daughter zooids are 
borne as lateral buds on the 
stem. In the section 
A siphonacea the colonies are 
upright and branched, 
springing from membranous 
or ramifying stolons. They 
resemble and are closely 
allied to certain families of 
the Cornulariidae, differing 
from them only in mode of 
budding and in the disposi- 
tion of the daughter zooids 
round a central, much-elongated mother zooid. The section contains 
two families, the Telestidae and the Coelogorgidae. The second section 
comprises the Pennalulacea or sea-pens, which are remarkable from 
the fact that the colony is not fixed by the base to a rock or other 




Fig. 8. 

A, Colony olPennatulaphospkorea 
from the metarachidial aspect, p, The 
peduncle. 

B, Section of the rachis bearing a 
single pinna, a, Axis; b, metarachi- 
dial; c, prorachidial ; d, pararachidial 
stem canals. 



IOO 



ANTHOZOA 



object, but is imbedded in sand or mud by the proximal portion of 
the stem known as the peduncle. In the typical genus, Pennatula 
(fig. 8), the colony looks like a feather having a stem divisible into 
an upper moiety or rachis, bearing lateral central leaflets (pinnae), 
and a lower peduncle, which is sterile and imbedded in sand or mud. 
The stem represents a greatly enlarged and elongated mother zooid. 
It is divided longitudinally by a partition separating a so-called 
" ventral " or prorachidial canal from a so-called " dorsal " or 
metarachidial canal. A rod-like supporting axis of peculiar texture 
is developed in the longitudinal partition, and a longitudinal canal 
is hollowed out on either side of the axis in the substance of the 
longitudinal partition, so that there are four stem-canals in all. 
The prorachidial and metarachidial aspects of the rachis are sterile, 
but the sides or pararachides bear numerous daughter zooids of 
two kinds— (i) fully-formed autozooids, (2) small stunted siphono- 
zooids. The pinnae are formed by the elongated autozooids, whose 
proximal portions are fused together to form a leaf-like expansion, 
from the upper edge of which the distal extremities of the zooids 

Croject. The siphonozooids are very numerous and lie between the 
ases -al the pinnae on the pararachides; they extend also on the 
prorachidial and metarachidial surfaces. The calcareous skeleton 
of the Pennatulacea consists of scattered spicules, but in one species, 
Protocaulon molle, spicules are absent. Although of great interest 
the Pennatulacea do not form an enduring skeleton or "coral," 
and need not be considered in detail in this place. 

The order Coenothecalia is represented by a single living species, 
Heliopora coerulea, which differs from all recent Alcyonana in the 
fact that its skeleton is not composed of spicules, but is formed as 
a secretion from a layer of cells called calicoblasts, which originate 
from the ectoderm. The corallum of Heliopora is of a blue colour, 
and has the form of broad, upright, lobed, or digitate masses flattened 
from side to side. The surfaces are pitted all over with perforations 
of two kinds, viz. larger star-shaped cavities, called calices, in 
which the zooids are lodged, and very numerous smaller round or 
polygonal apertures, which in life contain as many short unbranched 




A Fig. 9. B 

A, Portion of the surface of a colony of Heliopora coerulea magni- 
fied, showing two calices and the surrounding coenenchymal tubes. 

B, Single zooid with the adjacent soft tissues as seen after removal 
of the skeleton by decalcification. Z 1 , the distal, and Z 2 , the proximal 
or intracalicular portion of the zooid; ec, ectoderm; ct, coenen- 
chymal tubes; sp, superficial network of solenia. 

tubes, known as the coenenchymal tubes (fig. 9, A). The walls of the 
calices and coenenchymal tubes are formed of flat plates of calcite, 
which are so disposed that the walls of one tube enter into the com- 
position of the walls of adjacent tubes, and the walls of the calices 
are formed by the walls of adjacent coenenchymal tubes. Thus the 
architecture of the Helioporid colony differs entirely from such forms 
as Tubipora or Favosites, i.T which each corallite has its own distinct 
and proper wall. The cavities both of the calices and coenenchymal 
tubes of Heliopora are closed below by horizontal partitions or 
tabulae, hence the genus was formerly included in the group Tabulata, 
and was supposed to belong to the madreporarian corals, both 
because of its lamellar skeleton, which resembles that of a Madrepore, 
and because each calicle has from twelve to fifteen radial partitions 
or septa projecting into its cavity. The structure of the zooid of 
Heliopora, however, is that of a typical Alcyonarian, and the septa 
have only a resemblance to, but no real homology with, the similarly 
named structures in madreporarian corals. Heliopora coerulea is 
found between tide-marks on the shore platforms of coral islands. 
The order was more abundantly represented in Palaeozoic times by 
the Heliolitidae from the Upper and Lower Silurian and the Devonian, 
and by the Thecidae from the Wenlock limestone. In Heliolites 
porosus the colonies had the form of spheroidal masses; the calices 
were furnished with twelve pseudosepta, and the coenenchymal 
tubes were more or less regularly hexagonal. 

Zoantharia. — In this sub-class the arrangement of the mesenteries 
is subject to a great deal of variation, but all the types hitherto 
observed may be referred to a common pj an > illustrated by the 
living genus Edwardsia (fig. 10, A, B). This is a small solitary 
Zoantharian which lives embedded in sand. Its body is divisible 
into three portions, an upper capitulum bearing the mouth and 
tentacle*, a median scapus covered by a friable cuticle, and a terminal 



physa which is rounded. Both capitulum and physa can be retracted 
within the scapus. There are from sixteen to thirty- two simple 
tentacles, but only eight mesenteries, all of which are complete. 
The stomodaeum is compressed laterally, and is furnished with two 
longitudinal grooves, a sulcus and a sulculus. The arrangement of 
the muscle-banners on the mesenteries is characteristic. On six of 
the mesenteries the muscle-banners have the same position as in 
the Alcyonaria, namely, on the sulcar faces; but in the two remain- 
ing mesenteries, namely, those which are attached on either side 
of the sulcus, the muscle-banners are on the opposite or sulcular 
faces. It is not known whether all the eight mesenteries of Ed- 
wardsia are developed simultaneously or not, but in the youngest 




Fig. 10. 

A, Edwardsia claparedii (after A. Andres). Cap, capitulum; sc, 
scapus; pli, physa. 

B, Transverse section of the same, showing the arrangement of the 
mesenteries, s, Sulcus; si, sulculus. 

C, Transverse section of Halcampa. d, d, Directive mesenteries; 
st, stomodaeum. 

form which has been studied all the eight mesenteries were present, 
but only two of them, namely the sulco-laterals, bore mesenterial 
filaments, and so it is presumed that they are the first pair to be 
developed. In the common sea-anemone, Actinia equina (which 
has already been quoted as a type of Anthozoan structure), the 
mesenteries are numerous and are arranged in cycles. The mesen- 
teries of the first cycle are complete (i.e. are attached to the stomo- 
daeum), are twelve in number, and arranged in couples, distinguish- 
able by the position of the muscle-banners. In the four couples o' 
mesenteries which are attached to the sides of the elongated stomo- 
daeum the muscle-banners of each couple are turned towards one 
another, but in the sulcar and sulcular couples, known as the directive 




Fig. 11. — A, Diagram showing the sequence of mesenterial devel- 
opment in an Actinian. B, Diagrammatic transverse section of 
Gonactinia prolifera. 

mesenteries, the muscle-banners are on the outer faces of the mesen- 
teries, and so are turned away from one another (see fig. 10, C). 
The space enclosed between two mesenteries of the same couple is 
called an entocoele; the space enclosed between two mesenteries of 
adjacent couples is called an exocoele. The second cycle of mesen- 
teries consists of six couples, each formed in an exocoele of thb 
primary cycle, and in each couple the muscle-banners are vis-a-vis 
The third cycle comprises twelve couples, each formed in an exocoek 
between the primary and secondary couples and so on, it being a 
general rule (subject, however, to exceptions) that new mesenterial 
couples are always formed in the exocoeles, and not in the entocoeles. 
While the mesenterial couples belonging to the second and each 
successive cycle are formed simultaneously, those of the first cycle 



ANTHOZOA 



101 



are formed in successive pairs, each member of a pair being placed 
on opposite sides of the stomodaeum. Hence the arrangement in 
six couples is a secondary and not a primary feature. In most 
Actinians the mesenteries appear in the following order: — At the 
time when the stomodaeum is formed, a single pair of mesenteries, 
marked I, I in the diagram (fig. 11, A), makes its appearance, dividing 
the coelenteric cavity into a smaller sulcar and a large sulcular 
chamber. The muscle-banners of this pair are placed on the sulcar 
faces of the mesenteries. Next, a pair of mesenteries, marked 11,11 
in the diagram, is developed in the sulcular chamber, its muscle- 
banners facing the same way as those of I, I. The third pair is 
formed in the sulcar chamber, in close connexion with the sulcus, 
and in this case the muscle-banners are on the sulcular faces. The 
fourth pair, having its muscle-banners on the sulcar faces, is devel- 
oped at the opposite extremity of the stomodaeum in close connexion 
with the sulculus. There are now eight mesenteries present, having 
exactly the same arrangement as in Edwardsia. A pause in the 
development follows, during which no new mesenteries are formed, 
and then the six-rayed symmetry characteristic of a normal Actinian 
zooid is completed by the formation of the mesenteries V, V in the 
lateral chambers, and VI, VI in the sulcolateral chambers, their 
muscle-banners being so disposed that they form couples respectively 
with 11,11 and I, I. In Actinia equina the Edwardsia stage is arrived 
at somewhat differently. The mesenteries second in order of forma- 
tion form the sulcular directives, those fourth in order of formation 
form with the fifth the sulculo-lateral couples of the adult. 

As far as the anatomy of the zooid is concerned, the majority of 
the stony or madreporarian corals agree exactly with the soft-bodied 
Actinians, such as Actinia equina, both in the number and arrange- 




FlG. 12. 



A, Zoanthid colony, showing the expanded zooids. 

B, Diagram showing the arrangement of mesenteries in a young 
Zoanthid. 

C, Diagram showing the arrangement of mesenteries in an adult 
Zoanthid. I, 2, 3, 4, Edwardsian mesenteries. 

ment of the adult mesenteries and in the order of development of 
the first cycle. The few exceptions will be dealt with later, but it 
may be stated here that even in these the first cycle of six couples 
of mesenteries is always formed, and in all the cases which have 
been examined the course of development described above is followed . 
There are, however, several groups of Zoantharia in which the 
mesenterial arrangement of the adult differs widely from that just 
described. But it is possible to refer all these cases with more or 
less certainty to the Edwardsian type. 

The order Zoanthidea comprises a number of soft-bodied Zoan- 
tharians generally encrusted with sand. Externally they resemble 
ordinary sea-anemones, but there is only one ciliated groove, the 
sulcus, in the stomodaeum, and the mesenteries are arranged on a 
peculiar pattern. The first twelve mesenteries are disposed in 
couples, and do not differ from those of Actinia except in size. The 
mesenterial pairs I, II and III are attached to the stomodaeum, 
and are called macromesenteries (fig. 12, B), but IV, V and VI are 
much shorter, and are called micromesenteries. The subsequent 
development is peculiar to the group. New mesenteries are formed 
only in the sulco-lateral exocoeles. They are formed in couples, 
each couple consisting of a macromesentery and a micromesentery, 
disposed so that the former is nearest to the sulcar directives. The 
derivation of the Zoanthidea from an Edwardsia form is sufficiently 
obvious. 

The order CERiANTHiDEAcomprisesa few soft-bodied Zoantharians 
with rounded aboral extremities pierced by pores. They have two 
circlets of tentacles, a labial and a marginal, and there is only one 
ciliated groove in the stomodaeum, which appears to be the sulculus. 
The mesenteries are numerous, and the longitudinal muscles, though 
distinguishable, are so feebly developed that there are no muscle- 
banners. The larval forms of the type genus Cerianthus float freely 
in the sea, and were once considered to belong to a separate genus, 
Aracknactis. In this larva four pairs of mesenteries having the 
typical Edwardsian arrangement are developed, but the fifth and 
sixth pairs, instead of forming couples with the first and second, 
arise in the sulcar chamber, the fifth pair inside the fourth, and the 



sixth pair inside the fifth. New mesenteries are continually added 
in the sulcar chamber, the seventh pair within the sixth, the eighth 
pair within the seventh, and so on (fig. 13). In the Cerian<hidea, 
as in the Zoanthidea, much as the adult arrangement of mesenteries 
differs from that of Actinia, the derivation from an Edwardsia stock 
is obvious. 

The order Antipathidea is a well-defined group whose affi dries 




Fig.* 13 



A, Cerianthus solitarius (after A. Andres). ' „S 

B, Transverse section of the stoiti the sulculus, si, 
and the arrangement of the mesenteries. 

C, Oral aspect *>f Aracknactis brachiolata, the larva of Cerianthus, 
with seven tentacles. , 

D, Transverse section, of an older larva. The numerals indicate 
the order of .developioent of the mesenteries. , j; 

are more obscure. The type farm, Antipathes dieketoiptt (fig. 14), 
forms arborescent colonies consisting of numerous' zciDtft* arranged 
in a single series alon Each 

zooid has six tentacles; the stotnodaeum is elongate, btilt'^he sulcus 
and sulculus are very feefcly represented. Therejai^ tfertlBtesenteries 
in which the musculature $j so "tittte developed as tft^be almost 
indistinguishable.- 1 uteJenteries art 




Fig. 14. 



A, Portion of a colony of Antipathes dichotoma. 

B, Single zooid aftd axis of the same magnified, m, Mouth; m)r 
mesenterial filament; a#, axis. . 

C, Transverse section through the oral cone of Antipatkella minor 
st, Stomodaeum; ov, ovary. 

short, the sulco-lateral and sulculo-lateral pairs are a little longer, 
but the two transverse are very large and are the only mesenteries 
which bear gonads. As the development of the Antipathidea- is 
unknown, it is impossible to say what is the sequence of the mesen- 
terial development, but in Leiopathes glaberrima, a genus with twelve 
mesenteries, there are distinct indications of an Edwardsia stage. 

There are, in addition to these groups, several genera of Actinians 
whose mesenterial arrangement differs from the normal type. Of 



T02 



ANTHOZOA 



these perhaps the most interesting is Gonadinia prolifera (fig. n, B), 
with eight macromesenteries arranged on the Edwardsian plan. 
Two pairs of micromesenteries form couples with the first anl 
second Edwardsian pairs, and in addition there is a couple of micro- 
mesenteries in each of the sulculo-lateral exocoeles. Only the first 
and second pairs of Edwardsian macromesenteries are fertile, i.e. 
bear gonads. 

The remaining forms, the Actiniidea, are divisible into the 
Malacactiniae, or soft-bodied sea-anemones, which have already 
been described sufficiently in the course of this article, and the 
Scleractiniae ( = Madreporaria) or true corals. 

All recent corals, as has already been said, conform so closely 
to the anatomy of normal Actinlans that they cannot be classified 
apart from them, except that they are distinguished by the 
possession of a calcareous skeleton. This skeleton is largely 
composed of a number of radiating plates or septa, and it differs 
both in origin and structure from the calcareous skeleton of all 
Alcyonaria except Heliopora. It is formed, not from fused 
spicules, but as a secretion of a special layer of cells derived from 
the basal ectoderm, and known as calicoblasts. The skeleton or 
corallum of a typical solitary coral — the common Devonshire cup- 
coral Caryophyllia smithii (fig. 15) is a good example — exhibits 
the folio wings parts: — (1) The basal plate, between the zooid and 
• he surface of attachment. (2) The septa, radial plates of 




Fig. 15. — Corallum of Caryophyllia; semi-diagrammatic, th, Theca ; 
c, costae; sp, septa; p, palus; col, columella. 

calcite reaching from the periphery nearly or quite to the centre 
of the coral-cup or calicle. (3) The theca or wall, which in many 
corals is not an independent structure, but is formed by the con- 
joined thickened peripheral ends of the septa. (4) The columella, 
a structure which occupies the centre of the calicle, and may 
arise from the basal plate, when it is called essential, or may be 
formed by union of trabecular offsets of the septa, when it is called 
unessential. (5) The costae, longitudinal ribs or rows of spines 
on the outer surface of the theca. True costae always correspond 
to the septa, and are in fact the peripheral edges of the latter. 
(6) Epitheca, an offset of the basal plate which surrounds the 
base of the theca in a ring-like manner, and in some corals may 
take the place of a true theca. (7) Pali, spinous or blade-like 
upgrowths from the bottom of the calicle, which project between 
the inner edges of certain septa and the columella. In addition 
to these parts the following structures may exist in corals: — 
Dissepiments are oblique calcareous partitions, stretching from 
septum to septum, and closing the interseptal chambers below. 
The whole system of dissepiments in any given calicle is often 
called endotheca. Synapticulae are calcareous bars uniting adjacent 
septa. Tabulae are stout horizontal partitions traversing the 
centre of the calicle and dividing it into as many superimposed 
chambers. The septa in recent corals always bear a definite 
relation to the mesenteries, being found either in every entocoele 
or in every entocoele and exocoele. Hence in corals in which 
there is only a single cycle of mesenteries the septa are corre- 
spondingly few in number; where several cycles of mesenteries 



are present the septa are correspondingly numerous. In some 
cases — e.g. in some species of Madrepora — only two septa are 
fully developed, the remainder being very feebly represented. 

Though the corallum appears to live within the zooid, it is 
morphologically external to it, as is best shown by its develop- 
mental history. The larvae of corals are free swimming ciliated 
forms known as planulae, and they do not acquire a corallum 
until they fix themselves. A ring-shaped plate of calcite, 
secreted by the ectoderm, is then formed, lying between the 
embryo and the surface of attachment. As the mesenteries are 




Fig. 16. — Tangential section of a larva of Astroides calicularis 
which has fixed itself on a piece of cork, ec, Ectoderm; era, endo- 
derm; mg, mesogloea; m, m, mesenteries; s, septum; b, basal plate 
formed of ellipsoids of carbonate of lime secreted by the basal 
ectoderm ; ep, epitheca. (After von Koch.) 

formed, the endoderm of the basal disk lying above the basal 
plate is raised up in the form of radiating folds. There may be 
six of these folds, one in each entocoele of the primary cycle of 
mesenteries; or there may be twelve, one in each exocoele and 
entocoele. The ectoderm beneath each fold becomes detached 
from the surface of the basal plate, and both it and the mesogloea 
are folded conformably with the endoderm. The cells forming 
the limbs of the ectodermic folds secrete nodules of calcite, and 
these, fusing together, give rise to six (or twelve) vertical radial 
plates or septa. As growth proceeds new septa are formed 
simultaneously with the new couples of secondary mesenteries. 
In some corals, in which all the septa are entocoelic, each new 
system is embraced by a mesenteric couple; in others,in which the 
septa are both entocoelic and exocoelic, three septa are formed in 



M 




Fig. 17. — Transverse section through a zooid of Cladocora. The 
corallum shaded with dots, the mesogloea represented by a thick line. 
Thirty-two septa are present, six in the entocoeles of the primary 
cycle of mesenteries, I ; six in the entocoeles of the secondary cycle 
of mesenteries, II; four in the entocoeles of the tertiary cycle of 
mesenteries, III, only four pairs of the latter being developed; and 
sixteen in the entocoeles between the mesenterial pairs. D, D, 
Directive mesenteries; st, stomodaeum. (After Duerden.) 

every chamber between two primary mesenterial couples, one in the 
eiitocoele of the newly formed mesenterial couple of the secondary 
cycle, and one in each exocoele between a primary and a secondary 
couple. These latter are in turn embraced by the couples of the 
tertiary cycle of mesenteries, and new septa are formed in the 
exocoeles on either side of them, and so forth. 

It is evident from an inspection of figs. 16 and 17 that every 



ANTHOZOA 



103 



septum is covered by a fold of endoderm, mesogloea, and 
ectoderm, and is in fact pushed into the cavity of the zooid from 
without. The zooid then is, as it were, moulded upon the 
corallum. When fully extended, the upper part of the zooid 
projects for some distance out of the calicle, and its wall is 
reflected for some distance over the lip of the latter, forming a 
fold of soft tissue extending to a greater or less distance over the 
theca, and containing in most cases a cavity continuous over the lip 
of the calicle with the coelenteron. This fold of tissue is known as 
the edge-zone. In some corals the septa aresolid imperforate plates of 
calcite, and their peripheral ends are either firmly welded together, 
or are united by interstitial pieces so as to form imperforate 
theca. In others the peripheral ends of the septa are united only 
by bars or trabeculae, so that the theca is perforate, and in many 
such perforate corals the septa themselves are pierced by 
numerous perforations. In the former, which have been called 




Fig. 18. 

A, Schematic longitudinal section through a zooid and bud of 
Stylophora digitata. In A, B, and C the thick black lines represent 
the soft tissues; the corallum is dotted, s, Stomodaeum; c, c, 
coenosarc ; col, columella ; T, tabulae. 

B, Similar section through a single zooid and bud of Astroides 
calicularis. 

C, Similar section through three corallites of Lophohelia prolifera. 
ez, Edge-zone. 

D Diagram illustrating the process of budding by unequal division. 

E, Section through a dividing calicle of Mussa, showing the union 
of two septa in the plane of division and the origin of new septa at 
right angles to them. 

(C original; the rest after von Koch.) 

aporose corals, the only communication between the cavity of 
the edge-zone and the general cavity of the zooid is by way of the 
lip of the calicle; in the latter, or perforate corals, the theca is 
permeated by numerous branching and anastomosing canals 
lined by endoderm, which place the cavity of the edge-zone in 
communication with the general cavity of the zooid. 

A large number of corals, both aporose and perforate, are 
colonial. The colonies are produced by either budding or divi- 
sion. In the former case the young daughter zooid, with its 
corallum, arises wholly outside the cavity of the parent zooid, 
and the component parts of the young corallum, septa, theca, 
columella, &c, are formed anew in every individual produced. 
In division a vertical constriction divides a zooid into two equal 
or unequal parts, and the several parts of the two corals thus 
produced are severally derived from the corresponding parts of 
the dividing corallum. In colonial corals a bud is always formed 
from the edge-zone, and this bud develops into a new zooid 
with its corallum. The cavity of the bud in an aporose coral 
(fig. 18, A, C) does not communicate directly with that of the 
parent form, but through the medium of the edge-zone. As 
growth proceeds, and parent and bud become separated farther 
from one another, the edge- zone forms a sheet of soft tissue, 



bridging over the space between the two, and resting upon 
projecting spines of the corallum. This sheet of tissue is called 
the coenosarc. Its lower surface is clothed with a layer of 
calicoblasts which continue to secrete carbonate of lime, giving 
rise to a secondary deposit which more or less fills up the spaces 
between the individual coralla, and is distinguished as coenen- 
chyme. This coenenchyme may be scanty, or may be so abundant 
that the individual corallites produced by budding seem to be 
immersed in it. Budding takes place in an analogous manner 
in perforate corals (fig. 18, B), but the presence of the canal 
system in the perforate theca leads to a modification of the pro- 
cess. Buds arise from the edge-zone which already communicate 
with the cavity of the zooid by the canals. As the buds develop 
the canal system becomes much extended, and calcaieous tissue 
is deposited between the network of canals, the confluent edge- 
zones of mother zooid and bud forming a coenosarc. As the 
process continues a number of calicles are formed, imbedded in 
a spongy tissue in which the canals ramify, and it is impossible 
to say where the theca of one corallite ends and that of another 
begins. In the formation of colonies by division a constriction 
at right angles to the long axis of the mouth involves first the 
mouth, then the peristome, and finally the calyx itself, so that 
the previously single corallite becomes divided into two (fig. 18, 
E). After division the corallites continue to grow upwards, and 
their zooids may remain united by a bridge of soft tissue' or 
coenosarc. But in some cases, as they grow farther apart, this 
continuity is broken, each corallite has its own edge-zone, and 
internal continuity is also broken by the formation of dissepi- 
ments within each calicle, all organic connexion between the 
two zooids being eventually lost. Massive meandrine corals are 
produced by continual repetition of a process of incomplete 
division, involving the mouth and to some extent the peristome: 
the calyx, however, does not divide, but elongates to form a 
characteristic meandrine channel containing several zooid mouths. 
' Corals have been divided into Aporosa and Perforata, according 
as the theca and septa are compact and solid, or are perforated 
by pores containing canals lined by endoderm. The division 
is in many respects convenient for descriptive purposes, but 
recent researches show that it does not accurately represent the 
relationships of the different families. Various attempts have 
been made to classify corals according to the arrangement of the 
septa, the characters of the theca, the microscopic structure of 
the corallum, and the anatomy of the soft parts. The last- 
named method has proved little more than that there is a remark- 
able similarity between the zooids of all recent corals, the 
differences which have been brought to light being for the most 
part secondary and valueless for classificatory purposes. On the 
other hand, the study of the anatomy and development of the 
zooids has thrown much light upon the manner in which the 
corallum is formed, and it is now possible to infer the structure 
of the soft parts from a microscopical examination of the septa, 
theca, &c, with the result that unexpected relationships have 
been shown to exist between corals previously supposed to 
stand far apart. This has been particularly the case with the 
group of Palaeozoic corals formerly classed together as Rugosa. 
In many of these so-called rugose forms the septa have a char- 
acteristic arrangement, differing from that of recent corals 
chiefly in the fact that they show a tetrameral instead of a 
hexameral symmetry. Thus in the family Slauridae there are 
four chief septa whose inner ends unite in the middle of the 
calicle to form a false columella, and in the Zaphrentidae there 
are many instances of an arrangement, such as that depicted 
in fig. 19, which represents the septal arrangement of Streptelasma 
corniculum from the lower Silurian. In this coral the calicle is 
divided into quadrants by four principal septa, the main septum, 
counter septum, and two alar septa. The remaining septa are so 
disposed that in the quadrants abutting on the chief septum 
they converge towards that septum, whilst in the other quadrants 
they converge towards the alar septa. The secondary septa show 
a regular gradation in size, and, assuming that the smallest were 
the most recently formed, it will be noticed that in the chief 
quadrants the youngest septa lie nearest to the main septum; 



104 



ANTHOZOA 




Fig. 19. — Diagram of the arrange- 
ment of the septa in a Zaphrentid coral, 
m, Main septum; c, counter septum; 
t, t, alar septa. 



in the other quadrants the youngest septa lie nearest to the alar 
septa. This arrangement, however, is by no means characteristic 
even of the Zaphrentidae, and in the family Cyathophyllidae 
most of the genera exhibit a radial symmetry in which no trace 
of the bilateral arrangement described above is recognizable, 
and indeed in the genus Cyathophylkim itself a radial arrangement 
is the rule. The connexion between the Cyathophyllidae and 
modern Astraeidae is shown by Moseleya latistellata, a living 
reef-building coral from Torres Strait. The general structure 
of this coral leaves no doubt that it is closely allied to the 
Astraeidae, but in the young calicles a tetrameral symmetry 
is indicated by the presence of four large septa placed at right 
angles to one another. Again, in the family Amphiastraeidae 
there is commonly a single septum much larger than the rest, 
and it has been shown that in the young calicles, e.g. of Thecidio- 
smilia, two septa, corresponding to the main- and counter-septa 
jn of Streptelasma, are iirst 

formed, then two alar 
septa, ' and afterwards 
the remaining septa, 
the latter taking on a 
generally radial arrange- 
ment, though the original 
bilaterality is marked 
by the preponderance of 
the main septum. As 
the microscopic char- 
acter of the corallum of 
these extinct forms 
agrees with that of re- 
cent corals, it may be 
assumed that the anat- 
omy of the soft parts 
also was similar, and 
the tetrameral arrange- 
ment, when present, 
may obviously be referred to a stage when only the first two 
pairs of Edwardsian mesenteries were present and septa were 
formed in the intervals between them. 

Space forbids a discussion of the proposals to classify corals 
after the minute structure of their coralla, but it will suffice 
to say that it has been shown that the septa of all corals are built 
up of a number of curved bars called trabeculae, each of which 
is composed of a number of nodes. In many secondary corals 
(Cydolites, Thamnastraea) the trabeculae are so far separate 
that the individual bars are easily recognizable, and each looks 
something like a bamboo owing to the thickening of the two 
ends of each node. The trabeculae are united together by these 
thickened internodes, and the result is a fenestrated septum, 
which in older septa may become solid and aporose by continual 
deposit of calcite in the fenestrae. Each node of a trabecula 
may be simple, i.e. have only one centre of calcification, or may 
be compound. The septa of modern perforate corals are shown 
to have a structure nearly identical with that of the secondary 
forms, but the trabeculae and their nodes are only apparent on 
microscopical examination. The aporose corals, too, have a 
practically identical structure, their compactness being due to 
the union of the trabeculae throughout their entire lengths in- 
stead of at intervals, as in the Perforata. Further, the trabeculae 
may be evenly spaced throughout the septum, or may be grouped 
together, and this feature is probably of value in estimating the 
affinities of corals. (For an account of coral formations see 
Coral-reefs.) 

In the present state of our knowledge the Zoantharia in which 
a primary cycle of six couples of mesenteries is (or may be inferred 
to be) completed by the addition of two pairs to the eight 
Edwardsian mesenteries, and succeeding cycles are formed in 
the exocoeles of the pre-existing mesenterial cycles, may be classed 
in an order Actiniidea, and this may be divided into the sub- 
orders Malacadiniae, comprising the soft-bodied Actinians, 
such as Actinia, Sagartia, Bunodes, &c, and the Sder actiniae, 
comprising the corals. The Scleractiniae may best be divided 



into groups of families which appear to be most closely related 
to one another, but it should not be forgotten that there is great 
reason to believe that many if not most of the extinct corals 
must have differed from modern Actiniidea in mesenterial 
characters, and may have only possessed Edwardsian mesenteries, 
or even have possessed only four mesenteries, in this respect 
showing close affinities to the Stauromedusae. Moreover, 
there are some modern corals in which the secondary cycle 
of mesenteries departs from the Actinian plan. For example, 
J. E. Duerden has shown that in Pontes the ordinary zooids 
possess only six couples of mesenteries arranged on the Actinian 
plan. But some'zooids grow to a larger size and develop a number 
of additional mesenteries, .which arise either in the sulcar or 
the sulcular entocoele, much in the same manner as in Cerianthus. 
Bearing this in mind, the following arrangement may be taken 
to represent the most recent knowledge of coral structure: — 

Group A. 

Family I. Zaphrentidae. — Solitary Palaeozoic corals with an 
epithecal wall. Septa numerous, arranged pinnately with regard to 
four principal septa. Tabulae present. One or more pits or fossulae 
present in the calicle. Typical genera— Zaphrentis, Raf. Amplexus, 
M. Edw. and H. Streptelasma, Hall. Omphyma, Raf. 

Family 2. Turbinolidae. — Solitary, rarely colonial corals, with 
radially arranged septa and without tabulae. Typical genera — 
Flabellum, Lesson. Turbinolia, M. Edw. and H. Caryophyllia, 
Lamarck. Sphenotrochus, Moseley, &c. 

Family 3. Amphiastraeidae. — Mainly colonial, rarely solitary 
corals, with radial septa, but bilateral arrangement' indicated by 
persistence of a main septum. Typical genera — Amphiastraea, 
Etallon. Thecidiosmilia. 

Family a. Stylinidae. — Colonial corals allied to the Amphi- 
astraeidae, but with radially symmetrical septa arranged in cycles. 
Typical genera — Stylina, Lamarck (Jurassic). Convexaslraea, D' Orb. 
(Jurassic). Isastraea, M. Edw. and H. (Jurassic). Ogilvie refers the 
modern genus Galaxea to this family. 

Group B. 

Family 5. Ocui.inidae. — Branching or massive aporose corals, 
the calices projecting above the level of a compact coenenchyme 
formed from the coenosarc which covers the exterior of the corallum. 
Typical genera— Lophohelia, M. Edw. and H. Oculiha, M. Edw. 
and H. 

Family 6. Pocilloporidae. — Colonial branching aporose corals, 
with small calices sunk in the coenenchyme. Tabulae present, and 
two larger septa, an axial and abaxial, are always present, with 
traces of ten smaller septa. Typical genera — Pocillopora, Lamarck. 
Seriatopora, Lamarck. 

Family 7. Madreporidae. — Colonial branching or palmate 
perforate corals, with abundant trabecular coenenchyme. Theca 
porous; septa compact and reduced in number. Typical genera — 
Madrepora, Linn. Turbinariq, Oken. Montipora, Quoy and G. 

Family 8. Poritidae. — Incrusting or massive colonial perforate 
corals; calices usually in contact by their edges, sometimes disjunct 
and immersed in coenenchyme. Theca and septa perforate. Typical 
genera — Porites, M. Edw. and H. Goniopora, Quoy and G. Rhoda- 
raea, M. Edw. and H. 

Group C. 

Family 9. Cyathophyllidae. — Solitary and colonial aporose 
corals. Tabulae and vesicular endotheca present. Septa numerous, 
generally radial, seldom pinnate. Typical genera— Cyathophyllum, 
Goldfuss (Devonian and Carboniferous). Moseleya, Quelch (recent). 

Family 10. Astraeidae.— Aporose, mainly colonial corals, 
massive, branching, or maeandroid. Septa radial; dissepiments 
present ; an epitheca surrounds the base of massive or maeandroid 
forms, but only surrounds individual corallites in simple or branching 
forms. Typical genera— Goniastraea, M. Edw. and H. Heliastraea, 
M. Edw. and H. Maeandrina, Lam. Coeloria, M. Edw. and H. 
Favia, Oken. 

Family u. Fungidae. — Solitary and colonial corals, with 
numerous radial septa united by synapticulae. Typical genera — 
Lophoseris, M. Edw. and H. Thamnastraea, Le Sauvage. Lepto- 
phyllia, Reuss (Jurassic and Cretaceous). Futtgia, Dana. Sider- 
astraea, Blainv. 

Group D. 

Family 12. EuPSAMMiDAE.-^Solitary or colonial perforate corals, 
branching, massive, or encrusting. Septa radial ; the primary septa 
usually compact, the remainder perforate. Theca perforate. Synap- 
ticula present in some genera. Typical genera — Stephanophyllia, 
Michelin. Eupsammia, M. Edw. and H. Astroides, Blainv. Rhodop- 
sammia, M. Edw. and H. Dendrophyllia, M. Edw. and H. 

Group E. 

Family 13. Cystiphyllidae. — Solitary corals with rudimentary 
septa, and the calicle filled with vesicular endotheca. Genera— 



ANTHRACENES-ANTHRACITE 



105 



Cystiphyllum,' Lonsdale (Silurian and Devonian). Goniophyllum, 
M. Edw. and H. (In this Silurian genus the calyx is provided with a 
movable operculum, consisting of four paired triangular pieces, the 
bases of each' being attached to the sides of the calyx, and their apices 
meeting in the middle when the operculum is closed). Calcecla, 
Lam. (In this Devonian genus there is a single semicircular oper- 
culum furnished with a stout median septum and numerous feebly 
developed secondary septa. The calyx is triangular in section, 
pointed below, and the operculum is attached to it by hinge-like 
teeth.) 

Authorities. — The following list contains only the names of the 
more important and more general works on the structure and 
classification of corals and on coral reefs. For a fuller bibliography 
the works marked with an asterisk should be consulted : * A. Andres, 
Fauna und Flora des Golfes von Neapel, ix. (1884) ; H. M. Bernard, 
" Catalogue of Madreporarian Corals " in Brit. Museum, ii. (1896), 
iii. (1897) ; *G. C. Bourne, " Anthozoa," in E. Ray Lankester's 
Treatise on Zoology, vol. ii. (London, 1900); G. Brook, "Chal- 
lenger Reports," Zoology, xxxii. (1899) (Antipatharia); "Cat. 
Madrep. Corals," Brit. Museum, i. (1893); D.C.Danielssen, "Report 
Norwegian North Atlantic Exploring Expedition," Zoology, xix. 
(1890); J. E. Duerden, "Some Results on the Morphology and 
Development of Recent and Fossil Corals," Rep. Brit. Association, 
1903* pp. 684-685; " The Morphology of the Madreporaria," Biol. 
Bullet, vii. pp. 79-104; P. M. Duncan, Journ. Linnean Soc. xviii. 
(1885); P. H. Gosse, Actinologia britannica (London, i860); O. and 
R. Hertwig, Die Actinien (Jena, 1 879); R. Hertwig, " Challenger 
Reports," Zoology, vi. (1882) and xxvi. (1888); * C. B. Klunzinger, 
Die Korallthiere des Rothen Meeres (Berlin, 1877); * G. von Koch, 
Fauna und Flora des Golfes von Neapel, xv. (1887) ; Mitth. Zool. 
Stat. Neapel, ii. (1882) and xii. (1897); Palaeontographica, xxix. 
(1883); (also many papers in the Morphol. Jahrbuch from 1878 to 
1898); F. Koby, " Polypiers jurassiques de la Suisse," Mem. Soc. 
Palaeont. Suisse, vii.-xvi. (1880-1889); A. von Kolliker, "Die 
Pennatuliden," Abh. d. Senck. Naturf. Gesell. vii.; *" Challenger 
Reports," Zoology, i. Pennatulidae (1880); Koren and Danielssen, 
Norske Nordhaus Exped., Alcyonida (1887) ; H. de Lacaze-Duthiers, 
Hist. not. du corail (Paris, 1864) ; H. Milne-Edwards and J. Haime, 
Hist. nat. des coralliaires (Paris, 1857); H. N. Moseley, " Challenger 
Reports," Zoology, ii. (1881); H. A. Nicholson, -Palaeozoic Tabulate 
Corals (Edinburgh, 1879) ; M.M. Ogilvie, Phil. Transactions, clxxxvii. 
(1896); E. Pratz, Palaeontographica, xxix. (1882); J. J. Quelch, 
" Challenger Reports," Zoology, xvi. (1886); * P. S. Wright and Th. 
Studer, " Challenger Reports," Zoology, xxxi. (1889). (G. C. B.) 

ANTHRACENE (from the Greek a.vdpa£, coal), Ci 4 H l0 , a 
hydrocarbon obtained from the fraction of the coal-tar distillate 
boiling between 270 and 400 C. This high boiling fraction is 
allowed to stand for some days, when it partially solidifies. It is 
then separated in a centrifugal machine, the low melting-point 
impurities are removed by means of hot water, and the residue 
is finally hot-pressed. The crude anthracene cake is purified 
by treatment with the higher pyridine bases, the operation being 
carried out in large steam-jacketed boilers. The whole mass 
dissolves on heating, and the anthracene crystallizes out on 
cooling. The crystallized anthracene is then removed by a 
centrifugal separator and the process of solution in the pyridine 
bases is repeated. Finally the anthracene is purified by sub- 
limation. 

Many synthetical processes for the preparation of anthracene 
and its derivatives are known. It is formed by the condensation 
of acetylene tetrabromide with benzene in the presence of 
aluminium chloride: — ■ 

Br-CH-Br /CH X 

C.H 6 + I +C 6 H6=4HBr+C 6 H 4 < I >C 6 H 4 , 

Br-CH-Br X CH/ 

and similarly from methylene dibromide and benzene, and also 
when benzyl chloride is heated with aluminium chloride to 
200 C. By condensing ortho-brombenzyl bromide with sodium, 
C. L. Jackson and J. F. White (Ber., 1879, 12, p. 1965) obtained 
dihydro-anthr'acene 

C 6 H 4 <^ 2Br +4Na + BrC ^>C,H < = 4NaBr+C 6 H 4 <^pC 6 H4. 

Anthracene has also been obtained by heating ortho-tolylphenyl 
ketone with zinc dust 

/CPU * X CH, 

C 6 H,< = H,0+C 6 H 4 < I >C 6 H 4 . 

MTOCsHi YH/ 

Anthracene crystallizes in colourless monoclinic tables which 
show a fine blue fluorescence. It melts at 213 C. and boils 
at 351° C. It is insoluble in water, sparingly soluble in alcohol 
and ether, but readily soluble in hot benzene. It unites with 



picric acid to form a picrate, ChHio'CjHj (N0 2 )3-OH, which 
crystallizes in needles, melting at 138 C. On exposure to 
sunlight a solution of anthracene in benzene or xylene 
deposits para-anthracene (CuHio^, which melts at 244 C. 
and passes back into the ordinary form. Chlorine, and 
bromine form both addition and substitution products with 
anthracene; the addition product, anthracene dichloride, 
C14H10CI2, being formed when chlorine is passed into a cold 
solution of anthracene in carbon bisulphide. On treatment 
with potash, it forms the substitution product, monochlor- 
anthracene, G4H9CI. Nitro-anthracenes are not as yet 
known. The mono-oxyanthracenes (anthrols), C14H9OH or 

/ CH \ 
CsHVC I )C6H 3 OH (a) and (/3), resemble the phenols, whilst 

CH 

XXOHk 

C«Hj<f ] /CeH (7) (anthranol) is a reduction product of 

CH 

anthraquinone. /3-anthrol and anthranol give the corresponding 
amino compounds (anthramines) when heated with ammonia. 

Numerous sulphonic acids of anthracene are known, a mono- 
sulphonic acid being obtained with dilute sulphuric acid, whilst 
concentrated sulphuric acid produces mixtures of the anthracene 
disulphonic acids. By the action of sodium amalgam on an 
alcoholic solution of anthracene, an anthracene dihydride, 
C14H12, is obtained, whilst by the use of stronger reducing agents, 
such as hydriodic acid and amorphous phosphorus, hydrides 
of composition G4H16 and C14H24 are produced. 

Methyl and phenyl anthracenes are known; phenyl anthranol 
(phthalidin) being somewhat closely related to the phenol- 
phthaleins (q.v.). Oxidizing agents convert anthracene into 
anthraquinone (q.v.) ; the production of this substance by oxidiz- 
ing anthracene in glacial acetic acid solution, with chromic acid, 
is the usual method employed for the estimation of anthracene. 

ANTHRACITE (Gr. avdpa£, coal), a term applied to those 
varieties of coal which do not give off tarry or other hydrocarbon 
vapours when heated below their point of ignition; or, in other 
words, which burn with a smokeless and nearly non-luminous 
flame. Other terms having the same meaning are, " stone coal " 
(not to be confounded with the German Steinkohle) or " blind 
coal " in Scotland, and " Kilkenny coal " in Ireland. The im- 
perfect anthracite of north Devon, which however is only used 
as a pigment, is known as culm, the' same term being used in 
geological classification to distinguish the strata in which it is 
found; and similar strata in the Rhenish hill countries which are 
known as the Culm Measures. In America, culm is used as an 
equivalent for waste or slack in anthracite mining. 

Physically, anthracite differs from ordinary bituminous coal by 
its greater hardness, higher density, 1-3-1-4, and lustre, the latter 
being often semi-metallic with a somewhat brownish reflection. 
It is also free from included soft or fibrous notches and does 
not soil the fingers when rubbed. Structurally it shows some 
alteration by the development of secondary divisional planes and 
fissures so that the original stratification lines are not always 
easily seen. The thermal conductivity is also higher, a lump of 
anthracite feeling perceptibly colder when held in the warm 
hand than a similar lump of bituminous coal at the same tempera- 
ture. The chemical composition of some typical anthracites is 
given in the article Coal. 

Anthracite may be considered to be a transition stage between 
ordinary bituminous coal and graphite, produced by the more or 
less complete elimination of the volatile constituents of the 
former; and it is found most abundantly in areas that have been 
subjected to considerable earth-movements, such as the flanks 
of great mountain ranges. The largest and most important 
anthracite region, that of the north-eastern portion of the Penn- 
sylvania coal-field, is a good example of this; the highly con 
torted strata of the Appalachian region produce anthracite 
exclusively, while in the western portion of the same basin on 
the Ohio and its tributaries, where the strata are undisturbed, 
free-burning and coking coals, rich in volatile matter, prevail. In 
the same way the anthracite region of South Wales is confined 
to the contorted portion west of Swansea and Llanelly, the 



io6 



ANTHRACOTHERIUM— ANTHRAX 



central and eastern portions producing steam, coking and 
house coals. 

Anthracites of newer, tertiary or cretaceous age, are found in 
the Crow's Nest part of the Rocky Mountains in Canada, and 
at various points in the Andes in Peru. 

The principal use of anthracite is as a smokeless fuel. In the 
eastern United States, it is largely employed as domestic fuel, 
usually in close stoves or furnaces, as well as for steam purposes, 
since, unlike that from South Wales, it does not decrepitate when 
heated, or at least not to the same extent. For proper use, however, 
it is necessary that the fuel should be supplied in pieces as nearly 
uniform in size as possible, a condition that has led to the develop- 
ment of the breaker which is so characteristic a feature in American 
anthracite mining (see Coal). The large coal as raised from the 
mine is passed through breakers with toothed rolls to reduce the 
lumps to smaller pieces, which are separated into different sizes 
by a system of graduated sieves, placed in descending order. 
Each size can be perfectly well burnt alone on an appropriate 
grate, if kept free from larger or smaller admixtures. The 
common American classification is as follows:— 

Lump, steamboat, egg and stove coals, the latter in two or three 
sizes, all three being above i^ in. size on round-hole screens. 

Chestnut below I J inch above |. inch. 
rt -a ,, H ,, ,, j fi ,, 

Buckwheat ,, f e ,, „ I ,, 

Rice ,, I „ ,, ,»„ ,, 

Barley „ A „ „ l> „ 

From the pea size downwards the principal use is for steam 
purposes. In South Wales a less elaborate classification is 
adopted; but great care is exercised in hand-picking and cleaning 
the coal from included particles of pyrites in the higher qualities 
known as best malting coals, which are used for kiln-drying 
malt and hops. 

Formerly, anthracite was largely used, both in America and 
South Wales, as blast-furnace fuel for iron smelting, but for this 
purpose it has been largely superseded by coke in the former 
country and entirely in the latter. An important application 
has, however, been developed in the extended use of internal 
combustion motors driven by the so-called "mixed," "poor," 
" semi-water " or " Dowson gas " produced by the gasification 
of anthracite with air and a small proportion of steam. This 
is probably the most economical method of obtaining power 
known; with an engine as small as 15 horse-power the expendi- 
ture of fuel is at the rate of only 1 lb per horse-power hour, and 
with larger engines it is proportionately less. Large quantities of 
anthracite for power purposes are now exported from South 
Wales to France, Switzerland and parts of Germany. (H. B.) 

ANTHRACOTHERIUM (" coal-animal," so called from the 
fact of the remains first described having been obtained from 
the Tertiary lignite-beds of Europe), a genus of extinct artio- 
dactyle ungulate mammals, characterized by having 44 teeth, 
with five semi-crescentic cusps on the crowns of the upper 
molars. In many respects, especially the form of the lower jaw, 
Anlhracotherium, which is of Oligocene and Miocene age in 
Europe, and typifies the family Anlhracotheriidae, is allied to the 
hippopotamus, of which it is probably an ancestral form. The 
European A. magnum was as large as the last-mentioned animal, 
but there were several smaller species and the genus also occurs 
in Egypt, India and North America. (See Artiodactyla.) 

ANTHRAQUINONE, Ci 4 H 8 0._., an important derivative of 
anthracene, first prepared in 1834 by A. Laurent. It is prepared 
commercially from anthracene by stirring a sludge of anthracene 
and water in horizontal cylinders with a mixture of sodium 
bichromate and caustic soda. This suspension is then run through 
a conical mill in order to remove all grit, the cones of the mill 
fitting so tightly that water cannot pass through unless the mill is 
running; the speed of the mill when working is about 3000 
revolutions per minute. After this treatment, the mixture is 
run into lead-lined vats and treated with sulphuric acid, steam 
is blown through the mixture in order to bring it to the boil, and 
the anthracene is rapidly oxidized to anthraquinone. When the 
oxidation is complete, the anthraquinone is separated in a filter 



press, washed and heated to 120 C. with commercial oil of 
vitriol, using about 2§ parts of vitriol to 1 of anthraquinone. 
It is then removed to lead-lined tanks and again washed with 
water and dried; the product obtained contains about 95 % of 
anthraquinone. It may be purified by sublimation. Various 
synthetic processes have been used for the preparation of anthra- 
quinone. A. Behr and W. A. v. Dorp (Ber., 1874,7^.578) obtained 
orthobenzoyl benzoic acid by heating phthalic anhydride with 
benzene in the presence of aluminium chloride. This compound 
on heating with phosphoric anhydride loses water and yields 
anthraquinone, 

r „ /CO-^ C.H. ^CO-C 6 H 5 x „ „ ^-CCK. r „ 

C6H <CO> ^ CeH4< COOH ^C 6 H 4 < C0 >CeH 4 . 

It may be prepared in a similar manner by heating phthalyl 
chloride with benzene in the presence of aluminium chloride. 
Dioxy- and tetraoxy-anthraquinones areobtained when meta-oxy- 
and dimeta-dioxy-benzoic acids are heated with concentrated 
sulphuric acid. 

Anthraquinone crystallizes in yellow needles or prisms, which 
melt at 277° C. It is soluble in hot benzene, sublimes easily, and 
is very stable towards oxidizing agents. On the other hand, 
it is readily attacked by reducing agents. With zinc dust in 
presence of caustic soda it yields the secondary alcohol oxan- 
thranol, C6H 4 : CO-CHOH : C 6 H 4 , with tin and hydrochloric acid, 
the phenolic compound anthranol, C6H 4 : CO-C(OH): C 6 Hi; and 
with hydriodic acid at 1 50 C. or on distillation with zinc dust, 
the hydrocarbon anthracene, Ci 4 Hi . When fused with caustic 
potash, it gives benzoic acid. It behaves more as a ketone than 
as a quinone, since with hydroxylamine it yields an oxime, and on 
reduction with zinc dust and caustic soda it yields a secondary 
alcohol, whilst it cannot be reduced by means of sulphurous 
acid. Various sulphonic acids of anthraquinone are known, as 
well as oxy-derivatives, for the preparation and properties of 
which see Alizarin. 

ANTHRAX (the Greek for "coal," or " carbuncle," so called 
by the ancients because they regarded it as burning like coal; 
cf. the French equivalent charbon; also known as fievre char- 
bonneuse, Milzbrand, splenic fever, and malignant pustule), an 
acute, specific, infectious, virulent disease, caused by the Bacillus 
anthracis, in animals, chiefly cattle, sheep and horses, and 
frequently occurring in workers in the wool or hair, as well as in 
those handling the hides or carcases, of beasts which have been 
affected. 

Animals. — As affecting wild as well as domesticated animals 
and man, anthrax has been widely diffused in one or more of its 
forms, over the surface of the globe. It at times decimates the 
reindeer herds in Lapland and the Polar regions, and is only too 
well known in the tropics and in temperate latitudes. It has 
been observed and described in Russia, Siberia, Central Asia, 
China, Cochin-China, Egypt, West Indies, Peru, Paraguay, 
Brazil, Mexico, and other parts of North and South America, in 
Australia, and on different parts of the African continent, while 
for other European countries the writings which have been 
published with regard to its nature, its peculiar characteristics, 
and the injury it inflicts are innumerable. Countries in which 
are extensive marshes, or the subsoil of which is tenacious or 
impermeable, are usually those most frequently and seriously 
visited. Thus there have been regions notorious for its preval- 
ence, such as the marshes of Sologne, Dombes and Bresse in 
France; certain parts of Germany, Hungary and Poland; in 
Spain the half-submerged valleys and the maritime coasts of 
Catalonia, as well as the Romagna and other marshy districts of 
Italy; while it is epizootic, and even panzootic, in the swampy 
regions of Esthonia, Livonia, Courland, and especially of Siberia, 
where it is known as the Sibirskaja jaswa (Siberian boil -plague). 
The records of anthrax ^o back to a very ancient date. It is 
supposed to be the murrain of Exodus. Classical writers allude 
to anthrax as if it were the only cattle disease worthy cf 
mention (see Virgil, Georg. iii.). It figures largely in the history 
of the early and middle ages as a devastating pestilence attack- 
ing animals, and through them mankind; the oldest Anglo- 
Saxon manuscripts contain many fantastic recipes, leechdoms. 



ANTHRAX 



107 



charms and incantations for the prevention or cure of the 
" blacan blezene " (black blain) and the relief of the " elfshot " 
creatures. In the 18th and 19th centuries it sometimes spread 
like an epizootic over the whole of Europe, from Siberia to 
France. It was in this malady that disease-producing germs 
{bacterid) were first discovered, in 1840, by Pollender of Wipper- 
fiirth, and, independently, by veterinary surgeon Brauell of 
Dorpat, and their real character afterwards verified by C. J. 
Davaine (181 2-1882) of Alfort in 1863; and it was in their 
experiments with this disease that Toussaint, Pasteur and 
J. B. Chauveau first showed how to make the morbific poison its 
own antidote. (See Vivisection.) 

The symptoms vary with the species of animal, the mode of 
infection, and the seat of the primary lesion, internal or external. 
In all its forms anthrax is an inoculable disease, transmission 
being surely and promptly effected by this means, and it may be 
conveyed to nearly all animals by inoculation of a wound of the 
skin or through the digestive organs. Cattle, sheep and horses 
nearly always owe their infection to spores or bacilli ingested 
with their food or water, and pigs usually contract the disease by 
eating the flesh of animals dead of anthrax. 

Internal anthrax, of cattle and sheep, exhibits no premonitory 
symptoms that can be relied on. Generally the first indication 
of an outbreak is the sudden death of one or more of the herd or 
flock. Animals which do not die at once may be noticed to 
stagger and tremble; the breathing becomes hurried and the 
pulse very rapid, while the heart beats violently; the internal 
temperature of the body is high, 104 to 106° F. ; blood oozes 
from the nose, mouth and anus, the visible mucous membranes 
are dusky or almost black. The animal becomes weak and list- 
less, the temperature falls and death supervenes in a few hours, 
being immediately preceded by delirium, convulsions or coma. 
While death is usually rapid or sudden when the malady is 
general, constituting what is designated splenic apoplexy, 
internal anthrax in cattle is not invariably fatal. In some cases 
the animal rallies from a first attack and gradually recovers. 

In the external or localized form, marked by the formation 
of carbuncles before general infection takes place, death may 
not occur for several days. The carbuncles may appear in any 
part of the body, being preceded or accompanied by fever. 
They are developed in the subcutaneous connective tissue 
where this is loose and plentiful, in the interstices of the muscles, 
lymphatic glands, in the mucous membranes of the mouth and 
tongue (glossanthrax of cattle), pharynx and larynx (anthrax 
angina of horses and pigs), and the rectum. They begin as 
small circumscribed swellings which are warm, slightly painful 
and oedematous. In from two to eight hours they attain a con- 
siderable size, are cold, painless and gangrenous, and when 
they are incised a quantity of a blood-stained gelatinous exudate 
escapes. When the swellings have attained certain proportions 
symptoms of general infection appear, and, running their course 
with great rapidity, cause death in a few hours. Anthrax of the 
horse usually begins as an affection of the throat or bowel. In 
the former there is rapid obstructive oedema of the mucous 
membrane of the pharynx and larynx with swelling of the throat 
and neck, fever, salivation, difficulty in swallowing, noisy 
breathing, frothy discharge from the nose and threatening 
suffocation. General invasion soon ensues, and the horse may 
die in from four to sixteen hours. The intestinal form is marked 
by high temperature, great prostration, small thready pulse, 
tumultuous action of the heart, laboured breathing and symptoms 
of abdominal pain with straining and diarrhoea. When moved 
the horse staggers and trembles. Profuse sweating, a falling 
temperature and cyanotic mucous membranes indicate the 
approach of a fatal termination. 

In splenic fever or splenic apoplexy, the most marked altera- 
tions observed after death are — the effects of rapid decomposi- 
tion, evidenced by the foul odour, disengagement of gas beneath 
the skin and in the tissues and cavities of the body, yellow or 
yellowish-red gelatinous exudation into and between the muscles, 
effusion of citron or rust-coloured fluid in various cavities, 
extravasations of blood and local congestions throughout the 



body, the blood in the vessels generally being very dark and 
tar-like. The most notable feature, however, in the majority of 
cases is the enormous enlargement of the spleen, which is en- 
gorged with blood to such an extent that it often ruptures, while 
its tissue is changed into a violet or black fluid mass. 

The bacillus of anthrax, under certain conditions, retains its 
vitality for a long time, and rapidly grows when it finds a suitable 
field in which to develop, its mode of multiplication being by 
scission and the formation of spores, and depending, to a great 
extent at least, on the presence of oxygen. The morbid action 
of the bacillus is indeed said to be due to its affinity for oxygen; 
by depriving the red corpuscles of the blood of that most essential 
gas, it renders the vital fluid unfit to sustain life. Albert Hoffa 
and others assert that the fatal lesiqns are produced by the 
poisonous action of the toxins formed by the bacilli and not by 
the blocking up of the minute blood-vessels, or the abstraction 
of oxygen from the blood by the bacilli. 

It was by the cultivation of this micro-organism, or attenuation 
of the virus, that Pasteur was enabled to produce a' prophylactic 
remedy for anthrax. His discovery was first made with regard 
to the cholera of fowls, a most destructive disorder which 
annually carries off great numbers of poultry. Pasteur produced 
his inoculation material by the cultivation of the bacilli at a 
temperature of 42 C. in oxygen. Two vaccines are required. 
The first or weak vaccine is obtained by incubating a bouillon 
culture for twenty-four days at 42° C, and the second or less 
attenuated vaccine by incubating a bouillon culture, at the same 
temperature, for twelve days. Pasteur's method of protective 
inoculation comprises two inoculations with an interval of twelve 
days between them. Immunity, established in about fifteen 
days after the injection of the second vaccine, lasts from nine 
months to a year. 

Toussaint had, previous to Pasteur, attenuated the virus of 
anthrax by the action of heat; and Chauveau subsequently 
corroborated by numerous experiments the value of Toussaint's 
method, demonstrating that, according to the degree of heat 
to which the virus is subjected, so is its inocuousness when 
transferred to a healthy creature. In outbreaks of anthrax on 
farms where many animals are exposed to infection immediate 
temporary protection can be conferred by the injection of 
anthrax serum. 

Human Beings. — For many years cases of sudden death had 
been observed to occur from time to time among healthy men 
engaged in woollen manufactories, particularly in the work of 
sorting or combing wool. In some instances death appeared to 
be due to the direct inoculation of some poisonous material into 
the body, for a form of malignant pustule was observed upon 
the skin; but, on the other hand, in not a few cases without any 
external manifestation, symptoms of blood-poisoning, often 
proving rapidly fatal, suggested the probability of other channels 
for the introduction of the disease. In 1880 the occurrence of 
several such cases among woolsorters at Bradford, reported 
by Dr J. H. Bell of that town, led to an official inquiry in England 
by the Local Government Board, and an elaborate investigation 
into the pathology of what was then called " woolsorters' disease " 
was at the same time conducted at the Brown Institution, London, 
by Professor W. S. Greenfield. Among the results of this inquiry 
it was ascertained: (1) that the disease appeared to be identical 
with that occurring among sheep and cattle; (2) that in the blood 
and tissues of the body was found in abundance, as in the disease 
in animals, the Bacillus anthracis, and (3) that the skins, hair, 
wool, &c, of animals dying of anthrax retain this infecting 
organism, which, under certain conditions, finds ready access 
to the bodies of the workers. 

Two well-marked forms of this disease in man are recognized, 
" external anthrax " and " internal anthrax." In external 
anthrax the infecting agent is accidentally inoculated into some 
portion of skin, the seat of a slight abrasion, often the hand, 
arm or face. A minute swelling soon appears at the part, and 
develops into a vesicle containing serum or bloody matter, 
and varying in size, but seldom larger than a shilling. This 
vesicle speedily bursts and leaves an ulcerated or sloughing 



io8 



ANTHROPOID APES— ANTHROPOLOGY 



surface, lound about which are numerous smaller vesicles which 
undergo similar changes, and the whole affected part becomes 
hard and tender, while the surrounding surface participates 
in the inflammatory action, and the neighbouring lymphatic 
glands are also inflamed. This condition, termed " malignant 
pustule," is frequently accompanied with severe constitutional 
disturbance, in the form of fever, delirium, perspirations, together 
with great prostration and a tendency to death from septicaemia, 
although on the other hand recovery is not uncommon. It 
was repeatedly found that the matter taken from the vesicle 
during the progress of the disease, as well as the blood in the 
body after death, contained the Bacillus dnthracis, and when 
inoculated into small animals produced rapid death, with all 
the symptoms and post-mortem appearances characteristic of 
the disease as known to affect them. 

In internal anthrax there is no visible local manifestation 
of the disease, and the spores or bacilli appear to gain access 
to the system from the air charged with them, as in rooms where 
the contaminated wool or hair is unpacked, or again during 
the process of sorting. The symptoms usually observed are those 
of rapid physical prostration, with a small pulse, somewhat 
lowered temperature (rarely fever), and quickened breathing. 
Examination of the chest reveals inflammation .of the lungs and 
pleura. In some cases death takes place by collapse in less 
than one day, while in others the fatal issue is postponed for 
three or four days, and is preceded by symptoms of blood- 
poisoning, including rigors, perspirations, extreme exhaustion, 
&c. In some cases of internal anthrax the symptoms are more 
intestinal than pulmonary, and consist in severe exhausting 
diarrhoea, with vomiting and rapid sinking. Recovery from 
the internal variety, although not unknown, is more rare than 
from the external, and its most striking phenomena are its sudden 
onset in the midst of apparent health, the rapid development 
of physical prostration, and its tendency to a fatal termination 
despite treatment. The post-mortem appearances in internal 
anthrax are such as are usually observed in septicaemia, but in 
addition evidence of extensive inflammation of the lungs, pleura 
and bronchial glands has in most cases been met with. The 
blood and other fluids and the diseased tissues are found loaded 
with the Bacillus anthracis. 

Treatment in this disease appears to be of but little avail, 
except as regards the external form, where the malignant pustule 
may be excised or dealt with early by strong caustics to destroy 
the affected textures. For the relief of the general constitutional 
symptoms, quinine, stimulants and strong nourishment appear 
to be the only available means. An anti-anthrax serum has 
also been tried. As preventive measures in woollen manu- 
factories, the disinfection of suspicious material, or the wetting 
of it before handling, is recommended as lessening the risk to 
the workers. (J. Mac.) 

ANTHROPOID APES, or Manlike Apes, the name given to 
the family of the Simiidae, because, of all the ape-world, they 
most closely resemble man. This family includes four kinds, 
the gibbons of S. E. Asia, the orangs of Borneo and Sumatra, 
the gorillas of W. Equatorial Africa, and the chimpanzees of 
W. and Central Equatorial Africa. Each of these apes resembles 
man most in some one physical characteristic: the gibbons 
in the formation of the teeth, the orangs in the brain-structure, 
the gorillas in size, and the chimpanzees in the sigmoid flexure of 
the spine. In general structure they all closely resemble human 
beings, as in the absence of tails; in their semi-erect position 
(resting on finger-tips or knuckles); in the shape of vertebral 
column, sternum and pelvis; in the adaptation of the arms 
for turning the palm uppermost at will; in the possession of Si 
long vermiform appendix to the short caecum of the intestine; 
in the size of the cerebral hemispheres and the complexity of 
their convolutions. They differ in certain respects, as in the pro- 
portion of the limbs, in the bony development of the eyebrow 
ridges, and in the opposable great toe, which fits the foot to be 
a climbing and grasping organ. 

Man differs from them in the absence of a hairy coat; in the 
development of a large lobule to the external ear; in his fully 



erect attitude; in his flattened foot with the non -opposable 
great toe; in the straight limb-bones; in the wider pelvis; 
in the marked sigmoid flexure of his spine; in the perfection 
of the muscular movements of the arm; in the delicacy of hand; 
in the smallness of the canine teeth and other dental peculiarities; 
in the development of a chin; and in the small size of his jaws 
compared to the relatively great size of the cranium. Together 
with man and the baboons, the anthropoid apes form the group 
known to science as Catarhini, those, that is, possessing a 
narrow nasal septum, and are thus easily distinguishable from 
the flat-nosed monkeys or Platyrhini. The anthropoid apes are 
arboreal and confined to the Old World. They are of special 
interest from the important place assigned to them in the 
arguments of Darwin and the Evolutionists. It is generally 
admitted now that no fundamental anatomical difference can 
be proved to exist between these higher apes and man, but it 
is equally agreed that none probably of the Simiidae is in the 
direct line of human ancestry . There is a great gap to be bridged 
between the highest anthropoid and the lowest man, and much 
importance has been attached to the discovery of an extinct 
primate, Pithecanthropus (q.v.), which has been regarded as 
the " missing link." 

See Huxley's Man's Place in Nature (1863);" Robt. Hartmann's 
Anthropoid Apes (1883; London, 1885); A. H. Keane's Ethnology 
(1896); Darwin's Descent of Man (1871; pop. ed., 1901); Haeckel's 
Anthropogeny (Leipzig, 1874, 1903; Paris, 1877; Eng. ed., 1883); 
W. H. Flower and Rich. Lydekker, Mammals Living and Extinct 
(London, 1.891). 

ANTHROPOLOGY (Gr. avOpoiTos man, and \6yos, theory or 
science), the science which, in its strictest sense, has as its 
object the study of man as a unit in the animal kingdom. It is 
distinguished from ethnology, which is devoted to the study of 
man as a racial unit, and from ethnography, which deals with 
the distribution of the races formed by the aggregation of such 
units. To anthropology, however, in its more general sense. as 
the natural history of man, ethnology and ethnography may 
both be considered to belong, being related as parts to a whole. 

Various other sciences, in conformity with the above definition, 
must be regarded as subsidiary to anthropology, which yet hold 
their own independent places in the field of knowledge. Thus 
anatomy and physiology display the structure and functions of 
the human body, while psychology investigates the queries
of the human mind. Philology deals with the general principles 
of language, as well as with the relations between the languages 
of particular races and nations. Ethics or moral science treats 
of man's duty or rules of conduct toward his fellow-men. Soci- 
ology and the science of culture are concerned with the origin 
and development of arts and sciences, opinions, beliefs, customs, 
laws and institutions generally among mankind within historic 
time; while beyond the historical limit the study is continued 
by inferences from relics of early ages and remote districts, to 
interpret which is the task of pre-historic archaeology and 
geology. 

I. Man's Place in Nature. — In 1843 Dr J. C. Prichard, who 
perhaps of all others merits the title of founder of modern 
anthropology, wrote in his Natural History of Man: — 

" The organized world presents no contrasts and resemblances 
more remarkable than those which we discover on comparing man- 
kind with the inferior tribes. That creatures should exist so nearly 
approaching to each other in all the particulars of their physical 
structure, and yet differing so immeasurably in their endowments 
and capabilities, would be a fact hard to believe, if it were not 
manifest to our observation. The differences are everywhere 
striking: the resemblances are less obvious in the fulness of their 
extent, and they are never contemplated without wonder by those 
who, in the study of anatomy and physiology, are first made aware 
how near is man in his physical constitution to the brutes. In all 
the principles of his internal structure, in the composition and 
functions of his parts, man is but an animal. The lord of the earth, 
who contemplates the eternal order of the universe, and aspires to 
communion with its invisible Maker, is a being composed of the 
same materials, and framed on the same principles, as the creatures 
which he has tamed to be the servile instruments of his willj or slays 
for his daily food. The points of resemblance are innumerable; 
they extend to the most recondite arrangements of that mechanism 
which maintains instrumentally the physical life of the body, which 



ANTHROPOLOGY 



109 



brings forward its early development and admits, after a given period, 
its decay, and by means of which is prepared a succession of similar 
beings destined to perpetuate the race.' 

The acknowledgment of man's structural similarity with the 
anthropomorphous species nearest approaching him, viz.: the 
higher or anthropoid apes, had long before Prichard's day- 
been made by Linnaeus, who in his Systema Naturae (1735) 
grouped them together as the highest order of Mammalia, to 
which he gave the name of Primates. The Amoenitates Aca- 
demicae (vol. vi., Leiden, 1764), published under the auspices of 
Linnaeus, contains a remarkable picture which illustrates a 
discourse by his disciple Hoppius, and is here reproduced (see 
Plate, fig. 1). In this picture, which shows the crudeness of the 
zoological notions current in the 18th century as to both men 
and apes, there are set in a row four figures: (a) a recognizable 
orang-utan, sitting and holding a staff; (b) a chimpanzee, 
absurdly humanized as to head, hands, and feet; (c) a hairy 
woman, with a tail a foot long; (d) another woman, more 
completely coated with hair. The great Swedish naturalist was 
possibly justified in treating the two latter creatures as quasi- 
human, for they seem to be grotesque exaggerations of such 
tailed and hairy human beings as really, though rarely, occur, 
and are apt to be exhibited as monstrosities (see Bastian and 
Hartmann, Zeitschrift filr Ethnologie, Index, " Geschwaiizte 
Menschen "; Gould and Pile, Anomalies and Curiosities of 
Medicine, 1897). To Linnaeus, however, they represented normal 
anthropomorpha or man-like creatures, vouched for by visitors 
to remote parts of the world. This opinion of the Swedish 
naturalist seems to have been little noticed in Great Britain till 
it was taken up by the learned but credulous Scottish judge, 
Lord Monboddo (see his Origin and Progress of Language, 1774, 
&c; Antient Metaphysics, 1778). He had not heard of the 
tailed men till he met with them in the work of Linnaeus, with 
whom he entered into correspondence, with the result that he 
enlarged his range of mankind with races of sub-human type. 
One was founded on the description by the Swedish sailor 
Niklas Koping of the ferocious men with long tails inhabiting 
the Nicobar Islands. Another comprised the orang-utans of 
Sumatra, who were said to take men captive and set them to 
work as slaves. One of these apes, it was related, served as a 
sailor on board a Jamaica ship, and used to wait on the captain. 
These are stories which seem to carry their own explanation. 
When the Nicobar Islands were taken over by the British 
government two centuries later, the native warriors were still 
wearing their peculiar loin-cloth hanging behind in a most taiU 
like manner (E. H. Man, Journal Anthropological Institute, vol. 
xv. p. 442). As for the story of the orang-utan cabin boy, this 
may even be verbally true, it being borne in mind that in the 
Malay languages the term orang-utan, " man of the forest," was 
originally used for inland for:st natives and other rude men, 
rather than for the miyas apes to which it has come to be generally 
applied by Europeans. The speculations as to primitive man 
connected with these stories diverted the British public, headed 
by Dr Johnson, who said that Monboddo was " as jealous of his 
tail as a squirrel." Linnaeus's primarily zoological classification 
of man did not, however, suit the philosophical opinion of the 
time, which responded more readily to the systems represented 
by Buffon, and later by Cuvier, in which the human mind and 
soul formed an impassable wall of partition between him and 
other mammalia, so that the definition of man's position in the 
animal world was treated as not belonging to zoology, but to 
metaphysics and theology. It has to be borne in mind that 
Linnaeus, plainly as he recognized the likeness of the higher 
simian and the human types, does not seem to have entertained 
the thought of accounting for this similarity by common descent. 
It satisfied his mind to consider it as belonging to the system of 
nature, as indeed remained the case with a greater anatomist of 
the following century, Richard Owen. The present drawing, 
which under the authority of Linnaeus shows an anthropo- 
morphic series from which the normal type of man, the Homo 
sapiens, is conspicuously absent, brings zoological similarity into 
view without suggesting kinship to account for it. There are few 



ideas more ingrained in ancient and low civilization than that of 
relationship by descent between the lower animals and man. 
Savage' and barbaric religions recognize it, and the mythology 
of the world has hardly a more universal theme. But in educated 
Europe such ideas had long been superseded by the influence of 
theology and philosophy, with which they seemed too incom- 
patible. In the 19th century, however, Lamarck's theory of the 
development of new species by habit and circumstance led 
through Wallace and Darwin to the doctrines of the hereditary 
transmission of acquired characters, the survival of the fittest, 
and natural selection. Thenceforward it was impossible to 
exclude a theory of descent of man from ancestral beings whom 
zoological similarity connects also, though by lines of descent 
not at all clearly defined, with ancestors of the anthropomorphic 
apes. In one form or another such a theory of human descent 
has in our time become part of an accepted framework of zbology, 
if not as a demonstrable truth, at any rate as a working hypothesis 
which has no effective rival. 

The new development from Linnaeus's zoological scheme 
which has thus ensued appears in Huxley's diagram of simian 
and human skeletons (fig. 2, (a) gibbon; (b) orang; (c) chim- 
panzee; (d) gorilla; (e) man). Evidently suggested by the 
Linnean picture, this is brought up to the modern level of 
zoology, and continued on to man, forming an introduction to 
his zoological history hardly to be surpassed. Some of the main 
points it illustrates may be briefly stated here, the reader' being 
referred for further information to Huxley's Essays. In tracing 
the osteological characters of apes and man through this series, 
the general system of the skeletons, and the close correspondence 
in number and arrangement of vertebrae and ribs, as well as in 
the teeth, go far towards justifying the opinion of hereditary 
connexion. At the same time, the comparison brings into view 
differences in human structure adapted to man's pre-eminent 
mode of life, though hardly to be accounted its chief causes. 
It may be seen how the arrangement of limbs suited for going 
on all-fours belongs rather to the apes than to man, and walking 
on the soles of the feet rather to man than the apes. The two 
modes of progression overlap in human life, but the child's 
tendency when learning is to rest on the soles of the feet and the 
palms of the hands, unlike the apes, which support themselves 
on the sides of the feet and the bent knuckles of the hands. With 
regard to climbing, the long stretch of arm and the grasp with 
both hands and feet contribute to the arboreal life of the apes, 
contrasting with what seem the mere remains of the climbing 
habit to be found even among forest savages. On the whole, 
man's locomotive limbs are not so much specialized to particular 
purposes, as generalized into adaptation to many ends. As to the 
mechanical conditions of the human body, the upright posture 
has always been recognized as the chief. To it contributes tne 
balance of the skull on the cervical vertebrae, while the human 
form of the pelvis provides the necessary support to the intestines 
in the standing attitude. The marked curvature of the vertebral 
column, by breaking the shock to the neck and head in running 
and leaping, likewise favours the erect position. The lowest 
coccygeal vertebrae of man remain as a rudimentary tail. While 
it is evident that high importance must be attached to the 
adaptation of the human body to the life of diversified intelligence 
and occupation he has to lead, this must not be treated as though 
it were the principal element of the superiority of man, whose 
comparison with all lower genera of mammals must be mainly 
directed to the intellectual organ, the brain. Comparison of the 
brains of vertebrate animals (see Brain) brings into view the 
immense difference between the small, smooth brain of a fish or 
bird and the large and convoluted organ in man. In man, botn 
size and complexity contribute to the increased area of the 
cortex or outer layer of the brain, which has been fully ascertained 
to be the seat of the mysterious processes by which sensation 
furnishes the groundwork of thought. Schafer (Textbook of 
Physiology, vol. ii. p. 697) thus defines it: " The cerebral cortex 
is the seat of the intellectual functions, of intelligent sensation 
or consciousness, of ideation, of volition, and of memory." 

The relations between man and ape are most readily stated in 



no 



ANTHROPOLOGY 



comparison with the gorilla, as on the whole the most anthropo- 
morphous ape. In the general proportions of the body and limbs 
there is a marked difference between the gorilla and man. The 
gorilla's brain-case is smaller, its trunk larger, its lower limbs 
shorter, its upper limbs longer in proportion than those of man. 
The differences between a gorilla's skull and a man's are truly 
immense. In the gorilla, the face, formed largely by the massive 
jaw-bones, predominates over the brain-case or cranium; in the 
man these proportions are reversed. In man the occipital 
foramen, through which passes the spinal cord, is placed just 
behind the centre of the base of the skull, which is thus evenly 
balanced in the erect posture, whereas the gorilla, which goes 
habitually on all fours, and whose skull is inclined forward, in 
accordance with this posture has the foramen farther back. In 
man the surface of the skull is comparatively smooth, and the 
brow-ridges project but little, while in the gorilla these ridges 
overhang the cavernous orbits like penthouse roofs. The absolute 
capacity of the cranium of the gorilla is far less than that of man; 
the smallest adult human cranium hardly measuring less than 63 
cub. in., while the largest gorilla cranium measured had a content 
of only 34j cub. in. The largest proportional size of the facial 
bones, and the great projection of the jaws, confer on the gorilla's 
skull its small facial angle and brutal character, while its teeth differ 
from man's in relative size and number of fangs. Comparing the 
lengths of the extremities, it is seen that the gorilla's arm is of 
enormous length, in fact about one-sixth longer than the spine, 
whereas a man's arm is one-fifth shorter than the spine; both 
hand and foot are proportionally much longer in the gorilla than 
in man; the leg does not so much differ. The vertebral column 
of the gorilla differs from that of man in its curvature and other 
characters, as also does the conformation of its narrow pelvis. 
The hand of the gorilla corresponds essentially as to bones and 
muscles with that of man, but is clumsier and heavier; its thumb 
is " opposable " like a human thumb, that is, it can easily meet 
with its extremity the extremities of the other fingers, thus 
possessing a character which does much to make the human hand 
so admirable an instrument; but the gorilla's thumb is pro- 
portionately shorter than man's. The foot of the higher apes, 
though often spoken of as a hand, is anatomically not such, but 
a prehensile foot. It has been argued by Sir Richard Owen and 
others that the position of the great toe converts the foot of the 
higher apes into a hand, an extremely important distinction from 
man; but against this Professor T. H. Huxley maintained that 
it has the characteristic structure of a foot with a very movable 
great toe. The external unlikeness of the apes to man depends 
much on their hairiness, but this and some other characteristics 
have no great zoological value. No doubt the difference between 
man and the apes depends, of all things, on the relative size and 
organization of the brain. While similar as to their general 
arrangement to the human brain, those of the higher apes, such 
as the chimpanzee, are much less complex in their convolutions, 
as well as much less in both absolute and relative weight — the 
weight of a gorilla's brain hardly exceeding 20 oz., and a man's 
brain hardly weighing less than 32 oz., although the gorilla is 
considerably the larger animal of the two. 

These anatomical distinctions are undoubtedly of great moment, 
and it is an interesting question whether they suffice to place man 
in a zoological order by himself. It is plain that some eminent 
zoologists, regarding man as absolutely differing as to mind and 
spirit from any other animal, have had their discrimination of 
mere bodily differences unconsciously sharpened, and have been 
led to give differences, such as in the brain or even the foot of 
the apes and man, somewhat more importance than if they had 
merely distinguished two species of apes. Many naturalists hold 
the opinion that the anatomical differences which separate the 
gorilla or chimpanzee from man are in some respects less than 
those which separate these man-like apes from apes lower in the 
scale. Yet all authorities class both the higher and lower apes 
in the same order. This is Huxley's argument, some prominent 
points of which are the following: As regards the proportion of 
limbs, the hylobates or gibbon is as much longer in the arms than 
the gorilla as the gorilla is than the man, while on the other hand, 



it is as much longer in the legs than the man as the man is than 
the gorilla. As to the vertebral column and pelvis, the lower 
apes differ from the gorilla as much as, or more than, it differs 
from man. As to the capacity of the cranium, men differ from 
one another so extremely that the largest known human skull 
holds nearly twice the measure of the smallest, a larger proportion 
than that in which man surpasses the gorilla; while, with proper 
allowance for difference of size of the various species, it appears 
that some of the lower apes fall nearly as much below the higher 
apes. The projection of the muzzle, which gives the character 
of brutality to the gorilla as distinguished from the man, is yet 
further exaggerated in the lemurs, as is also the backward position 
of the occipital foramen. In characters of such importance as the 
structure of the hand and foot, the lower apes diverge extremely 
from the gorilla; thus the thumb ceases to be opposable in the 
American monkeys, and in the marmosets is directed forwards, 
and armed with a curved claw like the other digits, the great 
toe in these latter being insignificant in proportion. The same 
argument can be extended to other points of anatomical structure, 
and, what is of more consequence, it appears true of the brain. 
A series of the apes, arranged from lower to higher orders, shows 
gradations from a brain little higher that that of a rat, to a brain 
like a small and imperfect imitation of a man's; and the greatest 
structural break in the series lies not between man and the man- 
like apes, but between the apes and monkeys on one side, and the 
lemurs on the other. On these grounds Huxley, restoring in 
principle the Linnean classification, desired to include man in the 
order of Primates. This order he divided into seven families: 
first, the Anthropini, consisting of man only; second, the Catarhini 
or Old World apes; third, the Platyrhini, all New World apes, 
except the marmosets; fourth, the Arclopithecini, or marmosets; 
fifth, the Lemurini, or lemurs; sixth and seventh, the Cheiromyini 
and Galeopithecini. 

It is in assigning to man his place in nature on psychological 
grounds that the greater difficulty arises. Huxley acknowledged 
an immeasurable and practically infinite divergence, ending in 
the present enormous psychological gulf between ape and man. 
It is difficult to account for this intellectual chasm as due to 
some minor structural difference. The opinion is deeply rooted 
in modern as in ancient thought, that only a distinctively human 
element of the highest import can account for the severance 
between man and the highest animal below him. Differences in 
the mechanical organs, such as the perfection of the human hand 
as an instrument, or the adaptability of the human voice to the 
expression of human thought, are indeed of great value. But 
they have not of themselves such value, that to endow an ape 
with the hand and vocal organs of a man would be likely to raise 
it through any large part of the interval that now separates it 
from humanity. Much more is to be said for the view that man's 
larger and more highly organized brain accounts for those mental 
powers in which he so absolutely surpasses the brutes. 

The distinction does not seem to lie principally in the range 
and delicacy of direct sensation, as may be judged from such 
well-known facts as man's inferiority to the eagle in sight, or 
to the dog in scent. At the same time, it seems that the human 
sensory organs may have in various respects acuteness beyond 
those of other creatures. But, beyond a doubt, man possesses, 
and in some way possesses by virtue of his superior brain, a 
power of co-ordinating the impressions of his senses, which 
enables him to understand the world he lives in, and by under- 
standing to use, resist, and even in a measure rule it. No 
human art shows the nature of this human attribute more clearly 
than does language. Man shares with the mammalia and birds 
the direct expression of the feelings by emotional tones and 
interjectional cries; the parrot's power of articulate utterance 
almost equals his own; and, by association of ideas in some 
measure, some of the lower animals have even learnt to recognize 
words he utters. But, to use words in themselves unmeaning, 
as symbols by which to conduct and convey the complex in- 
tellectual processes in which mental conceptions are suggested, 
compared, combined, and even analysed, and new ones created — 
this is a faculty which is scarcely to be traced in any lower animal. 



ANTHROPOLOGY 



in 



The view that this, with other mental processes, is a function of 
the brain, is remarkably corroborated by modern investigation 
of the disease of aphasia, where the power of thinking remains, 
but the power is lost of recalling the word corresponding to the 
thought, and this mental defect is found to accompany a diseased 
state of a particular locality of the brain (see Aphasia). This 
may stand among the most perfect of the many evidences that, 
in Professor Bain's words, " the brain is the principal, though 
not the sole organ of mind." As the brains of the vertebrate 
animals form an ascending scale, more and more approaching 
man's in their arrangement, the fact here finds its explanation, 
that lower animals perform mental processes corresponding 
in their nature to our own, though of generally less power and 
complexity. The full evidence of this correspondence will be 
found in such works as Brehm's Thierleben; and some of the 
salient points are set forth by Charles Darwin, in the chapter 
on " Mental Powers," in his Descent of Man. Such are the 
similar effects of terror on man and the lower animals, causing 
the muscled to tremble, the heart to palpitate, the sphincters 
to be relaxed, and the hair to stand on end. The phenomena 
of memory, as to both persons and places, is strong in animals, 
as is manifest by their recognition of their masters, and their re- 
turning at once to habits of which, though disused for many years, 
their brain has not lost the stored-up impressions. Such facts 
as that dogs " hunt in dreams," make it likely that their minds 
are not only sensible to actual events, present and past, but can, 
like our minds, combine revived sensations into ideal scenes 
in which they are actors, — that is to say, they have the faculty 
of imagination. As for the reasoning powers in animals, the 
accounts of monkeys learning by experience to break eggs care- 
fully, and pick off bits of shell, so as not to lose the contents, 
or of the way in which rats or martens after a while can no longer 
be caught by the same kind of trap, with innumerable similar 
facts, show in the plainest way that the reason of animals goes 
so far as to form by new experience a new hypothesis of cause 
and effect which will henceforth guide their actions. The 
employment of mechanical instruments, of which instances of 
monkeys using sticks and stones furnish the only rudimentary 
- traces among the lower animals, is one of the often-quoted 
distinctive powers of man. With this comes the whole vast 
and ever-widening range of inventive and adaptive art, where 
the uniform hereditary instinct of the cell-forming bee and the 
nest-building bird is supplanted by multiform processes and 
constructions, often at first rude and clumsy in comparison to 
those of the lower instinct, but carried on by the faculty of 
improvement and new invention into ever higher stages. '" From 
the moment," writes A. R. Wallace (Natural Selection), " when 
the first skin was used as a covering, when the first rude spear 
was formed to assist in the chase, when fire was first used to 
cook his food, when the first seed was sown or shoot planted, 
a grand revolution was effected in nature, a revolution which 
in all the previous ages of the earth's history had had no parallel; 
for a being had arisen who was no longer necessarily subject 
to change with the changing universe, — a being who was in some 
degree superior to nature, inasmuch as he knew how to control 
and regulate her action, and could keep himself in harmony 
with her, not by a change in body, but by an advance of mind." 
As to the lower instincts tending directly to self-preservation, 
it is acknowledged on all hands that man has them in a less 
developed state than other animals ; in fact, the natural defence- 
lessness of the human being, and the long-continued care and 
teaching of the young by the elders, are among the commonest 
themes of moral discourse. Parental tenderness and care for 
the young are strongly marked among the lower animals, though 
so inferior in scope and duration to the human qualities; and 
the same may be said of the mutual forbearance and defence 
which bind together in a rudimentary social bond the families 
and herds of animals. Philosophy seeking knowledge for its 
own sake; morality, manifested in the sense of truth, right, and 
virtue; and religion, the belief in and communion with super- 
human powers ruling and pervading the universe, are human 
characters, of which it is instructive to trace, if possible, the 



earliest symptoms in the lower animals, but which can there 
show at most only faint and rudimentary signs of their wondrous 
development in mankind. That the tracing of physical and 
even intellectual continuity between the lower animals and our 
own race, does not necessarily lead the anthropologist to lower 
the rank of man in the scale of nature, may be shown by citing 
A. R. Wallace. Man, he considers, is to be placed " apart, as 
not only the head and culminating point of the grand series 
of organic nature, but as in some degree a new and distinct 
order of being." 

To regard the intellectual functions of the brain and nervous 
system as alone to be considered in the psychological comparison 
of man with the lower animals, is a view satisfactory to those 
thinkers who hold materialistic views. According to this school, 
man is a machine, no doubt the most complex and wonderfully 
adapted of all known machines, but still neither more nor less 
than an instrument whose energy is provided by force from 
without, and which, when set in action, performs the various 
queries for which its structure fits it, namely, to live, move,
feel, and think. This view, however, always has been strongly 
opposed by those who accept on theological grounds a spiritual- 
istic doctrine, or what is, perhaps, more usual, a theory which 
combines spiritualism and materialism in the doctrine of a 
composite nature in man, animal as to the body and in some 
measure as to the mind, spiritual as to the soul. It may be useful, 
as an illustration of one opinion on this subject, to continue 
here the citation of Dr Prichard's comparison between man and 
the lower animals : — 

" If it be inquired in what the still more remarkable difference 
consists, it is by no means easy to reply. By some it will be said 
that man, while similar in the organization of his body to the lower 
tribes, is distinguished from them by the possession of an immaterial 
soul, a principle capable of conscious feeling, of intellect and thought. 
To many persons it will appear paradoxical to ascribe the endowment 
of a soul to the inferior tribes in the creation, yet it is difficult to 
discover a valid argument that limits the possession of an immaterial 
principle to man. The phenomena of feeling, of desire and aversion, 
of love and hatred, of fear and revenge, and the perception of external 
relations manifested in the life of brutes, imply, not only through 
the analogy which they display to the human faculties, but likewise 
from all that we can learn or conjecture of their particular nature. 
the superadded existence of a principle distinct from the mere 
mechanism of material bodies. That such a principle must exist in 
all beings capable of sensation, or of anything analogous to human 
passions and feelings, will hardly be denied by those who perceive 
the force of arguments which metaphysically demonstrate the im- 
material nature of the mind. There may be no rational grounds for 
the ancient dogma that the souls of the lower animals were im- 
perishable, like the soul of man: this is, however, a problem which 
we are not called upon to discuss ; and we may venture to conjecture 
that there may be immaterial essences of divers kinds, and endowed 
*ith various attributes and capabilities. But the real nature of 
these unseen principles eludes our research: they are only known 
to us by their external manifestations. These manifestations are 
the various powers and capabilities, or rather the habitudes of 
action, which characterize the different orders of being, diversified 
according to their several destinations." 

Dr Prichard here puts forward distinctly the time-honoured 
doctrine which refers the mental faculties to the operation of 
the soul. The view maintained by a distinguished comparative 
anatomist, Professor St George Mivart, in his Genesis of Species, 
ch. xii., may fairly follow. " Man, according to the old scholastic 
definition, is 'a rational animal ' (animal rationale), and his 
animality is distinct in nature from his rationality, though in- 
separably joined, during life, in one common personality. Man's 
animal body must have had a different source from that of the 
spiritual soul which informs it, owing to the distinctness of the 
two orders to which those two existences severally belong." 
The two extracts just given, however, significant in themselves, 
fail to render an account of the view of the human constitution 
which would probably, among the theological and scholastic 
leaders of public opinion, count the largest weight of adherence. 
According to this view, not only life but thought are functions 
of the animal system, in which man excels all other animals 
as to height of organization: but beyond this, man embodies an 
immaterial and immortal spiritual principle which no lower 
cieature possesses, and which makes the resemblance of the anes 



112 



ANTHROPOLOGY 



to him but a mocking simulance. To pronounce any absolute 
decision on these conflicting doctrines is foreign to our present 
purpose, which is to show that all of them count among their 
adherents men of high rank in science. 

II. Origin of Man. — Opinion as to the genesis of man is 
divided between the theories of creation and evolution. In 
both schools, the ancient doctrine of the contemporaneous 
appearance on earth of all species of animals having been aban- 
doned under the positive evidence of geology, it is admitted that 
the animal kingdom, past and present, includes a vast series of 
successive forms, whose appearances and disappearances have 
taken place at intervals during an immense lapse of ages. The 
line of inquiry has thus been directed to ascertaining what 
formative relation subsists among these species and genera, 
the last link of the argument reaching to the relation between 
man and the lower creatures preceding him in time. On both 
the theories here concerned it would be admitted, in the words 
of Agassiz (Principles of Zoology, pp. 205-206), that " there is a 
manifest progress in the succession of beings on the surface of 
the earth. This progress consists in an increasing similarity of 
the living fauna, and, among the vertebrates especially, in their 
increasing resemblance to man." Agassiz continues, however, 
in terms characteristic- of the creationist school: " But this 
connexion is not the consequence of a direct lineage between the 
faunas of different ages. There is nothing like parental descent 
connecting them. The fishes of the Palaeozoic age are in no 
respect the ancestors of the reptiles of the Secondary age, nor 
does man descend from the mammals which preceded him in the 
Tertiary age. The Jink by which they are connected is of a higher 
and immaterial nature; and their connexion is to be sought in 
the view of the Creator himself, whose aim in forming the earth, 
in allowing it to undergo the successive changes which geology 
has pointed out, and in creating successively all the different 
types of animals which have passed away, was to introduce man 
upon the surface of our globe. Man is the end towards which all 
the animal creation has tended from the first appearance of the 
first Palaeozoic fishes." The evolutionist, on the contrary (see 
Evolution), maintains that different successive species of 
animals are in fact connected by parental descent, having 
become modified in the course of successive generations. The 
result of Charles Darwin's application of this theory to man 
may be given in his own words (Descent of Man, part i. ch. 6) : — 

" The Catarhine and Platyrhine monkeys agree in a multitude of 
characters, as is shown by their unquestionably belonging to one 
and the same order. The many characters which they possess in 
common can hardly have been independently acquired by so many 
distinct species; so that these characters must have been inherited. 
But an ancient form which possessed many characters common to 
the Catarhine and Platyrhine monkeys, and others in an inter- 
mediate condition, and some few perhaps distinct from those now 
present in either group, would undoubtedly have been ranked, if 
seen by a naturalist, as an ape or a monkey. And as man under a 
genealogical point of view belongs to the Catarhine or Old World 
stock, we must conclude, however much the conclusion may revolt 
our pride, that our early progenitors would have been properly thus 
designated. But we must not fall into the error of supposing that 
the early progenitor of the whole Simian stock, including man, 
was identical with, or even closely resembled, any existing ape or 
monkey." 

The problem of the origin of man cannot be properly discussed 
apart from the full problem of the origin of species. The 
homologies between man and other animals which both schools 
try to account for; the explanation of the intervals, with 
apparent want of intermediate forms, which seem to the creation- 
ists so absolute a separation between species; the evidence of 
useless "rudimentary organs," such as in man the external shell 
of the ear, and the muscle which enables some individuals to 
twitch their ears, which rudimentary parts the evolutionists 
claim to be only explicable as relics of an earlier specific condi- 
tion, — these, which are the main points of the argument on the 
origin of man, belong to general biology. The philosophical 
principles which underlie the two theories stand for the most 
part in strong contrast, the theory of evolution tending toward 
the supposition of ordinary causes, such as "natural selection," 
producing modifications in species, whether by gradual accumula- 



tion or more sudden leaps, while the theory of creation has 
recourse to acts of supernatural intervention (see the duke of 
Argyll, Reign of Law, ch. v.). St George Mivart (Genesis of 
Species) propounded a theory of a natural evolution of man as 
to his body, combined with a supernatural creation as to his 
soul; but this attempt to meet the difficulties on both sides 
seems to have satisfied neither. 

The wide acceptance of the Darwinian theory, as applied to 
the descent of man, has naturally roused anticipation that 
geological research, which provides evidence of the animal life 
of incalculably greater antiquity, would furnish fossil remains 
of some comparatively recent being intermediate between the 
anthropomorphic and the anthropic types. This expectation 
has hardly been fulfilled, but of late years the notion of a variety 
of the human race, geologically ancient, differing from any known 
in historic times, and with characters approaching the simian, 
has been supported by further discoveries. To bring this to the 
reader's notice, top and side views of three skulls, as placed 
together in the human development series in the Oxford Uni- 
versity Museum, are represented in the plate, for the purpose of 
showing the great size of the orbital ridges, which the reader 
may contrast with his own by a touch with his fingers on his 
forehead. The first (fig.3) is the famous Neanderthal skull from 
near Dusseldorf, described by Schaafhausen in Muller's Archiv, 
1858; Huxley in Lyell, Antiquity of Man, p. 86, and in Man's 
Place in Nature. The second (fig. 4) is the skull from the cavern 
of Spy in Belgium (de Puydt and Lohest, Compte rendu du 
Congrbs de Namur, r886). The foreheads of theses two skulls 
have an ape-like form, obvious on comparison with the simian 
skulls of the gorilla and other apes, and visible even in the small- 
scale figures in the Plate, fig. 2. Among modern tribes of man- 
kind the forehead of the Australian aborigines makes the nearest 
approach to this type, as was pointed out by Huxley. This brief 
description will serve to show the importance of a later discovery. 
At Trinil, in Java, in an equatorial region where, if anywhere, a 
being intermediate between the higher apes and man would seem 
likely to be found, Dr Eugene Dubois in 1891-1892 excavated 
from a bed, considered by him to be of Sivalik formation (Plio* 
cene), a thighbone which competent anatomists decide to be 
human, and a remarkably depressed calvaria or skull-cap (fig. 5) , 
bearing a certain resemblance in its proportions to the corre- 
sponding part of the simian skull. These remains were referred 
by their discoverer to an animal intermediate between man and 
ape, to which he gave the name of Pithecanthropus erectus (q.v.), 
but the interesting discussions on the subject have shown 
divergence of opinion among anatomists. At any rate, classing 
the Trinil skull as human, it may be described as tending towards 
the simian type more than any other known. 

III. Races of Mankind.— The classification of mankind into a 
number of permanent varieties or races, rests on grounds which 
are within limits not only obvious but definite. Whether from a 
popular or a scientific point of view, it would be admitted that a 
Negro, a Chinese, and an Australian belong to three such 
permanent varieties of men, all plainly distinguishable from one 
another and from any European. Moreover, such a division 
takes for granted the idea which is involved in the word race, 
that each of these varieties is due to special ancestry, each race 
thus representing an ancient breed or stock, however these breeds 
or stocks may have had their origin. The anthropological 
classification of mankind is thus zoological in its nature, like 
that of the varieties or species of any other animal group, and 
the characters on which it is based are in great measure physical, 
though intellectual and traditional peculiarities, such as moral 
habit and language, furnish important aid. Among the best- 
marked race-characters are the colour of the skin, eyes and hair; 
and the structure and arrangement of the latter. Stature is by 
no means a general criterion of race, and it would not, for in- 
stance, be difficult to choose groups of Englishmen, Kaffirs, and 
North American Indians, whose mean height should hardly 
differ. Yet in many cases it is a valuable means of distinction, 
as between the tall Patagonians and the stunted Fuegians,, and 
even as a help in minuter problems, such as separating the 



ANTHROPOLOGY 



113 



Teutonic and Celtic ancestry in the population of England (see 
Beddoe, " Stature and Bulk of Man in the British Isles," in 
Mem. Anthrop. Soc. London, vol. iii.). Proportions of the limbs, 
compared in length with the trunk, have been claimed as con- 
stituting peculiarities of African and American races; and 
other anatomical points, such as the conformation of the pelvis, 
have speciality. But inferences of this class have hardly attained 
to sufficient certainty and generality to be set down in the form 
of rules. The conformation of the skull is second only to the 
colour of the skin as a criterion for the distinction of race; and the 
position of the jaws is recognized as important, races being 
described as prognathous when the jaws project far, as in the 
Australian or Negro, in contradistinction to the orthognathous 
type, which is that of the ordinary well-shaped European skull. 
On this distinction in great measure depends the celebrated 
" facial angle," measured by Camper as a test of low and high 
races; but this angle is objectionable as resulting partly from 
the development of the forehead and partly from the position of 
the jaws. The capacity of the cranium is estimated in cubic 
measure by filling it with sand, &c, with the general result that 
the civilized white man is found to have a larger brain than the 
barbarian or savage. Classification of races on cranial measure- 
ments has long been attempted by eminent anatomists, and in 
certain cases great reliance may be placed on such measurements. 
Thus the skulls of an Australian and a Negro would be generally 
distinguished by their narrowness and the projection of the jaw 
from that of any Englishman; but the Australian skull would 
usually differ perceptibly from the Negroid in its upright sides 
and strong orbital ridges. The relation of height to breadth 
may also furnish a valuable test; but it is acknowledged by all 
experienced craniologists, that the shape of the skull riiay vary 
so much within the same tribe, and even the same family, that 
it must be used with extreme caution, and if possible only in 
conjunction with other criteria of race. The general contour of 
the face, in part dependent on the form of the skull, varies much 
in different races, among whom it is loosely defined as oval, 
lozenge-shaped, pentagonal, &c. Of particular features, some 
of the most marked contrasts to European types are seen in the 
oblique Chinese eyes, the broad-set Kamchadale cheeks, the 
pointed Arab chin, the snub Kirghiz nose, the fleshy protuberant 
Negro lips, and the broad Kalmuck ear. Taken altogether, the 
features have a typical character which popular observation 
seizes with some degree of correctness, as in the recognition of 
the Jewish countenance in a European city. 

Were the race-characters constant in degree or even in kind, 
the classification of races would be easy; but this is not so. 
Every division of mankind presents in every character wide 
deviations from a standard. Thus the Negro race, well marked 
as it may seem at the first glance, proves on closer examination 
to include several shades of complexion and features, in some 
districts varying far from the accepted Negro type; while the 
examination of a series of native American tribes shows that, 
notwithstanding their asserted uniformity of type, they differ 
in stature, colour, features and proportions of skull. (See 
Prichard, Nat. Hist, of Man; Waitz, Anthropology, parti, sec. 5.) 
Detailed anthropological research, indeed, more and more justi- 
fies Blumenbach's words, that " innumerable varieties of man- 
kind run into one another by insensible degrees." This state of 
things, due partly to mixture and crossing of races, and partly 
to independent variation of types, makes the attempt to arrange 
the whole human species within exactly bounded divisions an 
apparently hopeless task. It does not follow, however, that the 
attempt to distinguish special races should be given up, for there 
at least exist several definable types, each of which so far prevails 
in a certain population as to be taken as its standard. L. A. J. 
Quetelet's plan of defining such types will probably meet with 
general acceptance as the scientific method proper to this branch 
of anthropology. It consists in the determination of the stan- 
dard or typical " mean man " (homme moyen) of a population, 
with reference to any particular quality, such as stature, weight, 
complexion, &c. In the case of stature, this would be done by 
measuring a sufficient number of men, and counting how many 



of them belong to each height on the scale. If it be thus ascer- 
tained, as it might be in an English district, that the 5 ft. 7 in. 
men form the most numerous groUp, while the 5 ft. 6 in. and 5 ft. 
8 in. men are less in number, and the 5 ft. 5 in. and 5 ft. 9 in. 
still fewer, and so on until the extremely small number of 
extremely short or tall individuals of 5 ft. or 7 ft. is reached, it 
will thus be ascertained that the stature of the mean or typical 
man is to be taken as 5 ft. 7 in. The method is thus that of 
selecting as the standard the most numerous group, on both 
sides of which the groups decrease in number as they vary in 
type. Such classification may show the existence of two or 
more types, in a community, as, for instance, the population of a 
Californian settlement made up of Whites and Chinese might 
show two predominant groups (one of 5 ft. 8 in., the other of 
5 ft. 4 in.) corresponding to these two racial types. It need 
hardly be said that this method of determining the mean type 
of a race, as being that of its really existing and most numerous 
class, is altogether superior to the mere calculation of an average, 
which may actually be represented by comparatively few indi- 
viduals, and those the exceptional ones. For instance, the 
average stature of the mixed European and Chinese population 
just referred to might be 5 ft. 6 in. — a worthless and indeed 
misleading result. (For particulars of Quetelet's method, see 
his Physique sociale (1869), and Anthropometric (1871).) 

Classifications of man have been numerous, and though, 
regarded as systems, most of them are unsatisfactory, yet they 
have been of great value in systematizing knowledge, and are 
all more or less based on indisputable distinctions. J. F. Blumen- 
bach's division, though published as long ago as 1 781, has had 
the greatest influence. He reckons five races, viz. Caucasian, 
Mongolian, Ethiopian, American, Malay. The ill-chosen name 
of Caucasian, invented by Blumenbach in allusion to a South 
Caucasian skull of specially typical proportions, and applied 
by him to the so-called white races, is still current; it brings into 
one race peoples such as the Arabs and Swedes, although these 
are scarcely less different than the Americans and Malays; who 
are set down as two distinct races. Again, two of the best- 
marked varieties of mankind are the Australians and the Bush- 
men, neither of whom, however, seems to have a natural place in 
Blumenbach's series. The yet simpler classification by Cuvier 
into Caucasian, Mongol and Negro corresponds in some measure 
with a division by mere complexion into white, yellow and 
black races; but neither this threefold division, nor the ancient 
classification into Semitic, Hamitic and Japhetic nations can be 
regarded as separating the human types either justly or sufficiently 
(see Prichard, Natural History of Man, sec. 15; Waitz, Anthro- 
pology, vol. i. part i. sec. 5). Schemes which set up a larger 
number of distinct races, such as the eleven of Pickering, the 
fifteen of Bory de St Vincent and the sixteen of Desmoulins, 
have the advantage of finding niches for most well-defined human 
varieties; but no modern naturalist would be likely to adopt 
any one of these as it stands. In criticism of Pickering's system, 
it is sufficient to point out that he divides the white nations 
into two races, entitled the Arab and the Abyssinian (Picketing, 
Races of Man, ch. i.). Agassiz, Nott, Crawfurd and others' who 
have assumed a much larger number of races or species Of 
man, are not considered to have satisfactorily defined a corre- 
sponding number of distinguishable types. On the whole, 
Huxley's division probably approaches more nearly than any 
other to such a tentative classification as may be accepted in 
definition of the principal varieties of mankind, regarded from 
a zoological point of view, though anthropologists may be dis- 
posed to erect into separate races several of his widely-differing 
sub-races. He distinguishes four principal types of mankind, 
the Australioid, Negroid, Mongoloid and Xanthochroic ("fair 
whites"), adding a fifth variety, the Melanochroic ("dark 
whites "). 

In determining whether the races of mankind are to be classed 
as varieties of one species, it is important to decide whether 
every two races can unite to produce fertile offspring. It is 
settled by experience that the most numerous and well-known 
crossed races, such as the Mulattos, descended from Europeans 



H4 



ANTHROPOLOGY 



and Negroes — the Mestizos, from Europeans and American 
indigenes — the Zambos, from these American indigenes and 
Negroes, &c, are permanently fertile. They practically con- 
stitute sub-races, with a general blending of the characters of 
the two parents, and only differing from fully-established races 
in more or less tendency to revert to one or other of the original 
types. It has been argued, on the other hand, that not all such 
mixed breeds are permanent, and especially that the cross 
between Europeans and Australian indigenes is almost sterile; 
but this assertion, when examined with the care demanded by 
its bearing on the general question of hybridity, has distinctly 
broken down. On the whole, the general evidence favours 
the opinion that any two races may combine to produce a new 
sub-race, which again may combine with any other variety. 
Thus, if the existence of a small number of distinct races of 
mankind be taken as a starting-point, it is obvious that their 
crossing would produce an indefinite number of secondary 
varieties, such as the population of the world actually presents. 
The working out in detail of the problem, how far the differences 
among complex nations, such as those of Europe, may have been 
brought about by hybridity, is still, however, a task of almost 
hopeless intricacy. Among the boldest attempts to account 
for distinctly-marked populations as resulting from the inter- 
mixture of two races, are Huxley's view that the Hottentots 
are hybrid between the Bushmen and the Negroes, and his more 
important suggestion, that the Melanochroic peoples of southern 
Europe are of mixed Xanthochroic and Australiojd stock. 

The problem of ascertaining how the small number of races, 
distinct enough to be called primary, can have assumed their 
different types, has been for years the most disputed field of 
anthropology, the battle-ground of the rival schools of mono- 
genists and polygenists. The one has claimed all mankind to 
be descended from one original stock, and generally from a single 
pair; the other has contended for the several primary races 
being separate species of independent origin. The great problem 
of the monogenist theory is to explain by what course of variation 
the so different races of man have arisen from a single stock. 
In ancient times little difficulty was felt in this, authorities 
such as Aristotle and Vitruvius seeing in climate and circumstance 
the natural cause of racial differences, the Ethiopian having been 
blackened by the tropical sun, &c. Later and closer observations, 
however, have shown such influences to be, at any rate, far 
slighter in amount and slower in operation than was once sup- 
posed. A. de Quatrefages brings forward {Unite de Vespece 
humaine) his strongest arguments for the variability of races 
under change of climate, &c. {action du milieu),, instancing the 
asserted alteration in complexion, constitution and character 
of Negroes in America, and Englishmen in America and Australia. 
But although the reality of some such modification is not disputed, 
especially as to stature and constitution, its, amount is not enough 
to upset the counter-proposition of the remarkable permanence 
of type displayed by races, ages after they have been transported 
to climates extremely different from that of their former home. 
Moreover, physically different peoples, such as the Bushmen and 
Negroes in Africa, show no signs of approximation under the 
influence of the same climate; while, on the other hand, the 
coast tribes of Tierra del Fuego and forest tribes of tropical 
Brazil continue to resemble one another, in spite of extreme 
differences of climate and food. Darwin is moderate in his 
estimation of the changes produced on races of man by climate 
and mode of life within the range of history {Descent of Man, 
part i. ch. 4 and 7). The slightness and slowness of variation 
in human races having become known, a great difficulty of the 
monogenist theory was seen to lie in the apparent shortness 
of the Biblical chronology. Inasmuch as several well-marked 
races of mankind, such as the Egyptian, Phoenician, Ethiopian, 
&c, were much the same three or four thousand years ago as 
now, their variation from a single stock in the course of any like 
period could hardly be accounted for without a miracle. This 
difficulty the polygenist theory escaped, and in consequence 
it gained ground. Modern views have however tended to restore, 
though under a new aspect, the doctrine of a single human 



stock. The fact that man has existed during a vast period of 
time makes it more easy to assume the continuance of very slow 
natural variation as having differentiated even the white man 
and the Negro among the descendants of a common progenitor. 
On the other hand it does not follow necessarily from a theory 
of evolution of species that mankind must have descended from 
a single stock, for the hypothesis of development admits of the 
argument, that several simian species may have culminated in 
several races of man. The general tendency of the development 
theory, however, is against constituting separate species where 
the differences are moderate enough to be accounted for as due 
to variation from a single type. Darwin's summing-up of the 
evidence as to unity of type throughout the races of mankind 
is as distinctly a monogenist argument as those of Blumenbach, 
Prichard or Quatrefages — 

" Although the existing races of man differ in many respects, as 
in colour, hair, shape of skull, proportions of the body, &c, yet, if 
their whole organization be taken into consideration, they are found 
to resemble each other closely in a multitude of points. Many of 
these points are of so unimportant, or of so singular a nature, that 
it is extremely improbable that they should have been independently 
acquired by aboriginally distinct species or races. The same remark 
holds good with equal or greater force with respect to the numerous 
points of mental similarity between the most distinct races of man. 
... Now, when naturalists observe a close agreement in numerous 
small details of habits, tastes and dispositions between two or more 
domestic races, or between nearly allied natural forms, they use this 
fact as an argument that all are descended from a common progenitor 
who was thus endowed ; and, consequently, that all should be classed 
under the same species. The same argument may be applied with 
much force to the races of man." — (Darwin, Descent of Man, part i. 
ch. 7.) 

The main difficulty of the monogenist school has ever been to 
explain how races which have remained comparatively fixed in 
type during the long period of history, such as the white man and 
the Negro, should, in even a far longer period, have passed by 
variation from a common original. To meet this A. R. Wallace 
suggests that the remotely ancient representatives of the human 
species, being as yet animals too low in mind to have developed 
those arts of maintenance and social ordinances by which man 
holds his own against influences from climate and circumstance, 
were in their then wild state much more plastic than now to 
external nature; so that " natural selection " and other causes 
met with but feeble resistance in forming the permanent varieties 
or races of man, whose complexion and structure still remained 
fixed in their descendants (see Wallace, Contributions to the Theory 
of Natural Selection, p. 319). On the whole, it may be asserted 
that the doctrine of the unity of mankind stands on a firmer basis 
than in previous ages. It would be premature to judge how far 
the problem of the origin of races may be capable of exact 
solution; but the experience gained since 187 1 countenances 
Darwin's prophecy that before long the dispute between the 
monogenists and the polygenists would die a silent and un- 
observed death. 

IV. Antiquity of Man. — Until the 19th century man's first 
appearance on earth was treated on a historical basis as matter 
of record. It is true that the schemes drawn up by chronologists 
differed widely, as was natural, considering the variety and inconi- 
sistency of their documentary data. On the whole, the scheme 
of Archbishop Usher, who computed that the earth and man were 
created in 4004 B.C., was the most popular (see Chronology). 
It is no longer necessary, however, to discuss these chrono- 
logies. Geology has made it manifest that our earth must have 
been the seat of vegetable and animal life for an immense period 
of time; while the first appearance of man, though comparatively 
recent, is positively so remote, that an estimate between twenty 
and a hundred thousand years may fairly be taken as a minimum. 
This geological claim for a vast antiquity of the human race is 
supported by the similar claims of prehistoric archaeology and 
the science of culture, the evidence of all three departments of 
inquiry being intimately connected, and in perfect harmony. 

Human bones and objects of human manufacture have been 
found in such geological relation to the remains of fossil species 
of elephant, rhinoceros, hyena, bear, &c, as to lead to the distinct 
inference that man already existed at a remote period in localities 



ANTHROPOLOGY 



"5 



where these mammalia are now and have long been extinct. The 
not quite conclusive researches of Tournal and Christol in 
limestone caverns of the south of France date back to 1828, 
About the same time P. C. Schmerling of Liege was exploring 
the ossiferous caverns of the valley of the Meuse, and satisfied 
himself that the men whose bones he found beneath the stalagmite 
floors, together with bones cut and flints shaped by human 
workmanship, had inhabited this Belgian district at the same 
time with the cave-bear and several other extinct animals whose 
bones were imbedded with them {Recherches sur les ossements 
fossiles decouverts dans les cavernes de la province de Li&ge (Liege, ' 
1 833-1 834) ) . This evidence, however, met with little acceptance 
among scientific men. Nor, at first, was more credit given to the 
discovery by M. Boucher de Perthes, about 1841, of rude flint 
hatchets in a sand-bed containing remains of mammoth and 
rhinoceros at Menchecourt near Abbeville, which first find was 
followed by others in the same district (see Boucher de Perthes, De 
I'lndustrie primitive, ou les arts a leur origine (1846); Antiquitis 
celtiques el antidiluviennes (Paris, 1847), &c). Between 1850 and 
i860 French and English geologists were induced to examine into 
the facts, and found irresistible the evidence that man existed and 
used rude implements of chipped flint during the Quaternary or 
Drift period. Further investigations were then made, and over- 
looked results of older ones reviewed. In describing Kent's 
Cavern (q.v.) near Torquay, R. A. C. Godwin-Austen had main- 
tained, as early as 1840 (Proc. Geo. Soc. London, vol. iii. p. 286), 
that the human bones and worked flints had been deposited indis- 
criminately together with the remains of fossil elephant, rhinoceros, 
&c. Certain caves and rock-shelters in the province of Dordogne, 
in central France, were examined by a French and an English 
archaeologist, Edouard Lartet and Henry Christy, the remains 
discovered showing the former prevalence of the reindeer in this 
region, at that time inhabited by savages, whose bone and stone 
implements indicate a habit of life similar to that of the Eskimos. 
Moreover, the co-existence of man with a fauna now extinct or con- 
fined to other districts was brought to yet clearer demonstration 
by the discovery in these caves of certain drawings and carvings 
of the animals done by the ancient inhabitants themselves, such 
as a group of reindeer on a piece of reindeer horn, and a sketch 
of a mammoth, showing the elephant's long hair, on a piece of a 
mammoth's tusk from La Madeleine (Lartet and Christy, Reliquiae 
Aquitanicae, ed. by T. R. Jones (London, 1865), &c). 

This and other evidence (which is considered in more detail 
in the article Archaeology) is now generally accepted by 
geologists as carrying back the existence of man into the period 
of the post-glacial drift, in what is now called the Quaternary 
period, an antiquity at least of tens of thousands of years. Again, 
certain inferences have been tentatively made from the depth of 
mud, earth, peat, &c, which has accumulated above relics of 
human art imbedded in ancient times. Among these is the 
argument from the numerous borings made in the alluvium of 
the Nile valley to a depth of 60 ft., where down to the lowest 
level fragments of burnt brick and pottery were always found, 
showing that people advanced enough in the arts to bake brick 
and pottery have inhabited the valley during the long period 
required for the Nile inundations to deposit 60 ft. of mud, at a 
rate probably not averaging more than a few inches in a century. 
Another argument is that of Professor von Morlot, based on a 
railway section through a conical accumulation of gravel and 
alluvium, which the torrent of the Tiniere has gradually built up 
where it enters the Lake of Geneva near Villeneuve. Here three 
layers of vegetable soil appear, proved by the objects imbedded 
in them to have been the successive surface soils in two pre- 
historic periods and in the Roman period, but now lying 4, 10 
and 19 ft. underground. On this it is computed that if 4 ft. of 
soil were formed in the 1500 years since the Roman period, we 
must go 5000 years farther back for the date of the earliest human 
inhabitants. Calculations of this kind, loose as they are, deserve 
attention. 

The interval between the Quaternary or Drift period and the 
period of historical antiquity is to some extent bridged over by 
relics of various intermediate civilizations, e.g. the Lake-dwellings 



iq.v.) of Switzerland, mostly of the lower grades, and in some 
cases reaching back to remote dates. And further evidence of 
man's antiquity is afforded by the kitchen-middens or shell-heaps 
iq.v.), especially those in Denmark. Danish peat-mosses again 
show the existence of man at a time when the Scotch fir was 
abundant; at a later period the firs were succeeded by oaks, 
which have again been almost superseded by beeches, a succession 
of changes which indicate a considerable lapse of time. 

Lastly, chronicles and documentary records, taken in con- 
nexion with archaeological relics of the historical period, carry 
back into distant ages the starting-point of actual history, behind 
which lies the evidently vast period only known by inferences 
from the relations of languages and the stages of development of 
civilization. The most recent work of Egyptologists proves a 
systematic civilization to have existed in the valley of the Nile 
at least 6000 to 7000 years ago (see Chronology) . 

It was formerly held that the early state of society was one of 
comparatively high culture, and thus there was no hesitation in 
assigning the origin of man to a time but little beyond the range 
of historical records and monuments. But the researches of 
anthropologists in recent years have proved that the civilization 
of man has been gradually developed from an original stone-age 
culture, such as characterizes modern savage life. To the 6000 • 
years to which ancient civilization dates back must be added a 
vast period during which the knowledge, arts and institutions of 
such a civilization as that of ancient Egypt attained the high 
level evidenced by the earliest records. The evidence of com- 
parative philology supports the necessity for an enormous time 
allowance. Thus, Hebrew and Arabic are closely related 
languages, neither of them the original of the other, but both 
sprung from some parent language more ancient than either. 
When, therefore, the Hebrew records have carried back to the 
most ancient admissible date the existence of the Hebrew 
language, this date must have been long preceded by that of 
the extinct parent language of the whole Semitic family; while 
this again was no doubt the descendant of languages slowly 
shaping themselves through ages into this peculiar type. Yet 
more striking is the evidence of the Indo-European (formerly 
called Aryan) family of languages. The Hindus, Medes,Persians, 
Greeks, Romans, Germans, Celts and Slavs make their appear- 
ance at more or less remote dates as nations separate in language 
•as in history. Nevertheless, it is now acknowledged that at 
sorne far remoter time, before these nations were divided from 
the parent stock, and distributed over Asia and Europe, a single 
barbaric people stood as physical and political representative 
of the nascent Aryan race, speaking a now extinct Aryan lan- 
guage, from which, by a series of modifications not to be estimated 
as possible within many thousands of years, there arose languages 
which have been mutually unintelligible since the dawn of history, 
and between which it was only possible for an age of advanced 
philology to trace the fundamental relationship. 

From the combination of these considerations, it will be seen 
that the farthest date to which documentary or other records 
extend is now generally regarded by anthropologists as but the 
earliest distinctly visible point of the historic period, beyond 
which stretches back a vast indefinite series of prehistoric ages. 

V. Language. — In examining how the science of language 
bears on the general problems of anthropology, it is not necessary 
to discuss at length the critical questions which arise, the principal 
of which are considered elsewhere (see Language) . Philology is 
especially appealed to by anthropologists as contributing to the 
following lines of argument. A primary mental similarity of all 
branches of the human race is evidenced by their common 
faculty of speech, while at the same time secondary diversities 
of race-character and history are marked by difference of gram- 
matical structure and of vocabularies. The existence of groups 
or families of allied languages, each group being evidently 
descended from a single language, affords one of the principal 
aids in classifying nations and races. The adoption by one 
language of words originally belonging to another, proving as it 
does the fact of intercourse between two races, and even to some 
extent indicating the results of such intercourse, affords a 



n6 



ANTHROPOLOGY 



valuable clue through obscure regions of the history of 
civilization. 

Communication by gesture-signs, between persons unable to 
converse in vocal language, is an effective system of expression 
common to all mankind. Thus, the signs used to ask a deaf and 
dumb child about his meals and lessons, or to communicate with 
a savage met in the desert about game or enemies, belong to 
codes of gesture-signals identical in principle, and to a great 
extent independent both of nationality and education; there is 
even a natural syntax, or order of succession, in such gesture- 
signs. To these gestures let there be added the use of the 
interjectional cries, such as oh! ugh! hey! and imitative sounds 
to represent the cat's mew, the click of a trigger, the clap or thud 
of a blow, &c. The total result of this combination of gesture 
and significant sound will be a general system of expression, 
imperfect but serviceable, and naturally intelligible to all man- 
kind without distinction of race. Nor is such a system of 
communication only theoretically conceivable; it is, and always 
has been, in practical operation between people ignorant of one 
another's language, and as such is largely used in the intercourse 
of savage tribes. It is true that to some extent these means of 
utterance are common to the lower animals, the power of ex- 
. pressing emotion by cries and tones extending far down in the 
scale of animal life, while rudimentary gesture-signs are made by 
various mammals and birds. Still, the lower animals make no 
approach to the human system of natural utterance by gesture- 
signs and emotional-imitative sounds, while the practical 
identity of this human system among races physically so unlike 
as the Englishman and the native of the Australian bush 
indicates extreme closeness of mental similarity throughout the 
human species. 

When, however, the Englishman and the Australian speak 
each in his native tongue, only such words as belong to the 
interjectional and imitative classes will be naturally intelligible, 
and as it were instinctive to both. Thus the savage, uttering 
the sound waow! as an explanation of surprise and warning, 
might be answered by the white man with the not less evidently 
significant shl of silence, and the two speakers would be on 
common ground when the native indicated by the name bwirri 
his cudgel, flung whirring through the air at a flock of birds, or 
when the native described as a jakkal-yakkal the bird called by 
the foreigner a cockatoo. With these, and other very limited 
classes of natural words, however, resemblance in vocabulary 
practically ceases. The Australian and English languages each 
consist mainly of a series of words having no apparent connexion 
with the ideas they signify, and differing utterly; of course, 
accidental coincidences and borrowed words must be excluded 
from such comparisons. It would be easy to enumerate other 
languages of the world, such as Basque, Turkish, Hebrew, Malay, 
Mexican, all devoid of traceable resemblance to Australian and 
English, and to one another. There is, moreover, extreme 
difference in the grammatical structure both of words and sen- 
tences in various languages. The question then arises, how far 
the employment of different vocabularies, and that to a great 
extent on different grammatical principles, is compatible with 
similarity of the speakers' minds, or how far does diversity of 
speech indicate diversity of mental nature? The obvious 
answer is, that the power of using words as signs to express 
thoughts with which their sound does not directly connect them, 
in fact as arbitrary symbols, is the highest grade of the special 
human faculty in language, the presence of which binds together 
all races of mankind in substantial mental unity. The measure 
of this unity is, that any child of any race can be brought up to 
speak the language of any other race. 

Under the present standard of evidence in comparing languages 
and tracing allied groups to a common origin, the crude specula- 
tions as to a single primeval language of mankind, which formerly 
occupied so much attention, are acknowledged to be worthless. 
Increased knowledge and accuracy of method have as yet only 
left the way open to the most widely divergent suppositions. 
For all that known dialects prove to the contrary, on the one 
hand, there may have been one primitive language, from which 



the descendant languages have varied so widely, that neither 
their words nor their formation now indicate their unity in long 
past ages, while, on the other hand, the primitive tongues of 
mankind may have been numerous, and the extreme unlikeness 
of such languages as Basque, Chinese, Peruvian, Hottentot and 
Sanskrit may arise from absolute independence of origin. 

The language spoken by any tribe or nation is not of itself 
absolute evidence as to its race-affinities. This is clearly shown 
in extreme cases. Thus the Jews in Europe have almost lost the 
use of Hebrew, but speak as their vernacular the language of 
their adopted nation, whatever it may be; even the Jewish- 
German dialect, though consisting so largely of' Hebrew words, 
is philologically German, as any sentence shows: " Ich hab noch 
hoiom lo geachelt, " " I have not yet eaten to-day." The mixture 
of the Israelites in Europe by marriage with other nations is 
probably much greater than is acknowledged by them; yet, on 
the whole, the race has been preserved with extraordinary 
strictness, as its physical characteristics sufficiently show. 
Language thus here fails conspicuously as a test of race and even 
of national history. Not much less conclusive is the case of the 
predominantly Negro populations of the West India Islands, 
who, nevertheless, speak as their native tongues dialects of 
English or French, in which the number of intermingled native 
African words is very scanty: " Dem hitti netli na ini watra 
bikasi dem de fisiman," " They cast a net into the water, because 
they were fishermen." (Surinam Negro-Eng.) "Bef pas ca 
jamain lasse poter cones li," " Le bceuf n'est jamais las de porter 
ses cornes." (Haitian Negro-Fr.) If it be objected that the 
linguistic conditions of these two races are more artificial than 
has been usual in the history of the world, less extreme cases 
may be seen in countries where the ordinary results of. conquest- 
colonization have taken place. The Mestizos, who form so large 
a fraction of the population of modern Mexico, numbering 
several millions, afford a convenient test in this respect, inasmuch 
as their intermediate complexion separates them from both their 
ancestral races, the Spaniard, and the chocolate-brown indigenous 
Aztec or other Mexican. The mother- tongue of this mixed race 
is Spanish, with an infusion of Mexican words; and a large 
proportion cannot speak any native dialect. In most or all 
nations of mankind, crossing or intermarriage of races has thus 
taken place between the conquering invader and the conquered 
native, so that, the language spoken by the nation may represent 
the results of conquest as, much or more than of ancestry. :The 
supersession of the Celtic Cornish by English, and of the Slavonic 
Old-Prussian by German, are but examples of a process which 
has for untold ages been supplanting native dialects, whose very 
names have mostly disappeared. On the other hand, the 
language of the warlike invader or peaceful immigrant may 
yield, in a few generations, to the tongue of the mass of the 
population, as the Northman's was replaced by French, and 
modern German gives way to English in the United States. 
Judging, then, by the extirpation and adoption of languages 
within the range of history, it is obvious that to classify mankind 
intQ races, Aryan, Semitic, Turanian, Polynesian, Kaffir, &c, 
on the mere evidence of language, is intrinsically unsound. 

VI. Development of Civilization. — The conditions of man at the 
lowest and highest known levels of culture are separated by a 
vast interval; but this interval is so nearly filled by known 
intermediate stages, that the line of continuity between the 
lowest savagery and the highest civilization is unbroken at any 
critical point. * 

An examination of the details of savage life shows not only 
that there is an immeasurable difference between the rudest man 
and the highest lower animal, but also that the least cultured 
savages have themselves advanced far beyond the lowest 
intellectual and moral state at which human tribes can be con- 
ceived as capable of existing, when placed under favourable 
circumstances of warm climate, abundant food, and security from 
too severe destructive influences. The Australian black-fellow 
or the forest Indian of Brazil, who may be taken as examples 
of the lowest modern savage, had, before contact with whites, 
attained to rudimentary stages in many of the characteristic 



ANTHROPOLOGY 



117 



functions of civilized life. His language, expressing thoughts 
by conventional articulate sounds, is the same in essential 
principle as the most cultivated philosophic dialect, only less 
exact and copious. His weapons, tools and other appliances 
such as the hammer, hatchet, spear, knife, awl, thread, net, canoe, 
&c, are the evident rudimentary analogues of what still remains 
in use among Europeans. His structures, such as the hut, fence, 
stockade, earthwork, &c, may be poor and clumsy, but they are- 
of the same nature as our own. In the simple arts of broiling 
and roasting meat, the use of hides and furs for covering, the 
plaiting of mats and baskets, the devices of hunting, trapping 
and fishing, the pleasure taken in personal ornament, the touches 
of artistic decoration on objects of daily use, the savage differs 
in degree but not in kind from the civilized man. The domestic 
and social affections, the kindly care of the young and the old, 
some acknowledgment of marital and parental obligation, the 
duty of mutual defence in the tribe, the authority of the elders, 
and general respect to traditional custom as the regulator of 
life and duty, are more or less well marked in every savage tribe 
which is not disorganized and falling to pieces. Lastly, there is 
usually to be discerned amongst such lower races a belief in 
unseen powers pervading the universe, this belief shaping itself 
into an animistic or spiritualistic theology, mostly resulting in 
some kind of worship. If, again, high savage or low barbaric 
types be selected, as among the North American Indians, Polyne- 
sians, and Kaffirs of South Africa, the same elements of culture 
appear, but. at a more advanced stage, namely, a more full and 
accurate language, more knowledge of the laws of nature, more 
serviceable implements, more perfect industrial processes, more 
definite and fixed social order and frame of government, more 
systematic and philosophic schemes of religion and a more 
elaborate and ceremonial worship. At intervals new arts and 
ideas appear, such as agriculture and pasturage, the manufacture 
of pottery, the use of metal implements and the device of record 
and communication by picture writing. Along such stages of 
improvement and invention the bridge is fairly made between 
savage and barbaric culture; and this once attained to, the 
remainder of the series of stages of civilization lies within the 
range of common knowledge. 

The teaching of history, during the three to four thousand 
years of which contemporary chronicles have been preserved, 
is that civilization is gradually developed in the course of ages by 
enlargement and increased precision of knowledge, invention and 
improvement of arts, and the progression of social and political 
habits and institutions towards general well-being. That pro- 
cesses of development similar to these were in prehistoric times 
effective to raise culture from the savage to the barbaric level, 
two considerations especially tend to prove. First, there are 
numerous points in the culture even of rude races which are not 
explicable otherwise than on the theory of development. Thus, 
though difficult or superfluous arts may easily be lost, it is 
hard to imagine the abandonment of contrivances of practical 
daily utility, where little skill is required and materials are easily 
accessible. Had the Australians or New Zealanders, for instance, 
ever possessed the potter's art, they could hardly have forgotten 
it. The inference that these tribes represent the stage of culture 
before the invention of pottery is confirmed by the absence of 
buried fragments of pottery in the districts they inhabit. The 
same races who were found making thread by the laborious process 
of twisting with the hand, would hardly have disused, if they had 
ever possessed, so simple a labour-saving device as the spindle, 
which consists merely of a small stick weighted at one end; the 
spindle may, accordingly, be regarded as an instrument invented 
somewhere between the lowest and highest savage levels (Tylor, 
Early Hist, of Mankind, p. 193). Again, many devices of civiliza- 
tion bear unmistakable marks of derivation from a lower source; 
thus the ancient Egyptian and Assyrian harps, which differ from 
ours in having no front pillar, appear certainly to owe this re- 
markable defect to having grown up through intermediate 
forms from the simple strung bow, the still used type of the most 
primitive stringed instrument. In this way the history of 
numeral words furnishes actual proof of that independent intel- 



lectural progress among savage tribes which some writers have 
rashly denied. Such words as hand, hands, fool, man, &c, are 
used as numerals signifying 5, 10, 15, 20, &c, among many 
savage and barbaric peoples; thus Polynesian lima, ,i.e. 
"hand," means 5; Zulu latisitupa, i.e. "taking the thumb," 
means 6; Greenlandish arfersanek-pingasut, i.e. "on the other 
foot three," means 18; Tamanac tevin itoto, i.e. "One man," 
means 20, &c, &c. The existence of such expressions demon- 
strates that the people who use them had originally no spoken 
names for these numbers, but once merely counted them by 
gesture on their fingers and toes in low savage fashion, till they 
obtained higher numerals by the inventive process of describing 
in words these counting-gestures. Second, the process of 
" survival in culture " has caused the preservation in each stage 
of society of phenomena .belonging to an earlier period, but kept 
up by force of custom into the later, thus supplying evidence of 
the modern conditibn being derived from the ancient. Thus the 
mitre over an English bishop's coat-of-arms is a survival which 
indicates him as the successor of bishops who actually wore 
mitres, while armorial bearings themselves, and the whole craft 
of heraldry, are survivals bearing record of a state of warfare and 
social order whence our present state was by vast modification 
evolved. Evidence of this class, proving the derivation of 
modern civilization, not only from ancient barbarism, but beyond 
this, from primeval savagery, is immensely plentiful, especiallyin 
rites and ceremonies, where the survival of ancient habits is 
peculiarly favoured. Thus the modern Hindu, though using 
civilized means for lighting his household fires, retains the savage 
" fire-drill " for obtaining fire by friction of wood when what he 
considers pure or sacred fire has to be produced for sacrificial 
purposes; while in Europe into modern times the same primitive 
process has been kept up in producing the sacred and magical 
" need-fire," which was lighted to deliver cattle from a murrain. 
Again, the funeral offerings of food, clothing, weapons, &c, to 
the dead are absolutely intelligible and purposeful among savage 
races, who believe that the souls of the departed are ethereal 
beings capable of consuming food, and of receiving and using 
the souls or phantoms of any objects sacrificed fortheiruse. The 
primitive philosophy to which these conceptions belong has to a 
great degree been discredited by modern science; yet the clear 
survivals of such ancient and savage rites may still be seen in 
Europe, where the Bretons leave the remains of the All Souls' 
supper on the table for the ghosts of the dead kinsfolk to partake 
of, and Russian peasants set out cakes for the ancestral manes 
on the ledge which supports the holy pictures, and make 
dough ladders to assist the ghosts of the dead to ascend out of 
their graves and start on their journey for the future world; 
while other provision for the same spiritual journey is made 
when the coin is still put in the hand of the corpse at an Irish 
wake. In like manner magic still exists in the civilized world 
as a survival from the savage and barbaric times to which it 
originally belongs, and in which is found the natural source 
and proper home of utterly savage practices still carried on by 
ignorant peasants in Great Britain, such as taking omens from 
the cries of animals, or bewitching an enemy by sticking full of 
pins and hanging up to shrivel in the smoke an image or other 
object, that similar destruction may fall on the hated person 
represented by the symbol (Tylor, Primitive Culture, ch. i., iii., 
iv., xi., xii.; Early Hist, of Man, ch. vi.). 

The comparative science of civilization thus not only 
generalizes the data of history, but supplements its information 
by laying down the lines of development along which the lowest 
prehistoric culture has gradually risen to the highest modern 
level. Among the most clearly marked of these lines is that which 
follows the succession of the Stone, Bronze, and Iron Ages (see 
Archaeology). The Stone Age represents the early condition 
of mankind in general, and has remained in savage districts up to 
modern times, while the introduction of metals need not at once 
supersede the use of the old stone hatchets and arrows, which 
have often long continued in dwindling survival by the side of the 
new bronze and even iron Ones. The Bronze Age had its most 
important place among ancient nations of Asia and Europe, and 



n8 



ANTHROPOLOGY 



among them was only succeeded after many centuries by the 
Iron Age; while in other districts, such as Polynesia and Central 
and South Africa, and America (except Mexico and Peru), the 
native tribes were moved directly from the Stone to the Iron 
Age without passing through the Bronze Age at all. Although 
the three divisions of savage, barbaric, and civilized man do not 
correspond at all perfectly with the Stone, Bronze, and Iron Ages, 
this classification of civilization has proved of extraordinary 
value in arranging in their proper order of. culture the nations of 
the Old World. 

Another great line of progress has been followed by tribes 
passing from the primitive state of the wild hunter, fisher and 
fruit-gatherer to that of the settled tiller of the soil, for to 
this change of habit may be plainly in great part traced 
the expansion of industrial arts and the creation of higher 
social and political institutions. These, again, have followed 
their proper lines along the course of time. Among such is 
the immense legal development by which the primitive law 
of personal vengeance passed gradually away, leaving but a 
few surviving relics in the modern civilized world, and being 
replaced by the higher doctrine that crime is an offence against 
society, to be repressed for the public good. Another vast 
social change has been that from the patriarchal condition, in 
which the unit is the family under the despotic rule of its head, 
to the systems in which individuals make up a society whose 
government is centralized in a chief or king. In the growth of 
systematic civilization, the art of writing has had an influence so 
intense, that of all tests to distinguish the barbaric from the 
civilized state, none is so generally effective as this, whether they 
have but the failing link with the past which mere memory 
furnishes, or can have recourse to written records of past history 
and written constitutions of present order. Lastly, still following 
the main lines of human culture, the primitive germs of religious 
institutions have to be traced in the childish faith and rude rites 
of savage life, and thence followed in their expansion into the 
vast systems administered by patriarchs and priests, henceforth 
taking under their charge the precepts of morality, and enforcing 
them under divine sanction, while also exercising in political 
life an authority beside or above the civil law. 

The state of culture reached by Quaternary man is evidenced 
by the stone implements in the drift-gravels, and other relics 
of human art in the cave deposits. His drawings on bone or 
tusk found in the caves show no mean artistic power, as appears 
by the three specimens copied in the Plate. That representing 
two deer (fig. 6) was found so early as 1852 in the breccia of a 
limestone cave on the Charente, and its importance recognized 
in a remarkable letter by Prosper Merimee, as at once historically 
ancient and geologically modern (Congrcs d' anthropologic et 
d'archeologie prihistoriques, Copenhagen (1869), p. 128). The 
other two arc the famous mammoth from the cave of La 
Madeleine, on which the woolly mane and huge tusks of Elephas 
primigenius are boldly drawn (fig. 7) ; and the group of man and 
horses (fig. 8). There has been found one other contemporary 
portrait of man, where a hunter is shown stalking an aurochs. 

That the men of the Quaternary period knew the savage 
art of producing fire by friction, and roasted the flesh on which 
they mainly subsisted, is proved by the fragments of charcoal 
found in the cave deposits, where also occur bone awls and 
needles, which indicate the wearing of skin clothing, like that of 
the modern Australians and Fuegians. Their bone lance-heads 
and dart-points were comparableto thoseof northern and southern 
savages. Particular attention has to be given to the stone 
implements used by these earliest known of mankind. The 
division of tribes in the stone implement stage into two classes, 
the Palaeolithic or Old Stone Age, and the Neolithic or New 
Stone Age, according to their proficiency in this most important 
art furnishes in some respects the best means of determining 
their rank in general culture. 

In order to put this argument clearly before the reader, a few 
selected implements are figured in the Plate. The group in 
fig. 9 contains tools and weapons of the Neolithic period such 
as are dug up on European soil; they are evident relics of 



ancient populations who used them till replaced by metal. 
The stone hatchets are symmetrically shaped and edged by 
grinding, while the cutting flakes, scrapers, spear and arrow 
heads are of high finish. Direct knowledge of the tribes who 
made them is scanty, but implements so similar in make and 
design having been in use in North and South America until 
modern times, it may be assumed for purposes of classification 
that the Neolithic peoples of the New World were at a similar 
barbarous level in industrial arts, social organization, moral 
and religious ideas. Such comparison, though needing caution 
and reserve, at once proved of great value to anthropology. 
When, however, there came to light from the drift-gravels 
and limestone caves of Europe the Palaeolithic implements, 
of which some types are shown in the group (fig. 10), the difficult 
problem presented itself, what degree of general culture these 
rude implements belonged to. On mere inspection, their rude- 
ness, their unsuitability for being hafted, and the absence of 
shaping and edging by the grindstone, mark their inferiority 
to the Neolithic implements. Their immensely greater antiquity 
was proved by their geological position and their association 
with a long extinct fauna, and they were not, like the Neoliths, 
recognizable as corresponding closely to the implements used 
by modern tribes. There was at first a tendency to consider 
the Palaeoliths as the work of men ruder than savages, if, 
indeed, their makers were to be accounted human at all. Since 
then, however, the problem has passed into a more manageable 
state. Stone implements, more or less approaching the European 
Palaeolithic type, were found in Africa from Egypt southwards, 
where in such parts as Somaliland and Cape Colony they lie about 
on the ground, as though they had been the rough tools and 
weapons of the rude inhabitants of the land at no very distant 
period. The group in fig. 1 1 in the Plate shows the usual Somali- 
land types. These facts tended to remove the mystery from 
Palaeolithic man, though too little is known of the ruder ancient 
tribes of Africa to furnish a definition of the state of culture 
which might have co-existed with the use of Palaeolithic imple- 
ments. Information to this purpose, however, can now be 
furnished from a more outlying region. This is Tasmania, where 
as in the adjacent continent of Australia, the survival of marsupial 
animals indicates long isolation from the rest of the world. 
Here, till far on into the 19th century, the Englishmen could 
watch the natives striking off flakes of stone, trimming them to 
convenient shape for grasping them in the hand, and edging 
them by taking off successive chips on one face only. The group 
in fig. 12 shows ordinary Tasmanian forms, two of them being 
finer tools for scraping and grooving. (For further details 
reference may be made to H. Ling Roth, The Tasmanians, 
(2nd ed., 1899); R. Brough Smyth, Aborigines of Victoria (1878), 
vol. ii.; Papers and Proceedings of Royal Society of Tasmania; 
and papers by the present writer in Journal of the Anthropological 
Institute.) The Tasmanians, when they came in contact with the 
European explorers and settlers, were not the broken outcasts 
they afterwards became. They were a savage people, perhaps 
the lowest in culture of any known, but leading a normal, self- 
supporting, and not unhappy life, which had probably changed 
little during untold ages. The accounts, imperfect as they 
are, which have been preserved of their arts, beliefs and habits, 
thus present a picture of the arts, beliefs and habits of tribes 
whose place in the Stone Age was a grade lower than that of 
Palaeolithic man of the Quaternary period. 

The Tasmanian stone implements, figured in the Plate, show 
their own use when it is noticed that the rude chipping forms 
a good hand-grip above, and an effective edge for chopping, 
sawing, and cutting below. But the absence of the long-shaped 
implements, so characteristic of the Neolithic and Palaeolithic 
series, and serviceable as picks, hatchets, and chisels, shows re- 
markable limitation in the mind of these savages, who made 
a broad, hand-grasped knife their tool of all work to cut, saw, and 
chop with. Their weapons were the wooden club or waddy 
notched to the grasp, and spears of sticks, often crooked but well 
balanced, with points sharpened by tool or fire, and sometimes 
jagged. No spear thrower or bow and arrow was known. The 



ANTHROPOLOGY 



Plate 




Fig. ii. 



Fig. 13. 



ANTHROPOMETRY 



i ii 



Tasmanian savages were crafty warriors and kangaroo-hunters, 
and the women climbed the highest trees by notching, in quest 
of opossums. Shell-fish and crabs were taken, and seals knocked 
on the head with clubs, but neither fish-hook nor fishing-net was 
known, and indeed swimming fish were taboo as food. Meat 
and vegetable food, such as fern-root, was broiled over the fire, 
but boiling in a vessel was unknown. The fire was produced 
by the ordinary savage fire-drill. Ignorant of agriculture, 
with no dwellings but rough huts or breakwinds of sticks and 
bark, without dogs or other domestic animals, these savages, 
until the coming of civilized man, roamed after food within their 
tribal bounds. Logs and clumsy floats of bark and grass enabled 
them to cross water under favourable circumstances. They 
had clothing of skins rudely stitched together with bark thread, 
and they were decorated with simple necklaces of kangaroo 
teeth, shells and berries. Among their simple arts, plaiting 
and basket-work was one in which they approached the civilized 
level. The pictorial art of the Tasmanians was poor arid childish, 
quite below that of the Palaeolithic men of Europe. The 
Tasmanians spoke a fairly copious agglutinating language, 
well marked as to parts of speech, syntax and inflexion. Numera- 
tion was at a low level, based on counting fingers on one hand 
only, so that the word for man (puggana) stood also for the 
number 5. The religion of the Tasmanians, when cleared from 
ideas apparently learnt from the whites, was a simple form of 
animism based on the shadow (warrawa) being the soul or spirit. 
The strongest belief of the natives was in the power of the ghosts 
of the dead, so that they carried the bones of relatives to secure 
themselves from harm, and they fancied the forest swarming 
with malignant demons. They placed weapons near the grave 
for the dead friend's soul to use, and drove out disease from the 
sick by exorcising the ghost which was supposed to have caused 
it. Of greater special spirits of Nature we find something 
vaguely mentioned. The earliest recorders of the native social 
life set down such features as their previous experience of rude 
civilized life had made them judges of. They notice the self- 
denying affection of the mothers, and the hard treatment of 
the wives by the husbands, polygamy and the shifting marriage 
unions. But when we meet with a casual remark as to the 
tendency of the Tasmanians to take wives from other tribes 
than their own, it seems likely that they had some custom of 
exogamy which the foreigners did not understand. Meagre 
as is the information preserved of the arts, thoughts, and customs 
of these survivors from the lower Stone Age, it is of value as 
furnishing even a temporary and tentative means of working 
out the development of culture on a basis not of conjecture 
but of fact. 

Conclusion. — To-day anthropology is grappling with the heavy 
task of systematizing the vast stores of. knowledge to which the 
key was found by Boucher de Perthes, by Lartet, Christy and 
their successors. There have been recently no discoveries to 
rival in novelty those which followed the exploration of the bone- 
caves and drift-gravels, and which effected an instant revolution 
in all accepted theories of man's antiquity, substituting for a 
chronology of centuries a vague computation of hundreds of 
thousands of years. The existence of man in remote geological 
time cannot now be questioned, but, despite much effort made in 
likely localities, no bones, with the exception of those of the 
much-discussed Pithecanthropus, have been found which can 
be regarded as definitely bridging the gulf between man and the 
lower creation. It seems as if anthropology had in this direction 
reached the limits of its discoveries. Far different are the 
prospects in other directions where the work of co-ordinating the 
material and facts collected promises to throw much light on the 
history of civilization. Anthropological researches undertaken 
all over the globe have shown the necessity of abandoning the old 
theory that a similarity of customs and superstitions, of arts and 
crafts, justifies the assumption of a remote relationship, if not 
an identity of origin, between races. It is now certain that there 
has ever been an inherent tendency in man, allowing for difference 
of climate and material surroundings, to develop culture by the 
same stages and in the same way. American man, for example, 



need not necessarily owe the minutest portion of his mental, 
religious, social or industrial development to remote contact 
with Asia or Europe, though he were proved to possess identical 
usages. An example in point is that of pyramid-building. No 
ethnical relationship can ever have existed between the Aztecs 
and the Egyptians; yet each race developed the idea of the 
pyramid tomb through that psychological similarity which is as 
much a characteristic of the species man as is his physique. 

Bibliography. — J. C. Prichard, Natural History of Man (London, 
1843); T. H. Huxley, Man's Place in Nature (London, 1863); and 
" Geographical Distribution of Chief Modifications of Mankind," in 
Journal Ethnological Society for 1870; E. B. Tylor, Early History of 
Man (London, 1865), Primitive Culture (London, 1871), and 
Anthropology (London, 1881); A. de Quatrefages, Histoire generate 
des races humdines (Paris, 1889), Human Species (Eng. trans., 1879) ; 
Lord Avebury, Prehistoric Times (1865, 6th ed. 1900) and Origin 
of Civilization (1870, 6th ed. 1902) ; Theo. Waitz, Anthropologic der 
Naturvolker (1859-1871) ; E. H. Haeckel, Anthropogenic (Leipzig, 
1874-1891), Eng. trans., 1879; O. Peschel, Volkerkunde (Leipzig, 
1874-1897); P. Topinard, V Anthropologic (Paris, 1876); Elements 
d' anthropologic generate (Paris, 1885); D. G. Brinton, Races and 
Peoples (1890) ; A. H. Keane, Ethnology (1896), and Man: Past and 
Present (1899); G. Sergi, The Mediterranean Race (Eng. ed., 1889); 
F. Ratzel, History of Mankind (Eng. trans., 1897) ; G. de Mortillet, 
Le Prehistorique (Paris, 1882); A. C. Haddon, Study of Man (1897); 
J. Deniker, The Races of Man (London, 1900); W. Z. Ripley, The 
Races of Europe (1900, with long bibliography) ; The Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute of Great Britain; Revue d 'anthropologic 
(Paris) ; Zeitschrift fur Ethnologie (Berlin). See also bibliographies 
under separate ethnological headings (Australia, Africa, Arabs, 
America, &c). (E. B. T.) 

ANTHROPOMETRY (Gr. avBpwTOS, man, and ixtrpov, measure), 
the name given by the French savant, Alphonse Bertillon 
(b. 1853), to a system of identification (q.v.) depending on the 
unchanging character of certain measurements of parts of the 
human frame. He found by patient inquiry that several physical 
features and the dimensions of certain bones or bony structures 
in the body remain practically constant during adult life. He 
concluded from this that when these measurements were made 
and recorded systematically every single individual would 
be found to be perfectly distinguishable from others. The 
system was soon adapted to police methods, as the immense value 
of being able to fix a person's identity was fully realized, both 
in preventing false personation and in bringing home to any one 
charged with an offence his responsibility for previous wrong- 
doing. " Bertillonage," as it was called, became widely popular, 
and after its introduction into France in 1883, where it was soon 
credited with highly gratifying results, was applied to the 
administration of justice in most civilized countries. England 
followed tardily, and it was not until 1894 that an investigation 
of the methods used and results obtained was made by a special 
committee sent to Paris for the purpose. It reported favourably, 
especially on the use of the measurements for primary classifica- 
tion, but recommended also the adoption in part of a system of 
" finger prints " as suggested by Francis Galton, and already 
practised in Bengal. 

M. Bertillon selected the following five measurements as the 
basis of his system: (1) head length; (2) head breadth; (3) 
length of middle finger; (4) of left foot, and (5) of cubit or forearm 
from the elbow to the extremity of the middle finger. Each 
principal heading was further subdivided into three classes of 
" small," " medium " and " large," and as an increased guarantee 
height, length of little finger, and the colour of the eye were also 
recorded. From this great mass of details, soon represented in 
Paris by the collection of some 100,000 cards, it was possible, 
proceeding by exhaustion, to sift and sort down the cards till a 
small bundle of half a dozen produced the combined facts of the 
measurements of the individual last sought. The whole of the 
information is easily contained in one cabinet of very ordinary 
dimensions, and most ingeniously contrived so as to make the 
most of the space and facilitate the search. The whole of the 
record is independent of names, and the final identification is by 
means of the photograph which lies with the individual's card of 
measurements. 

Anthropometry, however, gradually fell into disfavour, and 
it has been generally supplanted by the superior system of finger 



120 



ANTHROPOMORPHISM— ANTIBES 



prints (q.v.). Bertillonage exhibited certain defects which were 
first brought to light in Bengal. The objections raised were (i) 
the costliness of the instruments employed and their liability to 
get out of order; (2) the need for specially instructed measurers, 
men of superior education; (3) the errors that frequently crept 
in when carrying out the processes and were all but irremediable. 
Measures inaccurately taken, or wrongly read off, could seldom, 
if ever, be corrected, and these persistent errors defeated all 
chance of successful search. The process was slow, as it was 
necessary to repeat it three times so as to arrive at a mean 
result. In Bengal measurements were already abandoned by 
1897, when the finger print system was adopted throughout 
British India. Three years later England followed suit; and 
as the result of a fresh inquiry ordered by the Home Office, 
finger prints were alone relied upon for identification. 

Authorities. — Lombroso, Antropometria di 400 delinquenti 
(1872); Roberts, Manual of Anthropometry (1878); Ferri, Studi 
comparati di antropometria (2 vols., 1881-1882); Lombroso, Rughe 
anomale speciali ai criminali (1890) ; Bertillon, Instructions signale- 
tiques pour I' identification anthropomitrique (1893); Livi, Anthropo- 
metria (Milan, 1900) ; Fiirst, Indextabeden zum anthropometrischen 
Gebrauch (Jena, 1902) ; Report of Home Office Committee on the Best 
Means of Identifying Habitual Criminals (1893-1894). (A. G.) 

ANTHROPOMORPHISM (Gr. &vdpwiros, man, ixop<j>rj, form), 
the attribution (a) of a human body, or (b) of human qualities 
generally, to God or the gods. The word anthropomorphism 
is a modern coinage (possibly from 18th century French). The 
New English Dictionary is misled by the 1866 reprint of Paul 
Bayne on Ephesians when it quotes " anthropomorphist " 
as 17 th century English. Seventeenth century editions print 
" anthropomorphits," i.e. anthropomorphites, in sense (a). The 
older abstract term is " anthropopathy," literally "attributing 
human feelings," in sense (b). 

Early religion, among its many objects of worship, includes 
beasts (see Animal-Worship), considered, in the more refined 
theology of the later Greeks and Romans, as metamorphoses of 
the great gods. Similarly we find " therianthropic " forms — 
half animal, half human — in Egypt or Assyria-Babylonia. In 
contrast with these, it is considered one of the glories of the 
Olympian mythology of Greece that it believed in happy manlike 
beings (though exempt from death, and using special rarefied 
foods, &c), and celebrated them in statues of the most exquisite 
art. Israel shows us animal images, doubtless of a ruder sort, 
when Yahweh is worshipped in the northern kingdom under the 
image of a steer. (Some scholars think the title " mighty one of 
Jacob," Psalm cxxxii., 2, 5, el al., vi* as if from T5*, is 
really " steer " t?x " of Jacob.") But the higher religion of Israel 
inclined to morality more than to art, and forbade image worship 
altogether. This prepared the way for the conception of God as 
an immaterial Spirit. True mythical anthropomorphisms occur 
in early parts of the Old Testament (e.g. Genesis iii. 8, cf. vi. 2), 
though in the majority of Old Testament passages such expres- 
sions are merely verbal (e.g. Isaiah lix. 1). In the Christian 
Church (and again in early Mahommedanism) simple minds 
believed in the corporeal nature of God. Gibbon and other 
writers quote from John Cassian the tale of the poor monk, who, 
being convinced of his error, burst into tears, exclaiming, " You 
have taken away my God! I have none now whom I can 
worship!" According to a fragment of Origen (on Genesis i. 
26), Melito of Sardis shared this belief. Many have thought 
Melito's work, -irepi evaw/xciTOv 6eov, must have been a treatise 
on the Incarnation; but it is hard to think that Origen could 
blunder so. Epiphanius tells of Audaeus of Mesopotamia and 
his followers, Puritan sectaries in the 4th century, who were 
orthodox except for this belief and for Quartodecimanism 
(see Easter). Tertullian, who is sometimes called an anthropo- 
morphist, stood ior the Stoical doctrine, that all reality, even 
the divine, is in a sense material. 

The reaction against anthropomorphism begins in Greek 
philosophy with the satirical spirit of Xenophanes (540 B.C.), 
who puts the case as broadly as any. The " greatest God " 
resembles man " neither in form nor in mind." In Judaism — 
unless we should refer to the prophets' polemic against images — 



a reaction is due to the introduction of the codified law. God 
seemed to grow more remote. The old sacred name Yahweh is 
never pronounced; even " God " is avoided for allusive titles 
like " heaven " or " place." Still, amid all this, the God of 
Judaism remains a personal, almost a limited, being. In Philo 
we see Jewish scruples uniting with others drawn from Greek 
philosophy. For, though the quarrel with popular anthropo- 
morphism was patched up, and the gods of the Pantheon were 
described by Stoics and Epicureans as manlike in form, philo- 
sophy nevertheless tended to highly abstract conceptions of 
supreme, or real, deity. Philo followed out the line of this tradi- 
tion in teaching that God cannot be named. How much exactly 
he meant is disputed. The same inheritance of Greek philosophy 
appears in the Christian fathers, especially Origen. He names 
and condemns the " anthropomorphites," who ascribe a human 
body to God (on Romans i., sub fin.; Rufinus' Latin version). 
In Arabian philosophy the reaction sought to deny that God 
had any attributes. And, under the influence of Mahommedan 
Aristotelianism, the same paralysing speculation found entrance 
among the learned Jews of Spain (see Maimonides). 

Till modern times the philosophical reaction was not carried 
out with full vigour. Spinoza (Ethics, i. 15 and 17), representing 
here as elsewhere both a Jewish inheritance and a philosophical, 
but advancing further, sweeps away all community between 
God and man. So later J. G. Fichte and Matthew Arnold (" a 
magnified and non-natural man "), — strangely, in view of their 
strong belief in an objective moral order. For the use of the 
word " anthropomorphic," or kindred forms, in this new spirit of 
condemnation for all conceptions of God as manlike — sense (b) 
noted above — see J. J. Rousseau in Mmile iv. (cited by Littre), — 
Nous sommes pour la plupart de vrais anthropomorphites. Rous- 
seau is here speaking of the language of Christian theology,— 
a divine Spirit: divine Persons. At the present day this usage 
is universal. What it means on the lips of pantheists is plain. 
But when theists charge one another with " anthropomorphism," 
in order to rebuke what they deem unduly manlike conceptions 
of God, they stand on slippery ground. All theism implies the 
assertion of kinship between man, especially in his moral being, 
and God. As a brilliant theologian, B. Duhm, has said, physio- 
morphism is the enemy of Christian faith, not anthropomorphism. 
The latest extension of the word, proposed in the interests of 
philosophy or psychology, uses it of the principle according to 
which man is said to interpret all things (not God merely) through 
himself. Common-sense intuitionalism would deny that man' 
does this, attributing to him immediate knowledge of reality. 
And idealism in all its forms would say that man, interpreting 
through his reason, does rightly, and reaches truth. Even here 
then the use of the word is not colourless. It implies blame. It 
is the symptom of a philosophy which confines knowledge within 
narrow limits, and which, when held by Christians (e.g. Peter 
Browne, or H. L. Mansel), believes only in an " analogical " 
knowledge of God. (R. Ma.) 

ANTI, or Campa, a tribe of South American Indians of Ara- 
wakan stock, inhabiting the forests of the upper Ucayali basin, 
east of Cuzco, on the eastern side of the Andes, south Peru. 
The Antis, who gave their name to the eastern province of 
Antisuyu, have always been notorious for ferocity and canni- 
balism. They are of fine physique and generally good-looking. 
Their dress is a robe with holes for the head and arms. Their 
long hair hangs down over the shoulders, and round their necks 
a toucan beak or a bunch of feathers is worn as an ornament. 

ANTIBES, a seaport town in the French department of the 
Alpes-Mari times (formerly in that' of the Var, but transferred 
after the Alpes-Maritimes department was formed in i860 out 
of the county of Nice). Pop. (1906) of the town, 5730; of the 
commune, 11,753. It is 12^ m. by rail S.W. of Nice, and is 
situated on the E. side of the Garoupe peninsula. It was formerly 
fortified, but all the ramparts (save the Fort Carre, built by 
Vauban) have now been demolished, and a new town is rising on 
their site. There is a tolerable harbour, with a 1 considerable 
fishing industry. The principal exports are dried fruits, salt fish 
and oil. Much perfume distilling is done here, as the surrounding 



ANTICHRIST 



121 



country produces an abundance of flowers. Antibes is the ancient 
Antipolis. It is said to hare been founded before the Christian 
era (perhaps about 340 B.C.) by colonists from Marseilles, and is 
mentioned by Strabo. It was the seat of a bishopric from the 
5th century to 1 244, when the see was transferred to Grasse. 

(W. A. B. C.) 

ANTICHRIST (dvrixpia-ros). The earliest mention of the 
name Antichrist, which was probably first coined in Christian 
eschatological literature, is in the Epistles of St John (I. ii. 18, 
22, iv. 3; II. 7), and it has since come into universal use. The 
conception, paraphrased in this word, of a mighty ruler who will 
appear at the end of time, and whose essence will be enmity to 
God (Dan. xi. 36; cf. 2 Thess. ii. 4; 6 avTiKel/xevos), is older, 
and traceable to Jewish eschatology. Its origin is to be sought 
in the first place in the prophecy of Daniel, written at the 
beginning of the Maccabean period. The historical figure who 
served as a model for the " Antichrist " was Antiochus IV. 
Epiphanes, the persecutor of the Jews, and he has impressed 
indelible traits upon the conception. Since then ever-recurring 
characteristics of this figure (cf. especially Dan xi. 46, &c.) are, 
that he would appear as a mighty ruler at the head of gigantic 
armies, that he would destroy three rulers (the three horns, 
Dan. vii. 8, 24), persecute the saints (vii. 25), rule for three and a 
half years (vii. 25, &c), and subject the temple of God to a 
horrible devastation (fSSeXvy/ia ttjs epjy/ioxrecos). When the end 
of the world foretold by Daniel did not take place, but the book 
of Daniel retained its validity as a sacred scripture which foretold 
future things, the personality of the tyrant who was God's enemy 
disengaged itself from that of Antiochus IV., and became merely 
a figure of prophecy, which was applied now to one and now to 
another historical phenomenon. Thus for the author of the 
Psalms of Solomon (c. 60 B.C.), Pompey, who destroyed the 
independent rule of the Maccabees and stormed Jerusalem, was 
the Adversary of God (cf . ii. 26, &c.) ; so too the tyrant whom 
the Ascension of Moses (c. a.d. 30) expects at the end of all 
things, possesses, besides the traits of Antiochus IV., those of 
Herod the Great. A further influence on the development of the 
eschatological imagination of the Jews was exercised by such a 
figure as that of the emperor Caligula (a.d. 37-41), who is known 
to have given the order, never carried out, to erect his statue in 
the temple of Jerusalem. In the little Jewish Apocalypse, the 
existence of which is assumed by many scholars, which in Mark 
xiii. and Matt. xxiv. is combined with the words of Christ to 
form the great eschatological discourse, the prophecy of the 
" abomination of desolation " (Mark xiii. 14 et seq.) may have 
originated in this episode of Jewish history. Later Jewish and 
Christian writers of Apocalypses saw in Nero the tyrant of the 
end of time. The author of the Syriac Apocalypse of Baruch (or 
his source), cap. 36-40, speaks in quite general terms of the last 
ruler of the end of time. In 4 Ezra v. 6 also is found the allusion : 
regnabit quern non sperant. 

The roots of this eschatological fancy are to be sought perhaps 
still deeper in a purely mythological and speculative expectation 
of a battle at the end of days between God and the devil, which 
has no reference whatever to historical occurrences. This idea 
has its original source in the apocalypses of Iran, for these are 
based upon the conflict between Ahura-Mazda (Auramazda, 
Ormazd) and Angro-Mainyush (Ahriman) and its consumma- 
tion at the end of the world. This Iranian dualism is proved 
to have penetrated into the late Jewish eschatology from the 
beginning of the 1st century before Christ, and did so probably 
still earlier. Thus the opposition between God and the devil 
already plays a part in the Jewish groundwork of the Testaments 
of the Patriarchs, which was perhaps composed at the end of 
the period of the Maccabees. In this the name of the devil 
appears, besides the usual form ( aaravas, 5id/3o\os), 
especially as Belial (Beliar, probably, from Ps. xviii. 4, where 
the rivers of Belial are spoken of, originally a god of the under- 
world) , a name which also plays a part in the Antichrist tradition. 
In the Ascension of Moses we already hear, at the beginning of 
the description of the latter time (x. 1): " And then will God's 
rule be made manifest over all his creatures, then will the devil 



have an end " (cf. Matt. xii. 28; Luke xi. 20; John xii. 31, 
xiv. 30, xvi. n). 1 This conception of the strife of God with the 
devil was further interwoven, before its introduction into the 
Antichrist myth, with another idea Of different origin, namely, 
the myth derived from the Babylonian religion, of the battle 
of the supreme God (Marduk) with the dragon of chaos (Tiamat), 
originally a myth of the origin of things which, later perhaps, 
was changed into an eschatological one, again under Iranian 
influence. 2 Thus it comes that the devil, the opponent of God, 
appears in the end often also in the form of a terrible dragon- 
monster; this appears most clearly in Rev. xii. Now it is 
possible that the whole conception of Antichrist has its final 
roots in this already complicated myth, that the form of the 
mighty adversary of God is but the equivalent in human form 
of the devil or of the dragon of chaos. In any case, however, 
this myth has exercised a formative influence on the conception 
of Antichrist. For only thus can we explain how his figure 
acquires numerous superhuman and ghostly traits, which cannot 
be explained by any particular historical phenomenon on which 
it may have been based. Thus the figure of Antiochus IV. 
has already become superhuman, when in Dan. viii. 10, it is said 
that the little horn " waxed great, even to the host of heaven; 
and cast down some of the host and of the stars to the ground." 
Similarly Pompey, in the second psalm of Solomon, is obviously 
represented as the dragon of chaos, and his figure exalted into 
myth. Without this assumption of a continual infusion of mytho- 
logical conceptions, we cannot understand the figure of Anti- 
christ. Finally, it must be mentioned that Antichrist receives, 
at least in the later sources, the name originally proper to the 
devil himself. 3 

From the Jews, Christianity took over the idea. It is present 
quite unaltered in certain passages, specifically traceable to 
Judaism, e.g. (Rev. xi.). "The Beast that ascendeth out of 
the bottomless pit " and, surrounded by a mighty host of nations, 
slays the " two witnesses " in Jerusalem, is the entirely super- 
human Jewish conception of Antichrist. Even if the beast 
(ch. xiii.), which rises from the sea at the summons of the devil, 
be interpreted as the Roman empire, and, specially, as any 
particular Roman ruler, yet the original form of the malevolent 
tyrant of the latter time is completely preserved. 

A fundamental change of the whole idea from the specifically 
Christian point of view, then, is signified by the conclusion of 
ch. ii. of the Second Epistle to the Thessalonians. 4 There can, 
of course, be no doubt as to the identity of the " man of sin, 
the son of perdition " here described with the dominating figure 
of Jewish eschatology (cf. ii. 3 &c, 6 avdpwiros ttjs avofiias, 
i.e. Beliar (?), 6 avrucdntvos — the allusion that follows to 
Dan xi. 36). But Antichrist here appears as a tempter, who 
works by signs and wonders (ii. 9) and seeks to obtain divine 
honours; it is further signified that this "man of sin " will 
obtain credence, more especially among the Jews, because they 
have not accepted the truth. The conception, moreover, has 
become almost more superhuman than ever (cf. ii. 4, " showing 
himself that he is God "). The destruction of the Adversary 
is drawn from Isaiah xi. 4, where it is said of the Messiah: " with 
the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked." 6 The idea that 
Antichrist was to establish himself in the temple of Jerusalem 
(ii. 4) is very enigmatical, and has not yet been explained. 
The " abomination of desolation " has naturally had its influence 
upon it; possibly also the experience of the time of Caliguia 
(see above). Remarkable also is the allusion to a power which 

1 See further, Bousset, Religion des Judentums, ed. ii. pp. 289 &c, 
381 &c, 585 &c. 

2 See Gunkel, Schopfung und Chaos (1893). 

3 It is, of course, uncertain whether this phenomenon already occurs 
in 2 Cor. vi. 15, since here Belial might still be Satan; cf. however, 
Ascensio Jesaiae iv. 2 &c. ; Sibyll. iii. 63 &c, ii. 167 &c. 

4 It is not necessary to decide whether the epistle is by St Paul or 
by a pupil of Paul, although the former seems to the present writer 
to be by far the more probable, in spite of the brilliant attack on the 
genuineness of the epistle by Wrede in Texte und ffbersetzungen, N.F. 
ix. 2. 

s Cf. 2 Thess. ii. 8; the Targum aiso. in its comment on the 
passage of Isaiah, applies " the wicked '' to Antichrist. 



i 22 



ANTICHRIST 



still retards the revelation of Antichrist (2 Thess. ii. 6 &c, t6 
Karexov; 6 Karkxav), an allusion which, in the tradition of 
the Fathers of the church, came to be universally, and probably 
correctly, referred to the Roman empire. In this then consists 
the significant turn given by St Paul in the Second Epistle to the 
Thessalonians to the whole conception, namely, in the substitu- 
tion for the tyrant of the latter time who should persecute the 
Jewish people, of a pseudo-Messianic figure, who, establishing 
himself in the temple of God, should find credence and a following 
precisely among the Jews. And while the originally Jewish 
idea led straight to the conception, set forth in Revelation, 
of the Roman empire or its ruler as Antichrist, here, on the con- 
trary, it is probably the Roman empire that is the power which 
still retards the reign of Antichrist. With this, the expectation 
of such an event at last separates itself from any connexion with 
historical fact, and becomes purely ideal. In this process of 
transformation of the idea, which has become of importance for 
the history of the world, is revealed probably the genius of Paul, 
or at any rate, that of the young Christianity which was breaking 
its ties with Judaism and establishing itself in the world of the 
Roman empire. 

This version of the figure of Antichrist, who may now really 
for the first time be described by this name, appears to have been 
at once widely accepted in Christendom. The idea that the 
Jews would believe in Antichrist, as punishment for not having 
believed in the true Christ, seems to be expressed by the author 
of the fourth gospel (v. 43). The conception of Antichrist as a 
perverter of men, leads naturally to his connexion with false 
doctrine (1 John ii. 18, 22; iv. 3; 2 John 7). The Teaching of 
the Apostles (xvi. 4) describes his form in the same way as 
2 Thessalonians {kcu. rdre <t>cuvricreTCu 6 K.00 twirXavos ebs vios 
Otov kcu. Tout cri)titia K<d repara). In the late Christian 
Sibylline fragment (iii. 63 &c.) also, " Beliar " appears above all 
as a worker of wonders, this figure having possibly been influenced 
by that of Simon Magus. Finally the author of the Apocalypse 
of St John also has made use of the new conception of Antichrist 
as a wonder-worker and seducer, and has set his figure beside 
that of the " first " Beast which was for him the actual embodi- 
ment of Antichrist (xiii. n &c). Since this second Beast could 
not appear along with the first as a power demanding worship 
and directly playing the part of Antichrist, he made out of him 
the false prophet (xvi. 13, xix. 20, xx. 10) who seduces the 
inhabitants of the earth to worship the first Beast, and probably 
interpreted this figure as applying to the Roman provincial 
priesthood. 1 

But this version of the idea of Antichrist, hostile to the Jews 
and better expressing the relation of Christianity to the Roman 
empire, was prevented from obtaining an absolute ascendancy 
in Christian tradition by the rise of the belief in the ultimate 
return of Nero, and by the absorption of this outcome of pagan 
superstition into the Jewish-Christian apocalyptic conceptions. 
It is known that soon after the death of Nero rumours were 
current that he was not dead. This report soon took the. more 
concrete form that he had fled to the Parthians and would return 
thence to take vengeance on Rome. This expectation led to 
the appearance of several pretenders who posed as Nero; and 
as late as a.d. 100 many still held the belief that Nero yet lived. 2 
This idea of Nero's return was in the first instance taken up by 
the Jewish apocalyptic writers. While the Jewish author of the 
fourth Sibylline book (c. a.d. 80) still only refers simply to the 
heathen belief, the author of the (Jewish?) original of the 17th 
chapter of the Apocalypse of St John expects the return of Nero 
with the Parthians to take vengeance on Rome, because she had 
shed the blood of the Saints (destruction of Jerusalem!). In 
the fifth Sibylline book, which, with the exception of verses 1-5 1, 
was mainly composed by a Jewish writer at the close of the first 
century, the return of Nero plays a great part. Three times the 
author recurs to this theme, 137-154; 214-227; 361-385. He 
sees in the coming again of Nero, whose figure he endows with 

1 See Bousset, Kommentar zur Offenbarung Johannis, on these 
passages. 

2 Ibid. ch. xvii. : and Charles, Ascension of Isaiah, lvii. sq. 



supernatural and, daemonic characteristics, a judgment of God, 
in whose hand the revivified Nero becomes a rod of chastisement. 
Later, the figure of Nero redivivus became, more especially in 
Christian thought, entirely confused with that of Antichrist. 
The less it became possible, as time went.on, to believe that Nero 
yet lived and would return as a living ruler, the greater was 
the tendency for his figure to develop into one wholly infernal 
and daemonic. The relation to the Parthians is also gradually 
lost sight of; and from being the adversary of Rome, Nero 
becomes the adversary of God and of Christ. This is the version 
of the expectation of Nero's second coming preserved in the 
form given to the prophecy, under Domitian, by the collaborator 
in the Apocalypse of John (xiii., xvii.). Nero is here the beast 
that returns from the bottomless pit, " that was, and is not, 
and yet is "; the head " as it were wounded to death " that lives 
again; the gruesome similitude of the L,amb that was slain, and 
his adversary in the final struggle. The number of the Beast, 
666, points certainly to Nero (p"U ,iDp = 666, or I'M -irp=6i6>. 
In the little apocalypse of the Ascensio Jesaiae (iii. i3b-iv, 18), 
which dates perhaps from the second, perhaps only from the 
first, decade of the third century, 3 it is said that Beliar, the king 
of this world, would descend from the firmament in the human 
form of Nero. In the same way, in Sibyll. v. 28-34, Nero and 
Antichrist are absolutely identical (mostly obscure remin- 
iscences, Sib. viii. 68 &c, 140 &c, 151 &c). Then the Nero- 
legend gradually fades away. But Victorinus of Pettau, 
who wrote during the persecution under Diocletian, still knows 
the relation of the Apocalypse to the legend of Nero; and 
Commodian, whose Carmen Apologeticum was perhaps not 
written until the beginning of the 4th century, knows two Anti- 
christ-figures, of which he still identifies the first with Nero 
redivivus. 

In proportion as the figure of Nero again ceased to dominate 
the imagination of the faithful, the wholly unhistorical, un- 
political and an ti- Jewish conception of Antichrist, which based 
itself more especially on 2 Thess. ii., gained the upper hand, 
having usually become associated with the description, of the 
universal conflagration of the world which had also originated 
in the Iranian eschatology. On the strength of exegetical com- 
binations, and with the assistance of various traditions, it was 
developed even in its details, which it thenceforth maintained 
practically unchanged. In this form it is in great part present in 
the eschatological portions of the Adv. Haereses of Irenaeus, and 
in the de Antithristo and commentary on Daniel of Hippolytus. 
In times of political excitement, during the following centuries, 
men appealed again and again to the prophecy of Antichrist. 
Then the foreground scenery of the prophecies was shifted; 
special prophecies, having reference to contemporary events, 
are pushed to the front, but in the background remains standing, 
with scarcely a change, the prophecy of Antichrist that is bound 
up with no particular time. Thus at the beginning of the 
Testamentum Domini, edited by Rahmani, there is an apocalypse, 
possibly of the time of Decius, though it has been worked over 
(Harnack, Chronol. der altchrist. Lilt. ii. 514 &c). In the third 
century, the period of Aurelianus and Gallienus, with its wild 
warfare of Romans and Persians, and of Roman pretenders 
one with another, seems especially to have aroused the spirit of 
prophecy. To this period belongs the Jewish apocalypse of Elijah 
(ed. Butten wieser) , of which the Antichrist is possibly Odaenathus 
of Palmyra, while Sibyll. xiii., a Christian writing of this period, 
glorifies this very prince. It is possible that at this time also the 
Sibylline fragment (iii. 63 &c.) and the Christian recension of the 
two first Sibylline books were written. 4 To this time possibly 
belongs also a recension of the Coptic apocalypse of Elijah, edited 
by Steindorff {Texts und Untersuchungen, N. F. h. 3). To the 
4th century belongs, according to Kamper {Die deutsche Kaiser- 
idee, 1896, p. 18) and Sackur {Texte und Forschungen, 1898, 
p. 114 &c), the first nucleus of the " Tiburtine " Sibyl, very cele- 
brated in the middle ages, with its prophecy of the return of 

* Harnack, Chronologie der altchristlichen Literatur, i. 573. 
4 See Bousset, in Ucrzog-Haucfc, Realencyklop. fur Theoiogie und 
Kirche (ed. 3), xvi-ii. 273 &c. 



ANTICLIMAX— ANTICOSTI 



123 



Constans, and its dream, which later on exercised so much 
influence, that after ruling over the whole world he would go to 
Jerusalem and lay down his crown upon Golgotha. To the 
4th century also perhaps belongs a series of apocalyptic pieces 
and homilies which have been handed down under the name of 
Ephraem. At the beginning of the Mahommedan period, then, 
we meet with the most influential and the most curious 
of these prophetic books, the Pseudo-Methodius, 1 which 
prophesied of the emperor who would awake from his sleep 
and conquer Islam. From the Pseudo-Methodius are derived 
innumerable Byzantine prophecies (cf . especially Vassiliev, 
Anecdota Graeeo- Byzantina) which follow the fortunes of 
the Byzantine emperors and their governments. A prophecy 
in verse, adorned with pictures, which is ascribed to Leo 
VI. the Philosopher (Migne, Pair. Graeca, cvii. p. 112 1 
&c), tells of the downfall of the house of the Comneni and 
sings of the emperor of the future who would one day awake 
from death and go forth from the cave in which he had lain. 
Thus the prophecy of the sleeping emperor of the future is very 
closely connected with the Antichrist tradition. There is extant 
a Daniel prophecy which, in the time of the Latin empire, foretells 
the restoration of the Greek rule. 2 In the East, too, Antichrist 
prophecies were extraordinarily flourishing during the period of 
the rise of Islam and of the Crusades. To these belong the 
apocalypses in Arabic, Ethiopian and perhaps also in Syrian, 
preserved in the so-called Liber dementis discipuli S. Petri 
{Petri apostoli apocalypsis per Clementem), the late Syrian 
apocalypse of Ezra (Bousset, Antichrist, 45 &c), the Coptic 
(14th) vision of Daniel (in the appendix to Woide's edition of the 
Codex Alexandrinus; Oxford, 1799), the Ethiopian Wisdom of 
the Sibyl, which is closely related to the Tiburtine Sibyl (see 
Basset, Apocryphes elhiopienncs, x.); in the last mentioned of 
these sources long series of Islamic rulers are foretold before the 
final time of Antichrist. Jewish apocalypse also awakes to fresh 
developments in the Mahommedan period, and shows a close 
relationship with the Christian Antichrist literature. One of the 
most interesting apocalypses is the Jewish History of Daniel, 
handed down in Persian. 3 

This whole type of prophecy reached the West above all 
through the Pseudo-Methodius, which was soon translated into 
Latin. Especially influential, too, in this respect was the letter 
which the monk Adso in 954 wrote to Queen Gerberga, De ortu 
et tempore Antichristi. The old Tiburtine Sibylla went through 
edition after edition, in each case being altered so as to apply to 
the government of the monarch who happened to be ruling at the 
time. Then in the West the period arrived in which eschatology, 
and above all the expectation of the coming of Antichrist, 
exercised a great influence on the world's history. This period, 
as is well known, was inaugurated, at the end of the 12th century, 
by the apocalyptic writings of the abbot Joachim of Floris. 
Soon the word Antichrist re-echoed from all sides in the em- 
bittered controversies of the West. The pope bestowed this title 
upon the emperor, the emperor upon the pope, the Guelphs on 
the Ghibellines and the Ghibellines on the Guelphs. In the 
contests between the rival powers and courts of the period, the 
prophecy of Antichrist played a political part. It gave motives to 
art, to lyrical, epic and dramatic poetry. 4 Among the visionary 
Franciscans, enthusiastic adherents of Joachim's prophecies, 
arose above all the conviction that the pope was Antichrist, or at 
least his precursor. From the Franciscans, influenced by Abbot 
Joachim, the lines of connexion are clearly traceable with Milic of 
Kremsier (Libellus de Antichristo) and Matthias of Janow. For 
Wycliffe and his adherent John Purvey (probably the author of 
the Commentarius in Apocalypsin ante centum annos editus, 
edited in 1528 by Luther), as on the other hand for Hus, the 
conviction that the papacy is essentially Antichrist is absolute. 
Finally, if Luther advanced in his contest with the papacy with 
greater and greater energy, he did so because he was borne on by 

1 Latin text by Sackur, cf. op. cit. 1 &c. ; Greek text by V. Istrin. 

2 See Bousset, Zeitschrift fur Kirchengeschichte, xx. p. 289 &c. 

3 Published in Merx, Archiv zur Erforschung des Alten Testament. 
* See especially the Ludus de Antichristo, ed. W. Meyer. 



the conviction that the pope in Rome was Antichrist. And if in 
the Augustana the expression of this conviction was suppressed 
for political reasons, in the Articles of Schmalkalden, drawn up by 
him, Luther propounded it in the most uncompromising fashion. 
This sentence was for him an articulus stantis et cadentis ecdesiae. 
To write the history of the idea of Antichrist in the last centuries 
of the middle ages, would be almost to write that of the middle 
ages themselves. 

Authorities. — See, for the progress of the idea in Jewish and 
New Testament times, the modern commentaries on Revelation 
and the 2nd Epistle to the Thessalonians ; Bousset, Antichrist (1895), 
and the article " Antichrist " in the Encyclop. Biblica; R. H. 
Charles, Ascension of Isaiah, Introduction, li.-lxxiii. For the history 
of the legend of Nero, see J. Geffcken, Nachrichten, der Gottinger 
Gesellschaft der Wissenschaft (1899), p. 446 &c. ; Th. Zahn, Zeitschrift 
fur kirchliche Wissenschaft und kirchliches Leben (1886), p. 337 &c. ; 
Bousset, Kritisch-exegetisches Kommentar zur Offenbarung Johannis, 
cap. 17, and the article " Sibyllen " in Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklo- 
pddie fur Theologie und Kirche (3rd ed.), xviii. 265 &c. ; Nordmeyer, 
Der Tod Neros in der Legende, a Festschrift of the Gymnasium of 
Moos. For the later history of the legend, see Bousset, Antichrist, 
where will be found a more detailed discussion of nearly all the 
sources named; Bousset, " Beitrage zur Geschichte der Eschato- 
logie," in Zeitschrift fur Kirchengeschichte, xx. 2, and especially 
xx. 3, on the later Byzantine prophecies; Vassiliev, Anecdota 
Graeco-Byzantina, i. (Moscow, 1893), which gives the texts of a 
series of Byzantine prophecies; E. Sackur, Sibyllinische Texte und 
Forschungen (1898), containing (1) Pseudo- Methodius, Latin text, (2) 
Epistola Adsonis, (3) the Tiburtine Sibylla; V. Istrin, The Apocalypse 
of Methodius of Patara and the Apocryphal Visions of Daniel in 
Byzantine and Slavo-Russian Literature, Russian (Moscow, 1897); 
J. Kampers, Die deutsche Kaiseridee in Prophetie und Sage (Munich, 
1896), and " Alexander der Grosse und die Idee des Welt- 
imperiums," in H. Grauert's Studien und Darstettungen aus dem 
Gebiet der Geschichte, vol. i. 2-3 (Freiburg, 1901); E. Wadstein, Die 
eschqtologische Ideengruppe, Antichrist, Weltsabbat, Weltende und 
Welgericht (Leipzig, 1896), which contains excellent material for the 
history of the idea in the West during the middle ages; W Meyer; 
" Ludus de Antichristo," in Sitzbericht der Miinchener Akad. (Phil, 
hist. Klasse 1882, H. i.); Kropatschek, Das Schriftprincip der 
lutherischen Kirche, i. 247 &c. (Leipzig, 1904) ; H. Rreuss, Die 
Vorstellungen vom Antichrist im spdteren Miltelalter, beiLuther u. i. d. 
Konfessionellen Polentik (Leipzig, 1906). (W. Bo.) 

ANTICLIMAX (i.e. the opposite to " climax "), in rhetoric, an 
abrupt declension (either deliberate or unintended) on the part 
of a speaker or writer from the dignity of idea which he appeared 
to be aiming at; as in the following well-known distich: — 
" The great Dalhousie, he^ the god of war. 
Lieutenant-colonel to the earl of Mar." 

An anticlimax can be intentionally employed only for a jocular 
or satiric purpose. It frequently partakes of the nature of 
antithesis, as — 

" Die and endow a college or a cat." 
It is often difficult to distinguish between "anticlimax" and 
" bathos "; but the former is more decidedly a relative term. A 
whole speech may never rise above the level of bathos; but a 
climax of greater or less elevation is the necessary antecedent of 
an anticlimax. 

ANTICOSTI, an island of the province of Quebec, Canada, 
situated in the Gulf of St Lawrence, between 49 and 50 N., 
and between 6i° 40' and 64 30' W., with a length of 135 m. and 
a breadth of 30 m. Population 250, consisting chiefly of the 
keepers of the numerous lighthouses erected by the Canadian 
government, The coast is dangerous, and the only two harbours, 
Ellis Bay and Fox Bay, are very indifferent. Anticosti was 
sighted by Jacques Cartier in 1 534, and named Assomption. In 
1763 it was ceded by France to Britain, and in 1774 became part 
of Canada. Wild animals, especially bears, are numerous, but 
prior to 1896 the fish and game had been almost exterminated 
by indiscriminate slaughter. In that year Anticosti and the 
shore fisheries were leased to M. Menier, the French chocolate 
manufacturer, who converted the island into a game preserve, 
and attempted to develop its resources of lumber, peat and 
minerals. 

See Logan, Geological Survey of Canada, Report of Progress from its 
Commencement to 1863 (Montreal, 1863-1865); E. Billings, Geo- 
logical Survey of Canada: Catalogue of the Silurian Fossils of Anti- 
costi (Montreal, 1866); J. Schmitt, Anticosti (Paris, 1904). 



124 



ANTICYCLONE— ANTIGO 



ANTICYCLONE (i.e. opposite to a cyclone), an atmospheric 
system in which there is a descending movement of the air and a 
relative increase in barometric pressure over the part of the 
earth's surface affected by it. At the surface the air tends to 
flow outwards in all directions from the central area of high 
pressure, and is deflected on account of the earth's rotation (see 
Ferrel's Law) so as to give a spiral movement in the direc- 
tion of the hands of a watch face upwards in the northern 
hemisphere, against that direction in the southern hemisphere. 
Since the air in an anticyclone is descending, it becomes warmed 
and dried, and therefore transmits radiation freely whether from 
the sun to the earth or from the earth into space. Hence in 
winter anticyclonic weather is characterized by clear air with 
periods of frost, causing fogs in towns and lew-lying damp areas, 
and in summer by still cloudless days with gentle variable airs 
and fine weather. 

ANTICYRA, the ancient name of three cities of Greece, 
(i) (Mod. Aspraspitia), in Phocis, on the bay of Anticyra, in 
the Corinthian gulf; some remains are still visible. It was a 
town of considerable importance in ancient times; was destroyed 
by Philip of Macedon; recovered its prosperity; and was cap- 
tured by T. Quinctius Flamininus in 198 B.C. The city was 
famous for its black hellebore, a herb which was regarded as 
a cure for insanity. This circumstance gave rise to a number 
of proverbial expressions, like 'Avrucipas at Set or " naviget 
Anticyram," and to frequent allusions in the Greek and Latin 
writers. Hellebore was likewise considered beneficial in cases 
of gout and epilepsy. (2) In Thessaly, on the right bank of 
the river Spercheus, near its mouth. (3) In Locris, on the north 
side of the entrance to the Corinthian gulf, near Naupactus. 

ANTIETAM, the name of a Maryland creek, near which, on the 
i6th-i7th of September 1862, was fought the battle of Antietam 
or Sharpsburg (see American Civil War), between the 
Federals under McClellan and the Confederates commanded 
by Lee. General McClellan had captured the passes of South 
Mountain farther east on the 14th, and his Army of the Potomac 
marched to meet Lee : s forces which, hitherto divided, had, by 
the 16th, successfully concentrated between the Antietam and 
the Potomac. The Confederate Army of Northern Virginia 
occupied a position which, in relation to the surrounding country, 
may be compared to the string of a bow in the act of being 
drawn, Lee's left wing forming the upper half of the string, his 
right the lower, and the Potomac in his rear the bow itself. 
The town of Sharpsburg represents the fingers of the archer 
drawing the bow. The right wing of the position was covered 
by the Antietam as it approaches the Potomac, the upper course 
of that stream formed no part of the battlefield. Generals 
Longstreet and Jackson commanded the right and left wings. 
The division of A. P. Hill was at Harper's Ferry, but had received 
orders to rejoin Lee. McClellan's troops appeared late on the 
16th, and Hooker was immediately sent across the upper Antie- 
tam. He had a sharp fight with Jackson's men, but night soon 
put an end to the contest. Early on the 19th the corps of Sumner 
and Mansfield followed Hooker across the upper stream whilst 
McClellan's left wing (Burnside's corps) drew up opposite Lee's 
extreme right. The Federal leader intended to hold back his 
centre whilst these two forces were rolling up Lee's wings. The 
battle began with a furious assault on the extreme right by 
Hooker's corps. After a very severe struggle he was repulsed 
with the loss of a quarter of his men, Jackson's divisions suffering 
even more severely and losing nearly all their generals and 
colonels. It was only the arrival of Hood and D. H. Hill which 
enabled Stonewall Jackson's corps to hold its ground, and had 
the other Federal corps been at hand to support Hooker the 
result might have been very different. Mansfield next attacked 
farther to the left and with better fortune. Mansfield was killed, 
but his successor led the corps well, and after heavy fighting 
Hood and D. H. Hill were driven back. Again want of support 
checked the Federals and the fight became stationary, both 
sides losing many men. Sumner now came into action, and 
overhaste involved him in a catastrophe, his troops being attacked 
in front and flank and driven back in great confusion with nearly 



half their number killed and wounded; and their retreat in- 
volved the gallant remnants of Mansfield's corps. Soon after- 
wards the Federal divisions of French and Richardson attacked 
D. H. Hill, whose men were now exhausted by continuous 
fighting. Here occurred the fighting in the "Bloody Lane," 
north of Sharpsburg which French and Richardson eventually 
carried. Opposed as they were by D. H. Hill, whose men had 
fought the battle of South Mountain and had already been 
three times engaged & fond on this day, proper support must 
have enabled the Federals to crush Lee's centre, but Franklin 
and Porter in reserve were not allowed by McClellan to move 
forward and the opportunity passed. Burnside, on the southern 
wing, had received his orders late, and acted on them still later. 
The battle was over on the right before he fired a shot, and Lee 
had been able to use nearly all his right wing troops to support 
Jackson. At last Burnside moved forward, and, after a brilliant 
defence by the handful of men left to oppose him, forced the 
Antietam and began to roll up Lee's right, only to be attacked 
in rear himself by A. P. Hill's troops newly arrived from Harper's 
Ferry. The repulse of Burnside ended the battle. Pressure was 
brought, to bear on McClellan to renew the fight, but he refused 
and Lee retired across the Potomac unmolested. The Army of 
the Potomac had lost 11,832 men out of 46,000 engaged; the 
cavalry and two corps in reserve had only lost 578. Lee's 31,200 
men lost over 8000 of their number. 

See the bibliography appended to American Civil War, and also 
General Palfrey's Antietam and Fredericksburg. 

ANTI-FEDERALISTS, the name given in the political history 
of the United States to those who, after the formation of the 
federal Constitution of 1 7 8 7 , opposed its ratification by the people 
of the several states. The " party " (though it was never 
regularly organized as such) was composed of statesrights, 
particularistic, individualistic and radical democratic elements; 
that is, of those persons who thought that a stronger govern- 
ment threatened the sovereignty and prestige of the states', 
or the special interests, individual of commercial, of localities, 
or the liberties of individuals, or who fancied they saw in the 
government proposed a new centralized, disguised " monarchic " 
power that would only replace the cast-off despotism of Great 
Britain. In every state the opposition to the Constitution was 
strong, and in two—North Carolina and Rhode Island — it 
prevented ratification until the definite establishment of the 
new government practically forced their adhesion. The in- 
dividualistic was the strongest element of opposition; the 
necessity, or at least the desirability, of a bill of rights was almost 
universally felt. Instead of accepting the Constitution upon the 
condition of amendments, — in which way they might very 
likely have secured large concessions, — the Anti-Federalists 
stood for unconditional rejection, and public opinion, which 
went against them, proved that for all its shortcomings the 
Constitution was regarded as preferable to the Articles of Con- 
federation. After the inauguration of the new government, 
the composition of the Anti-Federalist party changed. The 
Federalist (q.v.) party gradually showed broad-construction, 
nationalistic tendencies; the Anti-Federalist party became 
a strict-construction party and advocated popular rights against 
the asserted aristocratic, centralizing tendencies of its opponent, 
and gradually was transformed into the Democratic-Republican 
party, mustered and led by Thomas Jefferson, who, however, 
had approved the ratification of the Constitution and was not, 
therefore, an Anti-Federalist in the original sense of that term. 

See O. G. Libby, Geographical Distribution of the Vote . . . on the 
Federal Constitution, 1787-1788 (University of Wisconsin, Bulletin, 
1894) '• S. B. Harding, Contest over the Ratification of the Federal 
Constitution in . . . Massachusetts (Harvard University Studies, 
New York, 1896) ; and authorities on political and constitutional 
history in the article United States. 

ANTIGO, a city and the county-seat of Langlade county, 
Wisconsin, U.S.A., about 160 m. N.W. of Milwaukee. ' Pop. 
(1890) 4424; (1900) 5145, of whom 965 were foreign-born; 
(1905) 6663; (1910) 7196. It is served by the Chicago & North 
Western railway. Antigo is the centre of a good farming and 
lumbering district, and its manufactures consist principally of 



ANTIGONE— ANTIGONUS OF CARYSTUS 



"5 



lumber,chairs,furniture,sashes,doors and blinds, hubs and spokes, 
and other wood products. The city has a Carnegie library. 
Antigo was first settled in 1880, and was chartered as a city in 
1885. Its name is said to be part of an Indian word, neequee- 
antigo-sebi, meaning " evergreen." 

ANTIGONE. (1) in Greek legend, daughter of Oedipus and 
Iocaste (Jocasta), or, according to the older story, of Euryganeia. 
When her father, on discovering that Iocaste, the mother of his 
children, was also his own mother, put his eyes out and resigned 
the throne of Thebes, she accompanied him into exile at Colonus. 
After his death she returned to Thebes, where Haemon, the son 
of Creon, king of Thebes, became enamoured of her. When her 
brothers Eteocles and Polyneices had slain each other in single 
combat, she buried Polyneices, although Creon had forbidden it. 
As a punishment she was sentenced to be buried alive in a vault, 
where she hanged herself, and Haemon killed himself in despair. 
Her character and these incidents of her life presented an attrac- 
tive subject to the Greek tragic poets, especially Sophocles in the 
Antigone and Oedipus at Colonus, and Euripides, whose Antigone, 
though now lost, is partly known from extracts incidentally 
preserved in later writers, and from passages in his Phoenissae. 
In the order of the events, at least, Sophocles departed from the 
original legend, according to which the burial of Polyneices took 
place while Oedipus was yet in Thebes, not after he had died at 
Colonus. Again, in regard to Antigone's tragic end Sophocles 
differs from Euripides, according to whom the calamity was 
averted by the intercession of Dionysus and was followed by the 
marriage of Antigone and Haemon. In Hyginus's version of the 
legend, founded apparently on a tragedy by some follower of 
Euripides, Antigone, on being handed over by Creon to her 
lover Haemon to be slain, was secretly carried off by him, and 
concealed in a shepherd's hut, where she bore him a son Maeon. 
When the boy grew up, he went to some funeral games at Thebes, 
and was recognized by the mark of a dragon on his body. This 
led to the discovery that Antigone was still alive. Heracles 
pleaded in vain with Creon for Haemon, who slew both Antigone 
and himself, to escape his father's vengeance. On a painted vase 
the scene of the intercession of Heracles is represented (Heyder- 
mann, Uber eine nacheuripideische Antigone, 1868). Antigone 
placing the body of Polyneices on the funeral pile occurs on a 
sarcophagus in the villa Pamfili in Rome, and is mentioned in 
the description of an' ancient painting by Philostratus (Imag. ii. 
29), who states that the flames consuming the two brothers burnt 
apart, indicating their unalterable hatred, even in death. 

(2) A second Antigone was the daughter of Eurytion, king of 
Phthia, and wife of Peleus. Her husband, having accidentally 
killed Eurytion in the Calydonian boar hunt, fled and obtained 
expiation from Acastus, whose wife made advances to Peleus. 
Finding that her affection was not returned, she falsely accused 
Peleus of infidelity to his wife, who thereupon hanged herself 
(Apollodorus, iii. 13). 

ANTIGONUS CYCLOPS (or Monopthalmos ; so called from 
his having lost an eye) (382-301 B.C.), Macedonian king, son of 
Philip, was one of the generals of Alexander the Great. He was 
made governor of Greater Phrygia in 333, and in the division of 
the provinces after Alexander's death (323) Pamphylia and 
Lycia were added to his command. He incurred the enmity of 
Perdiccas, the regent, by refusing to assist Eumenes (q.v.) to 
obtain possession of the provinces allotted to him. In danger 
of his life he escaped with his son Demetrius into Greece, where 
he obtained the favour of Antipater, regent of Macedonia (321) ; 
and when, soon after, on the death of Perdiccas, a new division 
took place, he was entrusted with the command of the war against 
Eumenes, who had joined Perdiccas against the coalition of 
Antipater, Antigonus, and the other generals. Eumenes was 
completely defeated, and obliged to retire to Nora in Cappadocia, 
and a new army that was marching to his relief was routed by 
Antigonus. Polyperchon succeeding Antipater (d. 319) in the 
regency, to the exclusion of Cassander, his son, Antigonus 
resolved to set himself up as lord of all Asia, and in conjunction 
with Cassander and Ptolemy of Egypt, refused to recognize 
Polyperchon. He entered into negotiations with Eumenes; but 



Eumenes remained faithful to the royal house. Effecting his 
escape from Nora, he raised an army, and formed a coalition 
with the satraps of the eastern provinces. He was at last 
delivered up to Antigonus through treachery in Persia and put 
to death (316). Antigonus again claimed authority over the 
whole of Asia, seized the treasures at Susa, and entered Baby- 
lonia, of which Seleucus was governor. Seleucus fled to Ptolemy, 
and entered into a league with him (315), together with Lysi- 
machus and Cassander. After the war had been carried on 
with varying success from 315 to 311, peace was concluded, by 
which the government of Asia Minor and Syria was provisionally 
secured to Antigonus. This agreement was soon violated on the 
pretext that garrisons had been placed in some of the free Greek 
cities by Antigonus, and Ptolemy and Cassander renewed 
hostilities against him. Demetrius Poliorcetes, the son of 
Antigonus, wrested part of Greece from Cassander. At first 
Ptolemy had made a successful descent upon Asia Minor and on 
several of the islands of the Archipelago; but he was at length 
totally defeated by Demetrius in a naval engagement off Salamis, 
in Cyprus (306). On this victory Antigonus assumed the title 
of king, and bestowed the same upon his son, a declaration that 
he claimed to be the heir of Alexander. Antigonus now prepared 
a large army, and a formidable fleet, the command of which he 
gave to Demetrius, and hastened to attack Ptolemy in his own 
dominions. His invasion of Egypt, however, proved a failure; 
he was unable to penetrate the defences of Ptolemy, and was 
obliged to retire. Demetrius now attempted the reduction of 
Rhodes, which had refused to assist Antigonus against Egypt; 
but, meeting with obstinate resistance, he was obliged to make 
a treaty upon the best terms that he could (304). In 302, 
although Demetrius was again winning success after success in 
Greece, Antigonus was obliged to recall him to meet the con- 
federacy that had been formed between Cassander, Seleucus 
and Lysimachus. A decisive battle was fought at Ipsus, in 
which Antigonus fell, in the eighty-first year of his age. 

Diodorus Siculus xviii., xx. 46-86; Plutarch, Demetrius, Eumenes; 
Nepos, Eumenes; Justin xv. 1-4. See Macedonian Empire; and 
Kohler, " Das Reich des Antigonos," in the Sitzungsberichte d. Berl. 
Akad., 1898, p. 835 f. 

ANTIGONUS GONATAS (c. 319-239 B.C.), Macedonian king, 
was the son of Demetrius Poliorcetes, and grandson of Antigonus 
Cyclops. On the death of his father (283), he assumed the title 
of king of Macedonia, but did not obtain possession of the throne 
till 276, after it had been successively in the hands of Pyrrhus, 
Lysimachus, Seleucus, and Ptolemy Ceraunus. Antigonus 
repelled the invasion of the Gauls, and continued in undisputed 
possession of Macedonia till 274, when Pyrrhus returned from 
Italy, and (in 273) made himself master of nearly all the country. 
On the advance of Pyrrhus into Peloponnesus, he recovered his 
dominions. He was again (between 263 and 255) driven out of 
his kingdomby Alexander, the son of Pyrrhus, and again recovered 
it. The latter part of his reign was comparatively peaceful, and 
he gained the affection of his subjects by his honesty and his 
cultivation of the arts. He gathered round him distinguished 
literary men — philosophers, poets, and historians. He died in 
the eightieth year of his age, and the forty-fourth of his reign. 
His surname was usually derived by later Greek writers from 
the name of his supposed birthplace, Gonni (Gonnus) in Thessaly; 
some take it to be a Macedonian word signifying an iron plate for 
protecting the knee; neither conjecture is a happy one, and in 
our ignorance of the Macedonian language it must remain 
unexplained. 

Plutarch, Demetrius, Pyrrhus, Aratus; Justin xxiv. 1; xxv. 1-3; 
Polybius ii. 43-45, ix. 29, 34. See Thirlwall, History of Greece, vol 
viii. (1847); Holm, Griech. Gesch. vol. iv. (1894); Niese, Gesch. d. 
griech. u. maked. Staaten, vols. i. and ii. (1893, 1899); Beloch, Griech. 
Gesch. vol. iii. (1904) ; also Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Antigonos von 
Karystos (1881). 

ANTIGONUS OF CARYSTUS (in Euboea), Greek writer on 
various subjects, flourished in the 3rd century B.C. After some 
time spent at Athens and in travelling, he was summoned to 
the court of Attalus I. (241-197) of Pergamum. His chief work 
was the Lives of Philosophers drawn from personal knowledge, 
of which considerable fragments are preserved in Athenaeus 



126 



ANTIGUA^ANTILOCHUS 



and Diogenes Laertius. We still possess his Collection of Wonder- 
ful Tales, chiefly extracted from the Qav/xacna 'XKovaiiara. 
attributed to Aristotle and the Qav/iaaui of Callimachus. It 
is doubtful whether he is identical with the sculptor who, accord- 
ing to Pliny {Nat. Hist, xxxiv. 19), wrote books on his art. 

Text in Keller, Rerum Naturalium Scriptores Graeci Minores, i. 
(1877); see Kopke, De Antigono Carystio (1862); Wilaroowitz- 
Mollendorff, " A. von Karystos," in Philologische Untersuchungen, iv. 
(1881). 

ANTIGUA, an island in the British West Indies, forming, 
with Barbuda and Redonda, one of the five presidencies in the 
colony of the Leeward Islands. It lies 50 m. E. of St Kitts, 
in 1 7 6' N. and 61° 45' W., and is 54 m. in circumference, with 
an area of 108 sq. m. The surface is comparatively flat, and 
there is no central range of mountains as in most other West 
Indian islands, but among the hills in the south-west an elevation 
of 1328 ft. is attained. Owing to the absence of rivers, the 
paucity of springs, and the almost complete deforestation, 
Antigua is subject to frequent droughts, and although the average 
rainfall is 45-6 in., the variations from year to year are great. 
The dryness of the air proves very beneficial to persons suffering 
from pulmonary complaints. The high rocky coast is much 
indented by bays and arms of the sea, several of which form 
excellent harbours, that of St John being safe and commodious, 
but inferior to English Harbour, which, although little frequented, 
is capable of receiving vessels of the largest size. The soil, 
especially in the interior, is very fertile. Sugar and pineapples are 
the chief products for export, but sweet potatoes, yams, maize 
and guinea corn are grown for local consumption. Antigua is 
the residence of the governor of the Leeward Islands, and the 
meeting place of the general legislative council, but there is also 
a local legislative council of 16 members, half official and half 
unofficial. Until 1898, when the Grown Colony system was 
adopted, the legislative council was partly elected, partly 
nominated. Elementary education is compulsory. Agricultural 
training is given under government control, and the Cambridge 
local examinations and those of the University of London are 
held annually. Antigua is the see of a bishop of the Church 
of England, the members of which predominate here, but 
Moravians and Wesleyans are numerous. There is a small 
volunteer defence force. The island has direct steam com- 
munication with Great Britain, the United States and Canada, 
and is also served by the submarine cable. The three chief 
towns are St John, Falmouth and Parham. St John (pop. 
about 10,000), the capital, situated on the north-west, is an 
exceedingly picturesque town, built on an eminence overlooking 
one of the most beautiful harbours in the West Indies. Although 
both Falmouth and Parham have good harbours, most of the 
produce of the island finds its way to St John for shipment. 
The trade is chiefly with the United States, and the main exports 
are sugar, molasses, logwood, tamarinds, turtles, and pineapples. 
The cultivation of cotton has been introduced with success, and 
this also is exported. The dependent islands of Barbuda and 
Redonda have an area of 62 sq. m. Pop. of Antigua (1001), 
34,178; of the presidency, 35,073. 

Antigua was discovered in 1493 by Columbus, who is said 
to have named it after a church in Seville, called Santa Maria 
la Antigua. It remained, however, uninhabited until 1632, 
when a body of English settlers took possession of it, and in 1663 
another settlement of the same nation was effected under the 
direction of Lord Willoughby, to whom the entire island was 
granted by Charles II. It was ravaged by the French in 1666, 
but was soon after reconquered by the British and formally 
restored to them by the treaty of Breda. Since then it has been 
a British possession. 

ANTILEGOMENA (avTiXeyoiitva, contradicted or disputed), 
an epithet used by the early Christian writers to denote those 
books of the New Testament which, although sometimes publicly 
read in the churches, were not for a considerable time admitted 
to be genuine, or received into the canon of Scripture. They 
were thus contrasted with the Homologoumena, or universally 
acknowledged writings. Eusebius (Hist. Eccl. iii. 25) applies 



the term Antilegomena to the Epistle of James, the Epistle 0/ 
Jude, 2 Peter, 2 and 3 John, the Acts of Paul, the Shepherd 
of Hermas, the Teaching of the Apostles, the Apocalypse of 
John, and the Gospel according to the Hebrews. In later usage 
it describes those of the New Testament books which have 
obtained a doubtful place in the Canon. These are the Epistles 
of James and Jude, 2 Peter, 2 and 3 John, the Apocalypse of 
John, and the Epistle to the Hebrews. 

ANTILIA or Antillia, sometimes called the Island of the 
Seven Cities (Portuguese Isla das Sete Cidades), a legendary 
island in the Atlantic ocean. The origin of the name is quite 
uncertain. The oldest suggested etymology (1455) fancifully 
connects it with the name of the Platonic Atlantis, while later 
writers have endeavoured to derive it from the Latin anterior 
{i.e. the island that is reached " before " Cipango), or from the 
Jezirat al Tennyn, " Dragon's Isle," of the Arabian geographers. 
Antilia is marked in an anonymous mapwhich is dated 1424 and 
preserved in the grand-ducal library at Weimar. It reappears 
in the maps of the Genoese B. Beccario or Beccaria (1435), 
and of the Venetian Andrea Bianco (1436), and again in 1455 
and 1476. In most of these it is accompanied by the smaller 
and equally legendary islands of Royllo, St Atanagio, and Tanmar, 
the whole group being classified as insulae de novo reperiae, 
" newly discovered islands." The Florentine Paul Toscanelli, 
in his letters to Columbus and the Portuguese court (1474), 
takes Antilia as the principal landmark for measuring the 
distance between Lisbon and the island of Cipango or Zipangu 
(Japan). One of the chief early descriptions of Antilia is that 
inscribed on the globe which the geographer Martin Behainvmade 
at Nuremberg in 1492 (see Map: History). Behaim relates that 
in 734— a date which is probably a misprint for 714 — and after 
the Moors had conquered Spain and Portugal, the island of 
Antilia or " Septe Cidade " was colonized by Christian refugees 
under the archbishop of Oporto and six bishops. The inscription 
adds that a Spanish vessel sighted the island in 1414. According 
to an old Portuguese tradition each of the seven leaders founded 
and ruled a city, and the whole island became a Utopian common- 
wealth, free from the disorders of less favoured states. Later 
Portuguese tradition localized Antilia in the island of St Michael's, 
the largest of the Azores. It is impossible to estimate how far 
this legend commemorates some actual but imperfectly recorded 
discovery, and how far it is a reminiscence of the ancient idea 
of an elysium in the western seas which is embodied in the 
legends of the Isles of the Blest or Fortunate Islands. 

ANTILLES, a term of somewhat doubtful origin, now generally 
used, especially by foreign writers, as synonymous with the 
expression " West India Islands." Like " Brazil," it dates 
from a period anterior to the discovery of the New World, 
" Antilia," as stated above, being one of those mysterious 
lands, which figured on the medieval charts sometimes as an 
archipelago, sometimes as continuous land of greater or lesser 
extent, constantly fluctuating in mid-ocean between the Canaries 
and East India. But it came at last to be identified with the 
land discovered by Columbus. Later, when this was found to 
consist of a vast archipelago enclosing the Caribbean Sea and 
Gulf of Mexico, Antilia assumed its present plural form, Antilles, 
which was collectively applied to the whole of this archipelago. 

A distinction is made between the Greater Antilles, including 
Cuba, Jamaica, Haiti, and Porto Rico; and the Lesser Antilles, 
covering the remainder of the islands. 

ANTILOCHUS, in Greek legend, son of Nestor, king of Pylos. 
One of the suitors of Helen, he accompanied his father to the 
Trojan War. He was distinguished for his beauty, swiftness of 
foot, and skill as a charioteer; though the youngest among the 
Greek princes, he commanded the Pylians in the war, and 
performed many deeds of valour. He was a favourite of the 
gods, and an intimate friend of Achilles, to whom he was com- 
missioned to announce the death of Patroclus. When his father 
was attacked by Memnon, he saved his life at the sacrifice of his 
own (Pindar, Pyth. vi. 28), thus fulfilling an oracle which had 
bidden him " beware of an Ethiopian." His death was avenged 
by Achilles. According to other accounts, he was slain by 



ANTIMACASSAR— ANTIMONY 



127 



Hector (Hyginus, Fab. 113), or by Paris in the temple of the 
Thymbraean Apollo together with Achilles (Dares Phrygius 34). 
His ashes, with those of Achilles and Patroclus, were deposited 
in a mound on the promontory of Sigeum, where the inhabitants 
of Ilium offered sacrifice to the dead heroes (Odyssey, xxiv. 72; 
Strabo xiii. p. 596). In the Odyssey (xi. 468) the three friends 
are represented as united in the underworld and walking together 
in the fields of asphodel; according to Pausanias (iii. 19) they 
dwell together in the island of Leuke. 

ANTIMACASSAR, a separate covering for the back of a chair, 
or the head or cushions of a sofa, to prevent soiling of the perma- 
nent fabric. The name is attributable to the unguent for the 
hair commonly used in the early 19th century, — Byron calls it 
" thine incomparable oil, Macassar." The original antimacassar 
was almost invariably made of white crochet-work, very stiff, 
hard, and uncomfortable, but in the third quarter of the 19th 
century it became simpler and less inartistic, and was made of 
soft coloured stuffs, usually worked with a simple pattern in 
tinted wools or silk. 

ANTIMACHUS, of Colophon or Claros, Greek poet and gram- 
marian, flourished about 400 B.C. Scarcely anything is known 
of his life. His poetical efforts were not generally appreciated, 
although he received encouragement from his younger con- 
temporary Plato (Plutarch, Lysander, 18). His chief works 
were: a long-winded epic Thebais, an account of the expedition 
of the Seven against Thebes and the war of the Epigoni; and 
an elegiac poem Lyde, so called from the poet's mistress, for 
whose death he endeavoured to find consolation by ransacking 
mythology for stories of unhappy love affairs (Plutarch, Consol. ad 
Apoll. 9; Athenaeus xiii. 597). Antimachus was the founder 
of "learned" epic poetry, and the forerunner of the Alexandrian 
school, whose critics allotted him the next place to Homer. He 
also prepared a critical recension of the Homeric poems. 

Fragments, ed. Stoll (1845); Bergk, Poetae Lyrici Craeci (1882); 
Kinkel, Fragmenta epicorum Graecorum (1877). 

ANTI-MASONIC PARTY, an American political organization 
which had its rise after the mysterious disappearance, in 1826, 
of William Morgan (c. 1776-c. 1826), a Freemason of Batavia, 
New York, who had become dissatisfied with his Order and had 
planned to publish its secrets. When his purpose became known 
to the Masons, Morgan was subjected to frequent annoyances, 
and finally in September 1826 he was seized and surreptitiously 
conveyed to Fort Niagara, whence he disappeared. Though his 
ultimate fate was never known, it was generally believed at the 
time that he had been foully dealt with. The event created 
great excitement, and led many to believe that Masonry and 
good citizenship were incompatible. Opposition to Masonry 
was taken up by the churches as a sort of religious crusade, and 
it also became a local political issue in western New York, where 
early in 1827 the citizens in many mass meetings resolved to 
support no Mason for public office. In New York at this time 
the National Republicans, or " Adams men," were a very feeble 
organization, and shrewd political leaders at once determined 
to utilize the strong anti-Masonic feeling in creating a new and 
vigorous party to oppose the rising Jacksonian Democracy. In 
this effort they were aided by the fact that Jackson was a high 
Mason and frequently spoke in praise of the Order. In the 
elections of 1828 the new party proved unexpectedly strong, and 
after this year it practically superseded the National Republican 
party in New York. In 1829 the hand of its leaders was shown, 
when, in addition to its antagonism to the Masons, it became 
a champion of internal improvements and of the protective tariff. 
From New York the movement spread into other middle states 
and into New England, and became especially strong in Pennsyl- 
vania and Vermont. A national organization was planned as 
early as 1827, when the New York leaders attempted, unsuccess- 
fully, to persuade Henry Clay, though a Mason, to renounce the 
Order and head the movement. In September 183 1 the party 
at a national convention in Baltimore nominated as its candidates 
for the presidency and vice-presidency William Wirt of Maryland 
and Amos Ellmaker (1 787-1 851) of Pennsylvania; and in the 
election of the following year it secured the seven electoral votes 



of the state of Vermont. This was the high tide of its prosperity; 
in New York in 1833 the organization was moribund, and its 
members gradually united with other opponents of Jacksonian 
Democracy in forming the Whig party. In other states, however, 
the party survived somewhat longer, but by 1836 most of its 
members had united with the Whigs. Its last act in national 
politics was to nominate William Henry Harrison for president 
and John Tyler for vice-president at a convention in Philadelphia 
in November 1838. 

The growth of the anti-Masonic movement was due to the 
political and social conditions of the time rather than to the 
Morgan episode, which was merely the torch that ignited the 
train. Under the name of " Anti-Masons " able leaders united 
those who were discontented with existing political conditions, 
and the fact that William Wirt, their choice for the presidency 
in 1832, was not only a Mason but even defended the Order in a 
speech before the convention that nominated him, indicates 
that simple opposition to Masonry soon became a minor factor 
in holding together the various elements of which the party was 
composed. 

See Charles McCarthy, The Anlimasonic Party: A Study of 
Political Anti-Masonry in the United States, 1827-1840, in the Report 
of the American Historical Association for 1902 (Washington, 1903) ; 
the Autobiography of Thurlow Weed (2 vols., Boston, 1884); A. G. 
Mackey and W. R. Singleton, The History of Freemasonry, vol. vi. 
(New York, 1898) ; and J. D. Hammond, History of Political Parties 
in th-e Slate of New York (2 vols., Albany, 1842). 

ANTIMONY (symbol Sb, atomic weight 120-2), one of the 
metallic chemical elements, included in the same natural family 
of the elements as nitrogen, phosphorus, arsenic, and bismuth. 
Antimony, in the form of its sulphide, has been known from very 
early times, more especially in Eastern countries, reference to 
it being made in the Old Testament. The Arabic name for the 
naturally occurring stibnite is " kohl "; Dioscorides mentions it 
under the term cri^/it, Pliny as stibium; and Geber as antimonium. 
By the German writers it is called Speissglanz. Basil Valentine 
alludes to it in his Triumphal Car of Antimony (circa 1600), and 
at a later date describes the preparation of the metal. 

Native mineral antimony is occasionally found, and as such 
was first recognized in 1748. It usually occurs as lamellar or 
glanular masses, with a tin-white colour and metallic lustre, in 
limestone or in mineral veins often in association with ores of 
silver. Distinct crystals are rarely met with; these are rhombo- 
hedral and isomorphous with arsenic and bismuth; they have 
a perfect cleavage parallel to the basal plane, c (in), and are 
sometimes twinned on a rhombohedral plane, e (no). Hardness 
3~3i> specific gravity 6-65-6-72. Sala in Sweden, Allemont in 
Dauphine, and Sarawak in Borneo may be mentioned as some of 
the localities for this mineral. 

Antimony, however, occurs chiefly as the sulphide, stibnite; 
to a much smaller extent it occurs in combination with other 
metallic sulphides in the minerals wolfsbergite, boulangerite, 
bournonite, pyrargyrite, &c. For the preparation of metallic 
antimony the crude stibnite is first liquated, to free it from 
earthy and siliceous matter, and is then roasted in order to 
convert it into oxide. After oxidation, the product is reduced by 
heating with carbon, care being taken to prevent any loss through 
volatilization, by covering the mass with a layer of some protective 
substance such as potash, soda or glauber salt, which also aids 
the refining. For rich ores the method of roasting the sulphide 
with metallic iron is sometimes employed; carbon and salt or 
sodium sulphate being used to slag the iron. Electrolytic 
methods, in which a solution of antimony sulphide in sodium 
sulphide is used as the electrolyte, have been proposed (see 
German Patent 67973, an d also Borcher's Electro-Metallurgie), 
but do not yet appear to have been used on the large scale. 

Antimony combines readily with many other metals to form 
alloys, some of which find extensive application in the arts. 
Type-metal is an alloy of lead with antimony and tin, to which 
occasionally a small quantity of copper or zinc is added. The 
presence of the antimony in this alloy gives to it hardness, and 
the property of expanding on solidification, thus allowing a sharp 
cast of the letter to be taken. An alloy of tin and antimony forms 



128 



ANTIMONY 



the basis of Britannia-metal, small quantities of copper, lead, 
zinc or bismuth being added. It is a white metal of bluish 
tint and is malleable and ductile. For the linings of brasses, 
various white metals are used, these being alloys of copper, 
antimony and tin, and occasionally lead. 

Antimony is a silvery white, crystalline, brittle metal, and has 
a high lustre. Its specific gravity varies from 6-7 to 6-86; it 
melts at 43 2° C. (Dalton), and boils between 1090-1600° C. 
(T. Carnelley), or above 1300° (V. Meyer), Its specific heat is 
0-0523 (H. Kopp). The vapour density of antimony at 1572° C. 
is 10-74, and at 1640° C. 9-78 (V. Meyer, Berichte, 1889, 22, p. 725), 
so that the antimony molecule is less complex than the molecules 
of the elements phosphorus and arsenic. An amorphous modifica- 
tion of antimony can be prepared by heating the metal in a 
stream of nitrogen, when it condenses in the cool part of the 
apparatus as a grey powder of specific gravity 6-22, melting at 
614° C. and containing 98-99% of antimony (F. Herard, Comptes 
Rendus, 1888, cvii. 420). 

Another form of the metal, known as explosive antimony, was 
discovered by G. Gore (Phil. Trans., 1858, p. 185; 1859, p. 797; 
1862, p. 623), on electrolysing a solution of antimony trichloride 
in hydrochloric acid, using a positive pole of antimony and a 
negative pole of copper or platinum wire. It has a specific 
gravity of 5-78 and always contains some unaltered antimony 
trichloride (from 6 to 20%, G. Gore). It is very unstable, a 
scratch causing it instantaneously to pass into the stable form 
with explosive violence and the development of much heat. 
Similar phenomena are exhibited in the electrolysis of solutions 
of antimony tribromide and tri-iodide, the product obtained 
from the tribromide having a specific gravity of 5-4, and con- 
taining 18-20% of antimony tribromide, whilst that from the 
tri-iodide has a specific gravity of 5-2-5-8 and contains about 22 % 
of hydriodic acid and antimony tri-iodide. 

The atomic weight of antimony has been determined by 
the analysis of the chloride, bromide and iodide. J. P. Cooke 
(Proc. Amer. Acad., 1878, xiii. 1) and J. Bongartz {Berichte, 1883, 
16, p. 1942) obtained the value 120, whilstF. Pfeiffer (Ann. Chim. 
el Phys. ccix. 173) obtained the value 121 from the electrolysis 
of the chloride. 

Pure antimony is quite permanent in air at ordinary tempera- 
tures, but when heated in air or oxygen it burns, forming the 
trioxide. It decomposes steam at a red heat, and burns 
(especially when finely powdered)in chlorine. Dilute hydrochloric 
acid is without action on it, but on warming with the concentrated 
acid, antimony trichloride is formed; it dissolves in warm 
concentrated sulphuric acid, the sulphate Sb 2 (S0 4 ) 3 being formed. 
Nitric acid oxidizes antimony either to the trioxide Sb 4 0e or 
the pentoxide Sb 2 5 , the product obtained depending on the 
temperature and concentration of the acid. It combines directly 
with sulphur and phosphorus, and is readily oxidized when heated 
with metallic oxides (such as litharge, mercuric oxide, manganese 
dioxide, &c). Antimony and its salts may be readily detected 
by the orange precipitate of antimony sulphide which is produced 
when sulphuretted hydrogen is passed through theiracid solutions, 
and also by the Marsh test (see Arsenic); in this latter case 
the black stain produced is not soluble in bleaching powder 
solution. Antimony compounds when heated on charcoal with 
sodium carbonate in the reducing flame give brittle beads of 
metallic antimony, and a white incrustation of the oxide. The 
antimonious compounds are decomposed on addition of water, 
with formation of basic salts. 

Antimony may be estimated quantitatively by conversion into 
the sulphide; the precipitate obtained is dried at 100° C. and 
heated in a current of carbon dioxide, or it may be converted 
into the tetroxide by nitric acid. 

Antimony, like phosphorus and arsenic, combines directly 
with hydrogen. The compound formed, antimoniuretted 
hydrogen or stibine, SbH 3 , may also be prepared by the action 
of hydrochloric acid on an alloy of antimony and zinc, or by the 
action of nascent hydrogen on antimony compounds. As pre- 
pared by these methods it contains a relatively large amount of 
hydrogen, from which it can be freed by passing through a tube 



immersed in liquid air, when it condenses to a white solid. It is 
a poisonous colourless gas, with a characteristic offensive smell. 
In its general behaviour it resembles arsine, burning with a violet 
flame and being decomposed by heat into its constituent elements. 
When passed into silver nitrate solution it gives a black precipitate 
of silver antimonide, SbAg 3 . It is decomposed by the halogen 
elements and also by sulphuretted hydrogen. All three hydrogen 
atoms are replaceable by organic radicals and the resulting 
compounds combine with compounds of the type RC1, RBr and 
Rl.to form stibonium compounds. 

There are three known oxides of antimony, the trioxide Sb 4 0« 
which is capable of combining with both acids and bases to form 
salts, the tetroxide Sb 2 4 and the pentoxide SbjOj. Antimony tri- 
oxide occurs as the minerals valentinite and senarmontite, and can 
be artificially prepared by burning antimony in air; by heating the 
metal in steam to a bright red heat; by oxidizing melted antimony 
with litharge ; by decomposing antimony trichloride with an aqueous 
solution of sodium carbonate, or by the action of dilute nitric acid 
on the metal. It is a white powder, almost insoluble in water, and 
when volatilized, condenses in two crystalline forms, either octa- 
hedral or prismatic. It is insoluble in sulphuric and nitric acids, but 
is readily soluble in hydrochloric and tartaric acids and in solutions 
of the caustic alkalies. On strongly heating in air it is converted 
into the tetroxide. The corresponding hydroxide, orthoantimonious 
acid, Sb(OH) 3 , can be obtained in a somewhat impure form by precipi- 
tating tartar emetic with dilute sulphuric acid ; or better by decom- 
posing antimony! tartaric acid with sulphuric acid and drying the 
Erecipitated white powder at 100° C. Antimony tetroxide is formed 
y strongly heating either the trioxide or pentoxide. It is a non- 
volatile white powder, and has a specific gravity of 6-6952; it is 
insoluble in water and almost so in acids — concentrated hydrochloric 
acid dissolving a small quantity. It is decomposed by a hot solution 
of potassium bitartrate. Antimony pentoxide is obtained by 
repeatedly evaporating antimony with nitric acid and heating the 
resulting antimonic acid to a temperature not above 275° C. ; by 
heating antimony with red mercuric oxide until the mass becomes 
yellow (J. Berzelius) ; or by evaporating antimony trichloride to 
dryness with nitric acid. It is a pale yellow powder (of specific 
gravity 6-5), which on being heated strongly gives up oxygen and 
forms the tetroxide. It is insoluble in water, but dissolves slowly in 
hydrochloric acid. It possesses a feeble acid character, giving 
metantimoniates when heated with alkaline carbonates. 

Orthoantimonic acid, H 3 Sb0 4 , is obtained by the decomposition 
of its potassium salt with nitric acid (A. Geuther) ; or by the addition 
of water to the pentachloride, the precipitate formed being dried 
over sulphuric acid (P. Conrad, Chem. Ntws, 1879, xl. 198). It is a 
white powder almost insoluble in water and nitric acid, and when 
heated, is first converted into metantimonic acid, HSb0 3 , and then 
into the pentoxide Sb 2 Os. Pyroantimonic acid, H 4 Sb 2 07 (the 
metantimonic acid of E. Fremy), is obtained by decomposing 
antimony pentachloride with hot water, and drying the precipitate 
so obtained at 100 ° C. It is a white powder which is more soluble 
in water and acids than orthoantimonic acid. It forms two 
series of salts, of the types M 2 H 2 Sb 2 7 and M 4 Sb 2 7 . Metantimonic 
acid, HSb0 3 , can be obtained by heating orthoantimonic acid to 
175 C;, or by long fusion of antimony with antimony sulphide and 
nitre. The fused mass is extracted with water, nitric acid is added 
to the solution, and the precipitate obtained washed with water 
(J. Berzelius). It is a white powder almost insoluble in water. On 
standing with water for some time it is slowly converted into the 
ortho-acid. 

Compounds of antimony with all the halogen elements are known, 
one atom of the metal combining with three or five atoms of the 
halogen, except in the case of bromine, where only the tribromide is 
known. The majority of these halide compounds are decomposed 
by water, with the formation of basic salts. Antimony trichloride 
(" Butter of Antimony "), SbCl 3 , is obtained by burning the metal in 
chlorine; by distilling antimony with excess of mercuric chloride; 
and by fractional distillation of antimony tetroxide or trisulphide in 
hydrochloric acid solution. It is a colourless deliquescent solid of 
specific gravity 3-06; it melts at 73-2° C. (H. Kopp) to a colourless 
oil; and boils at 223° (H. Capitaine). It is soluble in alcohol and in 
carbon bisulphide, and also in a small quantity of Water; but with 
an excess of water it gives a precipitate of various oxychlorides, 
known as powder of algaroth (q.v.). These precipitated oxychlorides 
on continued boiling With water lose all their chlorine and ultimately 
give a residue of antimony trioxide. It combines with chlorides of 
the alkali metals to form double salts, and also with barium, calcium, 
strontium, and magnesium chlorides. Antimony pentachloride, 
SbCl 5> is prepared by heating the trichloride in a current of chlorine. 
It is a nearly colourless fuming liquid of unpleasant smell, which can 
be solidified to a mass of crystals melting at — 6° C. It dissociates into 
the trichloride and chlorine when heated. It combines with water, 
forming the hydrates SbCI 5 -H 2 and SbCl 5 -4H 2 0; it also combines 
with phosphorus oxychloride, hydrocyanic acid, and cyanogen 
chloride. In chloroform solution it combines with anhydrous oxalic 



ANTINOMIANS 



120 



acid to form a compound, SbjClsCCaC^), which is to be considered as 

COOSbCh 
tetra-chlorstibonium oxalate | (R. Anschutz and Evans, 

COOSbCU 
Annalen, 1887, ccxxxix. 235). Antimony! chloride, SbOCl, is pro- 
duced by the decomposition of one part of the trichloride with four 
parts of water. Prepared in this way it contains a small quantity 
of the unaltered chloride, which can be removed by ether or carbon 
bisulphide. It is a white powder insoluble in water, alcohol and 
ether. On heating, it is converted into the oxychloride SbiOsCl2 
(Sb2<I>3- SbOCl). Antimony oxychloride, SbOCU, is formed by addi- 
tion o f the calculated quantity of water to ice-cooled antimony 
pentachloride, SbCl 5 4-H 2 = SbOCl3+2HCl. It forms a yellowish 
crystalline precipitate which in moist air goes to a thick liquid. 
Compounds of composition, SbOCl3-2SbCls and SbOjCl^SbOCU, 
have also been described (W. C. Williams, Chem. News. 1871, xxiv. 

234)- 

Antimony tribromide, SbBrs, and tri-iodide, Sbla, may be prepared 
by the action of antimony on solutions of bromine or iodine in 
carbon bisulphide. The tribromide is a colourless crystalline mass 
of specific gravity 4-148 (23 °), melting at 90 to 94 C. and boiling at 
2 75'4° C. (H. Kopp). The tri-iodide forms red-coloured crystals of 
specific gravity 4-848 (26 ), melting at 165 to 167 C. and boiling at 
401° C. By the action of water they give oxybromides and oxy- 
iodides SbOBr, SbiOsBro, SbOI. Antimony penta-iodide, SbU, is 
formed by heating antimony with excess of iodine, in a sealed tube, 
to a temperature not above I30°C. It forms a dark brown crystalline 
mass, melting at 78 to 79 C., and is easily dissociated on heating. 
Antimony trifluoride, SbF3, is obtained by dissolving the trioxide in 
aqueous hydrofluoric acid or by distilling antimony with mercuric 
fluoride. By rapid evaporation of its solution it may be obtained 
in small prisms. The pentafluoride SbF 6 results when metantimonic 
acid is dissolved in hydrofluoric acid, and the solution is evaporated. 
It forms an amorphous gummy mass, which is decomposed by heat. 
Oxyfluorides of composition SbOF and SbOFs are known. 

Two sulphides of antimony are definitely known, the trisulphide 
SbnS3 and the pentasulphide Sb?Ss; a third, the tetrasulphide SbzS*, 
has also been described, but its existence is doubtful. Antimony 
trisulphide, SbA, occurs as the mineral antimonite or stibnite, from 
which the commercial product is obtained by a process of liquation. 
The amorphous variety may be obtained from the crystalline form 
by dissolving it in caustic potash or soda or in solutions of alkaline 
sulphides, and precipitating the hot solution by dilute sulphuric acid. 
The precipitate is then washed with water and dried at 100 C, 
by which treatment it is obtained in the anhydrous, form. On 
precipitating antimony trichloride or tartar emetic in acid solution 
with sulphuretted hydrogen, an orange-red precipitate of the hy- 
drated sulphide is obtained, which turns black on being heated to 
200 C The trisulphide heated in a current of hydrogen is reduced 
to the metallic state; it burns in air forming the tetroxide, and is 
soluble in concentrated hydrochloric acid, in solutions of the caustic 
alkalis, and in alkaline sulphides. By the union of antimony tri- 
sulphide with basic sulphides, livers of antimony are obtained. 
These substances are usually prepared by fusing their components 
together, and are dark powders which are less soluble in water the 
more antimony they contain. These thioantimonites are used in 
the vulcanizing of rubber and in the preparation of matches. Anti- 
mony pentasulphide, Sb 2 S 5 , is prepared by precipitating a solution 
of the pentachloride with sulphuretted hydrogen, by decomposing 
" Schlippe's salt " (5.11.) with an acid, or by passing sulphuretted 
hydrogen into water containing antimonic acid. It forms a fine 
dark orange powder, insoluble in water, but readily soluble in aqueous 
solutions of the caustic alkalis and alkaline carbonates. On 
heating in absence of air, it decomposes into the trisulphide and 
sulphur. 

An antimony phosphide and arsenide are known, as is also a 
thiophosphate, SbPSi, which is prepared by heating together anti- 
mony trichloride and phosphorus pentasulphide. 

Many organic compounds containing antimony are known. By 
distilling an alloy of antimony and sodium with mythyl iodide, 
mixed with sand, trimethyl stibine, Sb(CH3)i, is obtained; this com- 
bines with excess of methyl iodide to form tetramethyl stibonium 
iodide, Sb(CH 3 ).|I. From this iodide the trimethyl stibine may be 
obtained by distillation with an alloy of potassium and antimony 
in a current of carbon dioxide. It is a colourless liquid, slightly 
soluble in water, and is spontaneously inflammable. The stibonium 
iodide on treatment with moist silver oxide gives the correspond- 
ing tetramethyl stibonium hydroxide, Sb(CH 3 )iOH, which forms 
deliquescent crystals, of alkaline reaction, and absorbs carbon 
dioxide readily. On distilling trimethyl stibine with zinc methyl, 
antimony tetra-methyl and penta-methyl are formed. Correspond- 
ing antimony compounds containing the ethyl group are known, as 
is also a tri-phenyl stibine, Sb(CeH 6 )3, which is prepared from anti- 
mony trichloride, sodium and monochlorbenzene. See Chung Yu 
Wang, Antimony (1909). 

Antimony in Medicine. — So far back as Basil Valentine and 
Paracelsus, antimonial preparations were in great vogue as 
medicinal agents, and came to be so much abused that a pro- 

"• 5 



hibition was placed upon their employment by the Paiis parle- 
ment in 1566. Metallic antimony was utilized to make goblets 
in which wine was allowed to stand so as to acquire emetic 
properties, and " everlasting " pills of the metal, supposed to 
act by contact merely, were administered and recovered for 
future use after they had fulfilled their purpose. Antimony 
compounds act as irritants both externally and internally. 
Tartar emetic (antimony tartrate) when swallowed, acts directly 
on the wall of the stomach, producing vomiting, and after 
absorption continues this effect by its action on the medulla. 
It is a powerful cardiac depressant, diminishing both the force 
and frequency of the heart's beat. It depresses respiration, and 
in large doses lowers temperature. It depresses the nervous 
system, especially the spinal cord. It is excreted by all the 
secretions and excretions of the body. Thus as it passes out by 
the bronchial mucous membrane it increases the amount of 
secretion and so acts as an expectorant. On the skin its action 
is that of a diaphoretic, and being also excreted by the bile it 
acts slightly as a cholagogue. Summed up, its action is that 
of an irritant, and a cardiac and nervous depressant. But on 
account of this depressant action it is to be avoided for women 
and children and rarely used for men. 

Toxicology. — Antimony is one of the " protoplasmic " poisons, 
directly lethal to all living matter. In acute poisoning by it the 
symptoms are almost identical with those of arsenical poison- 
ing, which is much commoner (See Aksenic). The post-mortem 
appearances are also very similar, but the gastro-intestinal 
irritation is much less marked and inflammation of the lungs is 
more commonly seen. If the patient is not already vomiting 
freely the treatment is to use the stomach-pump, or give sulphate 
of zinc (gr. 10-30) by the mouth or apomorphine (gr. -sVtV) 
subcutaneously. Frequent doses of a teaspoonful of tannin 
dissolved in water should be administered, together with strong 
tea and coffee and mucilaginous fluids. Stimulants may be given 
subcutaneously, and the patient should be placed in bed between 
warm blankets with hot-'vi'ater bottles. Chronic poisoning by 
antimony is very rare, but resembles in essentials chronic 
poisoning by arsenic. In its medico-legal aspects antimonial 
poisoning is of little and lessening importance. 

ANTINOMIANS (Gr. avri, against, vofios, law), a term 
apparently coined by Luther to stigmatize Johannes Agricola 
(q.v.) and his following, indicating an interpretation of the anti- 
thesis between law and gospel, recurrent from the earliest times. 
Christians being released, in important particulars, from con- 
formity to the Old Testament polity as a whole, a real difficulty 
attended the settlement of the limits and the immediate authority 
of the remainder, known vaguely as the moral law. Indications 
are not wanting that St Paul's doctrine of justification by faith 
was, in his own day, mistaken or perverted in the interests of 
immoral licence. Gnostic sects approached the question in two 
ways. Marcionites, named by Clement of Alexandria Antitaclae 
(revolters against theDemiurge) held the Old Testament economy 
to be throughout tainted by its source; but they are not accused 
of licentiousness. Manichaeans, again, holding their spiritual 
being to be unaffected by the action of matter, regarded carnal 
sins as being, at worst, forms of bodily disease. Kindred to this 
latter view was the position of sundry sects of English fanatics 
during the Commonwealth, who denied that an elect person 
sinned, even when committing acts in themselves gross and evil. 
Different from either of these was the Antinomianism charged 
by Luther against Agricola. Its starting-point was a dispute 
with Melanchthon in 1527 as to the relation between repentance 
and faith. Melanchthon urged that repentance must precede 
faith, and that knowledge of the moral law is needed to produce 
repentance. Agricola gave the initial place to faith, maintaining 
that repentance is the work, not of law, but of the gospel-given 
knowledge of the love of God. The resulting Antinomian 
controversy (the only one within the Lutheran body in Luther's 
lifetime) is not remarkable for the precision or the moderation 
of the combatants on either side. Agricola was apparently 
satisfied in conference with Luther and Melanchthon at Torgau, 
December 1527. His eighteen Positiones of 1537 revived the 

11 



i-3° 



ANTINOMY— ANTIOCH 



controversy and made it acute. Random as are some of his 
statements, he was consistent in two objects: (i) in the interest 
of solifidian doctrine, to place the rejection of the Catholic doc- 
trine of good works on a sure ground; (2) in the interest of the 
New Testament, to find all needful guidance for Christian duty 
in its principles, if not in its precepts. From the latter part of 
the 17 th century charges of Antinomianism have frequently 
been directed against Calvinists, on the ground of their dis- 
paragement of "deadly doing " and of "legal preaching," 
The virulent controversy between Arminian and Calvinistic 
Methodists produced as its ablest outcome Fletcher's Checks to 
Antinomianism (17 71-1775). 

See G. Kawerau, in A. Hauck's Realencyklopadie (1896) ; Riess, 
in I. Goschler's Diet. Encyclop. de la theol. cath. (1858); J. H. 
Blunt. Diet, of Docl. and Hist. Theol. (1872) ; J. C. L. Gieseler, 
Ch. Hist. (New York ed. 1868, vol. iv.). 

ANTINOMY (Gr. avrl, against, po/xos, law), literally, the 
mutual incompatibility, real or apparent, of two laws. The 
term acquired a special significance in the philosophy of Kant, 
who used it to describe the contradictory results of applying to 
the universe of pure thought the categories or criteria proper to 
the universe of sensible perception (phenomena). These anti- 
nomies are four — two mathematical, two dynamical — connected 
with (1) the limitation of the universe in respect of space and 
time, (2) the theory that the whole consists of indivisible atoms 
(whereas, in fact, none such exist), (3) the problem-of freedom in 
relation to universal causality, (4) the existence of a universal 
being — about each of which pure reason contradicts the em- 
pirical, as thesis and antithesis. Kant claimed to solve these 
contradictions by saying, that in no case is the contradiction 
real, however really it has been intended by the opposing parti- 
sans, or must appear to the mind without critical enlightenment. 
It is wrong, therefore, to impute to Kant, as is often done, the 
view that human reason is, on ultimate subjects, at war with 
itself, in the sense of being impelled by equally strong arguments 
towards alternatives contradictory of each other. The difficulty 
arises from a confusion between the spheres of phenomena and 
noumena. In fact no rational cosmology is possible. 

See John Watson, Selections from Kant (trans. Glasgow, 1897), 
PP- '55 foil.; W. Windelband, History of Philosophy . (Eng. trans. 
1893); H. Sidgwick, Philos. of Kant, lectures x. and xi. (Lond., 
1905); F. Paulsen, /. Kant (Eng. trans. 1902), pp. 216 foil. 

ANTINOUS, a beautiful youth of Claudiopolis in Bithynia, 
was the favourite of the emperor Hadrian, whom he accompanied 
on his journeys. He committed suicide by drowning himself 
in the Nile (a.d. 130), either in a fit of melancholy or in order 
to prolong his patron's life by his voluntary sacrifice. After 
his death, Hadrian caused the most extravagant respect to be 
paid to his memory. Not only were cities called after him, 
medals struck with his effigy, and statues erected to him in all 
parts of the empire, but he was raised to the rank of the gods, 
temples were built for his worship in Bithynia, Mantineia in 
Arcadia, and Athens, festivals celebrated in his honour and 
oracles delivered in his name. The city of Antinoopolis was 
founded on the ruins of Besa where he died (Dio Cassius lix. 1 1 ; 
Spartianus, Hadrian). A number of statues, busts, gems and 
coins represented Antinoiis as the ideal type of youthful 
beauty, often with the attributes of some special god. We still 
possess a colossal bust in the Vatican, a bust in the Louvre, a 
bas-relief from the Villa Albani, a statue in the Capitoline 
museum, another in Berlin, another in the Lateran, and many 
more. 

See Levezow, tjber den Antivous (1808); Dietrich, Antinoos 
(1884); Laban, Der Gemiitsausdruck des Antinoos (1891);' Antinoiis, 
A Romance of Ancient Rome, from the German of A. Hausrath, by 
M. Safford (New York, 1882); Ebers, Der Kaiser (1881). 

ANTIOCH. There were sixteen cities known to have been 
founded under this name by Hellenistic monarchs; and at least 
twelve others were renamed Antioch. But by far the most famous 
and important in the list was 'Actiox«"i V &ri Aa4>vri (mod. 
Antakia), situated on the left bank of the Orontes, about 20 m. 
from the sea and its port, Seleucia of Pieria (Suedia). Founded 
as a Greek city in 300 B.C. by Seleucus Nicator, as soon as he 



had assured his grip upon western Asia by the victory of Ipsus 
(301), it was destined to .rival Alexandria in Egypt as the chief 
city of the hearer East, and to be the cradle of gentile Christianity. 
The geographical character of the district north and north-east of 
the elbow of Orontes makes it the natural centre of Syria, so long 
as that country is held by a western power; and only Asiatic/ 
and especially Arab, dynasties have neglected it for the oasis of 
Damascus. The two easiest routes from the Mediterranean 
lying through the Orontes gorge and the Beilan Pass, converge 
in the plain of the Antioch Lake (Baliik Geul or El Bahr) and are 
met there by (1) the road from the Amanic Gates (Baghche Pass) 
and western Commagene, which descends the valley of the Kara 
Su, (2) the roads from eastern Commagene and the Euphratean 
crossings at Samosata (Samsat) and Apamea Zeugma (Birejik), 
which descend the valleys of the Afrin and the Kuwaik, and 
(3) the road from the Euphratean ford at Thapsacus, which 
skirts the fringe of the Syrian steppe. Travellers by all these 
roads must proceed south by the single route of the Orontes 
valley. Alexander is said to have camped on the site of Antioch, 
and dedicated an altar to Zeus Bottiaeus, which lay in the north- 
west of the future city. But the first western sovereign practi- 
cally to recognize the importance of the district was Antigonus, 
who began to build a city, Antigonia, on the Kara Su a few miles 
north of the situation of Antioch; but, on his defeat, he left it to 
serve as a quarry for his rival Seleucus. The latter is said to 
have appealed to augury to determine the exact site of his 
projected foundation; but less fantastic considerations went far 
to settle it. To build south of the river, and on and under the 
last east spur of Casius, was to have security against invasion 
from the north, and command of the abundant waters of the 
mountain. One torrent, the Onopniktes (" donkey-drowner "), 
flowed through the new city, and many other streams came down 
a few miles west into the beautiful suburb of Daphne. The 
site appears not to have been found wholly uninhabited. A 
settlement \ Meroe, boasting a shrine of Anait, called by the 
Greeks the " Persian Artemis," had long been located there, 
and was ultimately included in the eastern suburbs of the new 
city; and there seems to have been a village on the spur (Mt. 
Silpius), of which we hear in late authors under the name Io, 
or Iopolis. This name was always adduced as evidence by 
Antiochenes (e.g. Libanius) anxious to affiliate themselves to 
the Attic Ionians — an anxiety which is illustrated by the 
Athenian types used on the city's coins. At any rate, Io may 
have been a small early colony of trading Greeks (Javan). 
John Malalas mentions also a village, Bottia, in the plain by 
the river. 

The original city of Seleucus was laid out in imitation of the 
'"' gridiron " plan of Alexandria by the architect, Xenarius. 
Libanius describes the first building and arrangement of this 
city (i. p. 300. 17). The citadel was on Mt. Silpius and the city 
lay mainly on the low ground to the north, fringing the river. 
Two great colonnaded streets intersected in the centre. Shortly 
afterwards a second quarter was laid out, probably on the east 
and by Antiochus I., which, from an expression of Strabo, 
appears to have been the native, as contrasted with the Greek, 
town. It was enclosed by a wall of its own. In the Orontes, 
north of the city, lay a large island, and on this Seleucus II. 
Callinicus began a third walled " city," which was finished 
by Antiochus III. A fourth and last quarter was added 
by Antiochus IV. Epiphanes (175-164 B.C.); and thenceforth 
Antioch was known as Tetrapolis. From west to east the whole 
was about 4 m. in diameter and little less from north to south, 
this area including many large gardens. Of its population in, 
the Greek period we know nothing. In the 4th century a.d. 
it was about 200,000 according to Chrysostom, who probably 
did not reckon slaves. About 4 m. west and beyond the suburb, 
Heraclea, lay the paradise of Daphne, a park of woods and 
waters, in the midst of which rose a great temple to the Pythian 
Apollo, founded by Seleucus I. and enriched with a cult-statue 
of the god, as Musagetes, by Bryaxis. A companion sanctuary 
of Hecate ,was constructed underground by Diocletian. The 
beauty and the lax morals of Daphne were celebrated all over 



ANTIOCH 



«3' 



the western world; and indeed Antioch as a whole shared in both 
these titles to fame. Its amenities awoke both the enthusiasm 
and the scorn of many writers of antiquity. 

Antioch became the capital and court-city of the western 
Seleucid empire under Antiochus I., its counterpart in the east 
being Seleucia-on-Tigris ; but its paramount importance dates 
from the battle of Ancyra (240 B.C.), which shifted the Seleucid 
centre of gravity from Asia Minor, and led indirectly to the rise 
of Pergamum. Thenceforward the Seleucids resided at Antioch 
and treated it as their capital par excellence. We know little 
of it in the Greek period, apart from Syria (q.v.), all our informa- 
tion coming from authors of the late Roman time. Among 
its great Greek buildings we hear only of the theatre, of which 
substructures still remain on the flank of Silpius, and of the 
royal palace, probably situated on the island. It enjoyed a 
great reputation for letters and the arts (Cicero pro Archia, 3); 
but the only names of distinction in these pursuits during the 
Seleucid period, that have come down to us, are Apollophanes, 
the Stoic, and one Phoebus, a writer on dreams. The mass 
of the population seems to have been only superficially Hellenic, 
and to have spoken Aramaic in non-official life. The nicknames 
which they gave to their later kings were Aramaic; and, except 
Apollo and Daphne, the great divinities of north Syria seem to 
have remained essentially native, such as the " Persian Artemis " 
of Meroe and Atargatis of Hierapolis Bambyce. We may infer, 
from its epithet, " Golden," that the external appearance of 
Antioch was magnificent; but the city needed constant restora- 
tion owing to the seismic disturbances to which the district 
has always been peculiarly liable. The first great earthquake 
is said by the native chronicler John Malalas, who tells us most 
that we know of the city, to have occurred in 148 B.C., and to 
have done immense damage. The inhabitants were turbulent, 
fickle and notoriously dissolute. In the many dissensions of 
the Seleucid house they took violent part, and frequently rose 
in rebellion, for example against Alexander Balas in 147 B.C., 
and Demetrius II. in 129. The latter, enlisting a body of Jews, 
punished his capital with fire and sword. In the last struggles 
of the Seleucid house, Antioch turned definitely against its feeble 
rulers, invited Tigranes of Armenia to occupy the city in 83, 
tried to unseat Antiochus XIII. in 65, and petitioned Rome 
against his restoration in the following year. Its wish prevailed, 
and it passed with Syria to the Roman Republic in 64 B.C., but 
remained a civitas libera. 

The Romans both felt and expressed boundless contempt for 
the hybrid Antiochenes; but their emperors favoured the city 
from the first, seeing in it a more suitable capital for the eastern 
part of the empire than Alexandria could ever be, thanks to the 
isolated position of Egypt. To a certain extent they tried to 
make it an eastern Rome. Caesar visited it in 47 B.C., and con- 
firmed its freedom. A great temple to Jupiter Capitolinus rose on 
Silpius, probably at the instance of Octavian, whose cause the city 
had espoused. A forum of Roman type was laid out. Tiberius 
built two long colonnades on the south towards Silpius. Agrippa 
and Tiberius enlarged the theatre, and Trajan finished their 
work. Antoninus Pius paved the great east to west artery with 
granite. A circus, other colonnades and great numbers of baths 
were built, and new aqueducts to supply them bore the names 
of Caesars, the finest being the work of Hadrian. The Roman 
client, King Herod, erected a long stoa on the east, and Agrippa 
encouraged the growth of a new suburb south of this. Under the 
empire we chiefly hear of the earthquakes which shook Antioch. 
One, in a.d. 37, caused the emperor Caligula to send two senators 
to report on the condition of the city. Another followed in the 
next reign; and in 115, during Trajan's sojourn in the place 
with his army of Parthia, the whole site was convulsed, the 
landscape altered, and the emperor himself forced to take shelter 
in the circus for several days. He and his successor restored the 
city; but in 526, after minor shocks, the calamity returned in 
a terrible form, and thousands of lives were lost, largely those of 
Christians gathered to a great church assembly. We hear also 
of especially terrific earthquakes on the 29th of November 528 
and the 31st of October 588. 



At Antioch Germanicus died in a.d. 19, and his body was burnt 
in the forum. Titus set up the Cherubim, captured from the 
Jewish temple, over one of the gates. Commodus had Olympic 
games celebrated at Antioch, and in a.d. 266 the town was suddenly 
raided by the Persians, who slew many in the theatre. In 387 
there was a great sedition caused by a new tax levied by order 
of Theodosius, and the city was punished by the loss of its 
metropolitan status. Zeno, who renamed it Theopolis, restored 
many of its public buildings just before the great earthquake 
of 526, whose destructive work was completed by the Persian 
Chosroes twelve years later. Justinian made an effort to revive 
it, and Procopius describes his repairing of the walls; but its 
glory was past. 

The chief interest of Antioch under the empire lies in its 
relation to Christianity. Evangelized perhaps by Peter, according 
to the tradition upon which the Antiochene patriarchate still 
rests its claim for primacy (cf . Acts xi.) , and certainly by Barnabas 
and Saul, its converts were the first to be called " Christians." 
They multiplied exceedingly, and by the time of Theodosius 
were reckoned by Chrysostom at about 100,000 souls. Between 
252 and 300 a.d. ten assemblies of the church were held at Antioch 
and it became the residence of the patriarch of Asia, When 
Julian visited the place in 362 the impudent population railed 
at him for his favour to Jewish and pagan rites, and to 
revenge itself for the closing of its great church of Constantine, 
burned down the temple of Apollo in Daphne. The emperor's 
rough and severe habits and his rigid administration prompted 
Antiochene lampoons, to which he replied in the curious satiric 
apologia, still extant, which he called Misopogon. His successor, 
Valens, who endowed Antioch with a new forum having a statue 
of Valentinian on a central column, reopened the great church, 
which stood till the sack of Chosroes in 538. Antioch gave its 
name to a certain school of Christian thought, distinguished by 
literal interpretation of the Scriptures and insistence on the 
human limitations of Jesus. Diodorus of Tarsus and Theodore 
of Mopsuestia were the leaders of this school. The principaflocal 
saint was Simeon Stylites, who performed his penance on a hill 
some 40 m. east. His body was brought to the city and buried 
in a building erected under the emperor Leo. In a.d. 635, during 
the reign of Heraclius, Antioch passed into Saracen hands, 
and decayed apace for more than 300 years; but in 969 it was 
recovered for Byzantium by Michael Burza and Peter the Eunuch. 
In 1084 the Seljuk Turks captured it but held it only fourteen 
years, yielding place to the crusaders, who besieged it for nine 
months, enduring frightful sufferings. Being at last betrayed, 
it was given to Bohemund, prince of Tarentum, and it remained 
the capital of a Latin principality for nearly two centuries. It 
fell at last to the Egyptian, Bibars, in 1268, after a great destruc- 
tion and slaughter, from which it never revived. Little remains 
now of the ancient city, except colossal ruins of aqueducts and 
part of the Roman walls, which are used as quarries for modern 
Antakia; but no scientific examination of the site has been made. 
A statue in the Vatican and a silver statuette in the British 
Museum perpetuate the type of its great effigy of the civic Fortune 
of Antioch — a majestic seated figure, with Orontes as a youth 
issuing from under her feet. 

Antakia, the modern town, is still of considerable importance. 
Pop. about 25,000, including Ansarieh, Jews, and a large body of 
Christians of several denominations about 8000 strong. Though 
superseded by Aleppo (q.v.) as capital of N. Syria, it is still the 
centre of a large district, growing in wealth and productiveness with 
the draining of its central lake, undertaken by a French company. 
The principal cultures are tobacco, maize and cotton, and the mul- 
berry for silk production. Liquorice also is collected and exported. 
In 1822 (as in 1872) Antakia suffered by earthquake, and when 
Ibrahim Pasha made it his headquarters in 1835, it had only 
some 5000 inhabitants. Its hopes, based on a Euphrates valley 
railway, which was to have started from its port of Suedia 
(Seleucia), were doomed to disappointment, and it has suffered 
repeatedly from visitations of cholera; but it has nevertheless 
grown rapidly and will resume much of its old importance 
when a railway is made down the lower Orontes valley. It is a 



132 



ANTIOCH IN PISIDIA— ANTIOPE 



centre of American mission enterprise, and has a British vice- 
consul. 

See C. O. Miiller, Antiguitates Antiochenae (1839); A. Freund, 
Beitrdge zur antiochenischen . . . Stadtchronik (1882) ; R. Forster, 
in Jahrbuch of Berlin Arch. Institute, xii. (1897). Also authorities 
for Syria. (D. G. H.) 

Synods or Antioch. Beginning with three synods convened 
between 264 and 269 in the matter of Paul of Samosata, more 
than thirty councils were held in Antioch in ancient times. 
Most of these dealt with phases of the Arian and of the Christo- 
logical controversies. The most celebrated took place in the 
summer of 341 at the dedication of the golden Basilica, and is 
therefore called in encaeniis {iv eyKcuvloLs), in dedicdtione. 
Nearly a hundred bishops were present, all from the Orient, 
but the bishop of Rome was not represented. The emperor 
Constantius attended in person. The council approved three 
creeds (Hahn, §§ 153-155). Whether or no the so-called "fourth 
formula" (Hahn, § 156) is to be ascribed to a continuation of this 
synod or to a subsequent but distinct assembly of the same 
year, its aim is like that of the first three; while repudiating 
certain Arian formulas it avoids the Athanasian shibboleth 
" homoousios." The somewhat colourless compromise doubtless 
proceeded from the party of Eusebius of Nicomedia, and proved 
not inacceptable to the more nearly orthodox members of the 
synod. The twenty-five canons adopted regulate the so-called 
metropolitan constitution of the church. Ecclesiastical power is 
vested chiefly in the metropolitan (later called archbishop), and 
the semi-annual provincial synod (cf. Nicaea, canon 5), which he 
summons and over which he presides. Consequently the powers of 
country bishops (chorepiscopi) are curtailed, and direct recourse to 
the emperor is forbidden. The sentence of one judicatory is to be 
respected by other judicatories of equal rank; re-trial may take 
place only before that authority to whom appeal regularly lies 
(see canons 3, 4, 6). Without due invitation, a bishop may not 
ordain, or in any other way interfere with affairs lying outside 
his qroper territory; nor may he appoint his own successor. 
Penalties are set on the refusal to celebrate Easter in accordance 
with the Nicene decree, as well as on leaving a church before the 
service of the Eucharist is completed. The numerous objections 
made by eminent scholars in past centuries to the ascription of 
these twenty-five canons to the synod in encaeniis have been 
elaborately stated and probably refuted by Hefele. The canons 
formed part of the Codex canonum used at Chalcedon in 451 and 
passed over into the later collections of East and West. 

The canons are printed in Greek by Mansi ii. 1307 ff., Bruns i. 
80 ff., Lauchert 43 ff., and translated by Hefele, Councils, ii. 67 ff. 
and by H. R. Percival in the Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, 2nd 
aeries, xiv. 108 ff. The four dogmatic formulas are given by G. 
Ludwig Hahn, Bibliothek der Symbole, 3rd edition (Bresiau, 1897), 
183 ff. ; for translations compare the Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, 
2nd series, iv. 461 ff., ii. 39 ff., ix. 12, ii. 44, and Hefele, ii. 76 ff. 
For full titles see Councils. (W. W. R.*) 

ANTIOCH IN PISIDIA, an ancient city, the remains of which, 
including ruins of temples, a theatre and a fine aqueduct, were 
found by Arundell in 1833 close to the modern Yalovach. It 
was situated on the lower southern slopes of the Sultan Dagh, 
in the Konia vilayet of Asia Minor, on the right bank of a stream, 
the ancient Anthius, which flows into the Hoiran Geul. It was 
probably founded on the site of a Phrygian sanctuary, by 
Seleucus Nicator, before 280 B.C. and was made a free city by 
the Romans in 189 B.C. It was a thoroughly Hellenized, Greek- 
speaking city, in the midst of a Phrygian people, with a mixed 
population that included many Jews. Before 6 B.C. Augustus 
made it a colony, with the title Caesarea, and it became the 
centre of civil and military administration in south Galatia, 
the romanization of which was progressing rapidly in the time of 
Claudius, a.d. 41-54, when Paul visited it (Acts xiii. 14, xiv. 21, 
xvi. 6, xviii. 23). In 1097 the crusaders found rest and shelter 
within its walls. The ruins are interesting, and show that Antioch 
was a strongly fortified city of Hellenic and Roman type. 

ANTIOCHUS, the name of thirteen kings of the Seleucid 
dynasty in Nearer Asia. The most famous are Antiochus III. 
the Great (223-187 B.C.) who sheltered Hannibal and waged war 
with Rome, and his son Antiochus IV. Epiphanes (176-164 B.C.) 



who tried to suppress Judaism by persecution (see Seleucid 
Dynasty) . 

The name was subsequently borne by the kings of Commagene 
(69 b.c.-a.d. 72), whose house was affiliated to the Seleucid. 

Antiochus I. of Commagene, who without sufficient reason 
has been identified with the Seleucid Antiochus XIII. Asiaticus, 
made peace on advantageous terms with Pompey in 64 B.C. 
Subsequently he fought on Pompey's side in the Civil War, 
and later still repelled an attack on Samosata by Marcus Antonius 
(Mark Antony.) He died before 31 B.C. and was succeeded by 
one Mithradates I. This Mithradates was succeeded by an 
Antiochus II., who was executed by Augustus in 29 B.C. After 
another Mithradates we know of an Antiochus III., on whose 
death in a.d. 17 Commagene became a Roman province. In 38 
his son Antiochus IV. Epiphanes was made king by Caligula, 
who deposed him almost immediately. Restored by Claudius 
in 41, he reigned until 72 as an ally of Rome against Parthia. 
In that year he was deposed on suspicion of treason and retired 
to Rome. Several of his coins are extant. 

On all the above see " Antiochos " in Pauly-Wissowa's Realen- 
cyclopddie der classischen Altertumswissenschajl, i. part ii. (1894). 

ANTIOCHUS OF ASCALON (1st century B.C.), Greek philo- 
sopher. His philosophy consisted in an attempt to, reconcile 
the doctrines of his teachers Philo of Larissa and Mnesarchus 
the Stoic. Against the scepticism of the former, he held that, 
the intellect has in itself a sufficient test of truth; against 
Mnesarchus, that happiness, though its main factor is virtue, 
depends also on outward circumstances. This electicism is 
known as the Fifth Academy (see Academy, Greek). His 
writings are lost, and we are indebted for information to Cicero 
{Acad. Pr. ii. 43), who studied under him at Athens, and Sextus 
Empiricus (Pyrrh. hyp. i. 235). Antiochus lectured also in 
Rome and Alexandria. 

See R. Hoyer, De Antiocho Ascalonita (Bonn, 1883). 

ANTIOCHUS OF SYRACUSE, Greek historian, flourished 
about 420 B.C. Nothing is known of his life, but his works, 
of which only fragments remain, enjoyed a, high reputation. 
He wrote a History of Sicily from the earliest times to 424', 
which was used by Thucydides, and the Colonizing of Italy, , 
frequently referred to by Strabo and Dionysius of Halicarnassus. 

Miiller, Fragmenta Histbricorum Graecorum, i.,; WolfHin, Antiochos 
von Syrakus, 1872. • 

ANTIOPE. (1) In Greek legend, the mother of Amphion and 
Zethus, and, according to Homer {Od. xi. 260), a daughter of 
the Boeotian river-god Asopus. In later poems she is called 
the daughter of Nycteus or Lycurgus. Her beauty attracted 
Zeus, who, assuming the form of a satyr, took her by force 
(Apollodorus iii. 5). After this she was carried off by Epopeus, 
king of Sicyon, who would not give her up till compelled by her 
uncle Lycus. On the way home she gave birth, in the neighbour- 
hood of Eleutherae on Mount Cithaeron, to the twins Amphion 
and Zethus, of whom Amphion was the son of the god, and 
Zethus the son of Epopeus. Both were left to be brought up 
by herdsmen. At Thebes Antiope now suffered from the per- 
secution of Dirce, the wife of Lycus, but at last escaped towards 
Eleutherae, and there found shelter, unknowingly, in the house 
where her two sons were living as herdsmen. Here she was 
discovered by Dirce, who ordered the two young men to tie 
her to the horns of a wild bull. They were about to obey, when 
the old herdsman, who had brought them up, revealed his secretj 
and they carried out the punishment on Dirce instead (Hyginus, 
Fab. 8). For this, it is said, Dionysus, to whose worship Dirce 
had been devoted, visited Antiope with madness, which caused 
her to wander restlessly all over Greece till she was cured, and 
married by Phocus of Tithorea, on Mount Parnassus, where 
both were buried in one grave (Pausanias ix. 17, x. 32). 

( 2) A second Antiope, daughter of Ares, and sister cf Hippolytej 
queen of the Amazons, was the wife of Theseus. There are 
various accounts of the manner in which Theseus became 
possessed of her, and of her subsequent fortunes. Either she 
gave herself up to him out of love, when with Heracles he 
captured Themiscyra, the seat of the Amazons, or she fell 1 to 
his lot as a captive (Dipdorus iv. 16). Or again, Theseus himseM 



ANTIOQUIA— ANTIPODES 



!33 



invaded the dominion of the Amazons and carried her off, the 
consequence of which was a counter-invasion of Attica by the 
Amazons. After four months of war peace was made, and 
Antiope left with Theseus as a peace-offering. According to 
another account, she had joined the Amazons against him 
because he had been untrue to her in desiring to marry Phaedra. 
She is said to have been killed by another Amazon, Molpadia, 
a rival in her affection for Theseus. Elsewhere it was believed 
that he had himself killed her, and fulfilled an oracle to that effect 
(Hyginus, Fab. 241). By Theseus she had a son, the well-known 
Hippolytus (Plutarch, Theseus). 

ANTIOQUIA, an interior department of the republic of 
Colombia, lying S. of Bolivar, W. of the Magdalena river, and 
E. of Cauca. Area, 22,870 sq. m.; pop. (est. 1899) 464,887. 
The greater part of its territory lies between the Magdalena 
and Cauca rivers and includes the northern end of the Central 
Cordillera. The country is covered with valuable forests, and 
its mineral wealth renders it one of the most important mining 
regions of the republic. The capital, Medellin (est. pop. 53 ,000 in 
1902), is a thriving mining centre, 4822 ft. above sea-level, and 
125 m. from Puerto Berrio on the Magdalena. Other important 
towns are Manizales (18,000 ) in the extreme south, the commer- 
cial centre of a rich gold and grazing region; Antioquia, the old 
capital, on the Cauca; and Puerto Berrio on the Magdalena, 
from which a railway has been started to the capital. 

ANTIPAROS (anc. Oliaros), an island of the kingdom of Greece, 
in the modern eparchy of Naxos, separated by a strait (about 
i|m. wide at the narrowest point) from the west coast of Pares. 
It is 7 m. long by 3 broad, and contains about 700 inhabitants, 
most of whom live in Kastro, a village on the north coast, and 
are employed in agriculture and fishing. Formerly piracy was 
common. The only remarkable feature in the island is a 
stalactite cavern on the south coast, which is reached by a 
narrow passage broken by two steep and dangerous descents 
which are accomplished by the aid of rope-ladders. The grotto 
itself, which is about 150 ft. by 100, and 50 ft. high (not all can 
be seen from any part, and probably some portions are still 
unexplored), shows many remarkable examples of stalactite 
formations and incrustations of dazzling brilliance. It is not 
mentioned by ancient writers; the first western traveller to 
visit it was the marquis de Nointel (ambassador of Louis XIV. 
to the Porte) who descended it with a numerous suite and held 
high mass there on Christmas day 1673. There is, however, in 
the entrance of the cavern an inscription recording the names 
of visitors in ancient times. 

See' J. P. de Tournefort, Relation d'un voyage au Levant (1717); 
English edition, 1718, vol. i. p. 146, and guide-books to Greece. 

ANTIPATER (3g8?-3i9 B.C.), Macedonian general, and 
regent of Macedonia during Alexander's Eastern expedition 
(334-323). He had previously (346) been sent as ambassador 
by Philip to Athens and negotiated peace after the battle of 
Chaeroneia (338). About 332 he set out against the rebellious 
tribes of Thrace; but before this insurrection was quelled, 
the Spartan king Agis had risen against Macedonia. Having 
settled affairs in Thrace as well as he could, Antipater hastened 
to the south, and in a battle near Megalopolis (331) gained a 
complete victory over the insurgents (Diodorus xvii. 62). His 
regency was greatly troubled by the ambition of Olympias, 
mother of Alexander, and he was nominally superseded by 
Craterus. But, on the death of Alexander in 323, he was, by the 
first partition of the empire, left in command of Macedonia, and 
in the Lamian War, at the battle of Crannon (322), crushed 
the Greeks who had attempted to re-assert their independence. 
Later in the same year he and Craterus were engaged in a 
war against the Aetolians, when the news arrived from Asia 
which induced Antipater to conclude peace with them; for 
Antigonus reported that Perdiccas contemplated making himself 
sole master of the empire. Antipater and Craterus accordingly 
prepared for war against Perdiccas, and allied themselves 
with Ptolemy, the governor of Egypt. Antipater crossed over 
into Asia in 321 ; and while still in Syria, he received information 
that Perdiccas had been murdered by his own soldiers. Craterus 



fell in battle against Eumenes (Diodorus xviii. 25-39). Antipater, 
now sole regent, made several new regulations, and having 
quelled a mutiny of his troops and commissioned Antigonus to 
continue the war against Eumenes and the other partisans of 
Perdiccas, returned to Macedonia, where he arrived in 320 
(Justin xiii. 6). Soon after he was seized by an illness which 
terminated his active career, 319. Passing over his son Cassander, 
he appointed the aged Polyperchon regent, a measure which gave 
rise to much confusion and ill-feeling (Diodorus xvii. , xviii) . 

ANTIPHANES, the most important writer of the Middle Attic 
comedy with the exception of Alexis, lived from about 408 to 334 
B.C. He was apparently a foreigner who settled in Athens, where 
he began to write about 387. He was extremely prolific: more 
than 200 of the 365 (or 260 ) comedies attributed to him are known 
to us from the titles and considerable fragments preserved in 
Athenaeus. They chiefly deal with matters connected with the 
table, but contain many striking sentiments. 

Fragments in Koch, Comicorum Atticorum Fragmenta, ii. (1884); 
see also Clinton, Philological Museum,. 1. (1832); Meineke, Historia 
Critica Comicorum Graecorum (1839). 

ANTIPHILUS, a Greek painter, of the age of Alexander. He 
worked for Philip of Macedon and Ptolemy I. of Egypt. Thus 
he was a contemporary of Apelles, whose rival he is said to have 
been, but he seems to have worked in quite another style. 
Quintilian speaks of his facility: the descriptions of his works 
which have come down to us show that he excelled in light and 
shade, in genre representations, and in caricature. 

See Brunn, Geschichte der griechischen Kunstler, ii.. p. 249. 

ANTIPHON, of Rhamnus in Attica, the earliest of the " ten " 
Attic orators, was born in 480 B.C. He took an active part in 
political affairs at Athens, and, as a zealous supporter of the 
oligarchical party, was largely responsible for the establishment 
of the Four Hundred in 41 1 (see Theramenes) ; on the restoration 
of the democracy he was accused of treason and condemned to 
death. Thucydides (viii. 68) expresses a very high opinion of 
him. Antiphon may be regarded as the founder of political 
oratory, but he never addressed the people himself except on the 
occasion of his trial. Fragments of his speech then delivered in 
defence of his policy (called Ilepl ^eraoracrecos) have been edited 
by J. Nicole (1907) from an Egyptian papyrus. His chief 
business was that of a professional speech-writer (\oyoypa<j)os) , 
for those who felt incompetent to conduct their own cases — 
as all disputants were obliged to do — without expert assistance. 
Fifteen of Antiphon's speeches are extant: twelve are mere school 
exercises on fictitious cases, divided into tetralogies, each con- 
sisting of two speeches for prosecution and defence— accusation, 
defence, reply, counter- reply; three refer to actual legal processes. 
All deal with cases of homicide (4>ovuccd 8Lkcu). Antiphon is also 
said to have composed a Ttx V7 l or ar t of Rhetoric. 

Edition, with commentary, by Maetzner (1838); text by Blass 
(1881); Jebb, Attic Orators; Plutarch, Vitae X. Oratorum; Philo- 
stratus, Vit. Sophistarum, i. 15; van Cleef, Index Antiphonteus, 
Ithaca, N. Y. (1895) ; see also Rhetoric. 

ANTIPHONY (Gr. avrl, and cj>o>vri, a voice) , a species of psalmody 
in which the choir or congregation, being divided into two parts, 
sing alternately. The peculiar structure of the Hebrew psalms 
renders it probable that the antiphonal method originated in the 
service of the ancient Jewish Church. According to the historian 
Socrates, its introduction into Christian worship was due to 
Ignatius (died 115 a.d.), who in a vision had seen the angels 
singing in alternate choirs. In the Latin Church it was not 
practised until more than two centuries later, when it was 
introduced by Ambrose, bishop of Milan, who compiled an 
antiphonary, or collection of words suitable for antiphonal 
singing. The antiphonary still in use in the Roman Catholic 
Church was compiled by Gregory the Great (590 a.d.). 

ANTIPODES (Gr. avrl, opposed to, and irodes, feet), a term 
applied strictly to any two peoples or places on opposite sides 
of the earth, so situated that a line drawn from the one to the 
other passes through the centre of the globe and forms a true 
diameter. Any two places having this relation— as London 
and, approximately, Antipodes Island, near New Zealand — - 
must be distant from each other by 180° of longitude, and the 



134 



aNTIPYRINE— ANTI-SEMITISM 



one must be as many degrees to the north of the equator as the 
other is to the south, in other words, the latitudes are numerically 
equal, but one is north and the other south. Noon at the one 
place is midnight at the other, the longest day corresponds to 
the shortest, and mid-winter is contemporaneous with mid- 
summer. In the calculation of days and nights, midnight on 
the one side may be regarded as corresponding to the noon 
either of the previous or of the following day. If a voyager sail 
eastward, and thus anticipate the sun, his dating will be twelve 
hours in advance, while the reckoning of another who has been 
sailing westward will be as much in arrear. There will thus be 
a difference of twenty-four hours between the two when they 
meet. To avoid the confusion of dates which would thus arise, 
it is necessary to determine a meridian at which dates should 
be brought into agreement, i.e. a line the crossing of which would 
involve the changing of the name of the day either forwards, 
when proceeding westwards, or backwards, when proceeding 
eastwards. Mariners have generally adopted the meridian 180 
from Greenwich, situated in the Pacific Ocean, as a convenient 
line for co-ordinating dates. The so-called " International Date 
Line," which is, however, practically only due to American 
initiative, is designed to remove certain objections to the meridian 
of 180 W., the most important of which is that groups of islands 
lying about this meridian differ in date by a day although only 
a few miles apart. Several forms have been suggested; these 
generally agree in retaining the meridian of 180° in the mid 
Pacific, with a bend in the north in order to make the 
Aleutian Islands and Alaska of the same time as America, and 
also in the south so as to bring certain of the South Sea islands 
into line with Australia and New Zealand. 

ANTIPYRINE (phenyldimethyl pyrazolone) (C u H 12 N 2 0), is 
prepared by the condensation of phenylhydrazine with aceto- 
acetic ester, the resulting phenyl methyl pyrazolone being heated 
with methyl iodide and methyl alcohol to 100-110 C: — 

CH 3 -C = N v CH 3 -C-N-CH 3 

I >N-C 6 H 6 H> 11 >N.C 6 H 6 

CH 2 -CCK HC-CO 

Phenyl methyl pyrazolone Antipyrine 

On the large scale phenylhydrazine is dissolved in dilute sulphuric 
acid, the solution warmed to about 40 C. and the aceto-acetic 
ester added. When the reaction is complete the acid is neutral- 
ized with soda, and the phenyl methyl pyrazolone extracted 
with ether and distilled in vacuo. The portion distilling at 
about 200 C. is then methylated by means of methyl alcohol 
and methyl iodide at ioo-no C, the excess of methyl alcohol 
removed and the product obtained decolorized by sulphuric 
acid. The residue is treated with a warm concentrated solution 
of soda, and the oil which separates is removed by shaking with 
benzene. The benzene layer on evaporation deposits the anti- 
pyrine as a colourless crystalline solid which melts at 113° C. and 
is soluble in water. It is basic in character, and gives a red 
coloration on the addition of ferric chloride. In medicine anti- 
pyrine (" phenazonum ") has been used as an analgesic and 
antipyretic. The dose is 5-20 grs., but on account of its 
depressant action on the heart, and the toxic effects to which 
it occasionally gives rise, it is now but little used'. It is more 
safely replaced by phenacetine. 

ANTIQUARY, a person who devotes himself to the study of 
ancient learning and " antiques," i.e. ancient objects of art or 
science. The London Society of Antiquaries was formed in 
the 1 8th century to promote the study of antiquities. As early 
as 1372 a society had been founded by Bishop Matthew Parker, 
Sir Robert Cotton, William Camden and others for the pre- 
servation of national antiquities. This body existed till 1604, 
when it fell under suspicion of being political in its aims, and was 
abolished by James I. Papers read at their meetings are pre- 
served in the Cottonian library and were printed by Thomas 
Hearne in 1720 under the title A Collection of Curious Discourses, 
a second edition appearing in 1 7 7 1 . In 1 707 a number of English 
antiquaries began to hold regular meetings for the discussion of 
their hobby and in 171 7 the Society of Antiquaries was formally 
reconstituted, finally receiving a charter from George II. in 1751. 



In 1780 George III. granted the society apartments in Somerset 
House, Strand. The society is governed by a council of twenty 
and a president who is ex officio a trustee of the British Museum. 
The present headquarters of the society are at Burlington House, 
Piccadilly. 

The Society of Antiquaries of Scotland was founded in 1780, 
and has the management of a large national antiquarian museum 
in Edinburgh. In Ireland a society was founded in 1849 called 
the Kilkenny Archaeological Society, holding its meetings at 
Kilkenny. In 1869 its name was changed to the Royal Historical 
and Archaeological Association of Ireland, and in 1890 to the 
Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland, its office being trans- 
ferred to Dublin. In France La SociitS Nationale des Antiquaires 
de France was formed in 1814 by the reconstruction of the 
Academie Celtique, which had existed since 1805. The American 
Antiquarian Society was founded in 181 2, with its headquarters 
at Worcester, Mass. It has a library of upwards of 100,000 
volumes and its transactions have been published bi-annually 
since 1849. In Germany the Gesamtvcrein der Deutschen Ge- 
schichts-und Altertumsvereine was founded in 1852. La Sociiti 
Roy ale des Antiquaires du Nord at Copenhagen is among the 
best known of European antiquarian societies. 

ANTIQUE (Lat. antiquus, old), a term conventionally restricted 
to the remains of ancient art, such as sculptures, gems, medals, 
seals, &c. In a limited sense it applies only to Greek and Roman 
art, and includes neither the artistic remains of other ancient 
nations nor any product of classical art of a later date than the 
fall of the western empire. 

ANTI-SEMITISM. In the political struggles of the concluding 
quarter of the 19th century an important part was played by 
a religious, political and social agitation against the Jews, 
known as " Anti-Semitism." The origins of this remarkable 
movement already threaten to become obscured by legend. 
The Jews contend that anti-Semitism is a mere atavistic revival 
of the Jew-hatred of the middle ages. The extreme section of 
the anti-Semites, who have given the movement its quasi- 
scientific name, declare that it is a racial struggle — an incident 
of the eternal conflict between Europe and Asia — and that the 
anti-Semites are engaged in an effort to prevent what is called 
the Aryan race from being subjugated by a Semitic immigration, 
and to save Aryan ideals from being modified by an alien and 
demoralizing oriental Anschauung. There is no essential foun- 
dation for either of these contentions. Religious prejudices 
reaching back to the dawn of history have been reawakened 
by the anti-Semitic agitation, but they did not originate it, 
and they have not entirely controlled it. The alleged racial 
divergence is, too, only a linguistic hypothesis on the physical 
evidence of which anthropologists are not agreed (Topinard, 
Anthropologic, p. 444; Taylor, Origins of Aryans, cap. i.), and, 
even if it were proved, it has existed in Europe for so many 
centuries, and so many ethnic modifications have occurred on 
both sides, that it cannot be accepted as a practical issue. It 
is true that the ethnographical histories of the Jews and the 
nations of Europe have proceeded on widely diverging lines, 
but these lines have more than once crossed each other and 
become interlaced. Thus Aryan elements are at the beginning of 
both; European morals have been ineradicably semitized by 
Christianity, and the Jews have been Europeans for over a 
thousand years, during which their character has been modified 
and in some respects transformed by the ecclesiastical and civil 
polities of the nations among whom they have made their 
permanent home. Anti-Semitism is then exclusively a question 
of European politics, and its origin is to be found, not in the 
long struggle between Europe and Asia, or between the Church 
and the Synagogue, which filled so much of ancient and medieval 
history, but in the social conditions resulting from the emancipa- 
tion of the Jews in the middle of the 19th century. 

If the emancipated Jews were Europeans in virtue of the 
antiquity of their western settlements, and of the character 
impressed upon them by the circumstances of their European 
history, they none the less presented the appearance of a strange 
people to their Gentile fellow-countrymen. They had been 



ANTI-SEMITISM 



i35 



secluded in their ghettos for centuries, and had consequently 
acquired a physical and moral physiognomy differentiating 
them in a measure from their former oppressors. This peculiar 
physiognomy was, on its moral side, not essentially Jewish or 
even Semitic. It was an advanced development of the main 
attributes of civilized life, to which Christendom in its transition 
from feudalism had as yet only imperfectly adapted itself. The 
ghetto, which had been designed as a sort of quarantine to safe^ 
guard Christendom against the Jewish heresy, had in fact proved 
a storage chamber for a portion of the political and social forces 
which were destined to sweep away the last traces of feudalism 
from central Europe. In the ghetto, the pastoral Semite, who 
had been made a wanderer by the destruction of his nationality, 
was steadily trained, through centuries, to become an urban 
European, with all the parasitic activities of urban economics, 
and all the democratic tendencies of occidental industrialism. 
Excluded from the army, the land, the trade corporations 
and the artisan gilds, this quondam oriental peasant was gradu- 
ally transformed into a commercial middleman and a practised 
dealer in money. Oppressed by the Church, and persecuted 
by the State, his theocratic and monarchical traditions lost 
their hold on his daily life, and he became saturated with a 
passionate devotion to the ideals of democratic politics. Finally, 
this former bucolic victim of Phoenician exploitation had his 
wits preternaturally sharpened, partly by the stress of his 
struggle for life, and partly by his being compelled in his urban 
seclusion to seek for recreation in literary exercises, chiefly the 
subtle dialectics of the Talmudists (Loeb, Juif de Vhistoire; 
Jellinek, Der Jiidische Stamm) . Thus, the Jew who emerged from 
the ghetto was no longer a Palestinian Semite, but an essentially 
modern European, who differed from his Christian fellow-country- 
men only in the circumstances that his religion was of the older 
Semitic form, and that his physical type had become sharply 
defined through a slightly more rigid exclusiveness in the matter 
of marriages than that practised by Protestants and Roman 
Catholics (Andree, Volkskunde der Juden, p. 58). 

Unfortunately, these distinctive elements, though not very 
serious in themselves, became strongly accentuated by concen- 
tration. Had it been possible to distribute the emancipated 
Jews uniformly throughout Christian society, as was the case 
with other emancipated religious denominations, there would 
have been no revival of the Jewish question. The Jews, however, 
through no fault of their own, belonged to only one class in 
European society — the industrial bourgeoisie. Into that class 
all their strength was thrown, and owing to their ghetto pre- 
paration, they rapidly took a leading place in it, politically and 
socially. When the mid-century revolutions made the bourgeoisie 
the ruling power in Europe, the semblance of a Hebrew domina- 
tion presented itself. It was the exaggeration of this apparent 
domination, not by the bourgeoisie itself, but by its enemies 
among the vanquished reactionaries on the one hand, and by 
the extreme Radicals on the other, which created modern anti- 
Semitism as a political force. 

The movement took its rise in Germany and Austria. Here 
the concentration of the Jews in one class of the population was 
aggravated by their excessive numbers. While in France the 
proportion to the total population was, in the early 'seventies, 
0-14%, and in Italy, 0-12 %, it was 1-22 % in Germany, and 
385 % in Austria-Hungary; Berlin had 4-36% of Jews, and 
Vienna 6-62% (Andree, Volkskunde, pp. 287, 291, 294, 295). 
The activity of the Jews consequently manifested itself in a far 
more intense form in these countries than elsewhere. This was 
apparent even before the emancipations of 1848. Towards 
the middle of the 18th century, a limited number of wealthy 
Jews had been tolerated as Schutz-Juden outside the 
ghettos, and their sons, educated as Germans under 
the influence of Moses Mendelssohn and his school (see Jews), 
supplied a majority of the leading spirits of the revolutionary 
agitation. To this period belong the formidable names of Ludwig 
Borne (1786-1837), Heinrich Heine (1799-1854), Edward Ganz 
(1798-1839), Gabriel Riesser (1806-1863), Ferdinand Lassalle 
(1825-1864), Karl Marx (1818-1883), Moses Hess (1812-1875), 



Ignatz Kuranda (1811-1884), and Johann Jacobi (1805-^77). 
When the revolution was completed, and the Jews entered in a 
body the national life of Germany and Austria, they sustained 
this high average in all the intellectual branches of middle-class 
activity. Here again, owing to the accidents of their history, 
a further concentration became apparent. Their activity was 
almost exclusively intellectual. The bulk of them flocked to 
the financial and the distributive (as distinct from the productive) 
fields of industry to which they had been confined in the ghettos. 
The sharpened faculties of the younger generation'at the same 
time carried everything before them in the schools, with the 
result that they soon crowded the professions, especially medicine, 
law and journalism (Nossig, Statistik des Jild. Stammes, pp. 33-37; 
Jacobs, Jew. Statistics, pp. 41-69). Thus the " Semitic domina- 
tion," as it was afterwards called, became every day more 
strongly accentuated. If it was a long time in exciting resent- 
ment and jealousy, the reason was that it was in no sense alien 
to the new conditions of the national life. The competition was 
a fair one. The Jews might be more successful than their 
Christian fellow-citizens, but it was in virtue of qualities which 
complied with the national standards of conduct. They were 
as law-abiding and patriotic as they were intelligent. Crime 
among them was far below the average (Nossig, p. 31). Their 
complete assimilation of the national spirit was brilliantly 
illustrated by the achievements in German literature, art and 
science of such men as Heinrich Heine and Berthold Auerbach 
(181 2-1882), Felix Mendelssohn (-Bartholdy) (1800-1847), an d 
Jacob Meyerbeer (1 794-1864), Karl Gustav Jacobi the mathe- 
matician (1804-1851), Gabriel Gustav Valentin the physiologist 
(1810-1883), and Moritz Lazarus (1824-1903) and Heymann 
Steinthal (1823-1899) the national psychologists. In politics, 
too, Edward Lasker (1829-1884) and Ludwig Bamberger (1823- 
1899) had shown how Jews could put their country before party, 
when, at the turning-point of German imperial history in 1866, 
they led the secession from the Fortschritts-Partei and founded 
the National Liberal party, which enabled Prince Bismarck 
to accomplish German unity. Even their financiers were not 
behind their Christian fellow-citizens in patriotism. Prince 
Bismarck himself confessed that the money for carrying on the 
1866 campaign was obtained from the Jewish banker Bleich- 
roeder, in face of the refusal of the money-market to support the 
war. Hence the voice of the old Jew-hatred — for in a weak 
way it was still occasionally heard in obscurantist corners — - 
was shamed into silence, and it was only in the European twilight 
— in Russia and Rumania — and in lands where medievalism 
still lingered, such as northern Africa and Persia, that oppression 
and persecution continued to dog the steps of the Jews. 

The signal for the change came in 1873, and was given un- 
consciously by one of the most distinguished Jews of his time, 
Edward Lasker, the gifted lieutenant of Bennigsen in the leader- 
ship of the National Liberal party. The unification of Germany 
in 1870, and the rapid payment of the enormous French war 
indemnity, had given an unprecedented impulse to industrial 
and financial activity throughout the empire. Money became 
cheap and speculation universal. A company mania set in which 
was favoured by the government, who granted railway and other 
concessions with a prodigal hand. The inevitable result of this 
state of things was first indicated by Jewish politicians and 
economists. On the 14th of January 1873, Edward Lasker 
called the attention of the Prussian diet to the dangers of the 
situation, while his colleague, Ludwig Bamberger, in an able 
article in the Preussischen Jahrbucher, condemned the policy 
which had permitted the milliards to glut the country instead 
of being paid on a plan which would have facilitated their gradual 
digestion by the economic machinery of the nation. Deeply 
impressed by the gravity of the impending crisis, Lasker instituted 
a searching inquiry, with the result that he discovered a series 
of grave company scandals in which financial promoters and 
aristocratic directors were chiefly involved. Undeterred by the 
fact that the leading spirit in these abuses, Bethel Henry Strous- 
berg (1823-1884), was a Jew, Lasker presented the results of 
his inquiry to the diet on the 7th of February 1873, in a speech 



136 



ANTI-SEMITISM 



of great power and full of sensational disclosures. The dramatic 
results of this speech need not be dwelt upon here (for details 
see Blum, Das deutsche Reich zur Zeit Bismarcks, pp. 153-181). 
It must suffice to say that in the following May the great Vienna 
" Krach " occurred, and the colossal bubble of speculation 
burst, bringing with it all the ruin foretold by Lasker and 
Bamberger. From the position occupied by the Jews in the 
commercial class, and especially in the financial section of that 
class, it was inevitable that a considerable number of them should 
figure in the scandals which followed. At this moment an obscure 
Hamburg journalist, Wilhelm Marr, who as far back as 1862 
had printed a still-born tract against the Jews (Judenspiegel) , 
published a sensational pamphlet entitled Der Sieg des Jitden- 
thums iiber das Germanthum (" The Victory of Judaism over 
Germanism "). The book fell upon fruitful soil. It applied to 
the nascent controversy a theory of nationality which, under 
the great sponsorship of Hegel, had seized on the minds of the 
German youth, and to which the stirring events of 1870 had 
already given a deep practical significance. The state, according 
to the Hegelians, should be rational, and the nation should 
be a unit comprising individuals speaking the same language 
and of the same racial origin. Heterogeneous elements might 
be absorbed, but if they could not be reduced to the national 
type they should be eliminated. This was the pseudo-scientific 
note of the new anti-Semitism, the theory which differentiated 
it from the old religious Jew-hatred and sought to give it a 
rational place in modern thought. Marr's pamphlet, which 
reviewed the facts of the Jewish social concentration without 
noticing their essentially transitional character, proved the 
pioneer of this teaching. It was, however, in the passions of 
party politics that the new crusade found its chief sources of 
vitality. The enemies of the bourgeoisie at once saw that the 
movement was calculated to discredit and weaken the school 
of Manchester Liberalism, then in the ascendant. Agrarian 
capitalism, which had been dethroned by industrial capitalism 
in 1848, and had burnt its fingers in 1873, seized the opportunity 
of paying off old scores. The clericals, smarting under the 
Kulturkampf, which was supported by the whole body of Jewish 
liberalism, joined eagerly in the new cry. In 1876 another 
sensational pamphlet was published, Otto Glogau's Die Borsen 
und Grundergeschwindel in Berlin (" The Bourses and the 
Company Swindles in Berlin "), dealing in detail with the Jewish 
participation in the scandals first revealed by Lasker. The 
agitation gradually swelled, its growth being helped by the 
sensitiveness and cacoethes scribendi of the Jews themselves, 
who contributed two pamphlets and a much larger proportion 
of newspaper articles for every one supplied by their opponents 
(Jacobs. Bibliog. Jew. Question, p. xi.). Up to 1870, however, 
it was more of a literary than a political agitation, and was 
generally regarded only as an ephemeral craze or a passing 
spasm of popular passion. 

Towards the end of 1879 it spread with sudden fury over 
the whole of. Germany. This outburst, at a moment when no 
new financial scandals or other illustrations of Semitic demoraliza- 
tion and domination were before the public, has never been fully 
explained. It is impossible to doubt, however, that the secret 
springs of the new agitation were more or less directly supplied 
by Prince Bismarck himself. Since 1877 the relations between 
the chancellor and the National Liberals had gradually become 
strained. The deficit in the budget had compelled the govern- 
ment to think of- new taxes, and in order to carry them through 
the Reichstag the support of the National Liberals had been 
solicited. Until then the National Liberals had faithfully 
supported the chancellor in nursing the consolidation of the 
new empire, but the great dream of its leaders, especially of 
Lasker and Bamberger, who had learnt their politics in England, 
was to obtain a constitutional and economic regime similar to 
that of the British Isles. The organization of German unity 
was now completed, and they regarded the new overtures of 
Prince Bismarck as an opportunity for pressing their constitu- 
tional demands. These were refused, the Reichstag was dissolved 
and Prince Bismarck boldly came forward with a new fiscal 



policy, a combination of protection and state socialism. Lasker 
and Bamberger thereupon led a powerful secession of National 
Liberals into opposition, and the chancellor was compelled to 
seek a new majority among the ultra-Conservatives and the 
Roman Catholic Centre. This was the beginning of the famous 
" journey to Canossa." Bismarck did not hide his mortification. 
He began to recognize in anti-Semitism a means of " dishing " 
the Judaized liberals; and to his creatures who assisted him in 
his press campaigns he dropped significant hints in this sense 
(Busch, Bismarck, \\. 453-454, iii. 16). He even spoke of a new 
Kulturkampf against the Jews (ibid. ii. p. 484). How these 
hints were acted upon has not been revealed, but it is sufficiently 
instructive to notice that the final breach with the National 
Liberals took place in July 1879, and that it was immediately 
followed by a violent revival of the anti-Semitic agitation. 
Marr's pamphlet was reprinted, and within a few months ran 
through nine further editions. The historian Treitschke gave 
the sanction of his great name to the movement. The Conserva- 
tive and Ultramontane press rang with the sins of the Jews. 
In October an anti-Semitic league was founded in Berlin and 
Dresden (for statutes of the league see Nineteenth Century, 
February 1881, p. 344). 

The leadership of the agitation was now definitely assumed by 
a man who combined with social influence, oratorical power and 
inexhaustible energy, a definite scheme of social regeneration and 
an organization for carrying it out. This man was Adolf Stocker 
(b. 1835), one of the court preachers. He had embraced the 
doctrines of Christian socialism which the Roman Catholics, 
under the guidance of Archbishop Ketteler, had adopted from 
the teachings of the Jew Lassalle (Nitti, Catholic Socialism, pp. 
94-96, 122, 127), and he had formed a society called "The 
Christian Social Working-man's Union." He was also a cbn^ 
spicuous member of the Prussian diet, where he sat and voted 
with the Conservatives. He found himself in strong sympathy 
with Prince Bismarck's new economic policy, which, although 
also of Lassallian origin (Kohut, Ferdinand Lassalle, pp. 144 et 
seq.), was claimed by its author as being essentially Christian 
(Busch, p. 483). Under his auspices the years 1880-1881 became 
a period of bitter and scandalous conflict with the Jews. The 
Conservatives supported him, partly to satisfy their old grudges 
against the Liberal bourgeoisie and partly because Christian 
Socialism, with its anti-Semitic appeal to ignorant prejudice, was 
likely to weaken the hold of the Social Democrats on the lower 
classes. The Lutheran clergy followed suit, in order to prevent 
the Roman Catholics from obtaining a monopoly of Christian 
Socialist^ while the Ultramontanes readily adopted anti- 
Semitism, partly to maintain their monopoly, and partly to 
avenge themselves on the Jewish and Liberal supporters of the 
Kulturkampf. In this way a formidable body of public opinion 
was recruited for the anti-Semites. Violent debates took place 
in the Prussian diet. A petition to exclude the Jews from the 
national schools and universities and to disable them from holding 
public appointments was presented to Prince Bismarck. Jews 
were boycotted and insulted. Duels between Jews and anti- 
Semites, many of them fatal, became of daily occurrence. Even 
unruly demonstrations and street riots were reported. Pamphlets 
attacking every phase and aspect of Jewish life streamed by the 
hundred from the printing-press. On their side the Jews did not 
want for friends, and it was owing to the strong attitude adopted 
by the Liberals that the agitation failed to secure 1 legislative 
fruition. The crown prince (afterwards Emperor Frederick) and 
crown princess boldly set themselves at the head of the party 
of protest. The crown prince publicly declared that the agita- 
tion was " a shame and a disgrace to Germany." A manifesto 
denouncing the movement as a blot on German culture, a danger 
to German unity and a flagrant injustice to the Jews themselves, 
was signed by a long list of illustrious men, including Herr von 
Forckenbeck, Professors Mommsen, Gneist, Droysen, Virchow, 
and Dr Werner Siemens (Times, November 18, 1880). During 
the Reichstag elections of 1881 the agitation played an active 
part, but without much effect, although Stocker was elected. 
This was due to the fact that the great Conservative parties, so 



ANTI-SEMITISM 



i37 



far as their political organizations were concerned, still remained 
chary of publicly identifying themselves with a movement which, 
in its essence, was of socialistic tendency. Hence the electoral 
returns of that year supplied no sure guide to the strength of 
anti-Semitic opinion among the German people. 

The first severe blow suffered by the German anti-Semites was 
in 1881, when, to the indignation of the whole civilized world, the 
barbarous riots against the Jews in Russia and the revival of the 
medieval Blood Accusation in Hungary (see infra) illustrated 
the liability of unreasoning mobs to carry into violent practice 
the incendiary doctrines of the new Jew-haters. From this blow 
anti-Semitism might have recovered had it not been for the 
divisions and scandals in its own ranks, and the artificial forms it 
subsequently assumed through factitious alliances with political 
parties bent less on persecuting the Jews than on profiting by the 
anti-Jewish agitation. The divisions showed themselves at the 
first attempt to form a political party on an anti-Semitic basis.* 
Imperceptibly the agitators had grouped themselves into two 
classes, economic and ethnological anti-Semites. The imprac- 
ticable racial views of Marr and Treitschke had not found 
favour with Stocker and the Christian Socialists. They were 
disposed to leave the Jews in peace so long as they behaved 
themselves properly, and although they carried on their agitation 
against Jewish malpractices in a comprehensive form which 
seemed superficially to identify them with the root-and-branch 
anti-Semites, they were in reality not inclined to accept the racial 
theory with its scheme of revived Jewish disabilities (Huret, La 
Question Sociale — interview with Stocker). This feeling was 
strengthened by a tendency on the part of an extreme wing of 
the racial anti-Semites to extend their campaign against Judaism 
to its offspring, Christianity. In 1879 Professor Sepp, arguing 
that Jesus was of no human race, had proposed that Christianity 
should reject the Hebrew Scriptures and seek a fresh historical 
basis in the cuneiform inscriptions. Later Dr Eugen Duhring, in 
several brochures, notably Die Judenfrage als Frage des Rassen- 
charaklers (1881, 5th ed. Berlin, 1901), had attacked Christianity 
as a manifestation of the Semitic spirit which was not compatible 
with the theological and ethical conceptions of the Scandinavian 
peoples. The philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche had also adopted 
the same view, without noticing that it was a reduclio ad absurdum 
of the whole agitation, in his Menschliches, Alhumenschliches 
(1878), Jenseits von Gut und Bose (1886), Genealogie der Moral 
(1887) . With these tendencies the Christian Socialists could have 
no sympathy, and the consequence was that when in March 1881 
a political organization of anti-Semitism was attempted, two 
rival bodies were created, the "' Deutsche Volksverein," under the 
Conservative auspices of Herr Liebermann von Sonnenberg (b. 
1848) and Herr Forster, and the " Sociale Reichsverein," led by 
the racial and Radical anti-Semites, Ernst Henrici (b. 1854) and 
Otto Bfickel (b. 1859). In 1886, at an anti-Semitic congress held 
at Cassel a reunion was effected under the name of the " Deutsche 
antisemitische Verein," but this only lasted three years. In June 
1889 the anti-Semitic Christian Socialists under Stocker again 
seceded. 

Meanwhile racial anti-Semitism with its wholesale radical 
proposals had been making considerable progress among the 
ignorant lower classes. It adapted itself better to popular 
passions and inherited prejudice than the more academic con- 
ceptions of the Christian Socialists. The latter, too, were largely 
Conservatives, and their points of contact with the proletariat 
were at best artificial. Among the Hessian peasantry the 
inflammatory appeals of Bockel secured many adherents. This 
paved the way for a new anti-Semitic leader, Herrmann Ahlwardt 
(b. 1846), who, towards the end of the 'eighties, eclipsed all the 
other anti-Semites by the sensationalism and violence with which 
he prosecuted the campaign. Ahlwardt was a person of evil 
notoriety. He was loaded with debt. In the Manche decoration 
scandals it was proved that he had acted first as a corrupt 
intermediary and afterwards as the betrayer of his confederates. 
His anti-Semitism was adopted originally as a means of chantage, 
and it was only when it failed to yield profit in this form that he 
came out boldly as an agitator. The wildness, unscrupulousness, 



and full-bloodedness of his propaganda enchanted the mob, and 
he bid fair to become a powerful democratic leader. His 
pamphlets, full of scandalous revelations of alleged malpractices 
of eminent Jews, were read with avidity. No fewer than ten of 
them were written and published during 1892. Over and over 
again he was prosecuted for libel and convicted, but this seemed 
only to strengthen his influence with his followers. The Roman 
Catholic clergy and newspapers helped to inflame the popular 
passions. The result was that anti-Jewish riots broke out. At 
Neustettjn the Jewish synagogue was burnt, and at Xanten the 
Blood Accusation was revived, and a Jewish butcher was tried 
on the ancient charge of murdering a Christian child' for ritual 
purposes. The man was, of course, acquitted, but the symptoms 
it revealed of reviving medievalism strongly stirred the liberal 
and cultured mind of Germany. All protest, however, seemed 
powerless, and the barbarian movement appeared destined to 
carry everything before it. 

German politics at this moment were in a very intricate state. 
Prince Bismarck had retired, and Count Caprivi, with a pro- 
gramme of general conciliation based on Liberal principles, was 
in power. Alarmed by the non-renewal of the anti-Socialist law, 
and by the conclusion of commercial treaties which made great 
concessions to German industry, the landed gentry and the 
Conservative party became alienated from the new chancellor. 
In January 1892 the split was completed by the withdrawal by 
the government of the Primary Education bill, which had been 
designed to place primary instruction on a religious basis. The 
Conservatives saw their opportunity of posing as the party of 
Christianity against the Liberals and Socialists, who had wrecked 
the bill, and they began to look towards Ahlwardt as a possible 
ally. He had the advantages over Stocker that he was not a 
Socialist, and that he was prepared to lead his apparently large 
following to assist the agrarian movement and weaken the Social 
Democrats. The intrigue gradually came to light. Towards the 
end of the year Herr Liebknecht, the Social Democratic leader, 
denounced the Conservatives to the Reichstag as being concerned 
" in using the anti-Semitic movement as a bastard edition of: 
Socialism for the use of stupid people." (1st December). Two 
days later the charge was confirmed. At a meeting of the party 
held on the 3rd of December the following plank was added to 
the Conservative programme : ' ' We combat the oppressive and 
disintegrating Jewish influence on our national life; we demand 
for our Christian people a Christian magistracy and Christian 
teachers for Christian pupils; we repudiate the excesses of anti- 
Semitism." In pursuance of the resolution Ahlwardt was re- 
turned to the Reichstag at a by-election by the Conservative 
district of Arnswalde-Friedeberg. The coalition was, however, 
not yet completed. The intransigeant Conservatives, led by 
Baron von Hammerstein, the editor of the Kreuz-Zeitung, justly 
felt that the concluding sentence of the resolution of the 3rd of 
December repudiating " the excesses of anti-Semitism " was 
calculated to hinder a full and loyal co-operation between the two 
parties. Accordingly on the 9th of December another meeting of 
the party was summoned. Twelve hundred members met at the 
Tivoli Hall in Berlin, and with only seven dissentients solemnly 
expunged the offending sentence from the resolution. The 
history of political parties may be searched in vain for a parallel 
to this discreditable transaction. 

The capture of the Conservative party proved the high-water 
mark of German anti-Semitism. From that moment the tide 
began to recede. All that was best in German national life was 
scandalized by the cynical tactics of the Conservatives. The 
emperor, strong Christian though he was, was shocked at the 
idea of serving Christianity by a compact with unscrupulous 
demagogues and ignorant fanatics. Prince Bismarck growled 
out a stinging sarcasm from his retreat at Friedrichsruh. Even 
Stocker raised his voice in protest against the " Ahlwardtismus " 
and " Bockelianismus," and called upon his Conservative 
colleagues to distinguish between " respectable and disreputable 
anti-Semitism." As for the Liberals and Socialists, they filled 
the air with bitter laughter, and declared from the housetops that 
the stupid party had at last been overwhelmed by its own 



'38 



ANTI-SEMITISM 



Stupidity. The Conservatives began to suspect that they had 
made a false step, and they were confirmed in this belief by the 
conduct of their new ally in the Reichstag. His debut in parlia- 
ment was the signal for a succession of disgraceful scenes. His 
whole campaign of calumny was transferred to the floor of the 
house, and for some weeks the Reichstag discussed little else than 
his so-called revelations. The Conservatives listened to his wild 
charges in uncomfortable silence, and refused to support him. 
Stocker opposed him in a violent speech. The Radicals and 
Socialists, taking an accurate measure of the shallow vanity of 
the man, adopted the policy of giving him " enough rope." 
Shortly after his election he was condemned to five months' 
imprisonment for libel, and he would have been arrested but for 
the interposition of the Socialist party, including five Jews, who 
claimed for him the immunities of a member of parliament. 
When he moved for a commission to inquire into his revelations, 
it was again the Socialist party which supported him, with the 
result that all his charges, without exception, were found to be 
absolutely baseless. Ahlwardt was covered with ridicule, and 
when in May the Reichstag was dissolved, he was marched off to 
prison to undergo the sentence for libel from which his parlia- 
mentary privilege had up to that moment protected him. 

His hold on the anti-Semitic populace, was, however, not 
diminished. On the contrary, the action of the Conservatives at 
the Tivoli congress could not be at once eradicated from the 
minds of the Conservative voters, and when the electoral cam- 
paign began it was found impossible to explain to them that the 
party leaders had changed their minds. The result was that 
Ahlwardt, although in prison, was elected by two constituencies. 
At Arnswalde-Friedeberg he was returned in the teeth of the 
opposition of the official Conservatives, and at Neustettin he 
defeated no less a person than his anti-Semitic opponent Stocker. 
Fifteen other anti-Semites, all of the Ahlwardtian school, were 
elected. This, however, represented little in the way of political 
influence; for henceforth the party had to stand alone as one of 
the many minor factions in the Reichstag, avoided by all the great 
parties, and too weak to exercise any influence on the main course 
of affairs. 

During the subsequent seven years it became more and more 
discredited. The financial scandals connected with Forster's 
attempt to found a Christian Socialist colony in Paraguay, the 
conviction of Baron von Hammerstein, the anti-Semitic Con- 
servative leader, for forgery andswindling(i895-i89<>),andseveral 
minor scandals of the same unsavoury character, covered the 
party with the very obloquy which it had attempted to attach to 
the Jews. At the same time the Christian Socialists who had 
remained with the Conservative party also suffered. After the 
elections of 1803, Stocker was dismissed from his post of court 
preacher, and publicly reprimanded for speaking familiarly of 
the empress. Two years later the Christian Socialist, Pastor 
Neumann, observing the tendency of the Conservatives tocaalesce 
with the moderate Liberals in antagonism to Social Democracy, 
declared against the Conservative party. The following year 
the emperor publicly condemned Christian Socialism and the 
" political pastors," and Stocker was expelled from the Conserva- 
tive party for refusing to modify the socialistic propanganda of his 
organ, Das Yolk. His fall was completed by a quarrel with the 
Evangelical Social Union. He left the Union and appealed to 
the Lutheran clergy to found a new church social organization, 
but met with no response. Another blow to anti-Semitism came 
from the Roman Catholics. They had become alarmed by the 
unbridled violence of the Ahlwardtians, and when in 1894 
Forster declared in an address to the German anti-Semitic Union 
that anarchical outrages like the murder of President Carnot were 
as much dut tc the " Anarchismus von oben " as the " Anar- 
chismus von unten,'- the Ultramontane Germania publicly 
washed its hands of the Jew-baiters (1st of July 1894). Thus 
gradually German anti-Semitism became stripped of every 
adventitious alliance; and at the general election of 1898 it only 
managed to return twelve members to the Reichstag, and in 1903 
its party strength fell to nine. A remarkable revival in its for- 
tunes, however; took place between 1905 and 1907. Identifying 



Russia. 



itself with the extreme Chauvinists and Anglophobes it profited by 
the anti-national errors of the Clericals and Socialists, and won no 
fewer than twelve by-elections. At the general election of 1907 
its jingoism and aggressive Protestantism were rewarded with 
twenty-five seats. It is clear, however, from the figures of the 
second ballots that these successes owed far more to the tend- 
encies of the party in the field of general politics than to its anti- 
Semitism. Indeed the specifically anti-Semitic movement has 
shown little activity since 1893. 

The causes of the decline of German anti-Semitism are not 
difficult to determine. While it remained a theory of nationality 
and a fad of the metaphysicians, it made considerable noise in the 
world, but without exercising much practical influence. When 
it attempted to play an active part in politics it became sub- 
merged by the ignorant and superstitious voters, who could not 
understand its scientific justification, but who were quite ready 
*to declaim and riot against the Jew bogey. It thus became a sort 
of Jacquerie which, being exploited by unscrupulous demagogues, 
soon alienated all its respectable elements. Its moments of real 
importance have been due not to inherent strength but to the 
uses made of it by other political parties for their own purposes. 
These coalitions are no longer of perilous significance so far as the 
Jews are concerned, chiefly because, in face of the menace of 
democratic socialism and its unholy alliance with the Roman 
Catholic Centrum, all supporters of the present organization of 
society have found it necessary to sink their differences. The new 
social struggle has eclipsed the racial theory of nationality. The 
Social Democrat became the enemy, and the new reaction counted 
on the support of the rich Jews and the strongly individualist 
Jewish middle class to assist it in preserving the existing social 
structure. Hence in Prince Billow's " Bloc " (1908) anti- 
Semites figured side by side with Judeophil Radicals. 

More serious have been the effects of German anti-Semitic 
teachings on the political and social life of the countries adjacent 
to the empire — Russia, Austria and France. In 
Russia these effects were first seriously felt owing to 
the fury of autocratic reaction to which the tragic death of the 
tsar Alexander II. gave rise. This, however, like the Strousberg 
Krach in Germany, was only the proximate cause of the out- 
break. There were other elements which had created a milieu 
peculiarly favourable to the transplantation of the German craze. 
In the first place the medieval anti-Semitism was still an integral 
part of the polity of the empire. The Jews were cooped up in one 
huge ghetto in the western provinces, " marked out to all their 
fellow-countrymen as aliens, and a pariah caste set apart for 
special and degrading treatment " {Persecution of the Jews in 
Russia, i89i,p.s). In the next place, owing to the emancipation 
of the serfs which had half ruined the landowners, while creating 
a free but moneyless peasantry, the Jews, who could be neither 
nobles nor peasants, had found a vocation as money-lenders 
and as middlemen between the grain producers, and the grain 
consumers and exporters. There is no evidence that this function 
was performed, as a rule, in an exorbitant or oppressive way. 
On the contrary, the fall in the value of cereals on all the pro- 
vincial markets, after the riots of 1881, shows that the Jewish 
competition had previously assured full prices to the farmers 
(Schwabacher, Denkschrift, 1882, p. 27). Nevertheless, the Jewish 
activity or " exploitation," as it was called, was resented, and 
the ill-feeling it caused among landowners and farmers was 
shared by non- Jewish middlemen and merchants who had thereby 
been compelled to be satisfied with small profits. Still there was 
but little thought of seeking a remedy in an organized anti- 
Jewish movement. On the contrary, the abnormal situation 
aggravated by the disappointments and depression caused by 
the Turkish war, had stimulated a widespread demand for con- 
stitutional changes which would enable the people to adopt a 
state-machinery more exactly suited to their needs. Among the 
peasantry this demand was promoted and fomented by the 
Nihilists, and among the landowners it was largely adopted as a 
means of checking what threatened to become a new Jacquerie 
(Walcker, Gegenwartige Lage Russlands, 1873; Innere Krisis 
Russlands, 1876). The tsar, Alexander II., strongly sympathized 



ANTI-SEMITISM 



I 39 



with this movement, and on the advice of Count Loris-Melikov 
and the council of ministers a rudimentary scheme of parlia- 
mentary government had been drafted and actually signed when 
the emperor was assassinated. Meanwhile a nationalist and re- 
actionary agitation, originating like its German analogue in the 
Hegelianism of a section of the lettered public, had manifested 
itself in Moscow. After some early vicissitudes, it had been 
organized, under the auspices of Alexis Kireiev, Chomyakov, 
Aksakov and Kochelev, into the Slavophil party, with a 
Romanticist programme of reforms based on the old traditions 
of the pre-Petrine epoch. This party gave a great impetus to 
Slav nationalism. Its final possibilities were sanguinarily 
illustrated by Muraviev's campaign in Poland in 1863, and 
in the war against Turkey in 1877, which was exclusively its 
handiwork (Statement by General Kireiev: Schiitz, Das heutige 
Russland, p. 104). After the assassination of Alexander II. the 
Slavophil teaching, as expounded by Ignatiev and Pobedo- 
nostsev, became paramount in the government, and the new tsar 
was persuaded to cancel the constitutional'project of his father. 
The more liberal views of a section of the Slavophils under 
Aksakov, who had been in favour of representative institutions 
on traditional lines, were displaced by the reactionary system of 
Pobfidonostsev, who took his stand on absolutism, orthodoxy 
and the racial unity of the Russian people. This was the situa- 
tion on the eve of Easter 1881. The hardening nationalism 
above, the increasing discontent below, the economic activity of 
the Hebrew heretics and aliens, and the echoes of anti-Semitism 
from over the western border were combining for an explosion. 

A scuffle in a tavern at Elisabethgrad in Kherson sufficed 
to ignite this combustible material. The scuffle grew into a 
riot, the tavern was sacked, and the drunken mob, hounded on 
by agitators who declared that the Jews were using Christian 
blood for the manufacture of their Easter bread, attacked and 
looted the Jewish quarter. The outbreak spread rapidly. On 
the 7 th of May there was a similar riot at Smiela, near Cherkasy, 
and the following day there was a violent outbreak at Kiev, 
which left 2000 Jews homeless. Within a few weeks the whole of 
western Russia, from the Black Sea to the Baltic, was smoking 
with the ruins of Jewish homes. Scores of Jewish women were 
dishonoured, hundreds of men, women and children were 
slaughtered, and tens of thousands were reduced to beggary and 
left without a shelter. Murderous riots or incendiary outrages 
took place in no fewer than 167 towns and villages, including 
Warsaw, Odessa and Kiev. Europe had witnessed no such 
scenes of mob savagery since the Black Death massacres in the 
14th century. As the facts gradually filtered through to the 
western capitals they caused a thrill of horror everywhere. 
An indignation meeting held at the Mansion House in London, 
under the presidency of the lord mayor, was the signal for a long 
series of popular demonstrations condemning the persecutions, 
held in most of the chief cities of England and the continent. 

Except as stimulated by the Judeophobe revival in Germany 
the Russian outbreak in its earlier forms does not belong speci- 
fically to modern anti-Semitism. It was essentially a medieval 
uprising animated by the religious fanaticism, gross superstition 
and predatory instincts of a people still in the medieval stage 
of their development. This is proved by the fact that, although 
the Russian peasant was supposed to be a victim of unbearable 
Jewish " exploitation," he was not moved to riot until he had 
been brutalized by drink and excited by the old fable of the 
Blood Accusation. The modern anti-Semitic element came 
from above and followed closely on the heels of the riots. It 
has been freely charged against the Russian government that it 
promoted the riots in 1881 in order to distract popular attention 
from the Nihilist propaganda and from the political disappoint^ 
ments involved in the cancellation of the previous tsar's con- 
stitutional project (Lazare, L' Antisemitisme, p. 21 1). This seems 
to be true of General Ignatiev, then minister of the interior, and 
the secret police (Semenoff, The Russian Government and the 
Massacres, pp. 17, 32, 241). It is certain that the local authori- 
ties, both civil and military, favoured the outbreak, and took no 
steps to suppress it, a-nd that the feudal bureaucracy who had 



just escaped a great danger were not sorry to see the discontented 
populace venting their passions on the Jews. In the higher 
circles of the government, however, other views prevailed. The 
tsar himself was at first persuaded that the riots were the work 
of Nihilists, and he publicly promised his protection to the Jews. 
On the other hand, his ministers, ardent Slavophils, thought 
they recognized in the outbreak an endorsement of the nationalist 
teaching of which they were the apostles, and, while reprobating 
the acts of violence, came to the conclusion that the most reason- 
able solution was to aggravate the legal disabilities of the perse- 
cuted aliens and heretics. To this view the tsar was won over, 
partly by the clamorous indignation of western Europe, which 
had wounded his national amour propre to the quick, and partly 
by the strongly partisan report of a commission appointed 
to inquire, not into the administrative complaisance which had 
allowed riot to run loose over the western and southern provinces, 
but into the " exploitation " alleged against the Jews, the 
reasons why " the former-laws limiting the rights of the Jews " 
had been mitigated, and how these laws could be altered so as 
" to stop the pernicious conduct of the Jews " (Rescript of the 
3rd of September 1881). The result of this report was the 
drafting of a " Temporary Order concerning the Jews " by the 
minister of the interior, which received the assent of the tsar 
on the 3 rd of May 1 882 . This order, which was so little temporary 
that it has not yet been repealed, had the effect of creating a 
number of fresh ghettos within the. pale of Jewish settlement. 
The Jews were cooped up within the towns, and their rural 
interests were arbitrarily confiscated. The doubtful incidence 
of the order gave rise to a number of judgments of the senate, 
by which all its persecuting possibilities were brought out, with 
the result that the activities of the Jews were completely para- 
lysed, and they became a prey to unparalleled cruelty. As the 
gruesome effect of this legislation became known, a fresh outburst 
of horror and indignation swelled up from western Europe. It 
proved powerless. Count Ignatiev was dismissed owing to the 
protests of high-placed Russians, who were disgusted by the new 
Kulturkampf, but his work remained, and, under the influence 
of Pobedonostsev, the procurator of the Holy Synod, the policy 
of the " May Laws," as they were significantly called, was applied 
to every aspect of Jewish life with pitiless rigour. The temper of 
the tsar may be judged by the fact that when an appeal for mercy 
from an illustrious personage in England was conveyed to him at 
Fredensborg through the gracious medium of the tsaritsa, he 
angrily exclaimed within the hearing of an Englishman in the 
ante-room who was the bearer of the message, " Never let me 
hear you mention the name of that people again !" 

The Russian May Laws are the most conspicuous legisla- 
tive monument achieved by modern anti-Semitism. It is true 
that they re-enacted regulations which resemble the oppressive 
statutes introduced into Poland through the influence of the 
Jesuits in the 16th century (Sternberg, Gesch. d. Juden in Polen, 
pp. 141 et seq.), but their Orthodox authors were as little con- 
scious of this irony of history as they were of the Teutonic 
origins of the whole Slavophil movement. These laws are an 
experimental application of the political principles extracted by 
Marr and his German disciples from the metaphysics of Hegel, 
and as such they afford a valuable means of testing the practical 
operation of modern anti-Semitism. Their result was a wide- 
spread commercial depression which was felt all over the empire. 
Even before the May Laws were definitely promulgated the 
passport registers showed that the anti-Semitic movement had 
driven 67,900 Jews across the frontier, and it was estimated 
that they had taken with them 13,000,000 roubles, representing a 
minimum loss of 60,000,000 roubles to the annual turnover of 
flie country's trade. Towards the end of 1882 it was calculated 
that the agitation had cost Russia as much as the whole Turkish 
war of 1877. Trade was everywhere paralysed. The enormous 
increase of bankruptcies, the transfer of investments to foreign 
funds, the consequent fall in the value of the rouble and the 
prices of Russian stocks, the suspension of farming queries
owing to advances on growing crops being no longer available, 
the rise in the prices of the necessaries of life, and lastly, the 



140 



ANTI-SEMITISM 



appearance of famine, filled half the empire with gloom. Banks 
closed their doors, and the great provincial fairs proved failures. 
When it was proposed to expel the Jews from Moscow there was 
a loud outcry all over the sacred city, and even the Orthodox 
merchants, realizing that the measure would ruin their flourishing 
trade with the south and west, petitioned against it. The Moscow 
Exhibition proved a failure. Nevertheless the government per- 
sisted with its harsh policy, and Jewish refugees streamed by 
tens of thousands across the western frontier to seek am asylum 
in other lands. In 1891 the alarm caused by this emigration led 
to further protests from abroad. The citizens of London again 
assembled at Guildhall, and addressed a petition to the tsar on 
behalf of his Hebrew subjects. It was handed back to the lord 
mayor by the Russian ambassador; with a curt intimation that 
the emperor declined to receive it. At the same time orders were 
defiantly given that the May Laws should be strictly enforced; 
Meanwhile the Russian minister of finance was at his wits' ends 
for money. Negotiations for a large loan had been entered upon 
with the house of Rothschild, and a preliminary contract had 
been signed, when, at the instance of the London firm, M- 
Wyshnigradski, the finance minister, was informed that unless 
the persecutions of the Jews were stopped the great banking- 
house would be compelled to withdraw from the operation. 
Deeply mortified by this attempt to deal with him de puissance a 
puissance, the tsar peremptorily broke off the negotiations, and 
ordered that overtures should be made to a non-Jewish French 
syndicate. In this way anti-Semitism, which had already so 
profoundly influenced the domestic politics of Europe, set its 
mark on the international relations of the powers, for it was 
the urgent need of the Russian treasury quite as much as the 
termination of Prince Bismarck's secret treaty of mutual neu- 
trality which brought about the Franco-Russian alliance (Daudet, 
Hisl. Dipt, de I' Alliance Franco-Russe, pp. 2 59 et. seq.). 

For nearly three years more the persecutions continued. 
Elated by the success of his crusade against the Jews, Pob&do- 
nostsev extended his persecuting policy to other non-Orthodox 
denominations. The legislation against the Protestant Stundists 
became almost as unbearable as that imposed on the Jews. In 
the report of the Holy Synod, presented to the tsar towards the 
end of 1893, the procurator called for repressive measures against 
Roman Catholics, Moslems and Buddhists, and denounced the 
rationalist tendency of the whole system of secular education in 
the empire {Neue Freie Presse, 31st January 1894). A year later, 
however, the tsar died, and his successor, without repealing any 
of the persecuting laws, let it gradually be understood that their 
rigorous application might be mitigated. The country was tired 
and exhausted by the persecution, and the tolerant hints which 
came from high quarters were acted upon with significant alacrity. 

A new era of conflict dawned with the great constitutional 
struggle towards the end of the century. The conditions, however, 
were very different from those which prevailed in the 'eighties. 
The May Laws had avenged themselves With singular fitness. By 
confining the Jews to the towns at the very moment that Count 
Witte's policy of protection was creating an enormous industrial 
proletariat they placed at the disposal of the disaffected masses 
an ally powerful in numbers and intelligence, and especially in its 
bitter sense of wrong, its reckless despair and its cosmopolitan 
outlook and connexions.. As early as 1885 the Jewish workmen 
assisted by Jewish university students led the way in the 
formation of trades unions. They also became the colporteurs of 
western European socialism, and they played an important part 
in the organization of the Russian Social Democratic Federation 
which their " Arbeiter Bund " joined in 1898 with no fewer than 
30,000 members. The Jewish element in the new democratic 
movement excited the resentment of the government, and undCr 
the minister of the interior, M. Sipiaguine, the persecuting laws 
were once more rigorously enforced. The " Bund " replied in 
1001 by proclaiming itself frankly political and revolutionary, 
and at once took a leading place in the revolutionary movement. 
The reactionaries were not slow to profit by this circumstance. 
With the support of M. Plehve, the new minister of the interior, 
and the whole of the bureaucratic class they denounced the 



revolution as a Jewish conspiracy, engineered for exclusively 
Jewish purposes and designed to establish a Jewish domination 
over the Russian people. The government and even the intimates 
of the tsar became persuaded that only by the terrorization of 
the Jews could the revolutionary movement be effectually dealt 
with. For this purpose a so-called League of True Russians was 
formed. Under high patronage, and with the assistance of the 
secret police and a large number of the local authorities, it set 
itself to stir-up the populace, chiefly the fanatics and the hooligans, 
against the Jews. Incendiary proclamations were prepared and 
printed in the ministry of the interior itself, and were circulated 
by the provincial governors and the police (Prince Urussov's 
speech in the Duma, June'8 (21), 1906). The result was another 
series of massacres which began at Kishinev in 1903 and cul- 
minated in wholesale butchery at Odessa and Bielostok in October 
1905.' An attempt was made to picture and excuse these 
outbreaks as a national upheaval against the Jew-made revolu- 
tion but it failed. They only embittered the revolutionists and 
"intellectuals" throughout the country, and. won for them a 
great deal of outspoken sympathy abroad. The artificiality of 
the anti- Jewish outbreak was illustrated by the first Duma 
elections. Thirteen Jews Were elected and every constituency 
which had been the scene of a pogrom returned a liberal member, 
Unfortunately the Jews benefited little by the new parliamentary 
constitution. The privileges of voting for members of the Duma 
and Of sitting in the new assembly were granted them, but all 
their civil and religious disabilities were maintained. Both the 
first and the second Duma proposed to emancipate them, but 
they were dissolved before any action could be taken. By the 
modification of the electoral law under which the third Duma was 
elected the voting power of the Jews was diminished and further 
restrictions were imposed upon them through official intimidation 
during the elections. The result was that only two Jews were 
elected, while the reactionary tendency of the new electorate 
virtually removed the question of their emancipation from the 
field of practical politics. 

The only other country in Europe in which a legalized anti- 
Semitism exists is Rumania. The conditions are very similar to 
those which obtain in Russia, with the important numahia 
difference that Rumania is a constitutional country, 
and that the Jewish persecutions are the work of the elected 
deputies of the nation. Like the Bourgeois Gentilhomme who 
wrote prose all his life without knowing it, the Rumanians 
practised the nationalist doctrines of the Hegelian anti-Semites 
unconsciously long before they were formulated in .Germany. In 
the old days of Turkish domination the lot of the Rumanian Jews 
was not conspicuously unhappy. It was only when the nation 
began to be emancipated, and the struggle in the East assumed 
the form of a crusade against Islam that the Jews were persecuted. 
Rumanian politicians preached a nationalism limited exclusively 
to indigenous Christians, and they were strongly supported by all 
who felt the commercial competition of the Jews. Thus, al- 
though the Jews had been settled in the land for many centuries, 
they were by law declared aliens. This was done in defiance of 
the treaty of Paris of 1856 and the convention of, 1858 which 
declared all Rumans to be equal before the law. Under the 
influence of this distinction the Jews became persecuted, and 
sanguinary riots were of frequent occurrence. The realization 
of a Jewish question led to legislation imposing disabilities on the 
Jews. In 1878 the congress of Berlin agreed to recognize ■ the 
independence of Rumania on condition that all religious dis- 
abilities were removed. Rumania agreed to this condition, but 
ultimately persuaded the powers to allow her to carry out the 
emancipation of the Jews gradually. Persecutions, however, 
continued, and in 1902 they led to a great exodus of Jews. The 
United States addressed a strong remonstrance to the Rumanian 
government, but the condition of the Jews was in no way im- 
proved. Their emancipation was in 1908 as far off as ever, and 
their disabilities heavier than those of their brethren in Russia. 
For this state of thing's the example of the anti-Semites in 
Germany, Russia, Austria and France was largely to blame, since 
it had justified the intolerance of the Rumans. Owing, also, to 



ANTI-SEMITISM 



141 



the fact that of late years Rumania had become a sort of annexe 
of the Triple Alliance, it wag found impossible to induce the 
signatories of the treaty of Berlin to take action to compel the 
state to fulfil its obligations under that treaty. 

In Austria-Hungary the anti-Semitic impulses came almost 
simultaneously from the North and East. Already in the 
'seventies the doctrinaire anti-Semitism of Berlin had 
Hungary, found an ec ho in Budapest. Two members of the diet, 
Victor Istoczy and Geza Onody, together with a 
publicist named Georg Marczianyi, busied themselves in making 
known the doctrine of Marr in Hungary. Marczianyi, who 
translated the German Judeophobe pamphlets into Magyar, and 
the Magyar works of Onody into German, was the chief medium 
between the northern and southern schools. In 1880 Istoczy 
tried to establish a " Nichtjuden Bund" in Hungary, with 
statutes literally translated from those of the German anti- 
Semitic league-. The movement, however, made no progress, 
owing to the stalwart Liberalism of the predominant political 
parties, and of the national principles inherited from the revolu- 
tion of 1848. The large part played by the Jews in that struggle, 
and the fruitful patriotism with which they had worked for the 
political and economic progress of the country, had created, too, 
a strong claim on the gratitude of the best elements in the nation. 
Nevertheless, among the ultramontane clergy, the higher aristo- 
cracy, the ill-paid minor officials, and the ignorant peasantry, the 
seeds of a tacit anti-Semitism were latent. It was probably 
the aversion of the nobility from anything in the nature of a 
demagogic agitation which for a time prevented these seeds 
from germinating. The news of the uprising in Russia and the 
appearance of Jewish refugees on the frontier, had the effect of 
giving a certain prominence to the agitation of Istoczy and Onody 
and of exciting the rural communities, but it did not succeed in 
impressing the public with the pseudo-scientific doctrines of the 
new anti-Semitism. It was not until the agitators resorted to 
the Blood Accusation — that never-failing decoy of obscurantism 
and superstition — that Hungary took a definite place in the anti- 
Semitic movement. The outbreak was short and fortunately blood- 
less, but while it lasted its scandals shocked the whole of Europe. 

Dr August Rohling, professor of Hebrew at the university of 
Prague, a Roman Catholic theologian of high position but 
dubious learning, had for some years assisted the Hungarian 
anti-Semites with rechauffe's of Eisenmenger's Entdecktes Juden- 
thum (Frankfurt a/M. 1700). Ini88i he made a solemn deposition 
before the Supreme Court accusing the Jews of being bound by 
their law to work the moral and physical ruin of non-Jews. He 
followed this up with an offer to depose on oath that the murder 
of Christians for ritual purposes was a doctrine secretly taught 
among Jews. Professor Delitzsch and other eminent Hebraists, 
both Christian and Jewish, exposed and denounced the ignorance 
and malevolence of Rohling, but were unable to stem the mischief 
he was causing. In April 1882 a Christian girl named Esther 
Sobymossi was missed from the Hungarian village of Tisza 
Eszlar, where a small community of Jews were settled. The 
rumour got abroad that she had been kidnapped and murdered 
by the Jews, but it remained the burden of idle gossip, and gave 
rise to neither judicial complaint nor public disorders. At this 
moment the question of the Bosnian Pacification credits was 
before the diet. The unpopularity of the task assumed by 
Austria-Hungary, under the treaty of Berlin, which was calcu- 
lated to strengthen the disaffected Croat element in the empire, 
had reduced the government majority to very small proportions, 
and all the reactionary factions in the country were accordingly 
in arms. The government was violently and unscrupulously 
attacked on all sides. On the 23rd of May there was a debate 
in the diet when M. Onody, in an incendiary harangue, told the 
story of the missing girl at Tisza Eszlar, and accused ministers 
of criminal indulgence to races alien to the national spirit. In 
the then excited state of the public mind on the Croat question, 
the manoeuvre was adroitly conceived. The government fell 
into the trap, and treated the story with lofty disdain. There- 
upon the anti-Semites set to work on the case, and M. Joseph 
Bary, the magistrate at Nyiregyhaza, and a noted anti-Semite, 



was induced to go to Tisza Eszlar and institute an inquiry. All 
the anti-liberal elements in the country now became banded 
together in this effort to discredit the liberal government, and 
for the first time the Hungarian anti-Semites found themselves 
at the head of a powerful party. Fifteen Jews were arrested and . 
thrown into prison. No pains were spared in preparing the case 
for trial. Perjury and even forgery were freely resorted to. 
The son of one of the accused, a boy of fourteen, was taken into 
custody by the police, and by threats and cajoleries prevailed 
upon to give evidence for the prosecution. He was elaborately 
coached for the terrible rdle he was to play. The trial opened at 
Nyiregyhaza on the 19th of June, and lasted till the 3rd of August. 
It was one of the most dramatic causes cSlebres of the century. 
Under the brilliant cross-examination of the advocates for the 
defence the whole of the shocking conspiracy was gradually 
exposed. The public prosecutor thereupon withdrew from the 
case, and the four judges— the chief of whom held strong anti- 
Semitic opinions — unanimously acquitted all the prisoners. 
The case proved the death-blow of Hungarian anti-Semitism. 
Although another phase of the Jewish question, which will be 
referred to presently, had still to occupy the public mind, the 
shame brought on the nation by the Tisza Eszlar conspiracy 
effectually prevented the anti-Semites from raising their voices 
with any effect again. 

Meanwhile a more formidable and complicated outburst was 
preparing in Austria itself. Here the lines of the German agita- 
tion were closely followed, but with far more dramatic results. 
It was exclusively political — that is to say, it appealed to anti- 
Jewish prejudices for party purposes while it sought to re- 
habilitate them on a pseudo-scientific basis, racial and economic. 
At first it was confined to sporadic pamphleteers. By their side 
there gradually grew up a school of Christian Socialists, recruited 
from the ultra-Clericals, for the study and application of the 
doctrines preached at Mainz by Archbishop Ketteler. This 
constituted a complete Austrian analogue to the Evangelical- 
Socialist movement started in Germany by Herr Stocker. For 
some years the two movements remained distinct, but signs of 
approximation were early visible. Thus one of the first com- 
plaints of the anti-Semites was that the Jews were becoming 
masters of the soil. This found an echo in the agrarian principles 
of the Christian Socialists, as expounded by Rudolph Meyer, 
in which individualism in landed property was admitted on the 
condition that the landowners were " the families of the nation " 
and not " cosmopolitan financiers." A further indication of anti- 
Semitism is found in a speech delivered in 1878 by Prince Alois 
von Liechtenstein (b. 1846), the most prominent disciple of 
Rudolph- Meyer, who denounced the national debt as a tribute 
paid by the state to cosmopolitan rentiers (Nitti, Catholic Social- 
ism, pp. 200, 201, 211, 216). The growing disorder in parliament, 
due to the bitter struggle between the German and Czech parties, 
served to bring anti-Semitism into the field of practical politics. 
Since 1867 the German Liberals had been in power. They had 
made enemies of the Clericals by tampering with the concordat, 
and they had split up their own party by the federalist policy 
adopted by Count Taaffe. The Radical secessionists in their turn 
found it difficult to agree, and an ultra-national German wing 
formed itself into a separate party under the leadership of Ritter 
von Schonerer (b. 1842), a Radical nationalist of the most violent 
type. In 1882 two anti-Semitic leagues had been founded in 
Vienna, and to these the Radical nationalists now appealed for 
support. The growing importance of the party led the premier, 
Count Taaffe, to angle for the support of the Clericals by accepting 
a portion of the Christian Socialist programme. The hostility 
this excited in the liberal press, largely written by Jews, served 
to bring the feudal Christian Socialists and Radical anti-Semites 
together. In 1891 these strangely assorted factions became 
consolidated, and during the elections of that year Prince 
Liechtenstein came forward as an anti-Semitic candidate and 
the acknowledged leader of the party. The elections resulted 
in the return of fifteen anti-Semites to the Reichsrath, chiefly 
from Vienna. ; 

Although Prince Liechtenstein and the bulk of the Christian 



142 



ANTI-SEMITISM 



Socialists had joined the anti-Semites with the support of the 
Clerical organ, the Vaterland, the Clerical party as a whole still 
held aloof from the Jew-baiters. The events of 1892-1895 put 
an end to their hesitation. The Hungarian government, in 
compliance with long-standing pledges to the liberal party, 
introduced into the diet a series of ecclesiastical reform bills 
providing for civil marriage, freedom of worship, and the legal 
recognition of Judasim on an equality with other denominations. 
These proposals, which synchronized with Ahlwardt's turbulent 
agitation in Germany, gave a great impulse to anti--5emitism 
and served to drive into its ranks a large number of Clericals. 
The agitation was taken in hand by the Roman Catholic clergy, 
and the pulpits resounded with denunciations of the Jews. 
One clergyman, Father Deckert, was prosecuted for preaching 
the Blood Accusation and convicted (1894). Cardinal Schlauch, 
bishop of Grosswardein, declared in the Hungarian House of 
Magnates that the Liberals were in league with " cosmopolitans " 
for the ruin of the country. In October 1894 the magnates 
adopted two of the ecclesiastical bills with amendments, but 
threw out the Jewish bill by a- majority of six. The crown sided 
with the magnates, and the ministry resigned, although it had 
a majority in the Lower House. An effort was made to form a 
Clerical cabinet, but it failed. Baron Banffy was then entrusted 
with the construction of a fresh Liberal ministry. The announce- 
ment that he would persist with the ecclesiastical bills lashed 
the Clericals and anti-Semites into a fury, and the agitation 
broke out afresh. The pope addressed a letter to Count Zichy 
encouraging the magnates to resist, and once more two of the 
bills were amended, and the third rejected. The papal nuncio, 
Mgr. Agliardi, now thought proper to pay a visit to Budapest, 
where he allowed himself to be interviewed on the crisis. This 
interference in the domestic concerns of Hungary was deeply 
resented by the Liberals, and Baron Banffy requested Count 
Kalnoky, the imperial minister of foreign affairs, to protest 
against it at the Vatican. Count Kalnoky refused arid tendered 
his resignation to the emperor. Clerical sympathies were pre- 
dominant in Vienna, and the emperor was induced for a moment 
to decline the count's resignation. It soon became clear, how- 
ever, that the Hungarians were resolved to see the crisis out, 
and that in the end Vienna would be compelled to give way. 
The emperor accordingly retraced his steps, Count Kalnoky's 
resignation was accepted, the papal nuncio was recalled, a batch 
of new magnates were created, and the Hungarian ecclesiastical 
bills passed. 

Simultaneously with this crisis another startling phase of the 
anti-Semitic drama was being enacted in Vienna itself. En- 
couraged by the support of the Clericals the anti-Semites resolved 
to make an effort to carry the Vienna municipal elections. So 
far the alliance of the Clericals with the anti-Semites had been 
unofficial, but on the eve of the elections (January 1895) the pope, 
influenced partly by the Hungarian crisis andpartly by an idea of 
Cardinal Rampolla that the best antidote to democratic socialism 
would be a clerically controlled fusion of the Christian Socialists 
and anti-Semites, sent his blessing to Prince Liechtenstein and 
his followers. This action alarmed the government and a con- 
siderable "body of the higher episcopate, who felt assured that 
any permanent encouragement given to the anti-Semites would 
in the end strengthen the parties of sedition and disorder. 
Cardinal Schonborn was despatched in haste to Rome to ex- 
postulate with the pontiff, and his representations were strongly 
supported by the French and Belgian bishops. The mischief was 
however, done, and although the pope sent a verbal message 
to Prince Liechtenstein excluding the anti-Semites from his 
blessing, the elections resulted in a great triumph for the Jew- 
haters. The municipal council was immediately dissolved by 
the government, and new elections were ordered, but these only 
strengthened the position of the anti-Semites, who carried 92 
seats out of a total of 138. A cabinet crisis followed, and the 
premiership was entrusted to the Statthalter of Galicia, Count 
Badeni, who assumed office with a pledge of war to the knife 
against anti-Semitism. In October the new municipal council 
elected as burgomaster of Vienna Dr Karl Lueger (b. 1844), a 



vehement anti-Semite, who had displaced Prince Liechtenstein 
as leader of the party. The emperor declined to sanction the 
election, but the council repeated it in face of the imperial 
displeasure. Once more a dissolution was ordered, and for three 
months the city was governed by administrative commissioners. 
In February 1896 elections were again held, and the anti-Semites 
were returned with an increased majority. The emperor then 
capitulated, and after a temporary arrangement, by which 
for one year Dr Lueger acted as vice-burgomaster and handed 
over the burgomastership to an inoffensive nominee, permitted 
the municipal council to have its way. The growing anarchy in 
parliament at this moment served still further to strengthen the 
anti-Semites, and their conquest of Vienna was speedily followed 
by a not less striking conquest of the Landtag of Lower Austria 
(November 1896). 

Since then a reaction of sanity has slowly but surely asserted 
itself. In 1908 the anti-Semites had governed Vienna twelve 
years, and, although they had accomplished much mischief, 
the millennium of which they were supposed to be the heralds 
had not dawned. On the contrary, the commercial interests 
of the city had suffered and the rates had beerr enormously 
increased {Neue Freie Presse, 29th March 1901), while the pre- 
datory hopes which secured them office had only been realized 
on a small and select scale. The spectacle of a Clerico-anti- 
Semitic tammany in Vienna had strengthened the resistance of 
the better elements in the country. Time had also shown that 
Christian Socialism is only a disguise for high Toryism, and 
that the German Radicals who were originally induced to join 
the anti-Semites had been victimized by the Clericals. The 
fruits of this disillusion began to show themselves in the general 
elections of 1900-1901, when the anti-Semites lost six seats in 
the Reichsrath. The elections were followed (26th January 1901) 
by a papal encyclical on Christian democracy, in which Christian 
Socialism was declared to be a term unacceptable to the Church, 
and the faithful were adjured to abstain from agitation of a 
demagogic and revolutionary character, a^id " to respect the 
rights of others." Nevertheless, in 1907 the Christian Socialists 
trebled their representation in the Reichsrath. This, however, 
was due more to their alliance with the German national parties 
than to any large increase of anti-Semitism in the electorate. 

The last country in Europe to make use of the teachings of 
German anti-Semitism in its party politics was France. The 
fact that the movement should have struck root in a 
republican country, where the ideals of democratic 
freedom have been so passionately cultivated, has been regarded 
as one of the paradoxes of our latter-day history. As a matter 
of fact, it is more surprising that it was not adopted earlier. All 
the social and political conditions which produced anti-Semitism 
in Germany were present in France, but in an aggravated form 
due primarily to the very republican regime which at first sight 
seemed to be a guarantee against it. In the monarchical states 
the dominance of the bourgeoisie was tempered in a measure by 
the power of the crown and the political activity of the aris- 
tocracy, which carried with them a very real restraining influence 
in the matter of political honour and morality. In France these 
restraining influences were driven out of public life by the re- 
public. The nobility both of the ancien rSgime and the empire 
stood aloof, and politics were abandoned for the most part to 
professional adventurers, while the bourgeoisie assumed the form 
of s3 omnipotent plutocracy. This naturally attracted to France 
all the financial adventurers in Europe, and in the train of the 
immigration came not a few German Jews, alienated from their 
own country by the agitation of Marr and Stocker. Thus 
the bourgeoisie was not only more powerful in France than in 
other countries, but the obnoxiousness of its Jewish element 
was accentuated by a tinge of the national enemy. The anti- 
clericalism of the bourgeois republic and its unexampled series 
of financial scandals, culminating in the Panama " Krach," thus 
sufficed to give anti-Semitism a- strong hold on the public mind. 

Nevertheless, it was not until 1882 that the anti- Jewish move- 
ment was seriously heard of in France. Paul Bontoux (b. 182a), 
1 who haa formerly been in the employ of the Rothschilds, 



ANTI-SEMITISM 



*43 



but had been obliged to leave the firm in consequence of 
his disastrous speculations, had joined the Legitimist party, 
and had started the Union Generale with funds obtained from 
his new allies. Bontoux promised to break up the alleged 
financial monopoly of the Jews and Protestants and to found a 
new plutocracy in its itead, which should be mainly Roman 
Catholic and aristocratic. The bait was eagerly swallowed. 
For five years the Union Generale, with the blessing of the pope, 
pursued an apparently prosperous career. Immense schemes 
were undertaken, and the 125-fr. shares rose gradually to 3200 
francs. The whole structure, however, rested on a basis of 
audacious speculation, and in January 1882 the Union Generale 
failed, with liabilities amounting to 212,000,000 francs. The cry 
was at once raised that the collapse was due to the manoeuvres 
of the Jews, and a strong anti-Semitic feeling manifested itself 
in clerical and aristocratic circles. In 1886 violent expression 
was given to this feeling in a book since become famous, La 
France juive, by Edouard Drumont (b. 1844). The author 
illustrated the theories of German anti-Semitism with a chronique 
scandaleuse full of piquant personalities, in which the corrup- 
tion of French national life under Jewish influences was painted 
in alarming colours. The book was read with avidity by the 
public, who welcomed its explanations of the obviously growing 
debauchery. The Wilson scandals and the suspension of the 
Panama Company in the following year, while not bearing out 
Drumont's anti-Semitism, fully justified his view of the prevailing 
corruption. Out of this condition of things rose the Boulangist 
movement, which rallied all the disaffected elements in the 
country, including Drumont's following of anti-Semites. It was 
not, however, until the flight of General Boulanger and the ruin of 
his party that anti-Semitism came forward as a political movement. 
The chief author of the rout of Boulangism was a Jewish 
politician and journalist, Joseph Reinach (b. 1856), formerly 
private secretary to Gambetta, and one of the ablest men in 
France. He was a Frenchman by birth and education, but his 
father and uncles were Germans, who had founded an important 
banking establishment in Paris. Hence he was held to personify 
the alien Jewish domination in France, and the ex-Boulangists 
turned against him and his co-religionists with fury. The 
Boulangist agitation had for a second time involved the Legiti- 
mists in heavy pecuniary losses, and under the leadership of the 
marquis de Mores they now threw all their influence on the side 
of Drumont. An anti-Semitic league was established, and with 
Royalist assistance branches were organized all over the country. 
The Franco- Russian alliance in 1891, when the persecutions of 
the Jews by Pobedonostsev were attracting the attention of 
Europe, served to invest Drumont's agitation with a fashionable 
and patriotic character. It was a sign of the spiritual approxima- 
tion of the two peoples. In 1892 Drumont founded a daily 
anti-Semitic newspaper, La Libre Parole. With the organization 
of this journal a regular campaign for the discovery of scandals 
was instituted. At the same time a body of aristocratic swash- 
bucklers, with the marquis de Mores and the comte de Lamase 
at their head, set themselves to terrorize the Jews and pro- 
voke them to duels. At a meeting held at Neuilly in 1891, Jules 
Guerin, one of the marquis de Mores's lieutenants, had demanded 
rhetorically un cadavre de Juif. He had not long to wait. Anti- 
Semitism was most powerful in the army, which was the only 
branch of the public service in which the reactionary classes were 
fully represented. The republican law compelling the seminarists 
to serve their term in the army had strengthened its Clerical and 
Royalist elements, and the result was a movement against the 
Jewish officers, of whom 500 held commissions. A series of 
articles in the Libre Parole attacking these officers led to a number 
of ferocious duels, and these culminated in 1892 in the death of an 
amiable and popular Jewish officer, Captain Armand Mayer, of 
the Engineers, who fell, pierced through the lungs by the marquis 
de Mores. This tragedy, rendered all the more painful by the 
discovery that Captain Mayer had chivalrously fought to shield 
a friend, aroused a great deal of popular indignation against the 
anti-Semites, and for a moment it was believed that the agitation 
had been killed with its victim. 



Towards the end of 1892, the discovery of the widespread 
corruption practised by the Panama Company gave a fresh 
impulse to anti-Semitism. The revelations were in a large 
measure due to the industry of the Libre Parole; and they were 
all the more welcome to the readers of that journal since it was 
discovered that three Jews were implicated in the scandals, one 
of whom, baron de Reinach, was uncle and father-in-law to the 
hated destroyer of Boulangism. The escape of the other two, Dr 
Cornelius Herz and M. Arton, and the difficulties experienced in 
obtaining their extradition, deepened the popular conviction that 
the authorities were implicated in the scandals, and kept the 
public eye for a long time absorbed by the otherwise restricted 
Jewish aspects of the scandals. In 1894 the military side of the 
agitation was revived by the arrest of a prominent Jewish staff 
officer, Captain Alfred Dreyfus, on a charge of treason. From 
the beginning the hand of the anti-Semite was flagrant in the new 
sensation. The first hint of the arrest appeared in the Libre 
Parole; and before the facts had been officially communicated 
to the public that journal was busy with a campaign against the 
war minister, based on the apprehension that, in conspiracy with 
the Juiverie and his republican colleagues, he might exert himself 
to shield the traitor. Anti-Semitic feeling was now thoroughly 
aroused. Panama had prepared the people to believe anything; 
and when it was announced that a court-martial, sitting in secret, 
had convicted Dreyfus, there was a howl of execration against 
the Jews from one end of the country to the other, although 
the alleged crime of the convict and the evidence by which 
it was supported were quite unknown. Dreyfus was degraded 
and transported for life amid unparalleled scenes of public 
excitement. 

The Dreyfus Case registers the climax not only of French, but 
of European anti-Semitism. It was the most ambitious and 
most unscrupulous attempt yet made to prove the nationalist 
hypothesis of the anti-Semites, and in its failure it afforded the 
most striking illustration of the dangers of the whole movement 
by bringing France to the verge of revolution. For a few months 
after the Dreyfus court-martial there was a comparative lull; 
but the highly strung condition of popular passion was illustrated 
by a violent debate on " The Jewish Peril " in the Chamber of 
Deputies (25th April 1895), and by two outrages with explosives 
at the Rothschild bank in Paris. Meanwhile the family of 
Dreyfus, absolutely convinced of his innocence, were casting 
about for the means of clearing his character and securing his 
liberation. They were wealthy, and their activity unsettled the 
public mind and aroused the apprehensions of the conspirators. 
Had the latter known how to preserve silence, the mystery would 
perhaps have been yet unsolved; but in their anxiety to allay 
all suspicions they made one false step, which proved the begin- 
ning of their ruin. Through their friends in the press they secured 
the publication of a facsimile of a document known as the 
Bordereau — a list of documents supposed to be in Dreyfus's 
handwriting and addressed apparently to the military attache of 
a foreign power, which was alleged to constitute the chief evidence 
against the convict. It was hoped by this publication to put an 
end to the doubts of the so-called Dreyfusards. The result, how- 
ever, was only to give them a clue on which they worked with 
remarkable ingenuity. To prove that the Bordereau was not in 
Dreyfus's handwriting was not difficult. Indeed, its authorship 
was recognized almost on the day of publication; but the 
Dreyfusards held their hands in order to make assurance doubly 
sure by further evidence. Meanwhile one of the officers of the 
general staff, Colonel Picquart, had convinced himself by an 
examination of the dossier of the trial that a gross miscarriage 
of justice had taken place. On mentioning his doubts to his 
superiors, who were animated partly by anti-Semitic feeling and 
partly by reluctance to confess to a mistake, he was ordered to 
the Tunisian hinterland on a dangerous expedition. Before 
leaving Paris, however, he took the precaution to confide his 
discovery to his legal adviser. Harassed by their anxieties, the 
conspirators made further communications to the newspapers; 
and the government, questioned and badgered in parliament, 
added to the revelations. The new disclosures, so far from 



144 



ANTI-SEMITISM 



stopping the Dreyfusards,provedtothem,among other things, that 
the conviction had been partially based on documents which had 
not been communicated to the counsel for the defence, and hence 
that the judges had been tampered with by the ministry of war 
behind the prisoner's back. So far, too, as these documents 
related to correspondence with foreign military attaches, it was 
soon ascertained that they were forgeries. In this way a terrible 
indictment was gradually drawn up against the ministry of war. 
The first step was taken towards the end of 1897 by a brother 
of Captain Dreyfus, who, in a letter to the minister of war, de- 
nounced Major Esterhazy as the real author of the Bordereau. 
The authorities, supported by parliament, declined to reopen the 
Dreyfus Case, but they ordered a court-martial on Esterhazy, 
which was held with closed doors and resulted in his acquittal. 
It now became clear that nothing short of an appeal to public 
opinion and a full exposure of all the iniquities that had been 
perpetrated would secure justice at the hands of the military 
chiefs. On behalf of Dreyfus, Emile Zola, the eminent novelist, 
formulated the case against the general staff of the army in an 
open letter to the president of the republic, which by its dramatic 
accusations startled the whole world. The letter was denounced 
as wild and fantastic even by those who were in favour of revision. 
Zola was prosecuted for libel and convicted, and had to fly the 
country; but the agitation he had started was taken in hand by 
others, notably M. Clemenceau, M. Reinach and M. Yves Guyot. 
In August 1898 their efforts found their first reward. A re- 
examination of the documents in the case by M. Cavaignac, then 
minister of war, showed that one was undoubtedly forged. 
Colonel Henry, of the intelligence department of the war office, 
then confessed that he had fabricated the document, and, on 
being sent to Mont Valerien under arrest, cut his throat. 

In spite of this damaging discovery the war office still per- 
sisted in believing Dreyfus guilty, and opposed a fresh inquiry. 
It was supported by three successive ministers of war, and ap- 
parently an overwhelming body of public opinion. By this time 
the question of the guilt or innocence of Dreyfus had become an 
altogether subsidiary issue. As in Germany and Austria, the 
anti-Semitic crusade had passed into the hands of the political 
parties. On the one hand the Radicals and Socialists, recognizing 
the anti-republican aims of the agitators and alarmed by the 
clerical predominance in the army, had thrown in their lot with 
the Dreyfusards; on the other the reactionaries, anxious to 
secure the support of the army, took the opposite view, denounced 
their opponents as sans patrie, and declared that they were 
conspiring to weaken and degrade the army in the face of the 
national enemy. The controversy was, consequently, no longer 
for or against Dreyfus, but for or against the army, and behind it 
was a life-or-death struggle between the republic and its enemies. 
The situation became alarming. Rumours of military plots 
filled the air. Powerful leagues for working up public feeling 
were formed and organized; attempts to discredit the republic 
and intimidate the government were made. The president was 
insulted; there were tumults in the streets, and an attempt was 
made by M. Deroulede to induce the military to march on the 
Elysee and upset the republic. In this critical situation France, 
to her eternal honour, found men with sufficient courage to do 
the right. The Socialists, by rallying to the Radicals against the 
reactionaries, secured a majority for the defence of the republic 
in parliament. Brisson's cabinet transmitted to the court of 
cassation an application for the revision of the case against 
Dreyfus; and that tribunal, after an elaborate inquiry, which 
fully justified Zola's famous letter, quashed and annulled the 
proceedings of the court-martial, and remitted the accused to 
another court-martial, to be held at Rennes. Throughout these 
proceedings the military party fought tooth and nail to impede 
the course of justice; and although the innocence of Dreyfus had 
been completely established, it concentrated all its efforts to 
secure a fresh condemnation of the prisoner at Rennes. Popular 
passion was at fever heat, and it manifested itself in an attack on 
M. Labori, one of the counsel for the defence, who was shot and 
wounded on the eve of his cross-examination of the witnesses for 
the prosecution. To the amazement and indignation of the 



whole world outside France, the Rennes court-martial again 
found the prisoner guilty; but all reliance on the conscientious- 
ness of the verdict was removed by a rider, which found "ex- 
tenuating circumstances," and by a reduction of the punishment 
to ten years' imprisonment, to which was added a recommenda- 
tion to mercy. The verdict was evidently an attempt at a com- 
promise, and the government resolved to advise the president 
of the republic to pardon Dreyfus. This lame conclusion did 
not satisfy the accused; but his innocence had been so clearly 
proved, and on political grounds there were such urgent reasons 
for desiring a termination of the affair, that it was accepted 
without protest by the majority of moderate men. 

The rehabilitation of Dreyfus, however, did not pass without 
another effort on the part of the reactionaries to turn the popular 
passions excited by the case to their own advantage. After the 
failure of Deroulede's attempt to overturn the republic, the 
various Royalist and Boulangist leagues, with the assistance of 
the anti-Semites, organized another plot. This was discovered 
by the government, and the leaders were arrested. Jules Guerin, 
secretary of the anti-Semitic league, shut himself up in the league 
offices in the rue Chabrol, Paris, which had been fortified and 
garrisoned by a number of his friends, armed with rifles. For 
more than a month these anti-Semites held the authorities at bay, 
and some 5000 troops were employed in the siege. The con- 
spirators were all tried by the senate, sitting as a high court, and 
Guerin was sentenced to ten years' imprisonment. The evidence 
showed that the anti-Semitic organization had taken an active 
part in the anti-republican plot (see the report of the Commission 
d'Instruction in the Petit Temps, 1st November 1899). 

The government now resolved to strike at the root of the 
mischief by limiting the power of the religious orders, and with 
this view a drastic Association bill was introduced into the 
chambers. This anti-clerical move provoked the wildest 
passions of the A reactionaries, but it found an overwhelming 
support in the elections of 1902 and the bill became law. The 
war thus definitely reopened soon led to a revival of the Dreyfus 
controversy. The nationalists flooded the country with incend- 
iary defamations of " the government of national treason," and 
Dreyfus on his part loudly demanded a fresh trial. It was clear 
that conciliation and compromise were useless. Early in: 1905 
M. Jaures urged upon the chamber that the demand of the 
Jewish officer should be granted if only to tranquillize the country. 
The necessary faits nouveaux were speedily found by the minister 
of war, General Andre, and having been examined by a special 
commission of revision were ordered to be transmitted to the 
court of cassation for final adjudication. On the 12th of July 
1906, the court, all chambers united, gave its judgment. Aftetf 
a lengthy review of the case it declared unanimously that the 
whole accusation against Dreyfus had been disproved, and it 
quashed the judgment of the Rennes court-martial sans renvoi. 
The explanation of the whole case is that Esterhazy and Henry 
were the real culprits; that they had made a trade of supplying 
the German government with military documents; and that once 
the Bordereau was discovered they availed themselves of the 
anti- Jewish agitation to throw suspicion on Dreyfus. 

Thus ended this famous case, to the relief of the whole country 
and with the approval of the great majority of French citizens. 
Except a knot of anti-Semitic monomaniacs all parties bowed 
loyally to the judgment of the court of cassation. The govern^ 
ment gave the fullest effect to the judgment. Dreyfus and 
Picquart were restored to the active list of the army with the 
ranks respectively of major and general of brigade. Dreyfus was 
also created a knight of the Legion of Honour, and received the 
decoration in public in the artillery pavilion of the military school. 
Zola, to whose efforts the triumph of truth was chiefly due, had 
not been spared to witness the final scene, but the chambers 
decided to give his remains a last resting-place in the Pantheon. 
When three months later M. Clemenceau formed his first cabinet 
he appointed General Picquart minister of war. Nothing indeed 
was left undone to repair the terrible series of wrongs which had 
grown out of the Dreyfus case. Nevertheless its destructive 
work could not be wholly healed. For over ten years it had been 



ANTI-SEMITISM 



H5 



a nightmare to France, and it now modified the whole course of 
French history. In the ruin of the French Church, which owed 
its disestablishment very largely to the Dreyfus conspiracy, may 
be read the most eloquent warning against the demoralizing 
madness of anti-Semitism. 

In sympathy with the agitation in France there has been a 
similar movement ii? Algeria, where the European population 
have long resented the admission of the native Jews to the rights 
of French citizenship. The agitation has been marked by much 
violence, and most of the anti-Semitic deputies in the French 
parliament, including M. Drumont, have found constituencies in 
Algeria. As the local anti-Semites are largely Spaniards and 
Levantine riff-raff, the agitation has not the peculiar nationalist 
bias which characterizes continental anti-Semitism. Before the 
energy of the authorities it has lately shown signs of subsiding. 

While the main activity of anti-Semitism has manifested itself 
in Germany, Russia, Rumania, Austria-Hungary and France, its 
vibratory influences have been felt in other countries 
Brf/*/ when conditions favourable to its extension have 

4c ' presented themselves. In England more than one 
attempt to acclimatize the doctrines of Marr and 
Treitschke has been made. The circumstance that at the time of 
the rise of German anti-Semitism a premier of Hebrew race, Lord 
Beaconsfield, was in power first suggested the Jewish bogey to 
English political extremists. The Eastern crisis of 1876-1878, 
which was regarded by the Liberal party as primarily a struggle 
between Christianity, as represented by Russia, and a degrad- 
ing Semitism, as represented by Turkey, accentuated the anti- 
Jewish feeling, owing to the anti-Russian attitude adopted by 
the government. Violent expression to the ancient prejudices 
against the Jews was given by Sir J. G. Tollemache Sinclair 
(A Defence of Russia, 1877). Mr T P. O'Connor, in a life of Lord 
Beaconsfield (1878), pictured him as the instrument of the Jewish 
people, " moulding the whole policy of Christendom to Jewish 
aims." Professor Goldwin Smith, in several articles in the 
Nineteenth Century (1878, 1881 and 1882), sought to synthetize 
the growing anti-Jewish feeling by adopting the nationalist 
theories of the German anti-Semites. This movement did not 
fail to find an equivocal response in the speeches of some of the 
leading Liberal statesmen; but on the country generally it pro- 
duced no effect. It was revived when the persecutions in Russia 
threatened England with a great influx of Polish Jews, whose 
mode of life was calculated to lower the standard of living in 
the industries in which they were employed, and it has left its 
trace in the anti-alien legislation of 1905. In 1883 Stocker 
visited London, but received a very unflattering reception. 
Abortive attempts to acclimatize anti-Semitism have also been 
made in Switzerland, Belgium, Greece and the United States. 

Anti-Semitism made a great deal of history during the thirty 
years up to 1908, but has left no permanent mark of a con- 
structive kind on the social and political evolution of Europe. 
It is the fruit of a great ethnographic and political error, and it 
has spent itself in political intrigues of transparent dishonesty. 
Its racial doctrine is at best a crude hypothesis: its nationalist 
theory has only served to throw into striking relief the essentially 
economic bases of modern society, while its political activity 
has revealed the vulgarity and ignorance which constitute its 
main sources of strength. So far from injuring the Jews, it has 
really given Jewish racial separatism a new lease of life. Its 
extravagant accusations, as in the Tisza Eszlar and Dreyfus 
cases, have resulted in the vindication of the Jewish character. 
Its agitation generally, coinciding with the revival of interest in 
Jewish history, has helped to transfer Jewish solidarity from a 
religious to a racial basis. The bond of a common race, vitalized 
by a new pride in Hebrew history and spurred on to resistance by 
the insults of the anti-Semites, has given a new spirit and a new 
source of strength to Judaism at a moment when the approxima- 
tion of ethical systems and the revolt against dogma were sapping 
its essentially religious foundations. In the whole history of 
Judaism, perhaps, there have been no more numerous or remark- 
able instances of reversions to the faith than in the period 
in question. The reply of the Jews to anti-Semitism has taken 



two interesting practical forms. In the first place there is the 
so-called Zionist movement, which is a kind of Jewish nationalism 
and is vitiated by the same errors that distinguish its anti- 
Semitic analogue (see Zionism). In the second place, there is a 
movement represented by the Maccabaeans' Society in London, 
which seeks to unite the Jewish people in an effort to raise the 
Jewish character and to promote a higher consciousness of the 
dignity of the race. It lays no stress on orthodoxy, but welcomes 
all who strive to render Jewish conduct an adequate reply to 
the theories of the anti-Semites. Both these movements are 
elements of fresh vitality to Judaism, and they are prob- 
ably destined to produce important fruit in future years. A 
splendid spirit of generosity has also been displayed by the Jewish 
community in assisting and relieving the victims of the Jew- 
haters. Besides countless funds raised by public subscription, 
Baron de Hirsch founded a colossal scheme for transplanting 
persecuted Jews to new countries under new conditions of life, 
and endowed it with no less a sum than £9,000,000 (see Hirsch, 
Maurice de). 

Though anti-Semitism has been unmasked and discredited, 
it is to be feared that its history is not yet at an end. While 
there remain in Russia and Rumania over six millions of Jew& who 
are being systematically degraded, and who periodically overflow 
the western frontier, there must continue to be a Jewish question 
in Europe; and while there are weak governments, and ignorant 
and superstitious elements in the enfranchized classes of the 
countries affected, that question will seek to play a part in politics. 

Literature. — No impartial history of modern anti-S«mitism has 
yet been written. The most comprehensive works on the subject, 
Israel among the Nations, by A. Leroy-Beaulieu (1895), and L'Anti- 
stmitisme, son histoire et ses causes, by Bernard Lazare (1894), are 
collections of studies rather than histories. M. Lazare's work will 
be found most useful by the student on account of its detached 
standpoint and its valuable bibliographical notes. A good list of 
works relating to Jewish ethnography will be found at the end of 
M. Isidor Loeb's valuable article, " Juifs," in the Dictionnaire 
universel de gSographie (1884). To these should be added, Adolf 
Jellinek, Der Judische Stamm (1869); Chwolson, Die semitischen 
Volker (1872); Nossig, Materialien zur Statistik (1887); Jacobs, 
Jewish Statistics (1891); and Andree, Zur Volkskunde der Juden 
(1881). A bibliography of the Jewish question from 1875 to 1884 
has been published by Mr Joseph Jacobs (1885). Useful additions 
and rectifications will be found in the Jewish World, nth September 
1885. During the period since 1885 the anti-Semitic movement 
has produced an immense pa,mphlet literature. Some of these pro- 
ductions have already been referred to ; others will be found in 
current bibliographies under the names of the personages mentioned, 
such as Stocker, Ahlwardt, &c. On the Russian persecutions, 
besides the works quoted by Jacobs, see the pamphlet issued by the 
Russo-Jewish Committee in 1890, and the annual reports of the 
Russo-Jewish Mansion House Fund ; Les Juifs de Russie (Paris, 
1 891); Report of the Commissioners of Immigration upon the Causes 
which incite Immigration to the United States (Washington, 1892) ; 
The New Exodus, by Harold Frederic (1892); Les Juifs russes, by 
Leo Errera (Brussels, 1893). The most valuable collection of facts 
relating to the persecutions of 1881-1882 are to be found in the 
Feuilles Jaunes (52 nos.), compiled and circulated for the information 
of the European press by the Alliance Israelite of Paris. Complete 
collections are very scarce. For the struggle during the past decade 
the Russische Correspondenz of Berlin should be consulted, together 
with its French and English editions. See also the publications of 
the Bund (Geneva; Imprimerie Israelite); Semenoff, The Russian 
Government and the Massacres, and Quarterly Review, October 1906. 
On the Rumanian question, see Bluntschli, Roumania and the Legal 
Status of the Jews (London, 1879); Wir Juden (Zurich, 1883); 
Schloss, The Persecution of the Jews in Roumania (London, 1885); 
Schloss, Notes of Information (1886); Sincerus, Juifs en Roumanie 
(London, 1901) ; Plotke, Die rumanischen Juden unter dem Fiirsten 
u. Kbnig Karl (1901); Dehn, Diplomatie u. Hochfinanz in der 
rumanischen Judenfrage (1901); Conybeare, "Roumania as a 
Persecuting Power," Nat. Rev., February 1901. On Hungary and 
the Tisza Eszlar Case, see (besides the references in Jacobs) Nathan, 
Der Prozess von Tisza Eszlar (Berlin, 1892). On this case and the 
Blood Accusation generally, see Wright, " The Jews and the Mali- 
cious Charge of Human Sacrifice," Nineteenth Century, 1883. The 
origins of the Austrian agitation are dealt with by Nitri, Catholic 
Socialism (r895). This work, though inclining to anti-Semitism, 
should be consulted for the Christian Socialist elements in the whole 
continental agitation. The most valuable source of information on 
the Austrian movement is the Osterteichische Wochenschrift, edited 
by Dr Bloch. See also pamphlets and speeches by the anti-Semitic 
leaders, Liechtenstein, Lueger, Schoenerer, &c. The case of the 
French anti-Semites is stated by E. Drumont in his France juive. 



146 



ANTISEPTICS— ANTITHESIS 



and other works; the other side by Isidor Loeb, Bernard Lazare, 
Leonce Reynaud, &c. Of the Dreyfus Case there is an enormous 
literature : see especially the reports of the Zola and Picquart trials, 
the revision case before the Court of Cassation, the proceedings of the 
Rennes court-martial, and the final judgment of the Court of Cas- 
sation printed in full in the Figaro, July 15, 1906; also Reinach, 
Histoire de I'affaire Dreyfus (Paris, 1908, 6 vols.), and the valuable 
series of volumes by Captain Paul Marin, MM. Clemenceau, Lazare, 
Yves Guyot, Paschal Grousset, Urbain Gohier, de Haime, de 
Pressense, and the remarkable letters of Dreyfus (Lettres d'un 
innocent). An English history of the case was published by F. C. 
Conybeare ( I 898) , whose articles and those of Sir Godfrey Lushington 
and L. J. Maxse in the National Review, 1897-1900, will be found 
invaluable by the student. On the Algerian question, see M. Wahl 
in the Revue des etudes juives; L. Forest, Naturalisation des Israe- 
lites algeriens ; and E. Audinet in the Revue generate de droit inter- 
national publique, 1897, No. 4. On the history of the anti-Semitic 
movement generally, see the annual reports of the Alliance Israelite 
of Paris and the Anglo-Jewish Association of London, also the 
annual summaries published at the end of the Jewish year by 
the Jetvish Chronicle of London. The connexion of the movement 
with general party politics must be followed in the newspapers. 
The present writer has worked with a collection of newspaper 
cuttings numbering several thousands and ranging over thirty 
years. (L. W.) 

ANTISEPTICS (Gr. deri, against, and crq-KTi.Kb's, putrefactive), 
the name given to substances which are used for the prevention 
of bacterial development in animal or vegetable matter. Some 
are true germicides, capable of destroying the bacteria, whilst 
others merely prevent or inhibit their growth. The antiseptic 
method of treating wounds (see Surgery) was introduced by 
Lord List*, and was an outcome of Pasteur's germ theory of 
putrefaction. For the growth of bacteria there must be a certain 
food supply, moisture, in most cases oxygen, and a certain 
minimum temperature (see Bacteriology). These conditions 
have been specially studied and applied in connexion with the 
preserving of food (see Food Preservation) and in the ancient 
practice of embalming the dead, which is the earliest illustration 
of the systematic use of antiseptics (see Embalming). In early 
inquiries a great point was made of the prevention of putre- 
faction, and work was done in the way of' finding how much 
of an agent must be added to a given solution, in order that 
the bacteria accidentally present might not develop. But for 
various reasons this was an inexact method, and to-day an 
antiseptic is judged by its effects on pure cultures of definite 
pathogenic microbes, and on their vegetative and spore forms. 
Their standardization has been effected in many instances, and 
a water solution of carbolic acid of a certain fixed strength is 
now taken as the standard with which other antiseptics are 
compared. The more important of those in use to-day are 
carbolic acid, the perchloride and biniodide of mercury, iodo- 
form, formalin, salicylic acid, &c. Carbolic acid is germicidal in 
strong solution, inhibitory in weaker ones. The so-called " pure" 
acid is applied to infected living tissues, especially to tuberculous 
sinuses or wounds, after scraping them, in order to destroy any 
part of the tuberculous material still remaining. A solution of 
1 in 20 is used to sterilize instruments before an operation, and 
towels or lint to be used for the patient. Care must always 
be taken to avoid absorption (see Carbolic Acid). The per- 
chloride of mercury is another very powerful antiseptic used 
in solutions of strength 1 in 2000, 1 in 1000 and 1 in 500. This 
or the biniodide of mercury is the last antiseptic applied to 
the surgeon's and assistants' hands before an operation begins. 
They are not, however, to be used in the disinfection of instru- 
ments, nor where any large abraded surface would favour absorp- 
tion. Boracic acid receives no mention here; though it is 
popularly known as an antiseptic, it is in reality only a soothing 
fluid, and bacteria will flourish comfortably in contact with it. 
Of the dry antiseptics iodoform is constantly used in septic 
or tuberculous wounds, and it appears to have an inhibitory 
action on Bacillus tuberculosis . Its power depends on the fact 
that it is slowly decomposed by the tissues, and free iodine 
given off. Among the more recently introduced antiseptics, 
chinosol, a yellow substance freely soluble in water, and lysol, 
another coal-tar derivative, are much used. But every anti- 
septic, however good, is more or less toxic and irritating to a 



wounded surface. Hence it is that the " antiseptic " method 
has been replaced in the surgery of to-day by the "aseptic" 
method (see Surgery), which relies on keeping free from 
the invasion of bacteria rather than destroying them when 
present. 

ANTISTHENES (c. 444-365 B.C.), the founder of the Cynic 
school of philosophy, was born at Athens of a Thracian mother, 
a fact which may account for the extreme boldness of his attack 
on conventional thought. In his youth he studied rhetoric 
under Gorgias, perhaps also under Hippias and Prodicus. 
Gomperz suggests that he was originally in good circumstances, 
but was reduced to poverty. However this may be, he came 
under the influence of Socrates, and became a devoted pupil. 
So eager was he to hear the words of Socrates that he used to 
walk daily from Peiraeus to Athens, and persuaded his friends 
to accompany him. Filled with enthusiasm for the Socratic idea 
of virtue, he founded a school of his own in the Cynosarges, the 
hall of the bastards (vodoi). Thither he attracted the poorer 
classes by the simplicity of his life and teaching. He wore a 
cloak and carried a staff and a wallet, and this costume became 
the uniform of his followers. Diogenes Laertius says that his 
works filled ten volumes, but of these fragments only remain. 
His favourite style seems to have been the dialogue, wherein 
we see the effect of his early rhetorical training. Aristotle 
speaks of him as uneducated and simple-minded, and Plato 
describes him as struggling in vain with the difficulties of 
dialectic. His work represents one great aspect of Socratic 
philosophy, and should be compared with the Cyrenaic and 
Megarian doctrines. 

Bibliography. — Charles Chappuis, Antisthene (Paris, 1854); 
A. Miiller, De Antisthenis cynici vita et scriptis (Dresden, i860); 
T. Gomperz, Greek Thinkers (Eng. trans., 1905), vol. ii. pp. 142 ff., 
150 ff. For his philosophy see Cynics, ami for his pupils, Diogenes 
and Crates, see articles under these headings. 

ANTISTROPHE, the portion of an ode which is sung by the 
chorus in its returning movement from west to east, in response 
to the strophe, which was sung from east to west. It is of the 
nature of a reply, and balances the effect of the strophe. Thus, 
in Gray's ode called " The Progress of Poesy," the strophe, which 
dwelt in triumphant accents on the beauty, power and ecstasy 
of verse, is answered by the antistrophe, in a depressed and 
melancholy key — 

" Man's feeble race what ills await, 
Labour, and Penury, the racks of Pain, 
Disease and Sorrow's weeping Train, 
And Death, sad refuge from the storms of Fate," &c. 

When the sections of the chorus have ended their responses, 
they unite and close in the epode, thus exemplifying the triple 
form in which the ancient sacred hymns of Greece were com- 
posed, from the days of Stesichorus onwards. As Milton says, 
" strophe, antistrophe and epode were a kind of stanza framed 
only for the music then used with the chorus that sang." 

ANTITHESIS (the Greek for " setting opposite "), in rhetoric, 
the bringing out of a contrast in the meaning by an obvious 
contrast in the expression, as in the following: — " When there 
is need of silence, you speak, and when there is need of speech, 
you are dumb; when present, you wish to be absent, and when 
absent, you desire to be present; in peace you are for war, and 
in war you long for peace; in council you descant on bravery, 
and in the battle you tremble." Antithesis is sometimes double 
or alternate, as in the appeal of Augustus: — " Listen, young 
men, to an old man to whom old men were glad to listen when 
he was young." The force of the antithesis is increased if the 
words on which the beat of the contrast falls are alliterative, or 
otherwise similar in sound, as — " The fairest but the falsest of 
her sex." There is nothing that gives to expression greater 
point and vivacity than a judicious employment of this figure; 
but, on the other hand, there is nothing more tedious and trivial 
than a pseudo-antithetical style. Among English writers who 
have made the most abundant use of antithesis are Pope, Young, 
Johnson, and Gibbon; and especially Lyly in his Euphues. 
It is, however, a much more common feature in French than in 



ANTITYPE— ANTOFAGASTA 



147 



English; while in German, with some striking exceptions, it is 
conspicuous by its absence. 

ANTITYPE (Gr. 6.vt'ltvko%) , the correlative of " type," to 
which it corresponds as the stamp to the die, or vice versa. In 
the sense of copy or likeness the word occurs in the Greek New 
Testament (Heb. ix. 24; 1 Peter iii. 21), English " figure." By 
theological writers antitype is employed to denote the reality of 
which a type is the prophetic symbol. Thus, Christ is the anti- 
type of many of the types of the Jewish ritual. By the fathers 
of the Greek church (e.g. Gregory Nazianzen) antitype is em- 
ployed as a designation of the bread and wine in the sacrament 
of the Lord's Supper. 

ANTIUM (mod. Anzio), an ancient Volscian city on the coast 
of Latium, about 33 m. S. of Rome. The legends as to its 
foundation, and the accounts of its early relations with Rome, 
are untrustworthy; but Livy's account of wars between Antium 
and Rome, early in the 4th century B.C., may perhaps be ac- 
cepted. Antium is named with Ardea, Laurentum and Circeii, 
as under Roman protection, in the treaty with Carthage in 
348 B.C. In 341 it lost its independence after a rising with the 
rest of Latium against Rome, and the beaks (rostra) of the six 
captured Antiatine ships decorated and gave their name to the 
orators' tribunal in the Roman Forum. At the end of the 
Republican period it became a resort of wealthy Romans, and 
the Julian and Claudian emperors frequently visited it; both 
Caligula and Nero were born there. The latter founded a colony 
of veterans and built a new harbour, the projecting moles of 
which are still extant. In the middle ages it was deserted in 
favour of Nettuno: at the end of the 17th century Innocent XII. 
and Clement XI. restored the harbour, not on the old site but 
to the east of it, with the opening to the east, a mistake which 
leads to its being frequently silted up; it has a depth of about 
15 ft. Remains of Roman villas are conspicuous all along the 
shore, both to the east and to the north-west of the town. That 
of Nero cannot be certainly identified, but is generally placed at 
the so-called Arco Muto, where remains of a theatre (discovered 
in 1712 and covered up again) also exist. Many works of art 
have been found. Of the famous temple of Fortune (Horace, 
Od. i. 35) no remains are known. The sea is encroaching 
slightly at Anzio, but some miles farther north-west the old 
Roman coast-line now lies slightly inland (see Tiber). The 
Volscian city stood on higher ground and somewhat away from 
the shore, though it extended down to it. It was defended by 
a deep ditch, which can still be traced, and by walls, a portion 
of which, on the eastern side, constructed of rectangular blocks 
of tufa, was brought to light in 1897. The modern place is a 
summer resort and has several villas, among them the Villa 
Borghese. 

See A. Nibby, Dintorni di Roma, i. 181; Notizie degli scavi, 
passim. (T. As.) 

ANTIVARI (Montenegrin Bar, so called by the Venetians 
from its position opposite Bari in Italy), a seaport of Montenegro 
which until 1878 belonged to Turkey. Pop. (1900) about 2500. 
The old town is built inland, on a strip of country running 
between the Adriatic Sea and the Sutorman range of mountains, 
overshadowed by the peak of Rumiya (5148 ft.). At a few 
hundred yards' distance it is invisible, hidden among dense 
olive groves. Within, there is a ruinous walled village, and the 
shell of an old Venetian fortress, surrounded by mosques and 
bazaars; for Antivari is rather Turkish than Montenegrin. 
The fine bay of Antivari, with Prstan, its port, is distant about 
one hour's drive through barren and forbidding country, shut 
in by mountains. At the northern horn of the bay stands 
Spizza, an Austrian military station. Antivari contains the 
residence of its Roman Catholic archbishop, and, in the centre 
of the shore, Topolitsa, the square undecorated palace of the 
crown prince. Antivari is the name applied both to Prstan and 
the old town. The Austrian Lloyd steamers call at times, and 
the " Puglia " S.S. Company runs a regular service of steamers 
to and from Bari. As an outlet for Montenegrin com- 
merce, however, Antivari cannot compete with the Austrian 
Cattaro, the harbour being somewhat difficult of access in 



stormy weather. Fishing and olive-oil refining are the main 
industries. 

ANT-LION, the name given to neuropterous insects of the 
family Myrmeleonidae, with relatively short and apically clubbed 
antennae and four large densely reticulated wings in which 
the apical veins enclose regular oblong spaces. The perfect 
insects are for the most part nocturnal and are believed to be 
carnivorous. The best-known species, Myrmeleon fortnicarius, 
which may be found adult in the late summer, occurs in many 
countries on the European continent, though like the rest of this 
group it is not indigenous in England. Strictly speaking, how- 
ever, the term ant-lion applies to the larval form, which has been 
known scientifically for over two hundred years, on account of its 
peculiar and forbidding appearance and its skilful and unique 
manner of entrapping prey by means of a pitfall. The abdomen 
is oval, sandy-grey in hue and beset with warts and bristles; 
the prothorax forms a mobile neck for the large square head, 
which carries a pair of long and powerful toothed mandibles. 
It is in dry and sandy soil that the ant-lion lays its trap. Having 
marked out the chosen site by a circular groove, it starts to crawl 
backwards, using its abdomen as a plough to shovel up the soil. 
By the aid of one front leg it places consecutive heaps of loosened 
particles upon its head, then with a smart jerk throws each little 
pile clear of the scene of queries. Proceeding thus it gradually
works its way from the circumference towards the centre. When 
the latter is reached and the pit completed, the larva settles 
down at the bottom, buried in the soil with only the jaws pro- 
jecting above the surface. Since the sides of the pit consist of 
loose sand they afford an insecure foothold to any small insect 
that inadvertently ventures over the edge. Slipping to the 
bottom the prey is immediately seized by the lurking ant-lion; 
or if it attempt to scramble again up the treacherous walls of the 
pit, is speedily checked in its efforts and brought down by showers 
of loose sand which are jerked at it from below by the larva. 
By means of similar head-jerks the skins of insects sucked dry 
of their contents are thrown out of the pit, which is then kept 
clear of refuse. A full-grown larva digs a pit about 2 in. deep 
and 3 in. wide at the edge. The pupa stage of the ant-lion is 
quiescent. The larva makes a globular case of sand stuck 
together with fine silk spun, it is said, from a slender spinneret 
at the posterior end of the body. In this it remains until the 
completion of the transformation into the sexually mature insect, 
which then emerges from the case, leaving the pupal integument 
behind. In certain species of Myrmeleonidae, such as Dendroleon 
pantheormis, the larva, although resembling that of Myrmeleon 
structurally, makes no pitfall, but seizes passing prey from any 
nook or crevice in which it shelters. 

The exact meaning of the name ant-lion (Fr. fourmilion) 
is uncertain. It has been thought that it refers to the fact 
that ants form a large percentage of the prey of the insect, 
the suffix " lion " merely suggesting destroyer or eater. Per- 
haps, however, the name may only signify a large terrestrial 
biting apterous insect, surpassing the ant in size and predatory 
habits. (R. I. P.) 

ANTOFAGASTA, a town and port of northern Chile and 
capital of the Chilean province of the same name, situated about 
768 m. N. of Valparaiso in 23° 38' 39" S. lat. and 70 24' 39" W. 
long. Pop. (est. 1902) 16,084. Antofagasta is the seaport for a 
railway running to Oruro, Bolivia, and is the only available 
outlet for the trade of the south-western departments of that 
republic. The smelting works for the neighbouring silver mines 
are located here, and a thriving trade with the inland mining 
towns is carried on. The town was founded in 1870 as a shipping 
port for the recently discovered silver mines of that vicinity, 
and belonged to Bolivia until 1879, when it was occupied by a 
Chilean military force. 

The province of Antofagasta has an area of 46,611 sq. m. 
lying within the desert of Atacama and between the provinces of 
Tarapaca. and Atacama. It is rich in saline and other mineral 
deposits, the important Caracoles silver mines being about 90 m. 
north-east of the port of Antofagasta. Like the other provinces 
of this region, Antofagasta produces for export copper, silver, 



148 



ANTOINE— ANTONINUS PIUS 



silver ores, lead, nitrate of soda, borax and salt. Iron and 
manganese ores are also found. Besides Antofagasta the 
principal towns are Taltal, Mejillones, Cobija (the old capital) 
and Tocopilla. Up to 1879 the province belonged to Bolivia, 
and was known as the department of Atacama, or the Litoral. 
It fell into the possession of Chile in the war of 1879-82, and was 
definitely ceded to that republic in 1885; 

ANTOINE, ANDR£ (1858- ), French actor-manager, was 
born at Limoges, and in his early years was in business. But he 
was an enthusiastic amateur actor, and in 1887 he founded in 
Paris the Theatre Libre, in order to realize his ideas as to the 
proper development of dramatic art. For an account of his 
work, which had enormous influence on the French stage, see 
Drama: France. In 1894 he gave up the direction of this 
theatre, and became connected with the Gymnase, and later 
(1896) with the Od6on. 

ANTONELLI, GIACOMO (1806-1876), Italian cardinal, was 
born at Sonnino on the 2nd of April 1806. He was educated for 
the priesthood, but, after taking minor orders, gave up the 
idea of becoming a priest, and chose an administrative career. 
Created secular prelate, he was sent as apostolic delegate to 
Viterbo, where he early manifested his reactionary tendencies 
in an attempt to stamp out Liberalism. Recalled to Rome in 
1 84 1, he entered the office of the papal secretary of state, but 
four years later was appointed pontifical treasurer-general. 
Created cardinal (nth June 1847), he was chosen by Pius IX. to 
preside over the council of state entrusted with the drafting of 
the constitution. On the 10th of March 1848 Antonelli became 
premier of the first constitutional ministry of Pius IX., a 
capacity in which he displayed consummate duplicity. Upon the 
fall of his cabinet Antonelli created for himself the governorship 
of the sacred palaces in order to retain constant access to and 
influence over the pope. After the assassination of Pellegrino 
Rossi (15th November 1848) he arranged the flight of Pius IX. 
to Gaeta, where he was appointed secretary of state. Notwith- 
standing promises to the powers, he restored absolute govern- 
ment upon returning to Rome (12th April 1850) and violated 
the conditions of the surrender by wholesale imprisonment of 
Liberals. In 1855 he narrowly escaped assassination. As ally 
of the Bourbons of Naples, from whom he had received an annual 
subsidy, he attempted, after i860, to facilitate their restoration 
by fomenting brigandage on the Neapolitan frontier. To the 
overtures of Ricasoli in 1861, Pius IX., at Antonelli's sugges- 
tion, replied with the famous " Non possumus," but subse- 
quently (1867) accepted, too late, Ricasoli's proposal concerning 
ecclesiastical property. After the September Convention (1864) 
Antonelli organized the Legion of Antibes to replace French 
troops in Rome, and in 1867 secured French aid against Gari- 
baldi's invasion of papal territory. Upon the reoccupation of 
Rome by the French after Mentana, Antonelli again ruled 
supreme, but upon the entry of the Italians in 1870 was obliged 
to restrict his activity to the management of foreign relations. 
He wrote, with papal approval, the letter requesting the Italians 
to occupy the Leonine city, and obtained from the Italians 
payment of the Peter's pence (5,000,000 lire) remaining in the 
papal exchequer, as well as 50,000 scudi — the first and only 
instalment of the Italian allowance (subsequently fixed by the 
Law of Guarantees, March 21, 1871) ever accepted by the Holy 
See. At Antonelli's death the Vatican finances were found to 
be in disorder, with a deficit of 45,000,000 lire. His personal 
fortune, accumulated during office, was considerable, and was 
bequeathed almost entirely to members of his family. To the 
Church he left little and to the pope only a trifling souvenir. 
From 1850 until his death he interfered little in affairs of dogma 
and church discipline, although he addressed to the powers 
circulars enclosing the Syllabus (1864) and the acts of the 
Vatican Council (1870). His activity was devoted almost 
exclusively to the struggle between the papacy and the Italian 
Risorgimento, the history of which is comprehensible only when 
the influence exercised by his unscrupulous, grasping and 
sinister personality is fully taken into account. He died on the 
6th of November 1876. 



ANTONELLO DA MESSINA (c. 1430-1479), Italian painter, 
was probably born at Messina about the beginning of the 15th 
century, and laboured at his art for some time in his native 
country. Happening to see at Naples a painting in oil by JaTi 
Van Eyck, belonging to Alphonso of Aragon, he was struck by 
the peculiarity and value of the new method, and set out for the 
Netherlands "to acquire a knowledge of the process from Van 
Eyck's disciples. He spent some time there in the prosecution 
of his art; returned with his secret to Messina about 1465; 
probably visited Milan; removed to Venice in 1472, where he 
painted for the Council of Ten; and died there in the middle of 
February 1479 (see Venturi's article in Thieme-Becker, Kiinstler- 
lexikon, 1907) .. His style is remarkable for its union — not always 
successful — of Italian simplicity with Flemish love of detail. 
His subjects are frequently single figures, upon the complete 
representation of which he bestows his utmost skill. There 
are extant — besides a number more or less dubious — twenty 
authentic productions, consisting of renderings of " Ecce Homo," 
Madonnas, saints, and half-length portraits, many of them 
painted on wood. The finest of all is said to be the nameless 
picture of a man in the Berlin museum. The National Gallery, 
London, has three works by him, including the " St Jerome in 
his Study." Antonello exercised an important influence on 
Italian painting, not only by the introduction of the Flemish 
invention, but also by the transmission of Flemish tendencies. 

ANTONINI ITINERARIUM, a valuable register, still extant; 
of the stations and distances along the various roads of the 
Roman empire, seemingly based on official documents, which 
were probably those of the survey organized by Julius Caesar, 
and carried out under Augustus. Nothing is known with 
certainty as to the date or author. It is considered probable 
that the date of the original edition was the beginning of the 3rd 
century, while that which we possess is to be assigned to the 
time of Diocletian. If the author or promoter of the work is 
one of the emperors, it is most likely to be Antoninus Caracalla. 

Editions by Wesseling, 1735, Parthey and Pindar, 1848. The 
portion relating to Britain was published under the title Iter Britan- 
niarum, with commentary by T. Reynolds, 1799. 

ANTONINUS, SAINT [Antonio Pierozzi, also called de For- 
ciglioni] (1389-1459), archbishop of Florence, was born at that 
city on the 1st of March 1389. He entered the Dominican order in 
his 1 6th year, and was soon entrusted, in spite of his youth, with 
the government of various houses of his order at Cortona, Rome, 
Naples and Florence, which he laboured zealously to reform. 
He was consecrated archbishop of Florence in 1446, and won the 
esteem and love of his people, especially by his energy and 
resource in combating the effects of the plague and earthquake 
in 1448 and 1453. He died on the 2nd of May 1459, and was 
canonized by Pope Adrian VI. in 1523. His feast is annually 
celebrated on the 13th of May. Antoninus had a great reputation 
for theological learning, and sat as papal theologian at the 
council of Florence (1439). Of his various works, the list of 
which is given in Quetif-Echard, De Scriptoribus Ord. Praedicat., 
i. 818, the best-known are his Summa theologica (Venice, 1477; 
Verona, 1740) and the Summa confessionalis (Mondovi, 1472), 
invaluable to confessors. 

See Bolland, Acta Sanctorum, i., and U. Chevalier, Rep. des. s. hist. 
(1905), pp. 285-286. 

ANTONINUS LIBERALIS, Greek grammarian, probably 
flourished about a.d. 150. He wrote a collection of forty-one 
tales of mythical metamorphoses (MeTafxop<buaeoov livvayuyii), 
chiefly valuable as a source of mythological knowledge. 

Westermann, Mythographi Graeci (1843); Oder, De Antonino 
Liber ali (1886). 

ANTONINUS PIUS [Titus Aurelius Fulvus Boionius 
Arrius Antoninus], (a.d. 86-161), Roman emperor a.d. 138- 
161, the son of Aurelius Fulvus, a Roman consul whose family 
had originally belonged to Nemausus (Nimes), was born near 
Lanuvium on the 19th of September 86. After the death of his 
father, he was brought up under- the care of Arrius Antoninus, 
his maternal grandfather, a man of integrity and culture, and 
on terms of friendship with the younger Pliny. Having filled 
with more than usual success the offices of quaestor and praetor, 



ANTONIO 



149 



he obtained the consulship in 120; he was next chosen one of the 
four consulars for Italy, and greatly increased his reputation 
by his conduct as proconsul of Asia. He acquired much influence 
with the emperor Hadrian, who adopted him as his son and 
successor on the 25th of February 138, after the death of his first 
adopted son Aelius Verus, on condition that he himself adopted 
Marcus Annius Verus, his wife's brother's son, and Lucius, son 
of Aelius Verus, afterwards the emperors Marcus Aurelius and 
Lucius Aelius Verus (colleague of Marcus Aurelius). A few 
months afterwards, on Hadrian's death, he was enthusiastically 
welcomed to the throne by the Roman people, who, for once, 
were not disappointed in their anticipation of a happy reign. 
For Antoninus came to his new office with simple tastes, kindly 
disposition, extensive experience, a well-trained intelligence and 
the sincerest desire for the welfare of his subjects. Instead of 
plundering to support his prodigality, he emptied his private 
treasury to assist distressed provinces and cities, and everywhere 
exercised rigid economy (hence the nickname KVfj.LVoirplo-Ti]s, 
, " cummin -splitter "). Instead of exaggerating into treason 
whatever was susceptible of unfavourable interpretation, he 
turned the very conspiracies that were formed against him into 
opportunities of signalizing his clemency. Instead of stirring 
up persecution against the Christians, he extended to them the 
strong hand of his protection throughout the empire. Rather 
than give occasion to that oppression which he regarded as 
inseparable from an emperor's progress through his dominions, 
he was content to spend all the years of his reign in Rome, or its 
neighbourhood. Under his patronage the science of jurisprud- 
ence was cultivated by men of high ability, and a number of 
humane and equitable enactments were passed in his name. 
Of the public transactions of this period we have but scant 
information, but, to judge by what we possess, those twenty-two 
years were not remarkably eventful. One of his first acts was 
to persuade the senate to grant divine honours to Hadrian, which 
they had at first refused; this gained him the title of Pius (duti- 
ful in affection). He built temples, theatres, and mausoleums, 
promoted the arts and sciences, and bestowed honours and 
salaries upon the teachers of rhetoric and philosophy. His 
reign was comparatively peaceful. Insurrections amongst the 
Moors, Jews, and Brigantes in Britain were easily put down. 
The one military result which is of interest to us now is the 
building in Britain of the wall of Antoninus from the Forth to 
the Clyde. In his domestic relations Antoninus was not so 
fortunate. His wife, Faustina, has almost become a byword for 
her lack of womanly virtue; but she seems to have kept her 
hold on his affections to the last. On her death he honoured 
her memory by the foundation of a charity for orphan girls, who 
bore the name of Alimentariae Faustinianae. He had by her 
two sons and two daughters; but they all died before his eleva- 
tion to the throne, except Annia Faustina, who became the wife 
of Marcus Aurelius. Antoninus died of fever at Lorium in Etruria, 
about 12 m. from Rome, on the 7th of March i6r, giving 
the keynote to his life in the last word that he uttered when 
the tribune of the night-watch came to ask the password — 
aequanimUas. 

The only account of his life handed down to us is that of Julius 
Capitolinus, one of the Scriptores Historiae Augustae. See Bossart- 
Muller, Zur Geschichte des Kaisers A. (1868); Lacour-Gayet, A. le 
Pieux et son Temps (1888); Bryant, The Reign of Antonine (Cam- 
bridge Historical Essays, 1895); P. B. Watson, Marcus Aurelius 
Antoninus (London, 1884), chap. ii. 

ANTONIO, known as " The Prior or Crato " (1531-1595), 
claimant of the throne of Portugal, was the natural son of Louis 
(Luis), duke of Beja, by Yolande (Violante) Gomez, a Jewess, 
who is said to have died a nun. His father was a younger 
son of Emanuel, king of Portugal (1495-1521). Antonio was 
educated at Coimbra, and was placed in the order of St John. 
He was endowed with the wealthy priory of Crato. Little is 
known of his life till 1578. In that year he accompanied King 
Sebastian (1557—1578) in his invasion of Morocco, and was 
taken prisoner by the Moors at the battle of Alcazar-Kebir, in 
which the king was slain. Antonio is said to have secured his 
release on easy terms by a fiction. He was asked the meaning 



of the cross of St John which he wore on his doublet, and replied 
that it was the sign of a small benefice which he held from the 
pope, and would lose if he were not back by the 1st of January. 
His captor, believing him to be a poor man, allowed him to 
escape for a small ransom. On his return to Portugal he found 
that his uncle, the cardinal Henry, only surviving son of King 
John III. (1521-1557), had been recognized as king. The 
cardinal was old, and was the last legitimate male representative 
of the royal line (see Portugal: History). The succession was 
claimed by Philip II. of Spain. Antonio, relying on the popular 
hostility to a Spanish ruler, presented himself as a candidate. 
He had endeavoured to prove that his father and mother had 
been married after his birth. There was, however, no evidence 
of the marriage. Antonio's claim, which was inferior not only 
to that of Philip II., but to that of the duchess of Braganza, was 
not supported by the nobles or gentry. His partisans were 
drawn exclusively from the inferior clergy, the peasants and 
workmen. The prior endeavoured to resist the army which 
Philip II. marched into Portugal to enforce his pretensions, but 
was easily routed by the duke of Alva, the Spanish commander, 
at Alcantara, on the 25th of August 1580. At the close of the 
year, or in the first days of 158 1, he fled to France carrying with 
him the crown jewels, which included many valuable diamonds. 
He was well received by Catherine de' Medici, who had a claim 
of her own on the crown of Portugal, and looked upon him 
as a convenient instrument to be used against Philip II. By 
promising to cede the Portuguese colony of Brazil to her, and 
by the sale of part of his jewels, Antonio secured means to fit 
out a fleet manned by Portuguese exiles and French and English 
adventurers. As the Spaniards had not yet occupied the Azores 
he sailed to them, but was utterly defeated at sea by the marquis 
of Santa Cruz off Saint Michael's on the 27th of July 1582. 
He now returned to France, and lived for a time at Ruel near 
Paris. Peril from the assassins employed by Philip II. to remove 
him drove Antonio from one refuge to another, and he finally 
came to England. Elizabeth favoured him for much the same 
reasons as Catherine de' Medici. In 1589, the year after the 
Armada, he accompanied an English expedition under the com- 
mand of Drake and Norris to the coast of Spain and Portugal. 
i The force consisted partly of the queen's ships, and in part of 
privateers who went in search of booty. Antonio, with all the 
credulity of an exile, believed that his presence would provoke 
a general rising against Philip II., but none took place, and 
the expedition was a costly failure. In 1590 the pretender left 
England and returned to France,, where he fell into poverty. 
His remaining diamonds were disposed of by degrees. The last 
and finest was acquired by M. de Sancy, from whom it was 
purchased by Sully and included in the jewels of the crown. 
During his last days he lived as a private gentleman on a small 
pension given him by Henry IV., and he died in Paris on the 
26th of August 1595. He left two illegitimate sons, and his 
descendants can be traced till 1687. In addition to papers 
published to defend his claims Antonio was the author of the 
Panegyrus Alphonsi Lusitanorum Regis (Coimbra, 1 550), and of a 
cento of the Psalms, P 'salmi Confessionales (Paris 1592), which 
was translated into English under the title of The Royal Penitent 
by Francis Chamberleyn (London, 1659), and into German as 
Heilige Betrachtungen (Marburg, 1677). 

Authorities. — AntOnio is frequently mentioned in the French, 
English, and Spanish state papers of the time. A life of him, attri- 
buted to Gomes Vasconcellos de Figueredo, was published in a 
French translation by Mme de Sainctonge at Amsterdam (1696). 
A modern account of him, Un pretendant portugais au XVI. Steele, 
by E. Fournier (Paris, 1852), is based on authentic sources. See 
also Dom Antonio Prior de Crato — notas de bibliographia, by J. de 
Aranjo (Lisbon, 1897). (D. H.) 

ANTONIO, NICOLAS (1617-1684), Spanish bibliographer, was 
born at Seville on the 31st of July 1617. After taking his degree 
at Salamanca (1636-1639), he returned to his native city, wrote 
his treatise De Exilio (which was not printed till 1659), and began 
his monumental register of Spanish writers. The fame of his 
learning reached Philip IV., who conferred the order of Santiago 
I on him in 1645, and sent him as general agent to Rome in 1654. 



i5° 



ANTONIO DE LEBRIJA— ANTONIUS 



Returning to Spain in 1679, Antonio died at Madrid in the spring 
of 1684. His Bibliotheca Hispana nova, dealing with the works 
of Spanish authors who flourished after 1 500, appeared at Rome 
in 1672; the Bibliotheca Hispana vetus, a literary history of 
Spain from the time of Augustus to the end of the 15th century, 
was revised by Manuel Marti, and published by Antonio's friend, 
Cardinal Jose Saenz de Aguirre at Rome in 1696. A fine edition 
of both parts, with additional matter found in Antonio's manu- 
scripts, and with supplementary notes by Francisco Perez Bayer, 
was issued at Madrid in 1 787-1 788. This great work, incompar- 
ably superior to any previous bibliography, is still unsuperseded 
and indispensable. 

Of Antonio's miscellaneous writings the most important is the 
posthumous Censura de historias fabidosas (Valencia, 1742), in which 
erudition is combined with critical insight. His Bibliotheca Hispana 
rabinica has not been printed ; the manuscript is in the national 
library at Madrid. 

ANTONIO DE LEBRIJA [Antonitjs Nebrissensis], (1444- 
1522), Spanish scholar, was born at Lebrija in the province of 
Andalusia. After studying at Salamanca he resided for ten years 
in Italy, and completed his education at Bologna University. 
On his return to Spain (1473), he devoted himself to the advance- 
ment of classical learning amongst his countrymen. After 
holding the professorship of poetry and grammar at Salamanca, 
he was transferred to the university of Alcala de Henares, where 
he lectured until his death in 1522, at the age of seventy-eight. 
His services to the cause of classical literature in Spain have 
been compared with those rendered by Valla, Erasmus and 
Budaeus to Italy, Holland and France. He produced a large 
number of works on a variety of subjects, including a Latin 
and Spanish dictionary, commentaries on Sedulius and Persius, 
and a Compendium of Rhetoric, based on Aristotle, Cicero and 
Quintilian. His most ambitious work was his chronicle entitled 
Rerum in Hispania Gesiarum Decades (published in 1545 by his 
son as an original work by his father), which twenty years later 
was found to be merely a Latin translation of the Spanish 
chronicle of Pulgar, which was published at Saragossa in 1567. 
De Lebrija also took part in the production of the Complutense 
polyglot Bible published under the patronage of Cardinal 
Jimenes. 

Antonio, Bibliotheca Hispana Nova, i. 132 (1888) ; Prescott, 
History of Ferdinand and Isabella, i. 410 (note) ; MacCrie, The 
Reformation in Spain in the Sixteenth Century (1829). 

ANTONIUS, the name of a large number of prominent citizens 
of ancient Rome, of the gens Antonia. Antonius the triumvir 
claimed that his family was descended from Anton, son of 
Heracles. Of the Antonii the following are important. 

1. Marcus Antonius (143-87 B.C.), one of the most dis- 
tinguished Roman orators of his time, was quaestor in 113, and 
praetor in 102 with proconsular powers, the province of Cilicia 
being assigned to him. Here he was so successful against the 
pirates that a naval triumph was awarded him. He was consul 
in 99, censor 97, and held a command in the Marsic War in 90. 
An adherent of Sulla, he was put to death by Marius and Cinna 
when they obtained possession of Rome (87) . Antonius's reputa- 
tion for eloquence rests on the authority of Cicero, none of his 
orations being extant. He is one of the chief speakers in Cicero's 
De Oratore. 

Velleius Paterculus ii. 22 ; Appian, Bell. Civ. i. 72 ; Dio Cassius 
xlv. 47; Plutarch, Marius, 44; Cicero, Orator, 5, Brutus, 37; 
Quintilian, Instit. iii. 1, 19; O. Enderlein, De M. Antonio oratore 
(Leipzig, 1882). 

2. Marcus Antonius, nicknamed Creticus in derision, elder 
son of Marcus Antonius, the " orator," and father of the triumvir. 
He was praetor in 74 B.C., and received an extraordinary com- 
mand (similar to that bestowed upon Pompcy by the Gabinian 
law) to clear the sea of pirates, and thereby assist the queries
against Mithradates VI. He failed in the task, and made him- 
self unpopular by plundering the provinces (Sallust, Hist, iii., 
fragments ed. B. Maurenbrecher, p. 108; Velleius Paterculus ii. 
31; Cicero, In Verrem, iii. 91). He attacked the Cretans, who 
had made an alliance with the pirates, but was totally defeated, 
most of his ships being sunk. Diodorus Siculus (xl. 1) states 
that he only saved himself by a disgraceful treaty. He died 



soon afterwards (72-71) in Crete. All authorities are agreed as 
to his avarice and incompetence. 

3. Gaius Antonius, nicknamed Hybrida from his half-savage 
disposition (Pliny, Nat. Hist. viii. 213), second son of Marcus 
Antonius, the " orator," and uncle of the triumvir. He was one 
of Sulla's lieutenants in the Mithradatic War, and, after Sulla's 
return, remained in Greece to plunder with a force of cavalry. 
In 76 he was tried for his malpractices, but escaped punishment; 
six years later he was removed from the senate by the censors, 
but soon afterwards reinstated. In spite of his bad reputation, 
he was elected tribune in 71, praetor in 66, and consul with 
Cicero in 63. He secretly supported Catiline, but Cicero won 
him over by promising him the rich province of Macedonia. On 
the outbreak of the Catilinarian conspiracy, Antonius was obliged 
to lead an army into Etruria, but handed over the command on 
the day of battle to Marcus Petreius, on the ground of ill-health. 
He then went to Macedonia, where he made himself so detested 
by. his oppression and extortions that he left the province, and 
was accused in Rome (59) both of having taken part in the . 
conspiracy and of extortion in his province. It was said that 
Cicero had agreed with Antonius to share his plunder. Cicero's 
defence of Antonius two years before in view of a proposal for 
his recall, and also on the occasion of his trial, increased the 
suspicion. In spite of Cicero's eloquence, Antonius was con- 
demned, and went into exile at Cephallenia. He seems to have 
been recalled by Caesar, since he was present at a meeting of the 
senate in 44, and was censor in 42. 

Cicero, In Cat. iii. 6, pro Flacco, 38; Plutarch, Cicero, 12; Dio 
Cassius xxxvii. 39, 40 ; xxxviii. 10. On his trial see article in Pauly- 
Wissowa's Realencyclopddie. 

4. Marcus Antonius, commonly called Mark Antony, the 
Triumvir, grandson of Antonius the " orator " and son of 
Antonius Creticus, related on his mother's side to Julius Caesar, 
was born about 83 B.C. Under the influence of his stepfather, 
Cornelius Lentulus Sura, he spent a profligate youth. For a time 
he co-operated with P. Clodius Pulcher, probably out of hostility 
to Cicero, who had caused Lentulus Sura to be put to death as 
a Catilinarian; the connexion was severed by a disagreement 
arising from his relations with Clodius's wife, Fulvia. In 58 he 
fled to Greece to escape his creditors. After a short time spent 
in attendance on the philosophers at Athens, he was summoned 
by Aulus Gabinius, governor of Syria, to take part in the cam- 
paigns against Aristobulus in Palestine, and in support of Ptolemy 
Auletes in Egypt. In 54 he was with Caesar in Gaul. Raised by 
Caesar's influence to the offices of quaestor, augur, and tribune 
of the plebs, he supported the cause of his patron with great 
energy, and was expelled from the senate-house when the Civil 
War broke out. Deputy-governor of Italy during Caesar's 
absence in Spain (49), second in command in the decisive battle 
of Pharsalus (48), and again deputy -governor of Italy while 
Caesar was in Africa (47) , Antony was second only to the dictator, 
and seized the opportunity of indulging in the most extravagant 
excesses, depicted by Cicero in the Philippics. In 46 he seems 
to have taken offence because Caesar insisted on payment for 
the property of Pompey which Antony professedly had purchased, 
but had in fact simply appropriated. The estrangement was not 
of long continuance; for we find Antony meeting the dictator 
at Narbo the following year, and rejecting the suggestion of 
Trebonius that he should join in the conspiracy that was already 
on foot. In 44 he was consul with Caesar, and seconded his 
ambition by the famous offer of the crown at the festival of 
Lupercalia (February 15). After the murder of Caesar on the 
15th of March, Antony conceived the idea of making himself 
sole ruler. At first he seemed disposed to treat the conspirators 
leniently, but at the same time he so roused the people against 
them-by the publication of Caesar's will and by his eloquent 
funeral oration, that they were obliged to leave the city. He 
surrounded himself with a bodyguard of Caesar's veterans, and 
forced the senate to transfer to him the province of Cisalpine 
Gaul, which was then administered by Decimus Junius Brutus, 
one of the conspirators. Brutus refused to surrender the 
province, and Antony set out to attack him in October 44, 



ANTONIUS— ANTRAIGUES 



1 5* 



But at this time Octavian, whom Caesar had adopted as his son, 
arrived from Illyria, and claimed the inheritance of his " father." 
Octavian obtained the support of the senate and of Cicero; 
and the veteran troops of the dictator flocked to his standard. 
Antony was denounced as a public enemy, and Octavian was 
entrusted with the command of the war against him. Antony 
was defeated at Mutina (43) where he was besieging Brutus. 
The consuls Aulus Hirtius and C. Vibius Pansa, however, fell in 
the battle, and the senate became suspicious of Octavian, who, 
irritated at the refusal of a triumph and the appointment of 
Brutus to the command over his head, entered Rome at the 
head of his troops, and forced the senate to bestow the consul- 
ship upon him (August 19th). Meanwhile, Antony escaped to 
Cisalpine Gaul, effected a junction with Lepidus and marched 
towards Rome with a large force of infantry and cavalry. 
Octavian betrayed his party, and came to terms with Antony 
and Lepidus. The three leaders met at Bononia and adopted the 
title of Triumviri rcipublicae constituendae as joint rulers. Gaul 
was to belong to Antony, Spain to Lepidus, and Africa* Sardinia 
and Sicily to Octavian. The arrangement was to last for five 
years. A reign of terror followed; proscriptions, confiscations, 
and executions became general; some of the noblest citizens 
were put to death, and Cicero fell a victim to Antony's revenge. 
In the following year (42) Antony and Octavian proceeded against 
the conspirators Cassius and Brutus, and by the two battles 
of Philippi annihilated the senatorial and republican parties. 
Antony proceeded to Greece, and thence to Asia Minor, to 
procure money for his veterans and complete the subjugation 
of the eastern provinces. On his passage through Cilicia in 41 
he fell a victim to the charms of Cleopatra, in whose company he 
spent the winter at Alexandria. At length he was aroused by 
the Parthian invasion of Syria and the report of an outbreak 
between Fulvia his wife and Lucius his brother on the one hand 
and Octavian on the other. On arriving in Italy he found that 
Octavian was already victorious; on the death of Fulvia, a 
reconciliation was effected between the triumvirs, and cemented 
by the marriage of Antony with Octavia, the sister of his col- 
league. A new division of the Roman world was made at 
Brundusium, Lepidus receiving Africa, Octavian the west, and 
Antony the east. Returning to his province Antony made 
several attempts to subdue the Parthians, without any decided 
success. In 39 he visited Athens, where he behaved in a most 
extravagant manner, assuming the attributes of the god 
Dionysus. In 37 he crossed over to Italy, and renewed the 
triumvirate for five years at a meeting with Octavian. Return- 
ing to Syria, he resumed relations with Cleopatra. His treatment 
of Octavia, her brother's desire to get rid of him, and the manner 
in which he disposed of kingdoms and provinces in favour of 
Cleopatra alienated his supporters. In 32 the senate deprived 
him of his powers and declared war against Cleopatra. After 
two years spent in preparations, Antony was defeated at the 
battle of Actium (2nd September 31). Once more he sought 
refuge in the society of Cleopatra, who had escaped with sixty 
ships to Egypt. He was pursued by his enemies and his 
troops abandoned him. Thereupon he committed suicide in the 
mistaken belief that Cleopatra had already done so (30 B.C.). 
Antony had been married in succession to Fadia, Antonia, Fulvia 
and Octavia, and left behind him a number of children. 

See Rome, History, II. "The Republic" {ad fin.); Caesar, De 
Bello Gallico, De Bello Civili; Plutarch, Lives of Antony, Brutus, 
Cicero, Caesar; Cicero, Letters (ed. Tyrrell and Purser) and Philip- 
pics; Appian, Bell. Civ. i.-v. ; Dio Cassius xli.-liii. In addition 
to the standard histories, see V. Gardthausen, Augustus und seine 
Zeit (Leipzig, 1891-1904); W. Drumann, Geschichte Roms (2nd ed. 
P. Groebe, 1 899), i. pp. 46-384; article by Groebe in Pauly-Wissowa's 
Realencyclopadie; and a snort but vivid sketch by de Quincey in 
his Essay on the Caesars. 

5. Lucius Antonius, youngest son of Marcus Antonius 
Creticus, and brother of the triumvir. In 44, as tribune of the 
people, he brought forward a law authorizing Caesar to nominate 
the chief magistrates during his absence from Rome. After the 
murder of Caesar, he supported his brother Marcus. He pro- 
posed an agrarian law in favour of the people and Caesar's 



veterans, and took part in the queries at Mutina (43). In 41
he was consul, and had a dispute with Octavian, which led to 
the so-called Perusian War, in which he was supported by Fulvia 
(Mark Antony's wife), who was anxious to recall her husband 
from Cleopatra's court. Later, observing the bitter feelings 
that had been evoked by the distribution of land among the 
veterans of Caesar, Antonius and Fulvia changed their attitude, 
and stood forward as the defenders of those who had suffered 
from its operation. Antonius marched on Rome, drove out 
Lepidus, and promised the people that the triumvirate should be 
abolished. On the approach of Octavian, he retired to Perusia 
in Etruria, where he was besieged by three armies, and compelled 
to surrender (winter of 41). His life was spared, and he was sent 
by Octavian to Spain as governor. Nothing is known of the 
circumstances or date of his death. Cicero, in his Philippics, 
actuated in great measure by personal animosity, gives a highly 
unfavourable view of his character. 

Appian, Bellum Civile, v. 14 flf. ; Dio Cassius xlviii. 5-14. 

6. Gaius Antonius, second son of Marcus Antonius Creticus, 
and brother of the triumvir. In 49 he was legate of Caesar 
and, with P. Cornelius Dolabella, was entrusted with the 
defence of Illyricum against the Pompeians. Dolabella's fleet 
was destroyed; Antonius was shut up in the island of Curicta 
and forced to surrender. In 44 he was city praetor, his brothers 
Marcus and Lucius being consul and tribune respectively in the 
same year. Gaius was appointed to the province of Macedonia, 
but on his way thither fell into the hands of M. Junius Brutus 
on the coast of Illyria. Brutus at first treated him generously, 
but ultimately put him to death (42). 

Plutarch , Brutus, 28 ; Dio Cassius xl vii. 2 1 -24. On the whole family , 
see the articles in Pauly-Wissowa's Realencyclopadie, i. pt. 2 (1894). 

ANTONOMASIA, in rhetoric, the Greek term for a substitution 
of any epithet or phrase for a proper name; as " Pelides," or 
" the son of Peleus," for Achilles; " the Stagirite " for Aristotle; 
" the author of Paradise Lost " for Milton; " the little corporal " 
for Napoleon I. ; " Macedonia's madman " for Alexander the 
Great, &c. &c. The opposite substitution of a proper name 
for some generic term is also sometimes called antonomasia; as 
" a Cicero " for an orator. 

ANTRAIGUES, EMMANUEL HENRI LOUIS ALEXANDRE 
DE LAUNAY, Comte d' (c. 1755-1812), French publicist and 
political adventurer, was a nephew of Francois Emmanuel de 
Saint-Priest (1735-1821), one of the last ministers of Louis XVI. 
He was a cavalry captain, but, having little taste for the army, 
left it and travelled extensively, especially in the East. On his 
return to Paris, he sought the society of philosophers and artists, 
visited Voltaire at Ferney for three months, but was more 
attracted by J. J. Rousseau, with whom he became somewhat 
intimate. He published a Memoire sur les etals-gSneraux, sup- 
ported the Revolution enthusiastically when it broke out, was 
elected deputy, and took the oath to the constitution; but 
he suddenly changed his mind completely, became a defender 
of the monarchy and emigrated in 1790. He was the secret 
agent of the comte de Provence (Louis XVIII.) at different 
courts of Europe, and at the same time received money from 
the courts he visited. He published a number of pamphlets, 
Des monstres ravagent partout, Point a" accommodement, &c. 
At Venice, where he was attache to the Russian legation, he was 
arrested in 1 797, but escaped to Russia. Sent as Russian attache 
to Dresden, he published a violent pamphlet against Napoleon I., 
and was expelled by the Saxon government. He then went to 
London, and it was universally believed that he betrayed the 
secret articles of the treaty of Tilsit to the British cabinet, but 
his recent biographer, Pingaud, contests this. In 181 2 he and 
his wife Madame Saint-Huberty, an operatic singer, were assas- 
sinated by an Italian servant whom they had dismissed. It has 
never been known whether the murder was committed from 
private or political motives. 

See H. Vaschalde, Notice bibliographique sur Louis Alexandre de 
Launay, comte d'Antraigues, sa vie et ses ceuvres; Leonce Pingaud, 
Un Agent secret, sous la revolution et I'empire, le comte d'Antraigues 
(Paris, 1893) ; fidouard de Goncourt, La Saint-Huberty et V opera au 
XVIIP siecle. 



152 



ANTRIM 



ANTRIM, RANDAL MACDONNELL, ist Earl of (d. 1636), 
called " Arranach," having been brought up in the Scottish 
island of Arran by the Hamiltons, was the 4th son of Sorley 
Boy MacDonnell (q.v.), and of Mary, daughter of Conn O'Neill, 
ist earl of Tyrone. He fought at first against the English 
government, participating in his brother James's victory over 
Sir John Chichester at Carrickfergus in November 1597, and 
joining in O'Neill's rebellion in 1600. But on the 16th of 
December he signed articles with Sir Arthur Chichester and 
was granted protection; in 1601 he became head of his house by 
his elder brother's death, his pardon being confirmed to him; 
and in 1602 he submitted to Lord Mount joy and was knighted. 
On the accession of James I. in 1603 he obtained a grant of the 
Route and the Glynns (Glens) districts, together with the island 
of Rathlin, and remained faithful to the government in spite 
of the unpopularity he thereby incurred among his kinsmen, 
who conspired to depose him. In 1607 he successfully defended 
himself against the charge of disloyalty on the occasion of the 
flight of the earls of Tyrone and Tyrconnell, and . rendered 
services to the government by settling and civilizing his districts, 
being well received the following year by James in London. In 
1618 he was created Viscount Dunluce, and subsequently he 
was appointed a privy councillor and lord-lieutenant of the 
county of Antrim. On the 12th of December 1620 he was 
created earl of Antrim. In 162 1 he was charged with harbouring 
Roman Catholic priests, confessed his offence and was pardoned. 
He offered his assistance in 1625 during the prospect of a Spanish 
invasion, but was still regarded as a person that needed watching. 
His arbitrary conduct in Ireland in 1627 was suggested as a fit 
subject for examination by the Star Chamber, but his fidelity 
to the government was strictly maintained to the last. In 163 1 
he was busy repairing Protestant churches, and in 1634 he 
attended the Irish parliament. He made an important agree- 
ment in 1635 for the purchase from James Campbell, Lord 
Cantire, of the lordship of Cantire, or Kintyre, of which the 
MacDonnells had been dispossessed in 1600 by Argyll; but his 
possession was successfully opposed by Lord Lome. He died 
on the 10th of December 1636. Antrim married Alice, daughter 
of Hugh O'Neill, earl of Tyrone, by whom, besides six daughters, 
he had Randal, 2nd earl and ist marquess of Antrim (q.v.), and 
Alexander, 3rd earl. Three other sons, Maurice, Francis and 
James, were probably illegitimate. The earldom has continued 
in the family down to the present day, the nth earl (b. 1851) 
succeeding in 1869. 

See also An Historical Account of the MacDonnells of Antrim, 
by G. Hill (1873). 

ANTRIM, RANDAL MACDONNELL, ist Marquess or (1609- 
1683), son of the ist earl of Antrim, was born in 1609 and edu- 
cated as a Roman Catholic. He travelled abroad, and on his 
return in 1634 went to court, next year marrying Katherine 
Manners, widow of the ist duke of Buckingham, and living on 
her fortune for some years in great splendour. In 1639, on the 
outbreak of the Scottish war, he initiated a scheme of raising a 
force in Ireland to attack Argyll in Scotland and recover Kintyre 
(or Cantire), a district formerly possessed by his family; but 
the plan, discouraged and ridiculed by Strafford, miscarried. 1 
Soon afterwards he returned to Ireland, and sought in 1641 to 
create a diversion, together with Ormonde, for Charles I. against 
the parliament. He joined in his schemes Lord Slane and Sir 
Phelim O'Neill, later leaders of the rebellion, but on the outbreak 
of the rebellion in the autumn he dissociated himself from his 
allies and retired to his castle at Dunluce. His suspicious conduct, 
however, and his Roman Catholicism, caused him to be regarded 
as an enemy by the English party. In May 1642 he was captured 
at Dunluce Castle by the parliamentary general Robert Munro, 
and imprisoned at Carrickfergus. Escaping thence he joined 
the queen at York; and subsequently, having proceeded to 
Ireland to negotiate a cessation of hostilities, he was again 
captured with his papers in May 1643 and confined at Carrick- 
fergus, thence once more escaping and making his way to 
Kilkenny, the headquarters of the Roman Catholic confedera- 
1 Strafford's Letters, ii. 300. 



tion. He returned to Oxford in December with a scheme for 
raising 10,000 Irish for service in England and. 2000 to join 
Montrose in Scotland, which through the influence of the duchess 
of Buckingham secured the consent of the king. On the 26th of 
January 1644 Antrim was created a marquess. He returned to 
Kilkenny in February, took the oath of association, and was 
made a member of the council and lieutenant-general of the 
forces of the Catholic confederacy. The confederacy, however, 
giving him no support in his projects, he threw up his commission, 
and with Ormonde's help despatched about 1600 men in June to 
Montrose's assistance in Scotland, subsequently returning to 
Oxford and being sent by the king in 1645 with letters for the 
queen at St Germains. He proceeded thence to Flanders and 
fitted out two frigates with military stores, which he brought to 
the prince of Wales at Falmouth. He visited Cork and after- 
wards in July 1646 joined his troops in Scotland, with the hope 
of expelling Argyll from Kintyre; but he was obliged to retire 
by order of the king, and returning to Ireland threw himself 
into : theintrigues between the various factions. In 1647 he was 
appointed with two others by the confederacy to negotiate a 
treaty with the prince of Wales in France, and though he antici- 
pated his companions by starting a week before them, he failed 
to secure the coveted lord-lieu tenancy > which was confirmed 
to Ormonde. He now ceased to support the Roman Catholics 
or the king's cause; opposed the treaty between Ormonde and 
the confederates; supported the project of union between 
O'Neill and the parliament; and in 1649 entered into com- 
munications with Cromwell, for whom he performed various 
services, though there appears no authority to support Carte's 
story that Antrirn was the author of a forged agreement for the 
betrayal- of the king's army by Lord Inchiquin. 1 Subsequently 
he joined Ireton, and was present at the siege of Carlow. He 
returned to England in December 1650, and in lieu of his con- 
fiscated estate received a pension of £500 and later of £800, 
together with lands in Mayo. At the Restoration Antrim was 
excluded from the Act of Oblivion on account of his religion, 
and on presenting himself at court was imprisoned in the Tower* 
subsequently being called before the lords justices in Ireland, 
In 1663 he succeeded, in spite of Ormonde's opposition, in 
securing a decree of innocence from the commissioners of claims. 
This raised an outcry from the adventurers who had been put 
in possession of his lands, and who procured a fresh trial; but 
Antrim appealed to the king, and through the influence of the 
queen mother obtained a pardon, his estates being restored 
to him by the Irish/ Act of Explanation in 1665. 2 Antrim died 
on the 3rd of February 1683. He is described by Clarendon as 
of handsome appearance but " of excessive pride and vanity 
and of a marvellous weak and narrow understanding." He 
married secondly Rose, daughter of Sir Henry O'Neill, but had 
no children, being succeeded in the earldom by his brother 
Alexander, 3rd earl of Antrim. 

See Hiberrlia Anglicana, by R. Cox (1 689-1 690) esp. app. 
xlix. vol. ii. 206; History of the Irish Confederation, by J. T. Gilbert 
(1882-1891); Aphorismical Discovery (Irish Archaeological Society, 
1879-1880); Thomason Tracts (Brit. Mus.), E 59 (18), 149 (12), 
138 (7), 153 (19), 61 (23) ; Murder will out, or the King's Letter justi- 
fying the Marquess of Antrim (1689); Hist. MSS. Comm. Series — 
MSS. of Marq. of Ormonde. (P. C. Y.) 

ANTRIM, a county in the north-east corner of Ireland, in 
the province of Ulster. It is bounded N. and E. by the narrow 
seas separating Ireland from Scotland, the Atlantic Ocean and 
Irish Sea, S. by: Belfast Lough and the Lagan river dividing it 
from the county Down, W. by Lough Neagh, dividing it from 
the counties Armagh and Tyrone, and by' county Londonderry, 
the boundary with which is the river Bann. 

The area is 751,965 acres or about 1175 sq.m. A large por- 
tion of the county is hilly, especially in the east, where the 
highest elevations are attained, though these are nowhere great. 
The range runs north and south, and, following this direction 

1 Life of Ormonde, iii. 509; see also Cal. of State Papers, Ireland, 
1660-1662, pp. 294, 217; Cal. of Clarendon St. Pap., ii. 69, and 
Gardiner's Commonwealth, i. 153. " 

2 Hallam, ConsU'Hist., iii. 396 (ed. 1855). 



ANTRIM 



J 5S 



the highest points are Knocklayd (1695 ft), Slieveanorra (1676), 
Trostan (1817), Slemish (1457), and Divis (1567). The inland 
slope is gradual, but on the northern shore the range terminates 
in abrupt and almost perpendicular declivities, and here, conse- 
quently, some of the finest coast scenery in the island is found, 
widely differing, with its unbroken lines of cliffs, from the 
indented coast-line of the west. The most remarkable cliffs are 
those formed of perpendicular basaltic columns, extending for 
many miles, and most strikingly displayed in Fair Head and the 
celebrated Giant's Causeway. From the eastern coast the hills 
rise instantly but less abruptly, and the indentations are wider 
and deeper. On both coasts there are several frequented 
watering-places, of which may be mentioned on the north 
Portrush (with well-known golf links), Port Ballintrae and Bally- 
castle; on the east Cushendun, Cushendall and Mill town on 
Red Bay, Cam Lough and Glenarm, Lame, and Whitehead on 
Belfast Lough. All are somewhat exposed to the easterly 
winds prevalent in spring. The only island of size is Rathlin, 
off Ballycastle, 65 m. in length by 15 in breadth, 7 m. from the 
coast, and of similar basaltic and limestone formation to that 
of the mainland. It is partially arable, and supports a small 
population. The so-called Island Magee is a peninsula separating 
Larne Lough from the Irish Channel. 

The valleys of the Bann and Lagan, with the intervening 
shores of Lough Neagh, form the fertile lowlands. These two 
rivers, both rising in county Down, are the only ones of import- 
ance. The latter flows to Belfast Lough, the former drains 
Lough Neagh, which is fed by a number of smaller streams, 
among them the Crumlin, whose waters have petrifying powers. 
The fisheries of the Bann and of Lough Neagh (especially for 
salmon) are of value both commercially and to sportsmen, the 
small town of Toome, at the outflow of the river, being the 
centre. Immediately below this point lies Lough Beg, the 
" Small Lake," about 15 ft. lower than Lough Neagh, which it 
excels in the pleasant scenery of its banks. The smaller streams 
are of great use in working machinery. 

Geology. — On entering the county at the south, a scarped 
barrier of hills is seen beyond the Lagan valley, marking the 
edge of the basaltic plateaus, and running almost continuously 
round the coast to Red Bay. Below it, Triassic beds are exposed 
from Lisburn to Island Magee, giving sections of red sands and 
marls. Above these, marine Rhaetic beds appear at intervals, 
notably near Larne, where they are succeeded by Lower Lias 
shales and limestones. At Portrush, the Lower Lias is seen on 
the shore, crowded with ammonites, but silicified and meta- 
morphosed by invading dolerite. The next deposits, as the 
scarps are approached, are greensands of " Selbornian " age, 
succeeded by Cenomanian, and locally by Turonian, sands. 
The Senonian series is represented by the White Limestone, a 
hardened chalk with flints, which is often glauconitic and con- 
glomeratic at the base. Denudation in earliest Eocene times has 
produced flint gravels above the chalk, and an ancient stream 
deposit of chalk pebbles occurs at Ballycastle. The volcanic 
fissures that allowed of the upwelling of basalt are represented 
by numerous dykes, many cutting the earlier lava-flows as well 
as all the beds below them. The accumulations of lava gave 
rise to the plateaus which form almost the whole interior of the 
county. In a quiet interval, the Lower Eocene plant-beds of 
Glenarm and Ballypalady were formed in lakes, where iron-ores 
also accumulated. Rhyolites were erupted locally near Tardree, 
Ballymena and Glenarm. The later basalts are especially marked 
by columnar jointing, which determines the famous structures 
of the Giant's Causeway and the coast near Bengore Head. 
Volcanic necks may be recognized at Carrick-a-rede, in the 
intrusive mass of dolerite at Slemish, at Carnmoney near Belfast, 
and a few other points. Fair Head is formed of intrusive 
dolerite, presenting a superb columnar seaward face. Faulting, 
probably in Pliocene times, lowered the basaltic plateaus to 
form the basin of Lough Neagh, leaving the eastern scarp at 
heights ranging up to 1800 ft. The glens of Antrim are deep 
notches cut by seaward-running streams through the basalt scarp, 
their floors being formed of Triassic or older rocks. Unlike most 



Irish counties, Antrim owes its principal features to rocks of 
Mesozoic and Cainozoic age. At Cushendun, however, a coarse 
conglomerate is believed to be Devonian, while Lower Carbon- 
iferous Sandstones, with several coal-seams, form a small pro- 
ductive basin at Ballycastle. The dolerite of Fair Head sends off 
sheets along the bedding-planes of these carboniferous strata. 
" Dalradian " schists and gneisses, with some dark limestones, 
come out in the north-east of the county, forming a moorland- 
region between Cushendun and Ballycastle. The dome of Knock- 
layd, capped by an outlier of chalk and basalt, consists mostly 
of this far more ancient series. Glacial gravels are well seen 
near Antrim town, and as drumlins between Ballymena and 
Ballycastle. The drift-phenomena connected with the flow of 
ice from Scotland are of special interest. Recently elevated 
marine clays, of post-glacial date, fringe the south-eastern coast, 
while gravels with marine shells, side by side with flint imple- 
ments chipped by early man, have been lifted some 20 ft. 
above sea-level near Larne. 

Rock-salt some 80 ft. thick is mined in the Trias near 
Carrickfergus. The Keuper clays yield material for bricks. 
Bauxite, probably derived from the decay of lavas, is found 
between Glenarm and Broughshane, associated with brown 
and red pisolitic iron-ores; both these materials are worked 
commercially. Bauxite occurs also near Ballintoy. The Bally- 
castle coal is raised and sold locally. 

Industries. — The climate is very temperate. The soil varies 
greatly according to the district, being in some cases a rich 
loam, in others a chalky marl, and elsewhere showing a coating 
of peat. The proportion of barren land to the total area is 
roughly as 1 to 9; and of tillage to pasture as 2 to 3. Tillage 
is therefore, relatively to other counties, well advanced, and 
oats and potatoes are largely, though decreasingly, cultivated. 
Flax is a less important crop than formerly. The numbers of 
cattle, sheep, pigs and poultry are generally increasing. Dutch, 
Ayrshire and other breeds are used to improve the breed of cattle 
by crossing. Little natural wood remains in the county, but 
plantations flourish on the great estates, and orchards have 
proved successful. 

The linen manufacture is the most important industry. 
Cotton-spinning by jennies was first introduced by Robert Joy 
and Thomas M'Cabe of Belfast in 1777; and an estimate made 
twenty-three years later showed upwards of 27,000 hands 
employed in this industry within 10 m. of Belfast, which remains 
the centre for it. Women are employed in the working of 
patterns on muslin. There are several paper-mills at Bushmills 
in the north; whisky-distilling is carried on; and there are 
valuable sea-fisheries divided between the district of Ballycastle 
and Carrickfergus, while the former is the headquarters of a 
salmon-fishery district. The workings at the Ballycastle 
collieries are probably the oldest in Ireland. In 1770 the miners 
accidentally discovered a complete gallery, which has been 
driven many hundred yards into the bed of coal, branching into 
thirty-six chambers dressed quite square, and in a workman-like 
mariner. No tradition of the mine having been formerly worked 
remained in the neighbourhood. The coal of some of the beds 
is bituminous, and of others anthracite. 

Communications. — Except that the Great Northern railway 
line from Belfast to the south and west runs for a short distance 
close to the southern boundary of the county, with a branch 
from Lisburn to the town of Antrim, the principal lines of 
communication are those of the Northern Counties system, 
under the control of the Midland railway of England. The chief 
routes are : — Belfast, Antrim, Ballymena (and thence to 
Coleraine and Londonderry) ; a line diverging from this at 
White Abbey to Carrickfergus and Larne, the port for Stranraer 
in Scotland; branches from Ballymena to Larne and to Park- 
more; and from Coleraine to Portrush. The Ballycastle 
railway runs from Ballymoney to Ballycastle on the north 
coast; and the Giant's Causeway and Portrush is an electric 
railway (the first to be worked in the United Kingdom). The 
Lagan Canal connects Lough Neagh with Belfast Lough. 

Population and Administration. — The population in 1891 was 



J 54 



ANTRIM— ANTWERP 



208,010, and in 1901, 196,090. The county is among those 
least seriously affected by emigration. Of the total about 50 % 
are Presbyterians, about 20 % each Protestant Episcopalians 
and Roman Catholics; Antrim being one of the most decidedly 
Protestant counties in Ireland. Of the Presbyterians the 
greater part are in connexion with the General Synod of Ulster, 
and the other are Remonstrants, who separated from the Synod 
in 1829, or United Presbyterians. The principal towns are 
Antrim (pop. 1826), Ballymena (10,886), Ballymoney (2952), 
Carrickfergus (4208), Lame (6670), Lisburn (11,461) and Port- 
rush (1941). Belfast though constituting a separate county 
ranks as the metropolis of the district. Ballyclare, Bushmills, 
Crumlin, Portglenone and Randalstown are among the lesser 
towns. Belfast and Larne are the chief ports. The county 
comprises 14 baronies and 79 civil parishes and parts of parishes. 
The constabulary force has its headquarters at Ballymena. 
The assize town is Belfast, and quarter sessions are held at 
Ballymena, Ballymoney, Belfast, Larne and Lisburn. The 
county is divided between the Protestant dioceses of Deny 
and Down, and the Roman Catholic dioceses of Down and 
Connor, and Dromore. It is divided into north, mid, east and 
south parliamentary divisions, each returning one member. 

History and Antiquities. — At what date the county of Antrim 
was formed is not known, but it appears that a certain district 
bore this name before the reign of Edward II. (early 14th cen- 
tury), and when the shiring of Ulster was undertaken by Sir 
John Perrot in the 16th century, Antrim and Down were already 
recognized divisions, in contradistinction to the remainder of 
the province. The earliest known inhabitants were of Celtic 
origin, and the names of the townlands or subdivisions, supposed 
to have been made in the 13th century, are pure Celtic. Antrim 
was exposed to the inroads of the Danes, and also of the northern 
Scots, who ultimately effected permanent settlements. The 
antiquities of the county consist of cairns, mounts or forts, 
remains of ecclesiastical and military structures, and round 
towers. The principal cairns are: one on Colin mountain, near 
Lisburn; one on Slieve True, near Carrickfergus; and two on 
Colinward. The cromlechs most worthy of notice are: one near 
Cairngrainey, to the north-east of the old road from Belfast to 
Templepatrick; the large cromlech at Mount Druid, near 
Ballintoy; and one at the northern extremity of Island Magee. 
The mounts, forts and intrenchments are very numerous. There 
are three round towers: one at Antrim, one at Armoy, and one 
on Ram Island in Lough Neagh, only that at Antrim being 
perfect. There are some remains of the ecclesiastic establish- 
ments at Bonamargy, where the earls of Antrim are buried, 
Kelts, Glenarm, Glynn, Muckamore and White Abbey. The 
noble castle of Carrickfergus is the only one in perfect preserva- 
tion. There are, however, remains of other ancient castles, as 
Olderfleet, Cam's, Shane's, Glenarm, Garron Tower, Redbay, 
&c, but the most interesting of all is the castle of Dunluce, 
remarkable for its great extent and romantic situation. 
Mount Slemish, about 8 m. east of Ballymena, is notable as 
being the scene of St Patrick's early life. Island Magee had, 
besides antiquarian remains, a notoriety as a home of witch- 
craft, and was the scene of an act of reprisal for the much- 
disputed massacre of Protestants about 1641, by the soldiery 
of Carrickfergus. 

ANTRIM, a market-town in the west of the county Antrim, 
Ireland, in the south parliamentary division, on the banks of the 
Six-Mile Water, half a mile from Lough Neagh, in a beautiful 
and fertile valley. Pop. (1901) 1826. It is 2if m. north-west 
of Belfast by the Northern Counties (Midland) railway, and is also 
the terminus of a branch of the Great Northern railway from 
Lisburn. There is nothing in the town specially worthy of 
notice, but the environs, including Shane's Castle and Antrim 
Castle, possess features of considerable interest. About a mile 
from the town is one of the most perfect of the round towers of 
Ireland, 93 ft. high and 50 in circumference at the base. It 
stands in the grounds of Steeple, a neighbouring seat, where is 
also the " Witches' Stone," a prehistoric monument. A battle 
was fought near Antrim between the English and Irish in the 



reign of Edward III.; and in 1642 a naval engagement took 
place on Lough Neagh, for Viscount Massereene and Ferrard 
(who founded Antrim Castle in 1662) had a right to maintain a 
fighting fleet on the lough. On the 7th of June 1798 there was 
a smart action in the town between the king's troops and a large 
body of rebels, in which the latter were defeated, and Lord 
O'Neill mortally wounded. Before the Union Antrim returned 
two members to parliament by virtue of letters patent granted 
in 1666 by Charles II. There are manufactures of paper, linen, 
and woollen cloth. The government is in the hands of town 
commissioners. 

ANTRUSTION, the name of the members of the bodyguard or 
military household of the Merovingian kings. The word, of which 
the formation has been variously explained, is derived from the 
O.H.Germ. trost, comfort, aid, fidelity, trust, through the latinized 
form trustis. Our information about the antrustions is derived 
from one of the formulae of Marculfus (i. 18, ed. Zeumer, p. 55) 
and from various provisions of the Salic law (see du Cange, 
Glossarium, s. "trustis"). Any one desiring to enter the body of 
Antrustions had to present himself armed at the royal palace, 
and there, with his hands in those of the king, take a special 
oath or trustis and fidelitas, in addition to the oath of fidelity 
sworn by every subject at the king's accession. This done, he 
was considered to be in trusle dominica and bound to the dis- 
charge of all the services this involved. In return for these, the 
antrustion enjoyed certain valuable advantages, as being speci- 
ally entitled to the royal assistance and protection; his wergeld 
is three times that of an ordinary Frank; the slayer of a Frank 
paid compensation of 200 solidi, that of an antrustion had to 
find 600. The antrustion was always of Frankish descent, and 
only in certain exceptional cases were Gallo-Romans admitted 
into the king's bodyguard. These Gallo-Romans then took the 
name of convivae regis, and the wergeld of 300 solidi was three 
times that of a homo romanus. The antrustions, belonging as 
they did to one body, had strictly defined duties towards one 
another; thus one antrustion was forbidden to bear witness 
against another under penalty of 1 5 solidi compensation. 

The antrustions seem to have played an important part at 
the time of Clovis. It was they, apparently, who formed the 
army which conquered the land, an army composed chiefly of 
Franks, and of a few Gallo-Romans who had taken the side of 
Clovis. After the conquest, the role of the antrustions became 
less important. For each of their expeditions, the kings raised 
an army of citizens in which the Gallo-Romans mingled more 
and more with the Franks; they only kept one small permanent 
body which acted as their bodyguard {trustis dominica), some 
members of which were from time to time told off for other 
tasks, such as that of forming garrisons in the frontier towns. 
The institution seems to have disappeared during the anarchy 
with which the 8th century opened. It has wrongly been held 
to be the origin of vassalage. Only the king bad antrustions; 
every lord could have vassals. The antrustions were a military 
institution; vassalage was a social institution, the origins of 
which are very complex. 

All historians of Merovingian institutions and law have treated 
of the antrustions, and each one has his different system. The 
principal authorities are : — Waitz, Deutsche Verfassungsgeschichte, 
3rd ed. vol. ii. pp. 335 et seq. ; Brunner, Deutsche Rechtsgeschichte, 
vol. ii. p. 97 et seq.; Fustel de Coulanges, La Monarchic franque, 
p. 80 et seq. ; Maxime Deloche, La Trustis et V antrustion royal sous 
les deux premieres races (Paris, 1873), collecting and discussing the 
principal texts; Guilhermoz, Les Origines de la noblesse (Paris, 1902), 
suggesting a system which is new in part. (C. Pf.) 

ANTWERP, the most northern of the nine provinces of 
Belgium. It is conterminous with the Dutch frontier on the 
north. Malines, Lierre and Turnhout are among the towns of 
the province. Its importance, however, is derived from the 
fact that it contains the commercial metropolis of Belgium. It 
is divided into three administrative districts (arrondissements), 
viz. Antwerp, Malines and Turnhout. These are subdivided 
into 25 cantons and 152 communes. The area is 707,932 acres 
or 1 106 sq. m. Pop. (1904) 888,980, showing an average of 
804 inhabitants to the square mile. 



ANTWERP 



55 



ANTWERP (Fr. Anvers), capital of the above province, an 
important city on the right bank of the Scheldt, Belgium's 
chief centre of commerce and a strong fortified position. 

Modern Antwerp is a finely laid out city with a succession of 
broad avenues which mark the position of the first enceinte. 
There are long streets and terraces of fine houses belonging to 
the merchants and manufacturers of the city which amply 
testify to its prosperity, and recall the 16th century distich that 
Antwerp was noted for its moneyed men (" Antwerpia nummis ") . 
Despite the ravages of war and internal disturbances it still 
preserves some memorials of its early grandeur, notably its fine 
cathedral. This church was begun in the 14th century, but not 
finished till 1518. Its tower of over 400 ft. is a conspicuous 
object to be seen from afar over the surrounding flat country. 
A second tower which formed part of the original plan has never 
been erected. The proportions of the interior are noble, and in 
the church are hung three of the masterpieces of Rubens, viz. 
" The Descent from the Cross," " The Elevation of the Cross," 
and " The Assumption." Another fine church in Antwerp is 
that of St James, far more ornate than the cathedral, and con- 
taining the tomb of Rubens, who devoted himself to its embel- 
lishment. The Bourse or exchange, which claims to be the 
first distinguished by the former name in Europe, is a fine new 
building finished in 1872, on the site of the old Bourse erected in 
1 53 1 and destroyed by fire in 1858. Fire has destroyed several 
other old buildings in the city, notably in 1891 the house of the 
Hansa League on the northern quays. A curious museum is 
the Maison Plantin, the house of the great printer C. Plantin 
(q.v.) and his successor Moretus, which stands exactly as it did 
in the time of the latter. The new picture gallery close to the 
southern quays is a fine building divided into ancient and 
modern sections. The collection of old masters is very fine, 
containing many splendid examples of Rubens, Van Dyck, 
Titian and the chief Dutch masters. Antwerp, famous in the 
middle ages and at the present time for its commercial enter- 
prise, enjoyed in the 17 th century a celebrity not less distinct 
or glorious in art for its school of painting, which included 
Rubens, Van Dyck, Jordaens, the two Teniers and many others. 

Commerce. — Since 1863, when Antwerp was opened to the 
trade of the outer world by the purchase of the Dutch right to 
levy toll, its position has completely changed, and no place in 
Europe has made greater progress in this period than the ancient 
city on the Scheldt. The following figures for the years 1904 
and 1905 show that its trade is still rapidly increasing: — 



\ear. 


Exports. 


Imports. 


Tonnage. 


Value. 


Tonnage. 


Value. 


1904 
1905 


6,578,558 
7,153,655 


£71,349,678 
£80,032,355 


8,427,894 
9,061,781 


£79,539,ioo 
£91,194,517 



The growth of its commerce in recent times may be measured 
by a comparison of the following figures. In 1888, 4272 ships 
entered the port and 4302 sailed from it. In 1905, 6095 entered 
the port and 6065 sailed from it — an increase of nearly 50 %. 
In 1888 the total tonnage was 7,800,000; in 1905 it had risen 
to 19,662,000. These figures explain how and why Antwerp 
has outgrown its dock accommodation. The eight principal 
basins or docks already existing in 1908 were (1) the Little or 
Bonaparte dock; (2) the Great dock, also constructed in 
Napoleon's time; (3) the Kattendijk, built in i860 and enlarged 
in 1881 ; (4) the Wood dock; (5) the Campine dock, used especially 
for minerals; (6) the Asia dock, which is in direct communication 
with the Meuse by a canal as well as with the Scheldt; (7) the 
Lefebvre dock; and (8) the America dock, which was only 
opened in 1905. Two new docks, called " intercalary " because 
they would fit into whatever scheme might be adopted for the 
rectification of the course of the Scheldt, were still to be con- 
structed, leading out of the Lefebvre dock and covering 70 acres. 
With the completion of the new maritime lock, ships drawing 
3c ft. of water would be able to enter these new docks and also 
the Lefebvre and America docks. In connexion with the 
projected grandc coupure (that is, a cutting through the neck of 



the loop in the river Scheldt immediately below Antwerp), the 
importance of these four docks would be greatly increased 
because they would then flank the new main channel of the river. 
When the Belgian Chambers voted in February 1906 the sums 
necessary for the improvement of the harbour of Antwerp no 
definite scheme was sanctioned, the question being referred to 
a special mixed commission. The improvements at Antwerp 
are not confined to the construction of new docks. The quays 
flanking the Scheldt are 3^ m. in length. They are constructed 
of granite, and no expense has been spared in equipping them 
with hydraulic cranes, warehouses, &c. 

Fortifications. — Besides being the chief commercial port of 
Belgium, Antwerp is the greatest fortress of that country. 
Nothing, however, remains of the former enceinte or even of 
the famous old citadel defended by General Chasse in 1832, 
except the Steen, which has been restored and contains a museum 
of arms and antiquities. After the establishment of Belgian 
independence Antwerp was defended only by the citadel and 
an enceinte of about 2\ m. round the city. No change occurred 
till 1859, when the system of Belgian defence was radically 
altered by the dismantlement of seventeen of the twenty-two 
fortresses constructed under Wellington's supervision in 18 15- 
1818. At Antwerp the old citadel and enceinte were removed. 
A new enceinte 8 m. in length was constructed, and the villages 
of Berchem and Borgerhout, now parishes of Antwerp, were 
absorbed within the city. This enceinte still exists, and is a 
fine work of art. It is protected by a broad wet ditch (plans 
in article Fortification), and in the caponiers are the 
magazines and store chambers of the fortress. The enceinte 
is pierced by nineteen openings or gateways, but of these seven 
are not used by the public. As soon as the enceinte was finished 
eight detached forts from 2 to 2§ m. distant from the enceinte 
were constructed. They begin on the north near Wyneghem 
and the zone of inundation, and terminate on the south at 
Hoboken. In 1870 Fort Merxem and the redoubts of Beren- 
drecht and Oorderen were built for the defence of the area to 
be inundated north of Antwerp. In 1878, in consequence of the 
increased range of artillery and the more destructive power of 
explosives, it was recognized that the fortifications of Antwerp 
were becoming useless and out of date. It was therefore decided 
to change it from a fortress to a fortified position by constructing 
an outer line of forts and batteries at a distance varying from 
6 to 9 m. from the enceinte. This second line was to consist of 
fifteen forts, large and small. Up to 1898 only five had been 
constructed,, but in that and the two following years five more 
were finished, leaving another five to complete the line. A 
mixed commission selected the points at which they were to be 
placed. With the completion of this work, which in 1908 was 
being rapidly pushed on, Antwerp might be regarded as one of 
the best fortified positions in Europe, and so long as its com- 
munications by sea are preserved intact it will be practically 
impregnable. 

Two subsidiary or minor problems remained over. (1) The 
much-discussed removal of the existing enceinte in order to 
give Antwerp further growing space. If it were removed there 
arose the further question, should a new enceinte be made at 
the first line of outer forts, or should an enceinte be dispensed 
with? An enceinte following the line of those forts would be 
30 m. in length. Then if the city grew up to this extended 
enceinte the outer forts would be too near. To screen the city 
from bombardment they would have to be carried 3 m. further 
out, and the whole Belgian army would scarcely furnish an 
adequate garrison for this extended position. A new enceinte, 
or more correctly a rampart of a less permanent character, 
connecting the eight forts of the inner line and extending from 
Wyneghem to a little south of Hoboken, was decided upon in 
1008. (2) The second problem was the position on the left 
bank of the Scheldt. All the defences enumerated are on the 
right bank. On the left bank the two old forts Isabelle and Marie 
alone defend the Scheldt. It is assumed (probably rightly) 
that no enemy could get round to this side in sufficient strength 
to deliver any attack that the existing forts could not easily 



i 5 6 



ANU 



repel. The more interesting question connected with the left 
bank is whether it does not provide, as Napoleon thought, the 
most natural outlet for the expansion of Antwerp. Proposals to 
connect the two banks by a tunnel under the Scheldt have been 
made from time to time in a fitful manner, but nothing whatever 
had been done by 1908 to realize what appears to be a natural 
and easy project. 

Population. — The following statistics show the growth of 
population in and since the 19th century. In 1800 the population 
was computed not to exceed 40,000. At the census of 1846 the 
total was 88,487; of 1851, 95,501; of 1880, 169,100; of 1900, 
272,830; and of 1904, 291,949. To these figures ought to be 
added the populations (1904) of Borgerhout (43,391) and Berchem 
(26,383), as they are part of the city, which would give Antwerp 
a total population of 361,723. 

History. — The suggested origin of the name Antwerp from 
Hand-werpen (hand- throwing), because a mythical robber chief 
indulged in the practice of cutting off his prisoners' hands and 
throwing them into the Scheldt, appeared to Motley rather far- 
fetched, but it is less reasonable to trace it, as he inclines to do, 
from an t werf (on the wharf), seeing that the form Andhunerbo 
existed in the 6th century on the separation of Austrasia and 
Neustria. Moreover, hand-cutting was ' not an uncommon 
practice in Europe. It was perpetuated from a savage past in 
the custom of cutting off the right hand of a man who died 
without heir, and sending it as proof of main-morte to the feudal 
lord. Moreover, the two hands and a castle, which form the 
arms of Antwerp, will not be dismissed as providing no proof by 
any one acquainted with the scrupulous care that heralds dis- 
played in the golden age of chivalry before assigning or recognizing 
the armorial bearings of any claimant. 

In the 4th century Antwerp is mentioned as one of the places 
in the second Germany, and in the nth century Godfrey of 
Bouillon was for some years best known as marquis of Antwerp. 
Antwerp was the headquarters of Edward III. during his early 
negotiations with van Artevelde, and his son Lionel, earl of 
Cambridge, was born there in 1338. 

It was not, however, till after the closing of the Zwyn and the 
decay of Bruges that Antwerp became of importance. At the 
end of the 1 5th century the foreign trading gilds Or houses were 
transferred from Bruges to Antwerp, and the building assigned 
to the English nation is specifically mentioned in 1 5 10. In 1 560, 
a year which marked the highest point of its prosperity, six 
nations, viz. the Spaniards, the Danes and the Hansa together, 
the Italians, the English, the Portuguese and the Germans, were 
named at Antwerp, and over 1000 foreign merchants were 
resident in the city. Guicciardini, the Venetian envoy, describes 
the activity of the port, into which 500 ships sometimes passed 
in a day, and as evidence of the extent of its land trade he 
mentioned that 2000 carts entered the city each week. Venice 
had fallen from its first place in European commerce, but still 
it was active and prosperous. Its envoy, in explaining the 
importance of Antwerp, states that there was as much business 
done there in a fortnight as in Venice throughout the year. 

The religious troubles that marked the second half of the 16th 
century broke out in Antwerp as in every other part of Belgium 
excepting Liege. In 1576 the Spanish soldiery plundered the 
town during what was called " the Spanish Fury," and 6000 
citizens were massacred. Eight hundred houses were burnt 
down, and over two millions sterling of damage was wrought in 
the town on that occasion. 

In 1585 a severe blow was struck at the prosperity of Antwerp 
when Parma captured it after a long siege and sent all its Protes- 
tant citizens into exile. The recognition of the independence of 
the United Provinces by the treaty of Miinster in 1648 carried 
with it the death-blow to Antwerp's prosperity as a place of 
trade, for one of its clauses stipulated that the Scheldt should be 
closed to navigation. This impediment remained in force until 
1863, although the provisions were relaxed during French rule 
from 1795 to 1814, and also during the time Belgium formed 
part of the kingdom of the Netherlands (1815 to 1830). Antwerp 
had reached the lowest point of its fortunes in 1800, and its 



population had sunk under 40,000, when Napoleon, malizingits 
strategical importance, assigned two millions for the construc- 
tion of two docks and a mole. 

One other incident in the chequered history of Antwerp 
deserves mention. In 1830 the city was captured by the Belgian 
insurgents, but the citadel continued to be held by a Dutch 
garrison under General Chasse. For a time this officer subjected 
the town to a periodical bombardment which inflicted much 
damage, and at the end of 1832 the citadel itself was besieged 
by a French army. During this attack the town was further 
injured. In December 1 83 2 , after a gallant defence, Chasse made 
an honourable surrender. 

See J. L. Motley's Rise of the Dutch Republic; C. Scribanii, 
Origines Antwerpiensiwm; Gens, Hist, de la ville d'Anvers; Mertens 
and Torfs, GesChiedenis van Antwerp; Genard, Anvers & travers 
les &ges; Annuairestatisque de la Belgique. (D. C. B.) 

ANU, a Babylonian deity, who, by virtue of being the first 
figure in a triad consisting of Anu, Bel and Ea, came to be re- 
garded as the father and king of the gods. Anu is so prominently 
associated with the city of Erech in southern Babylonia that 
there are good reasons for believing this place to have been the 
original seat of the Anu cult. If this be correct, then the goddess 
Nana (or Ishtar) of Erech was presumably regarded as his 
consort. The name of the god signifies the " high one " and he 
was probably a god of the atmospheric region above the earth — 
perhaps a storm god like Adad (q.v.), or like Yahweh among the 
ancient Hebrews. However this may be, already in the old- 
Babylonian period, i.e. before Khammurabi, Anu was regarded 
as the god of the heavens and his name became in fact synony- 
mous with the heavens, so that in some cases it is doubtful 
whether, under the term, the god or the heavens is meant. It 
would seem from this that the grouping of the divine powers 
recognized in the universe into a triad symbolizing the three 
divisions, heavens, earth and the watery deep, was a process 
of thought which had taken place before the third millennium. 
To Anu was assigned the control of the heavens, to Bel the 
earth, and to Ea the waters. The doctrine once established 
remained an inherent part of the Babylonian-Assyrian religion 
and led to the more or less complete disassociation of the three 
gods constituting the triad from their original local limitations. 
An intermediate step between Anu viewed as the local deity 
of Erech (or some other centre), Bel as the god of Nippur, and 
Ea as the god of Eridu is represented by the prominence which 
each one of the centres associated with the three deities in ques- 
tion must have acquired, and which led to each one absorbing 
the qualities of other gods so as to give them a controlling 
position in an organized pantheon. For Nippur we have the 
direct evidence that its chief deity, En-lil or Bel, was once 
regarded as the head of an extensive pantheon. The sanctity 
and, therefore, the importance of Eridu remained a fixed tradition 
in the minds of the people to the latest days, and analogy there- 
fore justifies the conclusion that Anu was likewise worshipped 
in a centre which had acquired great prominence. The summing- 
up of divine powers manifested in the universe in a threefold 
division represents an outcome of speculation in the schools 
attached to the temples of Babylonia, but the selection of Anu, 
Bel and Ea for the three representatives of the three spheres 
recognized, is due to the importance which, for one reason or 
the other, the centres in which Anu, Bel and Ea were worshipped 
had acquired in the popular mind. Each of the three must have 
been regarded in his centre as the most important member in a 
larger or smaller group, so that their union in a triad marks also 
the combination of the three distinctive pantheons into a 
harmonious whole. 

In the astral theology of Babylonia and Assyria, Anu, Bel and 
Ea became the three zones of the ecliptic, the northern, middle 
and southern zone respectively. The purely theoretical character 
of Anu is thus still further emphasized, and in the annals and 
votive inscriptions as well as in the incantations and hymns, he 
is rarely introduced as an active force to whom a personal 
appeal can be made. His name becomes little more than a 
synonym for the heavens in general and even his title as king 



ANUBIS— ANVILLE 



i57 



or father of the gods has little of the personal element in it. A 
consort Antum (or as some scholars prefer to read, Anatum) 
is assigned to him, on the theory that every deity must have a 
female associate, but Antum is a purely artificial product— a 
lifeless symbol playing even less of a part in what may be called 
the active pantheon than Anu. 

For works of reference see Babylonian and Assyrian Religion. 

(M. Ja.) 

ANUBIS (in Egyptian Anup, written Inpw in hieroglyphs), 
the name of one of the most important of the Egyptian gods, 
There were two types of canine divinities in Egypt, their leading 
representatives being respectively Anubis and Ophois (Wp-wi-wt, 
" opener of the ways "): the former type is symbolized by the 

recumbent animal J«\, the other by a similar animal (in a 

stiff standing attitude), carried as an emblem on a standard 

"V^ in war or in religious processions. The former comprised 



two beneficent gods of the necropolis; the latter also were 
beneficent, but warlike, divinities. They thus corresponded/at 
any rate in some measure, respectively to the fiercer and milder 
aspects of the dog-tribe. In late days the Greeks report that 
Kvves (dogs) were the sacred animals of Anubis while those of 

Ophois were Xwcoi (wolves). The above figure 3^ is coloured 
black as befits a funerary and nocturnal animal: it is more 
attenuated than even a greyhound, but it has the bushy tail of 
the fox or the jackal. Probably tliese were the original genii of 
the necropolis, and in fact the same lean animal figured passant 
•^^ is sib " jackal " or " fox." The domestic dog would be 
brought into the sacred circle through the increased veneration 
for animals, and the more pronounced view in later times of 
Anubis as servant, messenger and custodian of the gods. 

Anubis was the principal god in the capitals of the XVIIth 
and XVTIIth nomes of Upper Egypt, and secondary god in the 
Xlllth and probably in the Xllth nome; but his cult was 
universal. To begin with, he was the god of the dead, of the 
cemetery, of all supplies for the dead, and therefore of embalming 
when that became customary. In very early inscriptions the 
funerary prayers in the tombs are addressed to him almost 
exclusively, and he always took a leading place in them. In the 
scene of the weighing of the soul before Osiris, dating from the 
New-kingdom onwards, Anubis attends to the balance while 
Thoth registers the result. Anubis was believed to have been 
the embalmer of Osiris: the mummy of Osiris, or of the deceased, 
on a bier, tended by this god, is a very common subject on 
funerary tablets of the late periods. Anubis came to be con- 
sidered especially the attendant of the gods and conductor of 
the dead, and hence was commonly identified with Hermes 
(cf. the name Hermanubis); but the role of Hermes as the god 
of eloquence, inventor of arts and recorder of the gods was 
taken by Thoth. In those days Anubis was considered to be 
son of Osiris by Nephthys; earlier perhaps he was son of Re, 
the sun-god. In the 2nd century a. d. his aid was " com- 
pelled " by the magicians and necromancers to fetch the gods 
and entertain them with food (especially in the ceremony of 
gazing into the bowl of oil), and he is invoked by them some- 
times as the " Good Ox-herd." The cult of Anubis must at all 
times have been very popular in Egypt, and, belonging to the 
Isis and Serapis cycle, was introduced into Greece and Rome. 

See Erman, Egyptian Religion; Budge, Gods of the Egyptians', 
Meyer, in Zeits. J. Aeg. Spr. 41-97- ( F - Ll. G.) 

ANURADHAPURA, a ruined city of Ceylon, famous for its 
ancient monuments. It is situated in the North-central province, 
Anuradhapura became the capital of Ceylon in the 5th century 
B.C., and attained its highest magnificence about the commence- 
ment of the Christian era. In its prime it ranked beside Nineveh 
and Babylon in its colossal proportions — its four walls, each 16 m. 
long, enclosing an area oi 256 sq. m., — in the number of its 
inhabitants, and the splendour of its shrines and public edifices. 
It suffered much during the earlier Tamil invasions, and was 
finally deserted as a royal residence in a.d. 760, It fell, com- 



pletely into decay, and it is only of recent years that the jungle 
has been cleared away, the ruins laid bare, and some measure 
of prosperity brought back to the surrounding country by the 
restoration of hundreds of village tanks. The ruins consist of 
three classes of buildings, dagobas, monastic buildings, and 
pokunas. The dagobas are bell-shaped masses of masonry, 
varying from a few feet to over 11 00 in circumference. Some 
of them contain enough masonry to build a town for twenty-five 
thousand inhabitants. Remains of the monastic buildings are 
to be found in every direction in the shape of raised stone plat- 
forms, foundations and stone pillars. The most famous is the 
Brazen Palace erected by King Datagamana about 164 B.C. 
The pokunas are bathing-tanks or tanks for the supply of 
drinking-water, which are scattered everywhere through the 
jungle. The city also contains a sacred Bo-tree, which is said to 
date back to the year 245 B.C. The railway was extended from 
Matale to Anuradhapura in 1905. Population: town, 3672; 
province, 79,110. 

ANVIL (from Anglo-Saxon anfilt or onfilti, either that on 
which something is " welded " or " folded," cf. German falzen, 
to fold, or connected with other Teutonic forms of the word, 
cf. German amboss, in which case the final syllable is from 
" beat," and the meaning is " that on which something is 
beaten "), a mass of iron ou which material is supported while 
being shaped under the hammer (see Forging). The common 
blacksmith's anvil is made of wrought iron, often in America 
of cast iron, with a smooth working face of hardened steel. 
It has at one end a projecting conical beak or bick for use, in 
hammering curved pieces of metal; occasionally the other end 
is also provided with a bick, which is then partly rectangular in 
section. There is also a square hole in the face, into which tools, 
such as the anvil-cutter or chisel, can be dropped, cutting edge 
uppermost. For power hammers the anvil proper is supported 
on an anvil block which is of great massiveness, sometimes 
weighing over 200 tons for a 12-ton hammer, aiid this again 
rests on a strong foundation of timber and masonry or concrete. 
In anatomy the term anvil is applied to one of the bones of the 
middle ear, the incus, which is articulated with the malleus. 

ANVILLE, JEAN BAPTISTE BOURGUIGNON D' (1697- 
1782), perhaps the greatest geographical author of the 18th 
century, was born at Paris on the nthof July 1697. Hispassion 
for geographical research displayed itself from early years: at 
the age of twelve he was already amusing himself by drawing 
maps for Latin authors. Later, his friendship with the anti- 
quarian, Abbe Longuerue, greatly aided his studies. His first 
serious map, that of Ancient Greece, was published when he 
was fifteen, and at the age of twenty-two he was appointed one 
of the king's geographers, and began to attract the attention of 
the first authorities. D'Anville's studies embraced everything 
of geographical nature in the world's literature, as far as he could 
master it: for this purpose he not only searched ancient and 
modern historians, travellers and narrators of every description, 
but also poets, orators and philosophers. One of his cherished 
objects was to reform geography by putting an end to the blind 
copying of older maps, by testing the commonly accepted posi- 
tions of places through a rigorous examination of all the descrip- 
tive authority, and by excluding from cartography every name 
inadequately supported. Vast spaces, which had before been 
covered with countries and cities, were thus suddenly reduced 
almost to a blank. 

D'Anville was at first employed in the humbler task of illustrat- 
ing by maps the works of different travellers, such as Marchais, 
Charlevoix, Labat and Duhalde. For the history of China by 
the last-named writer he was employed to make an atlas, which 
was published separately at the Hague in 1737. In 1735 and 1736 
he brought out two treatises on the figure of the earth; but 
these attempts to solve geometrical problems by literary material 
were, to a great extent, refuted by Maupertuis' measurements 
of a degree within the polar circle. D'Anville's historical method 
was more successful in his 1743 map of Italy, which first indicated 
numerous errors in the mapping of that country, and was accom- 
panied by a valuable memoir (a novelty in such work), showing 



i 5 8 



ANWARI— APALACHIGOLA 



in full the sources of the design. A trigonometrical survey which 
Benedict XIV. soon after had made in the papal states strikingly 
confirmed the French geographer's results. In his later years 
d'Anville did yeoman service for ancient and medieval geography, 
accomplishing something like a revolution in the former; 
mapping afresh all the chief countries of the pre-Christian 
civilizations (especially Egypt), and by his MSmoire et abregi 
de giographie ancienne et generate and his Etats formSs en Europe 
apres la chute de I' empire romain en Occident (1771) rendering his 
labours still more generally useful. In 1754, at the age of fifty- 
seven, he became a member of the Academie des Inscriptions et 
Belles Lettres, whose transactions he enriched with many papers. 
In 1775 he received the only place in the Academie des Sciences 
which is allotted to geography; and in the same year he was 
appointed, without solicitation, first geographer to the king. 
His last employment consisted in arranging his collection of 
maps, plans and geographical materials. It was the most 
extensive in Europe, and had been purchased by the king, who, 
however, left him the use of it during his life. This task per- 
formed, he sank into a total imbecility both of mind and body, 
which continued for two years, till his death in January 1782. 

D'Anville's published memoirs and dissertations amounted to 
78, and his maps to 211. A complete edition of his works was an- 
nounced in 1806 by de Manne in 6 vols, quarto, Only two of which 
had appeared when the editor died in 1832. See Dacier's &oge de 
d'Anville (Paris, 1802). Besides the separate works noticed above, 
d'Anville's maps executed for Rollin's Histoire ancienne and Histoire 
romaine, and his Traite des mesures anciennes et modernes (1769), 
deserve special notice. 

ANWARI [Auhad-uddin Ali Anwari], Persian poet, was born 
in Khorasan early in the 12th century. He enjoyed the especial 
favour of the sultan Sinjar, whom he attended in all his warlike 
expeditions. On one occasion, when the sultan was besieging 
the fortress of Hazarasp, a fierce poetical conflict was maintained 
between Anwari and his rival Rashidi, who was within the 
beleaguered castle, by means of verses fastened to arrows. 
Anwari died at Balkh towards the end of the 12 th century. The 
Diwan, or collection of his poems, consists of a series of long 
poems, and a number of simpler lyrics. His longest piece, The 
Tears of Khorassan, was translated into English verse by Captain 
Kirkpa trick (see also Persia. Literature). 

ANWEILER, or Annweiler, a town of Germany, in the 
Bavarian Palatinate, on the Queich, 8 m. west of Landau, and 
on the railway from that place to Zweibriicken. Pop. 3700. 
It is romantically situated in the part of the Haardt called the 
Pfalzer Schweiz (Palatinate Switzerland), and is surrounded by 
high hills which yield a famous red sandstone. On the Sonnen- 
berg (1600 ft.) lie the ruins of the castle of Trifels, in which 
Richard Cceur de Lion was imprisoned in 1193/ The industries 
include cloth-weaving, tanning, dyeing and saw mills. There is 
also a considerable trade in wine. 

ANZENGRUBER, LUDWIG (1839-1889), Austrian dramatist 
and novelist, was born at Vienna on the 29th of November 1839. 
He was educated at the Realschule of his native town, and then 
entered a bookseller's shop; from i860 to 1867 he was an actor, 
without, however, displaying any marked talent, although 
his stage experience later stood him in good stead. In 1869 he 
became a clerk in the Viennese police department, but having 
in the following year made a success with his anti-clerical drama, 
Der Pfarrer von Kirchfeld, he gave up his appointment and 
devoted himself entirely to literature. He died at Vienna on 
the 10th of December 1889. Anzengruber was exceedingly 
fertile in ideas, and wrote a great many plays. They are mostly 
of Austrian peasant life, and although somewhat melancholy in 
tone are interspersed with bright and witty scenes. Among the 
best known are Der Meineidbauer (187 1), Die Kreuzelschreiber 
(1872), Der G'wissensimirm (1874), Hand und Herz (1875), 
Doppelselbstmord (1875), Das vierte Gebot (1877), and Der Fleck 
auf der Ehr' (1889). Anzengruber also published a novel of 
considerable merit, Der Schandfleck (1876; remodelled 1884); 
and various short stories and tales of village life collected under 
the title Wolken und Sunn'schein (1888). 

Anzengruber's collected works, with a biography, were published 
in 10 vols, in 1890 (3rd ed. 1897); his correspondence has been 



edited by A. Bettelheim (1902). See A. Bettelheim, L. Anzengruber 
(1890); L. Rosner, Erinnerungen an L. Anzengruber (1890): 
H. Sittenberger, Studien zur Dramaturgie der Gegenwart (1899); 
S. Friedmann, L. Anzengruber (1902). 

ANZIN, a town of northern France, in the department of 
Nord, on the Scheldt, 15 m. N.W. of Valenciennes, of which it 
is a suburb. Pop. (1906) 14,077. Anzin is the centre of im- 
portant coal-mines of the Valenciennes basin belonging to the 
Anzin Company, the formation of which dates to 1717. The 
metallurgical industries of the place are extensive, and include 
iron and copper founding and the manufacture of steam-engines, 
machinery, chain-cables and a great variety of heavy iron 
goods. There are also glass-works and breweries. 

AONIA, a district of ancient Boeotia, containing the mountains 
Helicon and Ci-thaeron, and thus sacred to the Muses, who are 
called by Pope the " Aonian maids." 

AORIST (from Gr. aopiaros, indefinite), the name given in 
Greek grammar to certain past tenses of verbs (first aorist, 
second aorist). 

AOSTA (anc. Augusta Praetoria Salassorum), a town and 
episcopal see of Piedmont, Italy, in the province of Turin, 
80 m. N.N.W. by rail of the town of Turin, and 48 m. direct, 
situated 1910 ft. above sea-level, at the confluence of the Buthier 
and the Dora Baltea, and at the junction of the Great and 
Little St Bernard routes. Pop. (1901) 7875. The cathedral, 
reconstructed in the nth century (to which one of its campanili 
and some architectural details belong), was much altered in the 
14th and 17th; it has a rich treasury including an ivory diptych 
of 406 with a representation of Honorius. The church of St 
Ours, founded in 425, and rebuilt in the 12th century, has good 
cloisters (1133); the 15th-century priory is picturesque. The 
castle of Bramafam (nth century) is interesting. Cretinism is 
common in the district. 

After the fall of the Roman empire the valley of Aosta fell 
into the hands of the Burgundian kings; and after many changes 
of masters, it came under the rule of Count Humbert I. of Savoy 
(Biancamano) in 1032. The privilege of holding the assembly 
of the states-general was granted to the inhabitants in 11 89. 
An executive council was nominated from this body in 1536, 
and continued to exist until 1802. After the restoration of the 
rule of Savoy it was reconstituted and formally recognized by 
Charles Albert, king of Sardinia, at the birth of his grandson 
Prince Amedeo, who was created duke of Aosta. Aosta was 
the birthplace of Anselm. For ancient remains see Augusta 
Praetoria Salassorum. 

APACHE (apparently from the Zuni name, = " enemy," 
given to the Navaho Indians), a tribe of North American Indians 
of Athapascan stock. The Apaches formerly ranged over south- 
eastern Arizona and south-western Mexico. The chief divisions 
of the Apaches were the Arivaipa, Chiricahua, Coyotero, Faraone 
Gileno, Llanero, Mescalero, Mimbreno, Mogollon, Naisha, 
Tchikun and Tchishi. They were a powerful and warlike tribe, 
constantly at enmity with the whites. The final surrender of 
the tribe took place in 1886, when the Chiricahuas, the division 
involved, were deported to Florida and Alabama, where they 
underwent military imprisonment. The Apaches are now in 
reservations in Arizona, New Mexico and Oklahoma, and number 
between 5000 and 6000. 

For details see Handbook of American Indians, ed. F. W. Hodge, 
(Washington, 1907) ; also Indians, North American. 

APALACHEE (apparently a Choctaw name, = "people on 
the other side "), a tribe of North American Indians of Muskho- 
gean stock. They have been known since the 16th century, and 
formerly ranged the country around Apalachee Bay, Florida. 
About 1600 the Spanish Franciscans founded a successful 
mission among them, but early in the 18th century the tribe 
suffered defeat at the hands of the British, the mission churches 
were burnt, the priests killed, and the tribe practically annihil- 
ated, more than one thousand of them being sold as slaves. 

See Handbook of American Indians, ed. F. W. Hodge (Washington, 
1907). 

APALACHICOLA, a city, port of entry, and the county-seat 
of Franklin county, Florida, U.S.A., in the N.W. part of the 



APAMEA— APATITE 



J 59 



state, on Apalachicola Bay and at the mouth of the Apalachicola 
river. Pop. (1890) 2727; (1900) 3077, of whom 1589 were of 
negro descent; (1905, state census) 3244. It is served by the 
Apalachicola Northern railway (to Chattahoochee, Florida), 
and by river steamers which afford connexion with railways 
at Carrabelle about 25 m. distant, at Chatahoochee (or River 
Junction), and at Columbus and Bainbridge, Georgia, and by 
ocean-going vessels with American and foreign ports. The city 
has a monument (1900) to John Gorrie (1803-1855), a physician 
who discovered the cold-air process of refrigeration in 1849 (and 
patented an ice-machine in 1850), as the result of experiments 
to lower the temperatures of fever patients. The bay is well 
protected by St Vincent, Flag, Sand, and St George's islands; 
and the shipping of lumber, naval stores and cotton, which 
reach the city by way of the river, forms the principal industry. 
Before the development of railways in the Gulf states, Apala- 
chicola was one of the principal centres of trade in the southern 
states, ranking third among the Gulf ports in 1835. In 1907 the 
Federal government projected a channel across the harbour bar 
100 ft. wide and 10 ft. deep and a channel 150 ft. wide and 18 ft. 
deep for Link Channel and the West Pass. In 1907 the exports 
were valued at $317,838; the imports were insignificant. The 
value of the total domestic and foreign commerce of the port 
for the year ending on the 30th of June 1907 was estimated 
at $1,240,000 (76,000 tons). The fishery products, including 
oysters, tarpon, sturgeon, caviare and sponges, are also important. 
APAMEA, the name of several towns in western Asia. 

1. A treasure city and stud-depot of the Seleucid kings in the 
valley of the Orontes. It was so named by Seleucus Nicator, 
after Apama, his wife. Destroyed by Chosroes in the 7 th 
century a.d., it was partially rebuilt and known as Famia by 
the Arabs; and overthrown by an earthquake in 1152. It kept 
its importance down to the time of the Crusades. The acropolis 
hill is now occupied by the ruins of Kalat el-Mudik. 

See R. F. Burton and T. Drake, Unexplored Syria; E. Sachau, 
Reise in Syrien, 1883. 

2. A city in Phrygia, founded by Antiochus Soter (from whose 
mother, Apama, it received its name), near, but on lower ground 
than, Cclaenae. It was situated where the Marsyas leaves the 
hills to join the Maeander, and it became a seat of Seleucid 
power, and a centre of Graeco-Roman and Graeco-Hebrew 
civilization and commerce. There Antiochus the Great collected 
the army with which he met the Romans at Magnesia, and there 
two years later the treaty between Rome and the Seleucid 
realm was signed. After Antiochus' departure for the East, 
Apamea lapsed to the Pergamenian kingdom and thence to 
Rome in 133, but it was resold to Mithradates V., who held it 
till 1 20. After the Mithradatic wars it became and remained a 
great centre for trade, largely carried on by resident Italians 
and by Jews. In 84 Sulla made it the seat of a convcntus of the 
Asian province, and it long claimed primacy among Phrygian 
cities. Its decline dates from the local disorganization of the 
empire in the 3rd century a.d.; and though a bishopric, it was 
not an important military or commercial centre in Byzantine 
times. The Turks took it first in 1070, and from the 13th 
century onwards it was always in Moslem hands. For a long 
period it was one of the greatest cities of Asia Minor, commanding 
the Maeander road; but when the trade routes were diverted 
to Constantinople it rapidly declined, and its ruin was completed 
by an earthquake. A Jewish tradition, possibly arising from 
a name Cibotus (ark), which the town bore, identified a neigh- 
bouring mountain with Ararat. The famous " Noah " coins of 
the emperor Philip commemorate this belief. The site is now 
partly occupied by Bineir (q.v., sometimes locally known also 
as Geiklar, " the gazelles," perhaps from a tradition of the 
Persian hunting-park, seen by Xenophon at Celaenae), which is 
connected with Smyrna by railway; there are considerable 
remains, including a great number of important Graeco-Roman 
inscriptions. 

See W. M. Ramsay, Cities and Bishoprics of Phrygia, vol. ii. ; 
G. Weber, Dineir-Celenes (1892); D. G. Hogarth in Journ. Hell. 
Studies (1888); O. Hirschfeld' in Trans, Berlin Academy (1875). 

"(D. G. H.) 



3. A town on the left bank of the Euphrates, at the end of a 
bridge of boats {zeugma) ; the Til-Barsip of the Assyrian inscrip- 
tions, now Birejik (q.v.). 

4. The earlier Myrlea of Bithynia, now Mudania (q.v.), the 
portof Brusa. Thename was given it by Prusias I., who rebuilt it. 

5. A city mentioned by Stephanus and Pliny as situated near 
the Tigris, the identification of which is still uncertain. 

6. A Greek city in Parthia, near Rhagae. 

APARRI, a town of the province of Cagayan, Luzon, Philip- 
pine Islands, on the Grande de Cagayan river near, its mouth, 
about 55 m. N. of Tuguegarao, the capital. Pop. (1903) 18,252. 
The valley is one of the largest tobacco-producing sections in 
the Philippines; and the town has a considerable coastwise 
trade. Here, too, is a meteorological station. 

APATITE, a widely distributed mineral, which, when found 
in large masses, is of considerable economic value as a phosphate. 
As a mineral species it was first recognized by A. G. Werner in 
1786 and named by him from the Greek airaTav, to deceive, 
because it had previously been mistaken for other minerals, 
such as beryl, tourmaline, chrysolite, amethyst, &c. Although 
long known to consist mainly of calcium phosphate, it was not 
until 1827 that G. Rose found that fluorine or chlorine is an 
essential constituent. Two chemical varieties of apatite are to 
be distinguished, namely a fluor-apatite, (CaF) Ca 4 P30i 2 , and a 
chlor-apatite, (CaCl) Ca 4 P 3 0i 2 : the former, which is much the 
commoner, contains 42-3% of phosphorus pentoxide (P 2 5 ) 
and 3-8% fluorine, and the latter 4-10% P 2 5 and 6-8% 
chlorine. Fluorine and chlorine replace each other in indefinite 
proportions, and they may also be in part replaced by hydroxyl, 
so that the general formula becomes [Ca (F, CI, OH)] Ca 4 P 3 0i 2 , 
in which the univalent group Ca(F, CI, OH) takes the place 
of one hydrogen atom in orthophosphoric acid H 3 P0 4 . The 
formula is sometimes written in the form 3Ca 3 (P0 4 ) 2 +CaF 2 . 
Mangan-apatite is a variety in which calcium is largely replaced 
by manganese (up to 10% MnO). Cerium, didymium, yttrium, 
&c, oxides may also sometimes be present, in amounts up to 5 %. 

Apatite frequently occurs as beautifully developed crystals, 
sometimes a foot or more in length, belonging to that division 
of the hexagonal system in which there is pyramidal hemi- 
hedrism. In this type of symmetry, of which apatite is the best 





Fig. 1. 



Fig. 2. 



example, there is only one plane of symmetry, which is per- 
pendicular to the hexad axis. The arrangement of the pyramidal 
faces n and u in fig. 2 show the hemihedral character and absence 
of the full number of planes and axes of symmetry. Fig. 2 
represents a highly modified crystal from St Gotthard; a more 
common form is shown in fig. 1, which is bounded by the hex- 
agonal prism m, hexagonal bipyramid x and basal pinacoid c. 

In its general appearance, apatite exhibits wide variations. 
Crystals may be colourless and transparent or white and opaque, 
but are often coloured, usually some shade of green or brown, 
occasionally violet, sky-blue, yellow, &c. The lustre is vitreous, 
inclining to sub-resinous. There is an imperfect cleavage 
parallel to the basal pinacoid, and the fracture is conchoidal. 
Hardness 5, specific gravity 3-2. 

Yellowish-green prismatic crystals from Jumilla in Murcia in 
Spain have long been known under the name asparagus-stone. 
Lazurapatite is a sky-blue variety found as crystals with lapis- 
lazuli in Siberia; and moroxite is the name given to dull greenish- 
blue crystals from Norway and Canada. Francolite, from Wheal 
Franco, near Tavistock in Devonshire, and also from several 
Cornish mines, occurs as crystallized stalactitic masses. In 



i6o 



APATURIA— APELLES 



addition to these crystallized varieties, there are massive varieties, 
fibrous, concretionary, stalactitic, or earthy in form, which are 
included together under the name phosphorite (q.v), and it is 
these massive varieties, together with various rock-phosphates 
(phosphatic nodules, coprolites, guano, &c.) which are of such 
great economic importance: crystallized apatite is mined for 
phosphates only in Norway and Canada. 

With regard to its mode of occurrence, apatite is found under 
a variety of conditions. In igneous rocks of all kinds it is in- 
variably present in small amounts as minute acicular crystals, 
and was one of the first constituents of the rock to crystallize 
out from the magma. The extensive deposits of chlor-apatite 
near Kragero and Bamle, near Brevik, in southern Norway, are 
in connexion with gabbro, the felspar of which has been altered, 
by emanations containing chlorine, to scapolite, and titanium 
minerals have been developed. The apatite occurring in con- 
nexion with granite and veins of tin-stone is, on the other hand, 
a fluor-apatite, and, like the other fluorine-bearing minerals 
characteristic of tin-veins, doubtless owes its origin to the 
emanations of tin fluoride which gave rise to the tin-ore. Special 
mention may be here made of the beautiful violet crystals of 
fluor-apatite which occur in the veins of tin-ore in the Erz- 
gebirge, and of the brilliant bluish-green crystals encrusting 
cavities in the granite of Luxullian in Cornwall. Another 
common mode of occurrence of apatite is in metamorphic 
crystalline rocks, especially in crystalline limestones: in eastern 
Canada extensive beds of apatite occur in the limestones associ- 
ated with the Laurentian gneisses. Still another mode of occur- 
rence is presented by beautifully developed and transparent 
crystals found with crystals of felspar and quartz lining the 
crevices in the gneiss of the Alps. Crystallized apatite is also 
occasionally found in metalliferous veins, other than those of 
tin, and in beds of iron ore; whilst if the massive varieties 
(phosphorite) be considered many other modes of occurrence 
might be cited. (L. J.S.) 

APATURIA (' ATaroiipia) , an ancient Greek festival held 
annually by all the Ionian towns except Ephesus and Colophon 
(Herodotus i. 147). At Athens it took place in the month of 
Pyanepsion (October to November), and lasted three days, on 
which occasion the various phratries (i.e. clans) of Attica met 
to discuss their affairs. The name is a slightly modified form of 
airaTopia = a/xaTraTopia, oyuoxaropta, the festival of "common 
relationship." The ancient etymology associated it with airaTr; 
(deceit), a legend existing that the festival originated in 1100 B.C. 
in commemoration of a single combat between a certain Melan- 
thus, representing King Thymoetes of Attica, and King Xanthus 
of Boeotia, in which Melanthus successfully threw his adver- 
sary off his guard by crying that a man in a black goat's skin 
(identified with Dionysus) was helping him (Schol. Aristophanes, 
Acharnians, 146). On the first day of the festival, called Dorpia 
or Dorpeia, banquets were held towards evening at the meeting- 
place of the phratries or in the private houses of members. On 
the second, Anarrhysis (from avappveiv, to draw back the 
victim's head), a sacrifice of oxen was offered at the public cost 
to Zeus Phratrius and Athena. On the third day, Cureotis 
(Kovpewns) , children born since -the last festival were presented 
by their fathers or guardians to the assembled phratores, and, 
after an oath had been taken as to their legitimacy and the 
sacrifice of a goat or a sheep, their names were inscribed in the 
register. The name Koupewris is derived either from /coOpos, 
that is, the day of the young, or less probably from Kelpu, 
because on this occasion young people cut their hair and offered 
it to the gods. The victim was called y.elov. On this day also 
it was the custom for boys still at school to declaim pieces of 
poetry, and to receive prizes (Plato, Timaeus, 21 b). According 
to Hesychius these three days of the festival were followed by a 
fourth, called iirifida, but this is merely a general term for the 
day after any festival. 

APE (Old Eng. apa; Dutch aap; Old Ger. affo; Welsh epa; 
Old Bohemian op; a word of uncertain origin, possibly an 
imitation of the animal's chatter), the generic English name, 
till the 1 6th century, for animals of the monkey tribe, and still 



used specifically for the tailless, manlike representatives of the 
order Primates (q.v.). The word is now generally a synonym 
for " monkey," but the common verb for both (as transferred 
figuratively to human beings) is " to ape," i.e. to imitate. 

APELDOORN, a town in the province of Gelderland, Holland, 
and a junction station 263 m. by rail W. of Amersfoort. It is 
connected by canal north and south with Zwolle and Zutphen 
respectively. Pop. (1000) 25,834. The- neighbourhood of Apel- 
doorh is very picturesque and well wooded. The Protestant 
church was restored after a fire in 1890. Close by is the favourite 
country-seat of the royal family of Holland called the Loo. 
It was originally a hunting-lodge of the dukes of Gelderland, 
but in its present form dates chiefly from the time of the Stadt- 
holder William in., king of England. Apeldoorn possesses large 
paper-mills. 

APELLA, the official title of the popular assembly at Sparta, 
corresponding to the ecclesia in most other Greek states. Every 
full citizen who had completed his thirtieth year was entitled to 
attend the meetings, which, according to Lycurgus's ordinance, 
must be held at the time of each full moon within the boundaries 
of Sparta. They had in all probability taken place originally 
in the Agora, but were later transferred to the neighbouring 
building known as the Skias (Paus. iii. 12. 10). The presiding 
officers were at first the kings, but in historical times the ephors, 
and the voting was conducted by shouts; if the president was 
doubtful as to the majority of voices, a division was taken and 
the votes were counted. Lycurgus had ordained that the apella 
must simply accept or reject the proposals submitted to it, 
and though this regulation fell into neglect, it was practically 
restored by the law of Theopompus and Polydorus which em- 
powered the kings and elders to set aside any " crooked " 
decision of the people (Plut. Lycurg. 6). In later times, too, the 
actual debate was almost, if not wholly, confined to the kings, 
elders, ephors and perhaps the other magistrates. The apella 
voted on peace and war, treaties and foreign policy in general: 
it decided which of the kings should conduct a campaign and 
settled questions of disputed succession to the throne: it elected 
elders, ephors and other magistrates, emancipated helots and 
perhaps voted on legal proposals. There is a single reference 
(Xen. Hell. iii. 3. 8) to a "small assembly" (17 /xi/cp& 
Ka.'Kovnevr] eKKkqaia) at Sparta, but nothing is known as to 
its nature or competence. The term apella does not occur in 
extant Spartan inscriptions, though" two decrees of Gythium 
belonging to the Roman period refer to the p.eyk\ai cbreXXtu 
(Le Bas-Foucart, Voyage arckiologique, ii., Nos. 242a, 243). 

See G. Gilbert, Constitutional Antiquities of Sparta and Athens 
(Eng. trans., 1895), pp. 49 ff. ; Sludien zur altspartanischen Geschichte 
(Gottingen, 1872), pp. 131 ff. ; G. F. Schomann, Antiquities of Greece: 
The Stale (Eng. trans., 1880), pp. 234 ff. ; De ecclesiis Lacedaemoniorum 
(Griefswald, 1836) [ = Opusc. academ. i. pp. 87 ff.]; C. O. Miiller, 
History and Antiquities of the Doric Race (Eng. trans., 2nd ed. 1839), 
book iii. ch. 5, §§ 8-10; G. Busolt, Die griechischen Staats- urid 
Rechtsaltertiimer, 1887 (in Iwan Miiller's Handbuch der klassischen 
Altertumswissenschaft, iv. i), § 90; Griechische Geschichte (2nd ed.), 
i. p. 552 ff- (M. N. T.) 

APELLES, probably the greatest painter of antiquity. He 
lived from the time of Philip of Macedon till after the death of 
Alexander. He was of Ionian origin, but after he had attained 
some celebrity he became a student at the celebrated school of 
Sicyon, where he worked under Pamphilus. He thus combined 
the Dorian thoroughness with the Ionic grace. Attracted to 
the court of Philip, he painted him and the young Alexander 
with such success that he became the recognized court painter 
of Macedon, and his picture of Alexander holding a thunderbolt 
ranked with the Alexander with the spear of the sculptor 
Lysippus. Other works of Apelles had a great reputation in 
antiquity, such as the portraits of the Macedonians Clitus, 
Archelaus and Antigonus, the procession of the high priest of 
Artemis at Ephesus, Artemis amid a chorus of maidens, a great 
allegorical picture representing Calumny, and the noted paint- 
ing representing Aphrodite rising out of the sea. Of none 
of these works have we any copy, unless indeed we may 
consider a painting of Alexander as Zeus in the house of the 
Vettii at Pompeii as a reminiscence of his work; but some of 



APELLICON— APENNINES 



161 



the Italian artists of the Renaissance repeated the subjects, in 
a vain hope of giving some notion of the composition of them. 

Few things are more hopeless than the attempt to realize 
the style of a painter whose works have vanished. But a great 
wealth of stories, true or invented, clung to Apelles in antiquity; 
and modern archaeologists have naturally tried to discover what 
they indicate. We are told, for example, that he attached great 
value to the drawing of outlines, practising every day. The tale 
is well known of his visit to Protogenes, and the rivalry of the 
two masters as to which could draw the finest and steadiest line. 
The power of drawing such lines is conspicuous in the decoration 
of red-figured vases of Athens. Apelles is said to have treated 
his rival with generosity, for he increased the value of his pictures 
by spreading a report that he meant to buy them and sell them 
as his own. Apelles allowed the superiority of some of his 
contemporaries in particular matters: according to Pliny he 
admired the dispositio of Melanthius, i.e. the way in which he 
spaced his figures, and the mensurae of Asclepiodorus, who 
must have been a great master of symmetry and proportion. 
It was especially in that undefinable quality "grace" that 
Apelles excelled. He probably used but a small variety of 
colours, and avoided elaborate perspective: simplicity of 
design, beauty of line and charm of expression were his chief 
merits. When the naturalism of some of his works is praised — 
for example, the hand of his Alexander is said to have stood out 
from the picture — we must remember that this is the merit 
always ascribed by ignorant critics to works which they admire. 
In fact the age of Alexander was one of notable idealism, and 
probably Apelles succeeded in a marked degree in imparting to 
his figures a beauty beyond nature. 

Apelles was also noted for improvements which he introduced 
in technique. He had a dark glaze, called by Pliny atramentum, 
which served both to preserve his paintings and to soften their 
colour. There can be little doubt that he was one of the most 
bold and progressive, of artists. (P. G.) 

APELLICON, a wealthy native of Teos, afterwards an Athenian 
citizen, a famous book collector. He not only spent large sums 
in the acquisition of his library, but stole original documents 
from the archives of Athens and other cities of Greece. Being 
detected, he fled in order to escape punishment, but returned 
when Athenion (or Aristion) , a bitter opponent of the Romans, 
had made himself tyrant of the city with the aid of Mithradates. 
Athenion sent him with some troops to Delos, to plunder the 
treasures of the temple, but he showed little military capacity. 
He was surprised by the Romans under the command of Orobius 
(or Orbius), and only saved his life by flight. He died a little 
later, probably in 84 B.C. 

Apeliicon's chief pursuit was the collection of rare and import- 
ant books. He purchased from the family of Neleus of Skepsis 
in the Troad manuscripts of the works of Aristotle and Theo- 
phrastus (including their libraries), which had been given to 
Neleus by Theophrastus himself, whose pupil Neleus had been. 
They had been concealed in a cellar to prevent their falling into the 
hands of the book-collecting princes of Pergamum, and were in 
a very dilapidated condition. Apellicon filled in the lacunae, and 
brought out a new, but faulty, edition. In 84 Sulla removed 
Apeliicon's library to Rome (Strabo xiii. p. 609; Plutarch, 
Sulla, 26). Here the MSS. were handed over to the grammarian 
Tyrannion, who took copies of them, on the basis of which the 
peripatetic philosopher Andronicus of Rhodes prepared an 
edition of Aristotle's works. Apeliicon's library contained a 
remarkable old copy of the Iliad. He is said to have published 
a biography of Aristotle, in which the calumnies of other bio- 
graphers were refuted. 

APENNINES (Gr. 'Arivvivos, Lat. Appenninus— in both 
cases used in the singular), a range of mountains traversing 
the entire peninsula of Italy, and forming, as it were, the 
backbone of the country. The name is probably derived from 
the Celtic pen, a mountain top: it originally belonged to the 
northern portion of the chain, from the Maritime Alps to Ancona; 
and Polybius is probably the first writer who applied it to the 
whole chain, making, indeed, no distinction between the 

n. 6 



Apennines and the Maritime Alps, and extending the former 
name as far as Marseilles. Classical authors do not differentiate 
the various parts of the chain, but use the name as a general 
name for the whole. The total length is some 800 m. and the 
maximum width 70 to 80 m. 

Divisions. — Modern geographers divide the range into three 
parts,, northern, central and southern. 

1. The northern Apennines are generally distinguished (though 
there is no real solution of continuity) from the Maritime Alps 
at the Bocchetta dell' Altare, some 5 m. W. of Savona on the 
high road to Turin. 1 They again are divided into three parts — 
the Ligurian, Tuscan and Umbrian Apennines. The Ligurian 
Apennines extend as far as the pass of La Cisa in the upper 
valley of the Magra (anc. Macro) above Spezia; at first they 
follow the curve of the Gulf of Genoa, and then run east-south-east 
parallel to the coast. On the north and north-east lie the broad 
plains of Piedmont and Lombardy, traversed by the Po, the 
chief tributaries of which from the Ligurian Apennines are the 
Scrivia (0/w&m)>Trebbia {Trebia) andTaro (Tarus). TheTanaro 
(Tanarus), though largely fed by tributaries from the Ligurian 
Apennines, itself rises in the Maritime Alps, while the rivers 
on the south and south-west of the range are short and unim- 
portant. The south side of the range rises steeply from the 
sea, leaving practically no coast strip: its slopes are sheltered 
and therefore fertile and highly cultivated, and the coast towns 
are favourite winter resorts (see Riviera). The highest point 
(the Monte Bue) reaches 591 5 ft. The range is crossed by several 
railways — the line from Savona to Turin (with a branch at Ceva 
for Acqui) , that from Genoa to Ovada and Acqui, the main lines 
from Genoa to Novi, the junction for Turin and Milan (both 
of which 2 pass under the Monte dei Giovi, the ancient Mons 
Ioventius, by which the ancient Via Postumia ran from Genua 
to Dertona), and that from Spezia to Parma under the pass of 
La Cisa. 3 All these traverse the ridge by long tunnels — that on 
the new line from Genoa to Honco is upwards of 5 m. in length. 

The Tuscan Apennines extend from the pass of La Cisa to the 
sources of the Tiber. The main chain continues to run in an 
east-south-east direction, but traverses the peninsula, the west 
coast meanwhile turning almost due south. From the northern 
slopes many rivers and streams run north and north-north-east 
into the Po, the Secchia {Secia) and Panaro (Scultenna) being 
among the most important, while farther east most of the rivers 
are tributaries of the Reno (anc. Rhenus). Other small streams, 
e.g. the Ronco (Bedesis) and Montone (litis), which flow into the 
sea together east of Ravenna, were also tributaries of the Po; 
and the Savio (Sapis) and the Rubicon seem to be the only 
streams from this side of the Tuscan Apennines that ran directly 
into the sea in Roman days. From the south-west side of the 
main range the Arno (q.v.) and Serchio run into the Mediterranean. 
This section of the Apennines is crossed by two railways, from 
Pistoia to Bologna and from Florence to Faenza, and by several 
good high roads, of which the direct road from Florence to 
Bologna over the Futa pass is of Roman origin; and certain 
places in it are favourite summer resorts. The highest point of 
the chain is Monte Cimone ( 7 1 03 f t. ) . The so-called Alpi Apuane 
(the Apuani were an ancient people of Liguria), a detached chain 
south-west of the valley of the Serchio, rise to a maximum height 
of 6 1 00 ft. They contain the famous marble quarries of Carrara. 
The greater part of Tuscany, however, is taken up by lower hills, 
which form no part of the Apennines, being divided from the 
main chain by the valleys of the Arno, Chiana {Clams) and 
Paglia (Pallia). Towards the west they are rich in minerals and 
chemicals, which the Apennines proper do not produce. 

The Umbrian Apennines extend from the sources of the Tiber 
to (or perhaps rather beyond) the pass of Scheggia near Cagli, 
where the ancient Via Flaminia crosses the range. The highest 
point is the Monte Nerone (5010 ft.). The chief river is the Tiber 
itself: the others, among which the Foglia (Pisaurus), Metauro 

1 The ancient Via Aemilia, built in 109 B.C., led over this pass, 
but originally turned east to Dertona (mod. Tortona). 

2 There are two separate lines from Sampierdarena to Ronco. 

3 This pass was also traversed by a nameless Roman road. 

II 



l62 



APENNINES 



(Metaurus) and Esino 1 may be mentioned, run north-east into 
the Adriatic, which is some 30 m. from the highest points of the 
chain. This portion of the range is crossed near its southern 
termination by a railway from Foligno to Ancona (which at 
Fabriano has a branch to Macerata and Porto Civitanova, on 
the Adriatic coast railway), which may perhaps be conveniently 
regarded as its boundary. 2 By some geographers, indeed, it is 
treated as a part of the central Apennines. 

2. The central Apennines are the most extensive portion of 
the chain, and stretch as far as the valley of the Sangro (Sangrus) . 
To the north are the Monti Sibillini, the highest point of which 
is the Monte Vettore (8128 ft.). Farther south three parallel 
chains may be traced, the westernmost of which (the Monti 
Sabini) culminates to the south in the Monte Viglio (7075 ft.), 
the central chain in the Monte Terminillo (7260 ft.), and farther 
south in the Monte Velino (8160 ft.), and the eastern in the 
Gran Sasso d'ltalia (9560 ft.), the highest summit of the Apen- 
nines, and the Maiella group (Monte Amaro, 9170 ft.). Between 
the western and central ranges are the plain of Rieti, the valley 
of the Sal to (Himella), and the Lago Fucino; while between the 
central and eastern ranges are the valleys of Aquila and Sulmona. 
The chief rivers on the west are the Nera (Nar), with its tribu- 
taries the Velino ( Velinus) and Salto, and the Anio, both of which 
fall into the Tiber. On the east there is at first a succession of 
small rivers which flow into the Adriatic, from which the highest 
points of the chain are some 25 m. distant, such as the Potenza 
(Flosis), Chienti (Cluentus), Tenna (Tinna), Tronto (Truentus), 
Tordino (Helvinus), Vomano (Vomanus), &c. The Pescara 
{Atemus), which receives the Aterno from the north-west and 
the Gizio from the south-east, is more important; and so is the 
Sangro. 

The central Apennines are crossed by the railway from Rome 
to Castelammare Adriatico via Avezzano and Sulmona: the 
railway from Orte to Terni (and thence to Foligno) follows the 
Nera valley; while from Terni a line ascends to the plain of 
Rieti, and thence crosses the central chain to Aquila, whence it 
follows the valley of the Aterno to Sulmona. In ancient times 
the Via Salaria, Via Caecilia and Via Valeria-Claudia all ran 
from Rome to the Adriatic coast. The volcanic mountains of 
the province of Rome are separated from the Apennines by the 
Tiber valley, and the Monti Lepini, or Volscian mountains, by 
the valleys of the Sacco and Liri. 

3. In the southern Apennines, to the south of the Sangro 
valley, the three parallel chains are broken up into smaller 
groups; among them may be named the Matese, the highest 
point of which is the Monte Miletto (6725 ft.). The chief rivers 
on the south-west are the Liri or Garigliano (anc. Liris)} with its 
tributary the Sacco (Trerus), the Volturno (Volturnus), Sebeto 
(Sabalus), Sarno (Sarnus), on the north the Trigno (Trinius), 
Biferno (Tifernus), and Fortore (Frento). The promontory of 
Monte Gargano, on the east, is completely isolated, and so are the 
volcanic groups near Naples. The district is traversed from 
north-west to south-east by the railway from Sulmona to 
Benevento and on to Avellino, and from south-west to north- 
east by the railways from Caianello via Isernia to Campobasso 
and Termoli, from Caserta to Benevento and Foggia, and from 
Nocera and Avellino to Rocchetta S. Antonio, the junction for 
Foggia, Spinazzola (for Barletta, Bari, and Taranto) and Potenza. 
Roman roads followed the same lines as the railways: the Via 
Appia ran from Capua to Benevento, whence the older road 
went to Venosa and Taranto and so to Brindisi, while the Via 
Traiana ran nearly to Foggia and thence to Bari. 

The valley of the Ofanto (Aufidus), which runs into the 
Adriatic close to Barletta, marks the northern termination of 
the first range of the Lucanian Apennines (now Basilicata), 
which runs from east to west, while south of the valleys of the 
Sele (on the west) and Basiento (on the east) — which form the 
line followed by the railway from Battipaglia via Potenza to 

1 This river (anc. Aesis) was the boundary of Italy proper in the 
3rd and 2nd centuries B.C. 

2 The Monte Conero, to the south of Ancona, was originally an 
island of the Pliocene sea. 



Metaponto — the second range begins to run due north and 
south as far as the plain of Sibari (Sybaris). The highest point 
is the Monte Pollino (7325 ft.). The chief rivers are the Sele 
{Silarus) — joined by the Negro (Tanager) and Calore (Color) — 
on the west, and the Bradano (Bradanus), Basiento (Casuentus), 
Agri (Aciris), Sinni (Siris) on the east, which flow into the gulf 
of Taranto; to the south of the last-named river there are 
only unimportant streams flowing into the sea east and west, 
inasmuch as here the width of the peninsula diminishes to some 
40 m. The railway running south from Sicignano to Lagonegro, 
ascending the valley of the Negro, is planned to extend to 
Cosenza, along the line followed by the ancient Via Popilia, 
which beyond Cosenza reached the west coast at Terina and 
thence followed it to Reggio. The Via Herculia, a branch of 
the Via Traiana, ran from Aequum Tuticum to the ancient 
Nerulum. At the narrowest point the plain of Sibari, through 
which the rivers Coscile (Sybaris) and Crati (Crathis) flow to 
the sea, occurs on the east coast, extending halfway across the 
peninsula. Here the limestone Apennines proper cease and the 
granite mountains of Calabria (anc. Bruttii) begin. The first 
group extends as far as the isthmus formed by the gulfs of S. 
Eufemia and Squillace; it is known as the Sila, and the highest 
point reached is 6330 ft. (theBotteDonato). The forests which 
covered it in ancient times supplied the Greeks and Sicilians 
with timber for shipbuilding. The railway from S. Eufemia to 
Catanzaro and Catanzaro Marina crosses the isthmus, and an 
ancient road may have run from Squillace to Monteleone. The 
second group extends to the south end of the Italian peninsula, 
culminating in the Aspromonte (-6420 ft.) to the east of Reggio 
di Calabria. In both groups the rivers are quite unimportant. 

Character. — The Apennines are to some extent clothed with 
forests, though these were probably more extensive in classical 
times (Pliny mentions especially pine, oak and beech woods, 
Hist. Nat. xvi. 177); they have indeed been greatly reduced in 
comparatively modern times by indiscriminate timber-felling, 
and though serious attempts at reafforestation have been made 
by the government, much remains to be done. They also furnish 
considerable summer pastures, especially in the Abruzzi: Pliny 
(Hist. Nat. xi. 240) praises the cheese of the Apennines. In the 
forests wolves were frequent, and still are fo^und, the flocks being 
protected against them by large sheep-dogs; bears, however, 
which were known in Roman times, have almost entirely dis- 
appeared. Nor are the wild goats called rotae, spoken of by 
Varro (R. R. II. i. 5), whjch may have been either chamois 
or steinbock, to be found. Brigandage appears to have been 
prevalent in Roman times in the remoter parts of the Apennines, 
as it was until recently: an inscription found near the Furlo 
pass was set up in a.d. 246 by an evocatus Augusti (a member 
of a picked corps) on special police duty with a detachment of 
twenty men from the Ravenna fleet (G. Henzen in Romische 
Mitteilungen, 1887, 14). Snow lies on the highest peaks of the 
Apennines for almost the whole year. The range produces no 
minerals, but there are a considerable number of good mineral 
springs, some of which are thermal (such as Bagni di Lucca, 
Monte Catini, Monsummano, Porretta, Telese, &c), while others 
are cool (such as Nocera, Sangemini, Cinciano, &c), the water 
of which is both drunk on the spot and sold as table water 
elsewhere. (T. As.) 

Geology. — The Apennines are the continuation of the Alpine 
chain, but the individual zones of the Alps cannot be traced into 
the Apennines. The zone of the Brianconnais (see Alps) may 
be followed as far as the Gulf of Genoa, but scarcely beyond, 
unless it is represented by the Trias and older beds of the Apuan 
Alps. The inner zone of crystalline and schistose rocks which 
forms the main chain of the Alps, is absent in the Apennines 
except towards the southern end. The Apennines, indeed, 
consist almost entirely of Mesozoic and Tertiary beds, like the 
outer zones of the Alps. Remnants of a former inner zone of 
more ancient rocks may be seen in the Apuan Alps, in the islands 
off the Tuscan coast; in the Catena Metallifera, Cape Circeo and 
the island of Zannone, as well as in the Calabrian peninsula. 
These remnants lie at a comparatively low level, and excepting 



APENRADE^-APHASIA 



163 



the Apuan Alps and the Calabrian peninsula they do not now 
form any part of the Apennine chain. But that in Tertiary 
times there was a high interior zone of crystalline rocks is 
indicated by the character of the Eocene beds in the southern 
Apennines. These are formed to a large extent of thick con- 
glomerates which are full of pebbles and boulders of granite and 
schist. Many of the boulders are of considerable size and they 
are often still angular. There is now no crystalline region from 
which they could reach their present position; and this and 
other considerations have led the followers of E. Suess to conclude 
that even in Tertiary times a large land mass consisting of 
ancient rocks occupied the space which is now covered by the 
southern portion of the Tyrrhenian Sea. This old land mass 
has been called Tyrrhenis, and probably extended from Sicily 
into Latium and as far west as Sardinia. On the Italian border 
of this land there was raised a mountain chain with an inner 
crystalline zone and an outer zone of Mesozoic and Tertiary 
beds. Subsequent faulting has caused the subsidence of the 
greater part of Tyrrhenis, including nearly the whole of the 
inner zone of the mountain chain, and has left only the outer 
zones standing as the present Apennines. 

Be this as it may, the Apennines, excepting in Calabria, are 
formed chiefly of Triassic, Jurassic, Cretaceous, Eocene and 
Miocene beds. In the south the deposits, from the Trias tothe 
middle Eocene, consist mainly of limestones, and were laid 
down, with a few slight interruptions, upon a quietly subsiding 
sea-floor. In the later part of the Eocene period began the 
folding which gave rise to the existing chain. The sea grew 
shallow, the deposits became conglomeratic and shaly, volcanic 
eruptions began, and the present folds of the Apennines were 
initiated. The folding and consequent elevation went on until 
the close of the Miocene period when a considerable subsidence 
took place and the Pliocene sea overspread the lower portions 
of the range. Subsequent elevation, without folding, has raised 
these Pliocene deposits to a considerable height — in some cases 
over 3000 ft. and they now lie almost undisturbed upon the 
older folded beds. This last elevation led to the formation of 
numerous lakes which are now filled up by Pleistocene deposits. 
Both volcanic eruptions and movements of elevation and 
depression continue to the present day on the shores of the 
Tyrrhenian Sea. In the northern Apennines the elevation of the 
sea floor appears to have begun at an earlier period, for the 
Upper Cretaceous of that part of the chain consists largely of 
sandstones and conglomerates. In Calabria the chain consists 
chiefly of crystalline and schistose rocks; it is the Mesozoic and 
Tertiary zone which has here been sunk beneath the sea. 
Similar rocks are found beneath the Trias farther north, in some 
of the valleys of Basilicata. Glaciers no longer exist in the 
Apennines, but Post-Pliocene moraines have been observed in 

Basilicata. 

References. — G. de Lorenzo, " Studi di geologia nell' Appennino 
Meridionale," Atti d. R. Accad. d. Sci. Fis. e Mat., Napoli, ser. 2, 
vol. viii., no. 7 (1896); F. Sacco, " L' Appennino settentrionale," 
Boll. Soc.geol. Ital. ( 1 893-1 899). (P. La.) 

APENRADE, a town of Germany in the Prussian province 
of Schleswig, beautifully situated on the Apenrade Fjord, an 
arm of the Little Belt, 38 m. N. of the town of Schleswig. Pop. 
(1900) 5952. It is connected by a branch line with the main 
railway of Schleswig, and possesses a good harbour, which affords 
shelter for a large carrying trade. Fishing, shipbuilding and 
various small factories provide occupation for the population. 
The town is a bathing resort, as is Elisenlund close by. 

APERTURE (from Lat. aperire, to open), an opening, In 
optics, it is that portion of the diameter of an object-glass or 
mirror through which light can pass free from obstruction. It 
is equal to the actual diameter of the cylinder of rays admitted 
by a telescope. 

APEX, the Latin word (pi. apices) for the top, tip or peak 
of anything. A diminutive " apiculus " is used in botany. 

APHANITE, a name given (from the Gr. ct.<j>avr)s, invisible) 
to certain dark-coloured igneous rocks which are so fine-grained 
that their component minerals arc not detected by the unaided 



eye. They consist essentially of plagioclase felspar, with horn- 
blende or augite, and may contain also biotite, quartz and a 
limited amount of orthoclase. Although a few authorities still 
recognize the aphanites as a distinct class, most systematic 
petrologists, at the present time, have discarded it, and regard 
these rocks as merely structural facies of other species. Those 
which contain hornblende are uniform, fine-grained diorites, 
vogesites, &c, while when pyroxene predominates they are 
ascribed to the dolerites, quartz-dolerites, &c. Hence, any rock 
which is compact, crystalline and fine grained, is frequently 
said to be aphanitic, without implying exactly to which of the 
principal rock groups it really belongs. 

APHASIA 1 (from Gr. a, privative, and (jmais, speech), a term 
which means literally inability to speak, and is used to denote 
various defects in the comprehension and expression of both 
spoken and written language which result from lesions of the 
brain. Aphasic disorders may be classed in two groups: — first, 
receptive or sensory aphasia, which comprises (a) inability to 
understand spoken language (auditory aphasia), and (b) inability 
to read (visual aphasia, or alexia); second, emissive or motor 
aphasia, under which category are included (a) inability to speak 
(motor vocal aphasia, or aphemia), and (b) inability to write 
(motor graphic aphasia, or agraphia). It has been shown that 
each of these defects is produced by destruction of a special 
region of the cortex of the brain. These regions, which are 
termed the speech centres, are, in right-handed people, situated 
in the left cerebral hemisphere; this is the reason why aphasia 
is so commonly associated with paralysis of the right side of the 
body. 

A study of the acquisition of the faculty of speech throws 
light upon the education of the speech centres, and helps to 
elucidate their physiological interaction and the phenomena of 
aphasia. The auditory speech centre is the first to show signs 
of functional activity, for within a few months of birth the child 
begins to understand spoken language. Some months later the 
motor vocal speech centre begins to functionate. The memories 
of the auditory word images which are stored up in the auditory 
speech centre play a most important part In the process of 
learning to speak. The child born deaf grows up mute. The 
visual speech centre comes into activity when the child is taught 
to read. Again, when he learns to write and thus begins to 
educate his graphic centre, he is constantly calling upon his 
visual speech centre for the visual images of the words he wishes 
to produce. From these remarks it will be seen that there is a 
very intimate association between the auditory speech centre 
and the motor vocal speech centre, also between the visual speech 
centre and the graphic centre. 

Auditory Aphasia.- — The auditory speech centre is situated in 
the posterior part of the first and second temporo-sphenoidal 
convolutions on the left side of the brain. Destruction of this 
centre causes " auditory aphasia." Hearing is unimpaired but 
spoken language is quite unintelligible. The subject of auditory 
aphasia may be compared to an individual who is listening to a 
foreign language of which he does not understand a word. 
Word deafness, a term often used as synonymous with auditory 
aphasia, is misleading and' should be abandoned. Auditory 
aphasia commonly interferes with vocal expression, for the 

1 In 1906 Pierre Marie of Paris expressed views (La Semaine 
medicate, May 23 and October 17, and elsewhere) upon the ques- 
tion of aphasia which have given rise to much animated controversy, 
since they are in many respects at complete variance with the 
classical conception which has been represented in the present 
article. Marie holds that Broca's convolution plays no special r61e 
in the function of speech. He admits that a lesion in the region of 
the lenticular nucleus is followed by inability to speak, but this 
defect is, in his opinion, to be regarded as an anarthria. He further 
admits the production of sensory aphasia — the aphasia of Wernicke, 
as he prefers to call it after its discoverer — by lesions which destroy 
the angular and supramarginal gyri, and the upper two temporo- 
sphenoidal convolutions, but -he regards the essential foundation of 
sensory aphasia as a diminution of intelligence. There are, in his 
opinion, no sensory images of language. Motor aphasia is, he believes, 
nothing more than a combination of sensory aphasia and anarthria 
These conclusions have been vigorously attacked, more especially 
by Dejcrine of Paris (La Presse medicate, July 1906. and elsewhere). 



1 64 



APHE'MON^iVPMDES 



majority of people when they speak do so by recalling the 
auditory memories of words stored up in the auditory speech 
centre. Amnesia verbalis is employed to designate failure to 
call up in the memory the images of words which are needed for 
purposes of vocal expression or silent thought. 

Visual Aphasia or Alexia.— The visual speech centre; which is 
located in the left angular gyrus, is connected with the two 
centres for vision which are situated one in either occipital' lobe. 
Destruction of the visual speech centre produces visual aphasia 
or alexia. Word blindness, sometimes used as the equivalent 
of visual aphasia, is, like word deafness, a misleading term. 
The individual is not blind, he sees the Words and letters per- 
fectly, but they appear to him as unintelligible cyphers, -When 
the visual speech centre is destroyed, the memories of the visual 
images of words are obliterated and interference with writing, 
a consequence of amnesia verbalis, results. On the other hand, 
when the lesion is situated deeply in the occipital lobe, anddoes 
not implicate the cortex, but merely cuts off the connexions of 
the angular gyrus with both visual centres, agraphia is not 
produced, for the visual word centre and its connexion with 
the graphic centre are still intact (pure, or sub-cortical word 
blindness). 

Motor Vocal Aphasia or Aphemia. — The centre for motor 
vocal speech is situated in the posterior part of the third left 
frontal convolution and extends on to the foot of the left ascend- 
ing frontal convolution (Broca's convolution) . Complete destruc- 
tion of this region produces loss of speech, although it often 
happens that a few words, such as "yes" and "no," and, it 
may be, emotional exclamations such as "Oh! dear!" and the 
like are retained. The utterance of unintelligible sounds is still 
possible, however, and there is neither defective voice production 
{aphonia) nor paralysis of the mechanism of articulation. The 
individual can recall the auditory and visual images of the words 
which he wishes to use, but his memory for the complicated, 
co-ordinated movements which he acquired in the process of 
learning to speak, and which are necessary for vocal, expression, 
has been blotted out. In the great majority of cases of motor 
vocal aphasia there is associated agraphia, a circumstance which 
is perhaps to be accounted for by the proximity of the graphic 
centre. When the lesion is situated below the cortex of Broca's 
convolution but destroys the fibres which pass from it towards 
the internal capsule, agraphia is not produced (sub-cortical or 
pure motor vocal aphasia). Destruction of the auditory speech 
centre is, as we have seen, commonly accompanied by more or 
less interference with vocal speech, a consequence of amnesia 
verbalis. 

Agraphia. — Discussion still rages as to the presence of a special 
writing centre. Those who favour the separate existence of a 
graphic centre locate it in the second left frontal convolution. 
It may be that the want of unanimity as to the graphic 
centre is to be explained by an anatomical relationship so close 
between the graphic centre and that for the fine movement of 
the hand that a lesion in this situation which produces agraphia 
must at the same time cause a paralysis of the hand. Destruction 
of the visual speech centre by obliterating the visual memories of 
words (amnesia verbalis) produces agraphia. Further, several 
instances are on record in which agraphia has followed destruc- 
tion of the commissure between the visual speech centre and the 
graphic centre. As already mentioned, agraphia is very often 
associated with motor vocal aphasia. 

A number of aphasic defects are met with in addition to those 
already mentioned. Thus paraphasia is a condition in which 
the patient makes use of words other than those he intends. 
He may mix up his words so that his conversation is quite 
unintelligible. In the most pronounced forms he gabbles away, 
employing unrecognizable sounds in place of words {jargon and 
gibberish aphasia). Paragraphia is a similar defect which occurs 
in writing. Both paraphasia and paragraphia may be produced 
by partial lesions of the sensory speech centres or of the com- 
missures which connect these with the motor centres. Object 
blindness (syn. mind-blindness) refers to an inability to recognize 
an object or its uses by the aid of sight alone. The probable 



explanation would seem to be that the ordinary centre for, vision, 
has been isolated from the other sensory centres with which it 
is connected. Not uncommonly there is associated visual 
aphasia; Optic aphasia was introduced to designate a somewhat 
similar state in which, although the uses of an object are recog^ 
nized, the patient cannot name it at sight, yet, if it is of such a 
nature that it appeals directly toone of, the other senses, he may 
at once be able to name it. Tactile aphasia is a rare defect in 
which there exists an inability to recognize an object by touch 
alone although the qualities which, under normal circumstances, 
suffice for its detection can be accurately described. Amusia, 
or loss of the musical faculty, may occur in association with or 
independent of aphasia. There is reason for believing that 
special receptive and emissive centres exist for the musical 
sense exactly analogous to; those for speech. 
: The speech centres are all supplied by the left middle cerebral 
artery. When this artery is blocked close to its origin by an 
embolus or thrombus, total aphasia results. It may be, however, 
thait only one of the smaller branches of the artery is obstructed, 
and, according to the region of the brain to which this branch; 
is distributed, one or more of the speech centres may be destroyed. 
Occlusion of the left posterior cerebral artery causes extensive 
softening of the occipital lobe and produces pure word blindness. 
Further, a tumour, abscess, haemorrhage or meningitis may be 
so situated as to damage or; destroy the individual speech centres 
or their connecting commissures. The amount of recovery to 
be expected in any given case depends upon the nature, situation 
and -extent of the. lesion, and upon the age of the patient. Even 
after complete destruction of the speech centres, perfect recovery 
may take place, for the centres in the right hemisphere of the 
brain are capable of education. This is only possible in young 
individuals. In the great majority of instances the nature of 
the lesion is such as to render futile all treatment directed 
towards its removal. In suitable cases, however, the education 
of the right side of the brain may be very greatly assisted by an 
intelligent application of scientific methods. 

Bibliography.— Broca, Bidletin de la Societe anatomique (1861) ; 
Wernicke, Der Aphasische Symptomen-complex (Breslau, 1874); 
Kussmaul, Ziemssen's, Cyclopaedia, vol. xiv. p. 759; Wyllie, The 
Disorders of Speech (1895) ; Elder, Aphasia and the Cerebral Speech 
Mechanism (1897); Collins, The Faculty of Speech (1897) ; Bastian, 
Aphasia and other Speech Defects (1898) ; Byrom Bramwetl, " Willr 
making and Aphasia," British Medical Journal (1897) ; " The 
Morison Lectures on Aphasia," The Lancet (1906). See also the 
works of Charcot, Hughlings Taokson, Dejerine, Lichtheimj Pitres; 
Grasset, Ross, Broadbent, Mills; Bateman, Miralli6, Exner, Marie 
and others. (J. B. T.) 

'APHELION (from Gr. &x6, from, and tjXios, sun), in astronomy, 
that point of the orbit of a planet at which it is most distant 
from the sun. Apogee^ Apocentre, Aposaturnium, &c. are terms 
applied, to those points of the orbit of a body moving around a 
centre of force — as the Earth, Saturn, &c. — at which it is 
farthest from the central body. 

APHEMIA (from Gr. a, without, and <$>r\}L-n, speech), in patho- 
logy, the loss of the power of speech (see Aphasia). 

APHIDES (pi. of Aphis), minute insects, also known as 
" plant-lice," "blight," and " green-fly," belonging to the 
homopterous division of the order Hemiptera, with long antennae 
and legs, two- jointed, twO-clawed tarsi, and usually a pair of 
abdominal tubes through which a waxy secretion is exuded. 
These tubes were formerly supposed to secrete the sweet substance 
known as " honey : ddw " so much sought after by a'nts; but 
this is now known to come from the alimentary canal. Both 
winged and wingless forms of both sexes occur, and the wings 
when present are normal in number, that is to say two pairs. 
Apart from their importance from the economic standpoint, 
Aphides are chiefly remarkable for the phenomena connected 
with the propagation of the species. The following brief 
summary of what takes place in the plant-louse of the rose 
(Aphis rosae), may be regarded as typical of the family, though 
exceptions occur in other species: Eggs produced in the autumn 
by fertilized females remain on the plant through the winter 
and hatching in the spring give rise to female individuals 
which may be winged or wingless. From these females are born 



APHORISMU^APHRAATES 



165 



parthenogenetically, that is to say without the intervention of 
males, and by a process that has been compared to internal bud- 
ding, large numbers of young resembling their parents in every 
particular except size, which themselves reproduce their kind 
in the same way. This process continues throughout the summer, 
generation after generation being produced until the number 
of descendants from a single individual of the spring-hatched 
brood may amount to very many thousands. In the autumn 
winged males appear, union between the sexes takes place and 
the females lay the fertilized eggs which are destined to carry 
the species through the cold months of winter. If, however, 
the food-plant is grown in a conservatory where protection 
against cold is afforded, the aphides may go on reproducing 
agamogenetically without cessation for many years together. 
Not the least interesting features connected with this strange 
life-history are the facts that the young may be born by the 
oviparous or viviparous methods and either gamogenetically 
or agamogenetically, and may develop into winged forms or 
remain wingless, and that the males only appear in any number 
at the close of the season. Although the factors* which determine 
these phenomena are not clearly understood, it is believed that 
the appearance of the males is connected with the increasing 
cold of autumn and the growing scarcity of food, and that the 
birth of winged females is similarly associated with decrease in 
the quantity or vitiation of the quality of the nourishment 
imbibed. Sometimes the winged females migrate from the 
plant they were born on to start fresh colonies on others often 
of quite a different kind. Thus the apple blight (Aphis mali) 
after producing many generations of apterous females on its 
typical food-plant gives rise to winged forms which fly away 
and settle upon grass or corn-stalks. 

Closely related to the typical aphides is Phylloxera vaslatrix, 
the insect which causes enormous loss by attacking the leaves 
and roots of vines. Its life-history is somewhat similar to that of 
Aphis rosae summarized above. In the autumn a single fertile 
egg is laid by apterous females in a crevice of the bark of the 
vine where it is protected during the winter. From this egg in 
the spring emerges an apterous female who makes a gall in the 
new leaf and lays therein a large number of eggs. Some of the 
apterous young that are hatched from these form fresh galls 
and continue to multiply in the leaves, others descend to the 
root of the plant, becoming what are known as rooMorms. 
These, like the parent form of spring, reproduce parthenogenetic- 
ally, giving rise to generation after generation of egg-laying 
individuals. In the course of the summer, from some of these 
eggs are hatched females which acquire wings and lay eggs from 
which wingless males and females are born. From the union of 
the sexes comes the fertile egg from which the parent form of 
spring is hatched. 

See generally G. B. Buckton, British Aphides (Ray Soc. 1876- 
1883) ; also Economic Entomology. (R. I. P.) 

APHORISM (from the Gr. d<£opif«e, to define), literally a 
distinction or a definition, a term used to describe a principle 
expressed tersely in a few telling words or any general truth 
conveyed in a short and pithy sentence, in such a way that when 
once heard it is unlikely to pass from the memory. The name 
was first used in the Aphorisms of Hippocrates, a long series of 
propositions concerning the symptoms and diagnosis of disease 
and the art of healing and medicine. The term came to be 
applied later to other sententious statements of physical science, 
and later still to statements of all kinds of principles. Care 
must be taken not to confound aphorisms with axioms. Aphor- 
isms came into beirig as the result of experience, whereas axioms 
are self-evident truths, requiring no proof, and appertain to 
pure reason. Aphorisms have been especially used in dealing with 
subjects to which no methodical or scientific treatment was 
applied till late, such as art, agriculture, medicine, jurisprudence 
and politics. The Aphorisms of Hippocrates form far the most 
celebrated as well as the earliest collection of the kind, and it 
may be interesting to quote a few examples. " Old men support 
abstinence well: people of a 1 ripe age less well: young folk 
badly, and children less well than all the rest, particularly thoise 



of them who are very lively. " " Those who are very fatbynature 
are more exposed to die suddenly than those who are thin." 
" Those who eject foaming blood, eject it from the lung." 
" When two illnesses arrive at the same time, the stronger 
silences the weaker." The first aphorism, perhaps the best 
known of all, which serves as a kind of introduction to the book, 
runs as follows:—" Life is short, art is long, opportunity fugitive, 
experimenting dangerous, reasoning difficult: it is necessary 
not only to do oneself what is right, but also to be seconded by 
the patient, by those who attend him, by external circum- 
stances." Another famous collection of aphorisms is that of the 
school of Salerno in Latin verse, in which Joannes de Meditano, 
one of the most celebrated doctors of the school of medicine of 
Salerno, has summed up the precepts of this school. The book 
was dedicated to a king of England. It is a disputed point as 
to which king, some authorities dating the publication as at 1066, 
others assigning a later date. The dedication gives the following 
excellent advice :-^- 

" Anglorum regi scribit schola tota Salernae. 
Si vis incolumem, si vis te reddere sanum, 
Curas tolle graves: irasci crede profanum : 
Parce mero : coenato parum ; non sit tibi vanum 
Surgere post epulas : somnum fuge meridianum : 
Ne mictum retine, nee comprime fortiter artdm : 
Haec bene si serves,. tu longo tempore vives." 

Another collection of aphorisms, also medical and also in 
Latin, is that of the Dutchman Hermann BoerhaaVe, published 
at Leiden in the year 1709; it gives a terse summary of the 
medical knowledge prevailing at the time, and is of great interest 
to the student of the history of medicine. v 

APHRAATES (a Greek form of the Persian name Aphrahat or 
Pharhadh), a Syriac writer belonging to the middle of the 4th 
century a. d., who composed a series of twenty-three expositions 
or homilies on points of Christian doctrine and practice. The 
first ten were written in 337, the following twelve in 344, and 
the last in 345. J The author was early known as hakklmi 
pharsaya ("the Persian sage"), was a subject of Sapor II., arid 
was probably of heathen parentage and himself a convert from 
heathenism. He seems at some time in his life to have assumed 
the name of Jacob, and is so entitled in the colophon to. a MS. 
of a.d. 512 which contains twelve of his homilies. Hence he was 
already by Gennadius of Marseilles (before 496) confused, with 
Jacob) bishop of Nisibis; and the ancient Armenian version of 
nineteen of the homilies has been published under this latter 
name. But (1) Jacob of Nisibis, who attended tha^council of 
Nicaea, died in 338; and (2) our author, being a Persian subject, 
cannot have lived at Nisibis, which became Persian only by 
Jovian's treaty of 363. . That his name was Aphrahat or 
Pharhadh we learn from comparatively late writers— Bar Bahlul 
(10th' century), Elias of Nisibis (nth), Bar-Hebraeus, and 
'Abhd-Isho'. George, bishop of the Arabs, writing in a.d. 714 to a 
friend who had sent him a series of questions about the " Persian 
sage," confesses ignorance of his name, home and rank,' but 
infers from his homilies that he was a monk, and of high esteem 
among the clergy. The fact that in 344 he was selected to draw 
up a circular letter from a council of bishops and other clergy to 
the churches of Seleucia and Ctesiphon and elsewhere— included 
in our collection as homily 14 — is held by Dr W. Wright and 
others to prove that he was a bishop. According to a marginal 
note in a 14th-century MS. (B.M. Orient. 1017), he was " bishop 
of Mar Mattai," a famous monastery near Mosul, but it is un-* 
likely that this institution existed so early. The homilies of 
Aphraates are intended to form, as Professor Bnrkitt has shown. 
" a full and ordered exposition of the Christian faith." The 
standpoint is that of the Syriac-speaking church, before it was 
touched by the Arian controversy. Beginning with faith as the 
foundation, the writer proceeds to build up the structure of 
doctrine and duty. The first ten homilies, which form one 
division completed in 337, are without polemical reference; 

1 Horn. 1-22 begin with the letters of the Syriac alphabet in suc- 
cession^ Their present order in the Syriac MSS. is therefore right. 
The ancient Armenian version, published by Antonelli in 1756, has 
only 19 of the homilies, and those in a somewhat different order. 



i66 



APHRODITE 



their subjects are faith, love, fasting, prayer, wars (a somewhat 
mysterious setting forth of the conflict between Rome and 
Persia under the imagery of Daniel), the sons of the covenant 
(monks or ascetics), penitents, the resurrection, humility, 
pastors. Those numbered 11-22, written in 344, are almost all 
directed against the Jews; the subjects are circumcision, 
passover, the sabbath, persuasion (the encyclical letter referred 
to above), distinction of meats, the substitution of the Gentiles 
for the Jews, that Christ is the Son of God, virginity and holiness, 
whether the Jews have been finally rejected or are yet to be 
restored, provision for the poor, persecution, death and the last 
times. The 23rd homily, on the " grape kernel " (Is. lxv. 8), 
written in 344, forms an appendix on the Messianic fulfilment of 
prophecy, together with a treatment of the chronology from 
Adam to Christ. Aphraates impresses a reader favourably by 
his moral earnestness, his guilelessness, his moderation in con- 
troversy, the simplicity of his style and language, his saturation 
with the ideas and words of Scripture. On the other hand, he is 
full of cumbrous repetition, he lacks precision in argument and 
is prone to digression, his quotations from Scripture are often 
inappropriate, and he is greatly influenced by Jewish exegesis. 
He is particularly fond of arguments about numbers. How 
wholly he and his surroundings were untouched by the Arian 
conflict may be judged from the 17th homily — "that Christ is 
the Son of God." He argues that, as the name " God " or " Son 
of God " was given in the O.T. to men who were worthy, and as 
God does not withhold from men a share in His attributes- — such 
as sovereignty and fatherhood — it was fitting that Christ who 
has wrought salvation for mankind should obtain this highest 
name. From the frequency of his quotations, Aphraates; is a 
specially important witness to the form in which the Gospels 
were read in the Syriac church in his day; Zahn and others 
have shown that he — mainly at least — used the Diatessaron. 
Finally, he bears important contemporary witness to the suffer- 
ings of the Christian church in Persia under Sapor (Shapur) II. 
as well as the moral evils which had infected the church, to the 
sympathy of Persian Christians with the cause of the Roman 
empire, to the condition of early monastic institutions, to the 
practice of the Syriac church in regard to Easter, &c. 

Editions by W. Wright (London, 1869), and J. Parisot (with 
Latin translation, Paris, 1894); the ancient Armenian version of 
19 homilies edited, translated into Latin, and annotated by Anto- 
nelli (Rome, 1756). Besides translations of particular homilies by 
G. Bickell and E. W. Budge, the whole have been translated by 
G. Bert (Leipzig, 1888). Cf. also C. J. F. Sasse, Proleg, in Aphr. 
Sapientis Persae sermones homileticos (Leipzig, 1879) ; J. Forget, 
De Vita et Scriptis Aphraatis (Louvain, 1882); F. C. Burkitt, Early 
Eastern Christianity (London, 1904) ; J. Labourt, Le Christianisme 
dans I 'empire perse (Paris, 1904); J. Zahn, Forschungen I.; 
" Aphraates and the Diatessaron," vol. ii. pp. 180-I86 of Burkitt's 
Evangelion Da-Mepharreshe (Cambridge, 1904); articles on 
" Aphraates and Monasticism," by R. H. Connolly and Burkitt 
in Journal of Theological Studies (1905) pp. 522-539; (1906) pp 
10-15. (N. M.) 

APHRODITE, 1 the Greek goddess of love and beauty, counter- 
part of the Roman Venus. Although her myth an4 cult were 
essentially Semitic, she soon became Hellenized and was admitted 
to a place among the deities of Olympus. Some mythologists 
hold that there already existed in the Greek system an earlier 
goddess of love, of similar attributes, who was absorbed by the 
Asiatic importation; and one writer (A. Enmann) goes so far 
as to deny the oriental origin of Aphrodite altogether. It is 
therefore necessary first to examine the nature and character- 
istics of her Eastern prototype, and then to see how far they 
reappear in the Greek Aphrodite. 

Among the Semitic peoples (with the notable exception of 
the Hebrews) a supreme female deity was worshipped under 
different names— the Assyrian Ishtar, the Phoenician Ashtereth 
(Astarte), the Syrian Atargatis (Derketo), the Babylonian Belit 
(Mylitta), the Arabian Hat (Al-ilat). The article " Aphrodite " 

1 No satisfactory etymology of the name has been given ; although 
the first part is usually referred to a4>p6s ("the sea foam"), it is 
equally probable that it is of Eastern origin. F. Homoll (Jahrbiicher 
fiir classische Philologie, cxxv., 1882) explains it as a corruption of 
Ashtoreth ; for other derivations see O. Gruppe, Griechische Mytho- 
logie, ii. p. 1348, note 2. 



in Roscher's Lexikon der Mythologie is based upon the theory 
that all these were originally moon-goddesses, on which assump- 
tion all their functions are explained. This view, however, has 
not met with general acceptance, on the ground that, in Semitic 
mythology, the moon is always a male divinity; and that the 
full moon and crescent, found as attributes of Astarte, are due 
to a misinterpretation of the sun's disk and cow's horns of Isis, 
the result of the dependence of Syrian religious art upon Egypt. 
On the other hand, there is some evidence in ancient authorities 
(Herodian v. 6, 10; Lucian, De Dea Syria, 4) that Astarte and 
the moon were considered identical. 

This oriental Aphrodite was worshipped as the bestower of 
all animal and vegetable fruitfulness, and under this aspect 
especially as a goddess of women. This worship was degraded 
by repulsive practices {e.g. religious prostitution, self -mutilation), 
which subsequently made their way to centres of Phoenician 
influence, such as Corinth and Mount Eryx in Sicily. In this 
connexion may be mentioned the idea of a divinity, half male, 
half female, uniting in itself the active and passive functions of 
creation, a symbol of luxuriant growth and productivity. Such 
was the bearded Aphrodite of Cyprus, called Aphroditos by 
Aristophanes according to Macrobius, who mentions a statue 
of the androgynous divinity in his Saturnalia (iii. 8. 2; see also 
Hermaphroditus). The moon, by its connexion with men- 
struation, and as the cause of the fertilizing dew, was regarded as 
exercising an influence over the entire animal and vegetable 
creation. 

The Eastern Aphrodite was closely related to the sea and the 
element of moisture; in fact, some consider that she made her 
first appearance on Greek soil rather as a marine divinity than 
as a nature goddess. According to Syrian ideas, as a fish goddess, 
she represented the fructifying power of water. At Ascalon 
there was a lake full of fish near the temple of Atargatis-Derketo, 
into which she was said to have been thrown together with her 
son Ichthys (fish) as a punishment for her arrogance, and to 
have been devoured by fishes; according to another version, 
ashamed of her amour with a beautiful youth, which resulted 
in the birth of Semiramis, she attempted to drown herself, but 
was changed into a fish with human face (see Atargatis). At 
Hierapplis (Bambyce) there was a pool with an altar in the 
middle, sacred to the goddess, where a festival was held, at which 
her images were carried into the water. Her connexion with the 
sea is explained by the influence of the moon on the tides, and 
the idea that the moon, like the sun and the stars, came up from 
the ocean. 

The oriental Aphrodite is connected with the lower world, and 
came to be looked upon as one of its divinities. Thus, Ishtar 
descends to the kingdom of Hat the queen of the dead, to find 
the means of restoring her favourite Tammuz (Adon, Adonis) 
to life. During her stay all animal and vegetable productivity 
ceases, to begin again with her return to earth — a clear indication 
of the conception of her as a goddesj of fertility. This legend, 
which strikingly resembles that of Persephone, probably refers 
to the decay of vegetation in winter, and the reawakening of 
nature in spring (cf. Hyacinthus). The lunar theory connects 
it with the disappearance of the moon at the time of change or 
during an eclipse. 

Another aspect of her character is that of a warlike goddess, 
armed with spear or bow, sometimes wearing a mural crown, 
as sovereign lady and protectress of the locality where she was 
worshipped. The spear and arrows are identified with the 
beams of the sun and moon. 

The attributes of the goddess were the ram, the he-gqat, the 
dove, certain fish, the cypress, myrtle and pomegranate, the 
animals being symbolical of fertility, the plants remedies against 
sterility. 

The worship of Aphrodite at an early date was introduced 
into Cyprus, Cythera and Crete by Phoenician colonists, whence 
it spread over the whole of Greece, and as far west as Italy and 
Sicily. In Crete she has been identified with Ariadne, who, 
according to one version of her story, was put ashore in Cyprus, 
where she died and was buried in a grove called after the name 



APHRODITE 



167 



of Ariadne-Aphrodite (L. R. Farnell, Cults of the Greek States, 
ii. p. 663). Cyprus was regarded as her true home by the Greeks, 
and Cythera was one of the oldest seats of her worship (cf. her 
titles Cytherea, Cypris, Paphia, Amathusia, Idalia — the last 
three from places in Cyprus). In both these islands there 
lingered a definite tradition of a connexion with the cult of the 
oriental Aphrodite Urania, an epithet which will be referred to 
later. The oriental features of her worship as practised at 
Corinth are due to its early commercial relations with Asia 
Minor; the fame of her temple worship on Mount Eryx spread 
to Carthage, Rome and Latium. 

In the Iliad, Aphrodite is the daughter of Zeus and Dione, a 
name by which she herself is sometimes called. This has been 
supposed to point to a confusion between Aphrodite and Hebe, 
the daughter of Zeus and Hera, Dione being an Epirot name 
for the last-named goddess. In the Odyssey, she is the wife of 
Hephaestus, her place being taken in the Iliad by Charis, the 
personification of grace and divine skill, possibly supplanted 
by Aphrodite, the goddess of love and beauty. Her amour 
with Ares, by whom she became the mother of Harmonia, the 
wife of Cadmus, is famous (Od. viii. 266). From her relations 
with these acknowledged Hellenic divinites it is argued that there 
once existed a primitive Greek goddess of love.. This view is 
examined in detail and rejected by Farnell (Cults, ii. pp. 619-626). 

It is admitted that few traces remain of direct relations of the 
Greek goddess to the moon, although such possibly survive in 
the epithets Traoi<t>aris, aarepia, ovpavia. It is suggested that 
this is due to the fact that, at the time of the adoption of the 
oriental goddess, the Greeks already possessed lunar divinities 
in Hecate, Selene, Artemis. But, although her connexion with 
the moon has practically disappeared, in all other aspects a 
development from the Semitic divinity is clearly manifest. 

Aphrodite as the goddess of all fruitfulness in the animal and 
vegetable world is especially prominent. In the Homeric hymn 
to Aphrodite she is described as ruling over all living things on 
earth, in the air, and in the water, even the gods being subject 
to her influence. She is the goddess of gardens, especially 
worshipped in spring and near lowlands and marshes, favourable 
to the growth of vegetation. As such in Crete she is called 
Antheia ("the flower-goddess"), at Athens iv ktjttois (" in the 
gardens "), and h /caXd/xois (" in the reed-beds ") or kv eXei 
(" in the marsh ") at Samos. Her character as a goddess of 
vegetation is clearly shown in the cult and ritual of Adonis 
(q.v.; also Farnell, ii. p. 644) and Attis (q.v.). In the animal 
world she is the goddess of sexual impulse; amongst men, of 
birth, marriage, and family life. To this aspect may be referred 
the names Genetyllis- (" bringing about birth "), Arma (apa>, 
" to join," i.e., in marriage, cf. Harmonia), Nymphia (" bridal 
goddess "), Kourotrophos (" rearer of boys "). Aphrodite 
Apaturus (see G. M. Hirst in Journal of Hellenic Studies, xxiii., 
1903) refers to her connexion with the clan and the festival 
Apaturia, at which children were admitted to the phr.atria. It 
is pointed out by Farnell that this cult of Aphrodite, as the 
patroness of married life, is probably a native development of 
the Greek religion, the oriental legends representing her by no 
means as an upholder of the purer relations of man and woman. 
As the goddess of the grosser form of love she inspires both men 
and women with passion {hnarpo<i>la, " turning them to " 
thoughts of love), or the reverse {airoarpo^la, " turning them 
away "). Upon her male favourites (Paris, Theseus) she bestows 
the fatal gift of seductive beauty, which generally leads to 
disastrous results in the case of the woman (Helen, Ariadne). 
As firixaviTLS (" contriver ") she acts as an intermediary for 
bringing lovers together, a similar idea being expressed in ;rpa£is 
(of "success" inlove, ox=creatrix). The two epithets avdpoifrovos 
(" man-slayer ") and aoxravSpa (" man-preserver ") find, an 
illustration in the pseudo-Plautine (in the Mercator) address to 
Astarte, who is described as the life and death, the saviour and 
destroyer of men and gods. It was natural that a personality 
invested with such charms should be regarded as the ideal of 
womanly beauty, but it is remarkable that the only probable 
instance in which she appears as such is as Aphrodite ttop<f>u 



(" form ") at Sparta (O. Gruppe suggests the meaning " ghost," 
C. Tiimpel the " dark one," referring to Aphrodite's connexion 
with the lower world). The function of Aphrodite as the 
patroness of courtesans represents the most degraded form of 
her worship as the goddess of love, and is certainly of Phoenician 
or Eastern origin. In Corinth there were more than a thousand 
of these tepo<5ovXoi (" temple slaves "), and wealthy men made 
it a point of honour to dedicate their most beautiful slaves to 
the service of the goddess. 

Like her oriental prototype, the Greek Aphrodite was closely 
connected with the sea. Thus, in the Hesiodic account of her 
birth, she is represented as sprung from the foam which gathered 
round the mutilated member of Uranus, and her name has been 
explained by reference to this. Further proof may be found ia 
many of her titles — avadvop.ivTj (" rising from the sea "), ewrXoiq 
(" giver of prosperous voyages "), yaXrivaia (" goddess of fail 
weather"), KaraaKoiria ("she who keeps a look-out from tha 
heights ") — in the attribute of the dolphin, and the veneration 
in which she was held by seafarers. Aphrodite Aineias, the 
protectress of the Trojan hero, is probably also another form 
of the maritime goddess of the East (see E. Worner, article 
"Aineias " in Roscher's Lexikon, and Farnell, ii. p. 638), which 
originated in the Troad, where Aphrodite Aineias may have 
been identical with the earth-goddess Cybele. The title injicinros 
is connected with the legend of Aeneas, who is said to have 
dedicated to his mother a statue that represented her on horse- 
back. Remembering the importance of the horse in the cult 
of the sea-god Poseidon, it is natural to associate it with Aphro- 
dite as the sea-goddess, although it may be explained with 
reference to her character as a goddess of vegetation, the horse 
being an embodiment of the corn-spirit (see J. G. Frazer, The 
Golden Rough, ii., 1900, p. 281). 

Like Ishtar, Aphrodite was connected with the lower world. 
Thus, at Delphi there was an image of Aphrodite hrtrvfifiia 
("Aphrodite of the tomb "), to which the dead were summoned 
to receive libations; the epithets ru^/3o)pi»xos (" grave-digger"), 
fivx^a (" goddess of the depths "), p.«Xaim (" the dark one "), 
the grave of Ariadne- Aphrodite at Amathus, and the myth of 
Adonis, point in the same direction. 

The cult of the armed Aphrodite probably belongs to the 
earlier period of her worship in Greece, and down to the latest 
period of Greek history she retained this character in some of the 
Greek states. The cult is found not only where oriental influence 
was strongest, but in places remote from it, such as Sparta, 
where she was known by the name of Areia (" the warlike "), 
and there are numerous references in the Anthology to an 
Aphrodite armed with helmet and spear. It is possible that the 
frequent association of Aphrodite with Ares is to be explained 
by an armed Aphrodite early worshipped at Thebes, the most 
ancient seat of the worship of Ares. 

The most distinctively oriental title of the Greek Aphrodite 
is Urania, the Semitic " queen of the heavens." It has been 
explained by reference to the lunar character of the goddess, 
but more probably signifies "she whose seat is in, heaven," 
whence she exercises her sway over the whole world — earth, sea, 
and air alike. Her cult was first established in Cythera, probably 
in connexion with the purple trade, and at Athens it is associated 
with the legendary Porphyrion, the purple king. At Thebes, 
Harmonia (who has been identified with Aphrodite herself) 
dedicated three statues, of Aphrodite Urania, Pandemos, and 
Apostrophia. A few words must be added on the second of 
these titles. There is no doubt that Pandemos was originally an 
extension of the idea of the goddess of family and city life to 
include the whole people, the political community. Hence the 
name was supposed to go back to the time of Theseus, the reputed 
author of the reorganization of Attica and its demes. Aphrodite 
Pandemos was held in equal regard with Urania; she was called 
aty.vi\ ("holy"), and was served by priestesses upon whom strict 
chastity was enjoined. In time, however, the meaning of the 
term underwent a change, probably due to the philosophers 
and moralists, by whom a radical distinction was drawn be- 
tween Aphrodite Urania and Pandemos. According to Plato 



i68 



APHTHOMUS^-APIS 



(Symposium, 180), there are two Aphrodites, " the elder, having' 
no mother, who is called the heavenly Aphrodite — she is the 
daughter of Uranus; the younger, who is the daughter of Zeus 
and Dione — her we call common." The same distinction is 
found in Xenophon's Symposium (viii. 9), although the author is 
doubtful whether there are two goddesses, or whether Urania 
and Pandemos are two names for the same goddess, just as Zeus, 
although one and the same, has many titles; but in any case, 
he says, the ritual of Urania is purer, more serious, than that of 
Pandemos. The same idea is expressed in the statement (quoted 
by Athenaeus, 569 d, from Nicander of Colophon) that after 
Solon's time courtesans were put under the protection of Aphro- 
dite Pandemos. But there is no doubt that the cult of Aphrodite 
was on the whole as pure as that of any other divinities, and 
although a distinction may have existed in later times between 
the goddess of legal marriage and the goddess of free love, these 
titles do not express the idea. Aphrodite Urania was represented 
in Greek art on a swan, a tortoise or a globe; Aphrodite Pan- 
demos as riding on a goat, symbolical of wantonness. (For the 
legend of Theseus and Aphrodite hnrpayla, "on the goat," see 
Farnell, Cults, ii. p. 633.) 

To her oriental attributes the following may be added: the 
sparrow and hare (productivity), the wry- neck (as a love-charm, 
of which Aphrodite was considered the inventor) , the swan and 
dolphin (as a marine divinity), the tortoise (explained by Plutarch 
as a symbol of domesticity, but connected by Griippe with the 
marine deity), the rose, the poppy, and the lime tree. 

In ancient art Aphrodite was at first represented clothed, 
sometimes seated, but more frequently standing; then naked, 
rising from the sea, or after the bath. Finally, all idea of the 
divine vanished, and the artists merely presented her as the 
type of a beautiful woman, with oval face, full of grace and 
charm, languishing eyes, and laughing mouth, which replaced 
the dignified severity and repose of the older forms. The most 
famous of her statues in ancient times was that at Cnidus, the 
work of Praxiteles, which was imitated on the coins of that town,' 
and subsequently reproduced in various copies, such as the 
Vatican and Munich. Of existing statues the most famous is 
the Aphrodite of Melos (Venus of Milo), now in the Louvre, 
which was found on the island in 1820 amongst the ruins of the 
theatre; the Capitoline Venus at Rome and the Venus of Capua, 
represented as a goddess of victory (these two exhibit a lofty 
conception of the goddess) ; the Medicean Venus at Florence, 
found in the porticus of Octavia at Rome and (probably wrongly) 
attributed to Cleomenes; the Venus stooping in the bath, in the 
Vatican; and the Callipygos at Naples, a specimen of the most 
sensual type. 

For the oriental Aphrodite . see E. Meyer, article " Astarte " in 
W. H. Roscher's Lexikon der Mythologie, and Wolf Baudissin, 
articles " Astarte " and " Atargatis " in Herzog-Hauck's Real- 
encyklopddie fur protestantische Theologie; for the Greek, articles 
m Roscher's Lexikon and Pauly-Wissowa's Realencyelopadie; 
L. Preller, Griechische Mythologie . (4th ed. by C. Robert) ; L. R. 
Farnell, Cults of the Greek States, ii. (1896); O. Gruppe, Griechische 
Mythologie und Religionsgeschichte, ii. (1906); L. Dyer, The Gods 
in Greece (1891) ; A. Enmann, Kypros und der Vr sprung des Aphro- 
dite-Kults (1886). W. H. Engel, Kypros, ii. (1841), and J. B. Lajard, 
Recherches sur le culte de Venus (1837), may still be consulted with 
advantage. For Aphrodite in art see J. J. Bernoulli, Aphrodite 
(1873) ; W. J. Stillman, Venus and Apollo in Painting and Sculpture 
(1897). In the article Greek Art, figs. 71 (pi. v.) and 77 (pi. vi.) 
represent Aphrodite of Criidusand Melos respectively. (J. H. F.) 

APHTHONIUS, of Antioch, Greek sophist and rhetorician, 
flourished in the second half of the 4th century A.D., or even later. 
Nothing is known of his life, except that he was a friend of 
Libanius and of a certain Eutropius, perhaps the author of the 
epitome of Roman history. We possess by him HpoyvfivaanaTa, 
a text-book on the elements of rhetoric, with exercises for the 
use of the young before they entered the regular rhetorical 
schools. They apparently formed an introduction to the Tkxvr] 
of Hermogenes. His style is pure and simple, and ancient critics 
praise his " Atticism." The book maintained its popularity as 
late as the 17th century, especially in Germany. A collection of 
forty fables by Aphthonius, after the style of Aesop, is also extant. 

Spengel, Rhetores Graeci, ii. ; Finckh, Aphlhonii Progymnasmata 



(1865); Hoppichler, De, Theone, Hejimogene, Aphthonioque Pro- 
gymnasmatum Scriptoribus (1884) ; edition of the fables t>y Furia 
(1810). 

APHTHONIUS, AELIUS FESTUS, Latin grammarian, possibly 
of African origin, lived in the 4th century a.d. He wrpte a 
metrical handbook in four books, which has been incorporated 
by Marius Victorinus in his system of grammar. 

Keil, Grarnmatici Latini, vi. ; Schultz, Quibus Auctoribus Aelius 
Festus Aphthonius usus sit (1885). 

APICIUS, the name of three celebrated Roman epicures. 
The second of these, M. Gavius Apiciua, who lived under Tiberius, 
is the most famous (Seneca, Consol. ad Helviam, 10). He in- 
vented various cakes and sauces, and is said to have written on 
cookery. The extant De Re Coquinaria (ed. Schuch, 1874), a 
collection of receipts, ascribed to one Caelius Apicius, is founded 
on Greek originals, and belongs to the 3rd century a.d. It is 
probable that the real title was Caelii Apicius, Apicius being 
the name of the work (cp. Taciti Agricola), and De Re Coquinaria 
a sub-title. 

APICULTURE (from Lat. apis, a bee), bee-keeping (see Bee). 
So also other compounds of api-. Apiarium or apiary, a bee- 
house or hive, is used figuratively by old writers for a place of 
industry, e.g. a college. 

APION, Greek grammarian and commentator on Homer, 
born at Oasis in Libya, flourished in the first half of the 1st 
century a.d. He studied at Alexandria, and headed a deputation 
sent to Caligula (in 38) by the Alexandrians to complain of the 
Jews: his charges were answered by Josephus in his Contra 
Apionem. He settled at Rome — it is uncertain when— and 
taught rhetoric till the reign of Claudius. Apion was a man of 
great industry and learning, but extremely vain. He wrote 
sevefal works, which are lost. The well-known story of 
Androclus and the lion, preserved in Aulus Gellius, is from his 
KlyvKTiand.; fragments of his TAcocom 'O/irjpLKcd are printed 
in the Etytnologicum Gudianiom, ed. Sturz, 181S, 

APIS or Hapis, the sacred bull of Memphis, in Egyptian Hp, 
Hope, Hope. By Manetho his worship is said to have been 
instituted by Kaiechos of the Second Dynasty. Hape is named 
on very early monuments, but little is ; known of the divine 
animal before the New Kingdom. He was entitled "the re- 
newal of the life " of the Memphite god Ptah:' but after death 
he became Osorapis, i.e. the Osiris Apis, just as dead men were 
assimilated to Osiris, the king of the underworld. This Osorapis 
was identified with Serapis, and may well be really identical 
with him (see Serapis): and Greek writers make the Apis an 
incarnation of Osiris, ignoring the connexion with Ptah. Apis 
was the most important of all the sacred animals in Egypt, 
and, like the others, its importance increased as time went on. 
Greek and Roman authors have much to say about Apis, the 
marks by which the black bull-calf was recognized, the manner 
of his conception by a ray from heaven, his house at Memphis 
with court for disporting himself, the mode of prognostication 
from his actions, the mourning at his death, his costly 'burial 
and the rejoicings throughout the country when a new Apis 
was found. Mariette's excavation of the Serapeum at Memphis 
revealed the tombs of over sixty animals, ranging from the 
time of Amenophis III. to that of Ptolemy Alexander. At first 
each animal was buried in a separate tomb with a chapel built 
above it. Khamuis, the priestly son of Rameses II. (c. 1300 
B.C.), excavated a great gallery to be lined with the tomb 
chambers; another similar gallery was added by Ps'ammeti- 
chus I. The careful statement of the ages of the animals in 
the later instances, with the regnal dates for their birth, en- 
thronization and death have thrown much light on the 
chronology from the XXIInd dynasty onwards. The name 
of the mother-cow and the place of birth are often recorded. 
The Sarcophagi are of immense size, and the burial must h&ve 
entailed enorfnous expense. It is therefore remarkable that 
the priests' contrived to bury one of the animals in the fourth 
year of Cambyses. 

See Jablonski, Pantheon, ii.; Budge, Gods of the Egyptians, ii. 
356; Mariette-Maspero, Le SSrapSum de Memphis. (F. Ll. G.) 



APLITE-^APOGALYPITIC BITERATURE 



169 



APLITE, in petrology, the name given to intrusive rock in 
which quartz and felspar are the dominant minerals. Aplites 
are usually very fine-grained, white, grey or flesh-coloured, and 
their constituents are visible only with the help of a magnifying 
lens. Dykes and threads of aplite are very frequently to be 
observed traversing granitic bosses; they occur also, though 
in less numbers, in syenites, diorites, quartz-diabases and 
gabbros. Without doubt they have usually a genetic affinity 
to the rocks they intersect. The aplites of granite areas, for 
example, are the last part of the magma to crystallize, and 
correspond in composition to the quartzo-felspathic aggregates 
which fill up the interspaces between the early minerals in the 
main body of the rock. They bear a considerable resemblance 
to the eutectic mixtures which are formed on the cooling of 
solutions of mineral salts, and remain liquid till the excess of 
either of the components has separated out, finally solidifying 
en masse when the proper proportions of the constituents and a 
suitable temperature are reached. The essential components 
of the aplites are quartz and alkali felspar (the latter usually 
orthoclase or micro perthite). Crystallization has been appar* 
ently rapid (as the rocks are so fine-grained), and the ingredients 
have solidified almost at the same time. Hence their crystals 
are rather imperfect and fit closely to one another in a sort of 
fine mosaic of nearly equi-dimensional grains. Porphyritic 
felspars occur occasionally and quartz more seldom; but the 
relation of the aplites to quartz-porphyries, granophyres and 
felsites is very close, as all these rocks have nearly the same 
chemical composition. Yet the aplites associated with diorites 
and quartz-diabases differ in minor respects from the common 
aplites, which accompany granites. The accessory minerals 
of these rocks are principally oligoclase, muscovite, apatite and 
zircon. Biotite and all ferromagnesian minerals rarely appear 
in them, and never are in considerable amount. Riebeckite- 
granites (paisanites) have close affinities to aplites, shown 
especially in the prevalence of alkali felspars. Tourmaline also 
occurs in some aplites. The rocks of this group are very frequent 
in all areas where masses of granite are known. They form 
dykes and irregular veins which may be only a few inches or 
many feet in diameter. Less frequently aplite forms stocks 
or bosses, or occupies the edges or -irregular portions of the 
interior of outcrops of granite. The syenite-aplites consist 
mainly of alkali felspar; the diorite-aplites of plagioclase; 
there are nepheline-bearing aplites which intersect some 
elaeolite-syenites. In all cases they bear the same relation to 
the parent masses. By increase of quartz aplites pass gradually, 
in a few localities, through highly quartzose modifications 
(beresite, &c.) into quartz veins. (J. S. F.) 

APNOEA (Gr. aTVOia, from d-, privative, TVteiv, to breathe), 
a technical term for suspension of breathing. 

APOCALYPSE (Gr. curoKaXu^ts , disclosure), a term applied 
to the disclosure to certain privileged persons of something 
hidden from the mass of men. The Greek root corresponds 
in the Septuagint to the Heb. galdh, to reveal. The last book 
of the New Testament bears in Greek the title 'Atto/coXu^is 
'Idiavvov, and is frequently referred to as the Apocalypse 
of John, but in the English Bible it appears as the Revelation 
of St John the Divine (see Revelation), Earlier among 
the hellenistic Jews the term was used of a number of 
writings which depicted in a prophetic and parabolic way the 
end or future state of the world (e.g. Apocalypse of Baruch), 
the whole class is now commonly known as Apocalyptic 
Literature (q.v.). 

APOCALYPSE, KNIGHTS OF THE, a secret society founded 
in Italy in 1693 to defend the church against the expected 
Antichrist. Agostino Gabrino, the son of a merchant of 
Brescia, was its founder. On Palm Sunday 1693, when the 
choir of St Peter's was chanting Quis est iste Rex Gloriae? 
Gabrinc. sword in hand, rushed to the altar crying Ego sum Rex 
Gloriae. Though Gabrino was treated as a madman, the society 
flourished, until a member denounced it to the Inquisition, who 
arrested the knights. Though chiefly mechanics they always 
carried swords even when at work, and wore on their breasts a 



star with seven rays. Gabrino styled himself monarch of the 
Holy Trinity. He was credited by his enemies with a desire 
to introduce polygamy. 

APOCALYPTIC LITERATURE. The Apocalyptic literature 
of Judaism and Christianity embraces a considerable period, 
from the centuries following the exile down to the close of the 
middle ages. In the present survey we shall limit ourselves to 
the great formative periods in this literature: — in Judaism to 
200 B.C. to a.d. 100, and in Christianity to a.d. 50 to 350 or 
thereabouts. 

The transition from prophecy to apocalyptic (airoKaKvTTeiv, 
to reveal something hidden) was gradual and already accom- 
plished within the limits of the Old Testament. Beginning in 
the bosom of prophecy, and steadily differentiating itself from 
it in its successive developments, it never came to stand in 
absolute contrast to it. Apocalyptical elements disclose them- 
selves in the prophetical books of Ezekiel, Joel, Zechariah, 
while in Isaiah xxiv.-xxvii. and xxxiii. we find well-developed 
apocalypses; but it is not until we come to Daniel that we have 
a fully matured and classical example of this class of literature. 
The way, however, had in an especial degree been prepared for 
the apocalyptic type of thought and literature by Ezekiel, for 
with him the word of God had become identical with a written 
book (ii. 9-iii. 3) by the eating of which he learnt the will of God, 
just as primitive man conceived that the eating of the tree in 
Paradise imparted spiritual knowledge. When the divine word 
is thus conceived as a written message, the sole office of the 
prophet is to communicate what is written. Thus the human 
element is reduced to zero, and the conception of prophecy 
becomes mechanical. And as the personal element disappears 
in the conception of the prophetic calling, so it tends to disappear 
in the prophetic view of history, and the future comes to be 
conceived not as the organic result of the present under the 
divine guidance, but as mechanically determined from the 
beginning in the counsels of God, and arranged under artificial 
categories of time. This is essentially the apocalyptic conception 
of history, and Ezekiel may be justly represented as in certain 
essential aspects its founder in Israel. 

We shall now consider (I.) Apocalyptic, its origin and general 
characteristics; (II.) Old Testament Apocalyptic; (IH.) New 
Testament Apocalyptic. 

I. Apocalyptic — its Origin and General Characteristics 

i. Sources of Apocalyptic— -The origin of Apocalyptic is to 
be sought in (a) unfulfilled prophecy and in (b) traditional 
elements drawn from various sources. 

(a) The origin of Apocalyptic is to be sought in unfulfilled 
prophecy. That certain prophecies relating to the coming 
kingdom of God had clearly not been fulfilled was a matter of 
religious difficulty to the returned exiles from Babylon. The 
judgments predicted by the pre-exilic prophets had indeed been 
executed to the letter, but where were the promised glories of 
the renewed kingdom and Israel's unquestioned sovereignty 
over the nations of the earth? One such unfulfilled prophecy 
Ezekiel takes up and reinterprets in such a way as to show that 
its fulfilment is still to come. The prophets Jeremiah (iv.-vi.) 
and Zephaniah had foretold the invasion of Judah by a mighty 
people from the north. But as this northern foe had failed to 
appear Ezekiel re-edited this prophecy in a new form as a final 
assault of Gog and his hosts on Jerusalem, and thus established 
a permanent dogma in Jewish apocalyptic, which in due course 
passed over into Christian. 

But the non-fulfilment of prophecies relating to this or that 
individual event or people served to popularize the methods of 
apocalyptic in a very slight degree in comparison with the non- 
fulfilment of the greatest of all prophecies— the advent of the 
Messianic kingdom. Thus, though Jeremiah had promised that 
after seventy years (xxv. n., xxix. 10) Israel should be restored 
to their own land (xxiv. 5, 6), and then enjoy the blessings of the 
Messianic kingdom under the Messianic king (xxiii. 5, 6), this 
period passed by and things remained as of old. Haggai and 
Zechariah explained the delay by the failure of Judah to rebuild 



170 



APOCALYPTIC LITERATURE 



the temple, and so generation after generation the hope of the 
kingdom persisted, sustained most probably by ever-fresh 
reinterpretations of ancient prophecy, till in the first half of the 
2nd century the delay is explained in the Books 6f Daniel and 
Enoch as due not to man's shortcomings but to the counsels 
of God. The 70 years of Jeremiah are interpreted by the 
angel in Daniel (ix. 25-27) as 70 weeks of years, of which 69^ 
have already expired, while the writer of Enoch (lxxxv.-xc.) 
interprets the 70 years of Jeremiah as the 70 successive reigns 
of the 70 angelic patrons of the nations, which are to come to 
a close in his own generation. 

But the above periods came and passed by, and again the 
expectations of the Jews were disappointed. Presently the 
Greek empire of the East was overthrown by Rome, and in due 
course this new phenomenon, so full of meaning for the Jews, 
called forth a new interpretation of Daniel. The fourth and 
last empire which, according to Daniel vii. 10-25, was to be Greek, 
was now declared to be Roman by the Apocalypse of Baruch 
(xxxvi.-xl.) and 4 Ezra (x. 60-xii. 35). Once more such ideas 
as those of " the day of Yahweh " and the " new heavens and 
a new earth " were constantly re-edited with fresh nuances in 
conformity with their new settings. Thus the inner development 
of Jewish apocalyptic was always conditioned by the historical 
experiences of the nation. 

(ft) Another source of apocalyptic was primitive mythological 
and cosmological traditions, in which the eye of the seer could 
see the secrets of the future no less surely than those of the past. 
Thus the six days of the world's creation, followed by a seventh 
of rest, were regarded as at once a history of the past and a fore- 
casting of the future. As the world was made in six days its 
history would be accomplished in six thousand years, since each 
day with God was as a thousand years and a thousand years as 
one day; and as the six days of creation were followed by one 
of rest, so the six thousand years of the world's history would be 
followed by a rest of a thousand years (2 Enoch xxxii. 2-xxxiii. 2). 
Of primitive mythological traditions we might mention the 
primeval serpent, leviathan, behemoth, while to ideas native to 
or familiar in apocalyptic belong those of the seven archangels, 
the angelic patrons of the nations (Deut. xxxii. 8, in LXX. ; Isaiah 
xxiv. 21; Dan. x. 13, 20, &c), the mountain of God in the north 
(Isaiah xiv. 13; Ezek. i. 4, &c), the garden of Eden. 

ii. Object and Contents of Apocalyptic. — The object of this 
literature in general was to solve the difficulties connected with 
the righteousness of God and the suffering condition of His 
righteous servants on earth. The righteousness of God postulated 
according to the law the temporal prosperity of the righteous 
and the temporal prosperity of necessity; for as yet there was 
no promise of life or recompense beyond the grave. But this 
connexion was not found to obtain as a rule in life, and the 
difficulties arising from this conflict between promise and ex- 
perience centred round the lot of the righteous as a community 
and the lot of the righteous man as an individual. Old Testament 
prophecy had addressed itself to both these problems, though it 
was hardly conscious of the claims of ths latter. It concerned 
itself essentially with the present, and with the future only as 
growing organically out of the present. It taught the absolute 
need of personal and national righteousness, and foretold the 
ultimate blessedness of the righteous nation on the present earth. 
But its views were not systematic and comprehensive in regard 
to the nations in general, while as regards the individual it held 
that God's service here was its own and adequate reward, and 
saw no need of postulating another world to set right the evils of 
this. But later, with the growing claims of the individual and 
the acknowledgment of these in the religious and intellectual life, 
both problems, and especially the latter, pressed themselves 
irresistibly on the notice of religious thinkers, and made it 
impossible for any conception of the divine rule and righteousness 
to gain acceptance, which did not render adequate satisfaction 
to the claims of both problems. To render such satisfaction was 
the task undertaken by apocalyptic, as well as to vindicate the 
righteousness of God alike in respect of the individual and of the 
nation. To justify their contention they sketched in outline 



the history of the world and mankind, the origin of evil and its 
course, and the final consummation of all things. Thus they 
presented in fact a theodicy, a rudimentary philosophy of religion. 
The righteous as a nation should yet possess the earth, even in 
this world the faithful community should attain its rights in an 
eternal Messianic kingdom on earth, or else in temporary blessed- 
ness here and eternal blessedness hereafter. So far as regards 
the righteous community. It was, however, in regard to the 
destiny of the individual that apocalyptic rendered its chief 
service. Though the individual might perish amid the disorders 
of this world, he would not fail, apocalyptic taught,- to attain 
through resurrection the recompense that was his due in the 
Messianic kingdom or in heaven itself. Apocalyptic thus forms 
the indispensable preparation for the religion of the New 
Testament. 

iii. Form of Apocalyptic. — The form of apocalyptic is a literary 
form; for we cannot suppose that the writers experienced the 
voluminous and detailed visions we find in their books. On the 
other hand the reality of the visions is to some extent guaranteed 
by the writer's intense earnestness and by his manifest belief 
in the divine origin of his message. But the difficulty of regarding 
the visions as actual experiences, or as in any sense actual, is 
intensified, when full account is taken of the artifices of the 
writer; for the major part of his visions consists of what is to 
him really past history dressed up in the guise of prediction. 
Moreover, the writer no doubt intended that his reader should 
take the accuracy of the prediction (?) already accomplished 
to be a guarantee for the accuracy of that which was still un- 
realized. How, then, it may well be asked, can this be consistent 
with reality of visionary experience ? Are we not here obliged 
to assume that the visions are a literary invention and nothing 
more ? 

However we may explain the inconsistency, we are precluded 
by the moral earnestness of the writer from assuming the visions 
to be pure inventions. But the inconsistency has in part been 
explained by Gunkel, who has rightly emphasized that the 
writer did not freely invent his materials but derived them in 
the main from tradition, as he held that these mysterious tradi- 
tions of his people were, if rightly expounded, forecasts of the 
time to come. Furthermore, the visionary who is found at most 
periods of great spiritual excitement was forced by the prejudice 
of his time, which refused to acknowledge any inspiration in the 
present, to ascribe his visionary experiences and reinterpretations 
of the mysterious traditions of his people to some heroic figure 
of the past. Moreover, there will always be a difficulty in deter- 
mining what belongs to his actual vision and what to the literary 
skill or free invention of the author, seeing that the visionary 
must be dependent on memory and past experience for the forms 
and much of the matter of the actual vision. 

iv. Apocalyptic as distinguished from Prophecy.-^-We have 
already dwelt on certain notable differences between apocalyptic 
and prophecy; but there are certain others that call for attention. 

(a) In the Nature of its Message. — The message of the prophets 
was primarily a preaching of repentance and righteousness if the 
nation would escape judgment; the message of the apocalyptic 
writers was of patience and trust for that deliverance and reward 
were sure to come. 

(b) By its dualistic Theology. — Prophecy believes that this 
world is God's world and that in this world His goodness and 
truth will yet be vindicated. Hence the prophet prophesies of 
a definite future arising out of and organically connected with 
the present. The apocalyptic writer on the other hand despairs 
of the present, and directs his hopes absolutely to the future, to 
a new world standing in essential opposition to the present. 
(Non fecit Altissimus unum saeculum sed duo, 4 Ezra vii. 50.) 
Here we have essentially a dualistic principle, which, though it 
can largely be accounted for by the interaction of certain inner 
tendencies and outward sorrowful experience on the part of 
Judaism, may ultimately be derived from Mazdean influences. 
This principle, which shows itself clearly at first in the conception 
that the various nations are under angelic rulers, who are in a 
greater or less degree in rebellion against God, as in Daniel and 



APOCALYPTIC LITERATURE 



171 



Enoch, grows in strength with each succeeding age, till at last 
Satan is conceived as " the ruler of this world " (John xii. 31) 
or " the god of this age " (2 Cor. iv. 4). Under the guidance 
of such a principle the writer naturally expected the world's 
culmination in evil to be the immediate precursor of God's 
intervention on behalf of the righteous, and every fresh growth 
in evil to be an additional sign that the time was at hand. The 
natural concomitant in conduct of such a belief is an uncom- 
promising asceticism. He that would live to the next world 
must shun this. Visions are vouchsafed only to those who to 
prayer have added fasting. 

(c) By pseudonymous Authorship. — We have already touched" 
on this characteristic of apocalyptic. The prophet stood in 
direct relations with his people; his prophecy was first spoken 
and afterwards written. The apocalyptic writer could obtain 
no hearing from his contemporaries, who held that, though God 
spoke in the past, " there was no more any prophet." This 
pessimism and want of faith limited and defined the form in 
which religious enthusiasm should manifest itself, and prescribed 
as a condition of successful effort the adoption of pseudonymous 
authorship. The apocalyptic writer, therefore, professedly 
addressed his book to future generations. Generally directions 
as to the hiding and sealing of the book (Dan. xii. 4, 9; 1 Enoch 
i. 4; Ass. Mos. i. 16-18) were given in the text in order to explain 
its publication so long after the date of its professed period. 
Moreover, there was a sense in which such books were not 
wholly pseudonymous. Their writers were students of ancient 
prophecy and apocalyptical tradition, and, though they might 
recast and reinterpret them, they could not regard them as 
their own inventions. Each fresh apocalypse would in the 
eyes of its writer be in some degree but a fresh edition of the 
traditions naturally attaching themselves to great names in 
Israel's past, and thus the books named respectively Enoch, 
Noah, Ezra would to some slight extent be not pseudonymous. 

(d) By its comprehensive and deterministic Conception of 
History. — Apocalyptic took an indefinitely wider view of the 
world's history than prophecy. Thus, whereas prophecy had 
to deal with temporary reverses at the hands of some heathen 
power, apocalyptic arose at a time when Israel had been subject 
for generations to the sway of one or other of the great world- 
powers. Hence to harmonize such difficulties with belief in 
God's righteousness, it had to take account of the r61e of such 
empires in the counsels of God, the rise, duration and downfall 
of each in turn, till finally the lordship of the world passed into 
the hands of Israel, or the final judgment arrived. These events 
belonged in the main to the past, but the writer represented 
them as still in the future, arranged under certain artificial 
categories of time definitely determined from the beginning in 
the counsels of God and revealed by Him to His servants the 
prophets. Determinism thus became a leading characteristic of 
Jewish apocalyptic, and its conception of history became severely 
mechanical. 

II. Old Testament Apocalyptic 

i. Canonical: — 

Isaiah xxiv. — xxvii.; xxxiii.; xxxiv.-xxxv. 

(Jeremiah xxxiii. 14-26 ?) 

Ezekiel ii. 8 ; xxxviii.-xxxix. 

Joel iii. 9-17. 

Zech. xii.-xiv. 

Daniel. 

We cannot enter here into a discussion of the above passages 
and books. 1 All are probably pseudepigraphic except the 
passages from Ezekiel and Joel. Of the remaining passages and 
books Daniel belongs unquestionably to the Maccabean period, 
and the rest possibly to the same period. Isaiah xxxiii. was 
probably written about 163 B.C. (Duhm and Marti); Zech. 
xii.-xiv. about 160 B.C., Isaiah xxiv .-xxvii. about 128 B.C., and 
xxxiv.-xxxv. sometime in the reign of John Hyrcanus. Jeremiah 
xxxiii. 14-26 is assigned by Marti to Maccabean times, but this 
is highly questionable. 

1 See the separate headings for the various apocalyptic books 
mentioned in this article. 



ii. Extra -canonical: — 

(a) Palestinian: — 

(2OO-I0O B.C.) 

Book of Noah. 
1 Enoch vi.— xxxvi. ; lxxii.— xc. 
Testaments of the XII. Patriarchs. 
(100 B.C. to I B.C.) 

1 Enoch i.— v. ; xxxvii.— lxxi. ; xci.— civ. 

Testaments of the XII. Patriarchs, i.e. T. Lev. x., xiv.-xvi., 

T. Jud. xxi. 6-xxiii, T. Zeb. ix., T. Dan. v. 6, 7. 
Psalms of Solomon. 

(a.d. i-ioo and later.) 
Assumption of Moses. 
Apocalypse of Baruch. 
4 Ezra. 

Greek Apocalypse of Baruch. 
Apocalypse of Zephaniah. 
Apocalypse of Abraham. 
Prayer of Joseph. 
Book of Eldad and Modad. 
Apocalypse of Elijah. 

(b) Hellenistic: — 

2 Enoch. 

Oracles of Hystaspes. 

Testament of Job. 

Testaments of the III. Patriarchs. 

Sibylline Oracles (excluding Christian portions). 

Book of Noah. — Though this book has not come down to us 
independently, it has in large measure been incorporated in 
the Ethiopic Book of Enoch, and can in part be reconstructed 
from it. The Book of Noah is mentioned in Jubilees x. 13, xxi. 10. 
Chapters lx., lxv.-lxix. 25 of the Ethiopic Enoch are without 
question derived from it. Thus lx. 1 runs: " In the year 500, in 
the seventh month ... in the life of Enoch." Here the editor 
simply changed the name Noah in the context before him into 
Enoch, for the statement is based on Gen. v. 32, and Enoch 
lived only 365 years. Chapters vi.-xi. are clearly from the same 
source; for they make no reference to Enoch, but bring forward 
Noah (x. 1) and treat of the sin of the angels that led to the 
flood, and of their temporal and eternal punishment. This 
section is compounded of the Semjaza and Azazel myths, and 
in its present composite form is already presupposed by 1 Enoch 
Ixxxviii.-xc. Hence these chapters are earlier than 166 B.C. 
Chapters cvi.-cvii. of the same book are probably from the same 
source; likewise liv. 7-lv. 2, and Jubilees vii. 20-39, x - I " I S- 
In the former passage of Jubilees the subject-matter leads to 
this identification, as well as the fact that Noah is represented 
as speaking in the first person, although throughout Jubilees it 
is the angel that speaks. Possibly Eth. En. xii. 3-8, xliii.-xliv., 
lix. are from the same work. The book may have opened with 
Eth. En. cvi.-cvii. On these chapters may have followed Eth. 
En. vi.-xi., lxv.-lxix. 25, lx., xii. 3-8, xliii.-xliv., liv. 7-lv. 2; 
Jubilees vii. 26-39, x - 1 -tS- 

The Hebrew Book of Noah, a later work, is printed in Jellinek's 
Bet ha-Midrasch, iii. 155-156, and translated into German in 
Ronsch, Das Buck der Jubilaen, 385-387. It is based on the part 
of the above Book of Noah which is preserved in the Book of 
Jubilees. The portion of this Hebrew work which is derived 
from the older work is reprinted in Charles's Ethiopic Version 
of the Hebrew Book of Jubilees, p. 179. 

/ Enoch, or the Ethiopic Book of Enoch. — This is the most 
important of all the apocryphal writings for the history of 
religious thought. Like the Pentateuch, the Psalms, the Megil- 
loth and the Pirke Aboth, this work was divided into five parts, 
which, as we shall notice presently, spring from five different 
sources. Originally written partly in Aramaic (i.e. vi.-xxxvi.) and 
partly in Hebrew (i.-vi., xxxvii.-cviii.), it was translated into 
Greek, and from Greek into Ethiopic and possibly Latin. Only 
one-fifth of the Greek version in two forms survives. The various 
elements of the book were written by different authors at different 
dates, vi.-xxxvi. was written before 166 B.C., lxxii -lxxxii. 
before the Book of Jubilees, i.e. before 120 B.C. or thereabouts, 
lxxxiii.-xc. about 166 B.C., i.-v., xci.-civ. before 95 B.C., and 
xxxvii.-lxxi. before 64 B.C. There are many interpolations 
drawn mainly from the Book of Noah. 

Testaments of the XII. Patriarchs. — This book, in some respects 



172 



APOCALYPTIC LITERATURE 



the most important of Old Testament apocryphs, has only 
recently come into its own. Till a few years ago, owing to 
Christian interpolations, it was taken to be a Christian apocryph, 
written originally in Greek in the 2nd century a.d. Now it is 
acknowledged by Christian and Jewish scholars alike to have 
been written in Hebrew in the 2nd century B.C. From Hebrew 
it was translated into Greek and from Greek into Armenian and 
Slavonic. The versions have come down in their entirety, and 
small portions of the Hebrew text have been recovered from 
later Jewish writings. The Testaments were written about the 
same date as the Book of Jubilees. These two books form the 
only Apology in Jewish literature for the religious and civil 
hegemony of the Maccabees from the Pharisaic standpoint. 
To the Jewish interpolation of the 1st century B.C. (about 60-40), 
i.e. T. Lev. x., xiv.-xvi.; T. Jud. xxii.-xxiii., &c, a large 
interest attaches; for these, like 1 Enoch xci.-civ. and the Psalms 
of Solomon, constitute an unmeasured attack on every office — 
prophetic, priestly and kingly — administered by the Maccabees. 
The ethical character of the book is of the highest type, and its 
profound influence on the writers of the New Testament is yet 
to be appreciated. (See Testaments of the XII. Patriarchs.) 

Psalms of Solomon. — These psalms, in all eighteen, enjoyed 
but small consideration in early times, for only six direct refer- 
ences to them are found in early literature. Their ascription to 
Solomon is due solely to the copyists or translators, for no such 
claim is made in any of the psalms. On the whole, Ryle and 
James are no doubt right in assigning 70-40 B.C. as the limits 
within which the psalms were written. The authors were 
Pharisees. They divide their countrymen into two classes — 
" the righteous," ii. 38-39, iii. 3-5, 7, 8, &c, and " the sinners," 
ii. 38, iii. 13, iv. 9, &c; " the saints," iii. 10, &c, and " the 
transgressors," iv. 11, &c. The former are the Pharisees; the 
latter the Sadducees. They protest against the Asmonaean 
house for usurping the throne of David, and laying violent hands 
on the high priesthood (xvii. 5, 6, 8), and proclaim the coming of 
the Messiah, the Son of David, who is to set all things right and 
establish the supremacy of Israel. Pss. xvii.-xviii. and i.-xvi. 
cannot be assigned to the same authorship. The hopes of the 
Messiah are confined to the former, and a somewhat different 
eschatology underlies the two works. Since the Psalms were 
written in Hebrew, and intended for public worship in the 
synagogues, it is most probable that they were composed in 
Palestine. (See Solomon, The Psalms of.) 

The Assumption of Moses.— This book was lost for many cen- 
turies till a large fragment of it was discovered and published by 
Ceriani in 1861 {Monumenta Sacra, I. i. 55-64) from a palimpsest 
of the 6th century. Very little was known about the contents 
of this book prior to this discovery. The present book is possibly 
the long-lost AiaOrjKrj Mcovaiws mentioned in some ancient 
lists, for it never speaks of the assumption of Moses, but always 
of his natural death. About a half of the original Testament is 
preserved in the Latin version. The latter half probably dealt 
with questions about the creation. With this " Testament " 
the " Assumption," to which almost all the patristic references 
and that of Jude are made, was subsequently edited. The book 
was written between 4 B.C. and a.d. 7. As for the author, he 
was no Essene, for he recognizes animal sacrifices and cherishes 
the Messianic hope; he was not a Sadducee, for he looks forward 
to the establishment of the Messianic kingdom (x.) ; nor a Zealot, 
for the quietistic ideal is upheld (ix.), and the kingdom is estab- 
lished by God Himself (x.). He is therefore a Chasid of the 
ancient type, and glorifies the ideals which were cherished by 
the old Pharisaic party, but which were now being fast disowned 
in favour of a more active role in the political life of the nation. 
He pours his most scathing invectives on the Sadducees, who 
are described in vii. in terms that recall the anti-Sadducean 
Psalms of Solomon. His object, therefore, is to protest against 
the growing secularization of the Pharisaic party through its 
adoption of popular Messianic beliefs and political ideals. (See 
also Moses, Assumption of.) 

Apocalypse of Baruch — The Syriac. — This apocalypse has 
survived only in the Syriac version. The Syriac is a translation 



from the Greek, and the Greek in turn from the Hebrew. The 
book treats of the Messiah and the Messianic kingdom, the woes 
of Israel in the past and the destruction of Jerusalem in the 
present, as well as of theological questions relating to original 
sin, free will, works, &c. The views expressed on several of 
these subjects are often conflicting. We must, therefore, 
assume a number of independent sources put together by 
an editor or else that the book is on the whole the work of 
one author who made use of independent writings but failed 
to blend them into one harmonious whole. In its present form 
the book was written soon after a.d. 70. For fuller treatment 
see Baruch. 

4 Ezra. — This apocryph is variously named. In the first 
Arabic and Ethiopic versions it is called 1 Ezra; in some Latin 
MSS. and in the English authorized version it is 2 Ezra, and in 
the Armenian 3 Ezra. With the majority of the Latin MSS. we 
designate the book 4 Ezra. In its fullest form this apocryph 
consists of sixteen chapters, but i.-ii. and xv.-xvi. are of different 
authorship from each other and from the main work iii.-xiv. 
The book was written originally in Hebrew. There are Latin, 
Syriac, Ethiopic, Arabic (two), and Armenian versions. The 
Greek version is lost. This apocalypse is of very great import- 
ance, on account of its very full treatment of the theological 
questions rife in the latter half of the 1st century of the Christian 
era. The book, even if written by one author, was based on a 
variety of already existing works. It springs from the same 
school of thought as the Apocalypse of Baruch, and its affinities 
with the latter are so numerous and profound that scholars have 
not yet come to any consensus as to the relative priority of either. 
In its present form it was composed a.d. 80-100. For fuller 
treatment see Ezra. 

Apocalypse of Baruch — The Greek.— This work is referred to 
by Origen (de Princip. II. iii. 6) : " Denique etiam Baruch 
prophetae librum in assertionis hujus' testimonium vocant, quod 
ibi de septem mundis vel caelis evidentius indicatur." This 
book survives in two forms in Slavonic and Greek. The former 
was translated by Bonwetsch in 1896, in the Nachrichten von 
der konigl. Ges. der Wiss. zu Gott. pp. 91-101; the latter by 
James in 1897 in Anecdota, ii. 84-94, with an elaborate intro- 
duction (pp. li.-lxxi.). The Slavonic is only of secondary value, 
as it is merely an abbreviated form of the Greek. Even the 
Greek cannot claim to be the original work, but only to be a 
recension of it; for, whereas Origen states that this apocalypse 
contained an account of the seven heavens, the existing Greek 
work describes only five, and the Slavonic only -two. As the 
original, work presupposes 2 Enoch and the Syriac Apocalypse of 
Baruch and was known to Origen, it was written between 
a.d. 80 and 200, and nearer the earlier date than the later, as it 
would otherwise be hard to understand how it came to circulate 
among Christians. The superscription shows points of con- 
nexion with the Rest of the Words of Baruch, but little weight 
can be attached to the fact, since titles and superscriptions 
were so frequently transformed and expanded in ancient times. 
As James and Kohler have pointed out, part of section 4 on the 
Vine is a Christian addition. A German translation of the Greek 
appears in Kautzsch's Apok. u. Pseud, ii. 448-457, and a strong 
article by Kohler on the Jewish authorship of the book in 
the Jewish Encyclopedia, ii. 549-551. (See Baruch.) 

Apocalypse of Abraham. — This book is found only in the 
Slavonic (edited by Bonwetsch, Studien zur Geschichte d. Theo- 
logie und Kirche, 1897), a translation from the Greek. It is of 
Jewish origin, but in part worked over by a Christian reviser. 
The first part treats of Abraham's conversion, and the second 
forms an apocalyptic expansion of Gen. xv. This book was 
possibly known to the author of the Clem. Recognitions, i. 32, 
a passage, however, which may refer to Jubilees. It is most 
probably distinct from the 'Atok6.\v\I/i.s 'AjSpad/z used by the 
gnostic Sethites (Epiphanius,, Haer. xxxix. 5), which was Very 
heretical. On the other hand, it is, probably identical with the 
apocryphal book 'A/3 paa.fi mentioned in the Stichometry of 
Nicephorus, and the Synopsis Athanasii, together with the 
Apocalypses of Enoch, &c. 



APOCALYPTIC LITERATURE 



J73 



Lost Apocalypses: Prayer of Joseph.— The Prayer of Joseph 
is quoted by Origen [Itt Joann. II. xxv, (Lommatzsch, i. 147, 
148); in Gen. III. ix. (Lommatzsch, viii. 30-31)].' The fragments 
in Origen represent Jacob as speaking and claiming to be " the 
first servant in God's presence," " the first-begotten of every 
creature animated by God," and declaring that the angel who 
wrestled with Jacob (and was identified by Christians with 
Christ) was only eighth in rank. The work was obviously 
anti-Christian. (See Schiirer*, iii. 265-266.) 

Book of Eldad and Modad.-— This book was written in the 
name of the two prophets mentioned in Num. xi. 26-29. It 
consisted, according to the Targ. Jon* on Num. xi. 26-20, mainly 
of prophecies on Magog's last attack on Israel. The Shepherd 
of Hermas quotes it Vis. ii. 3. (See Marshall in Hastings' Bible 
Dictionary, i. 677.) 

Apocalypse of Elijah. — This apocalypse is mentioned in two 
of the lists of books. Origen, Ambrosiaster, and Euthalius 
ascribe to it 1 Cor. ii. 9: If they are right, the apocalypse is 
pre- Pauline. The peculiar form in which 1 Cor. ii. 9 appears 
in Clemens Alex. Protrept. x. 94, and the Const. A post. vii. 32, 
shows that both have the same source, probably this apocalypse. 
Epiphanius (Haer. xlii., ed. Oehler, vol. ii. 678) ascribes to this 
work Eph. v. 14. Isr. Levi (Revue des Uudesjuives, 1880, i. 
108 sqq.) argues for the existence of a Hebrew apocalypse of 
Elijah from two Talmudic passages. A late work of this name 
has been published by Jellinek, Bet ha-Midrasch, 1855, iii. 65-68, 
and Buttenwieser in 1 897. Zahn, Gesch. des N. T. Kanons, ii. 801- 
810, assigns this apocalypse to the and century a.d. (See 
Schiirer*. iii. 267-271.) 

Apocalypse of Zephaniah. — Apart from two of the lists this 
work is known to us in its original form only through a citation 
in Clem. Alex. Strom, v. n, 77. A Christian revision of it is 
probably preserved in the two dialects of Coptic. Of these the 
Akhmim text is the original of the Sahidic. These texts and 
their translations have been edited by Steindorff, Die Apokalypse 
des Elias, eine unbekannte Apokalypse und Bruchsliicke der 
Sophonias- Apokalypse (1899). As Schiirer (Theol. Liter alur- 
zeitung, 1899, No. I. 4-8) has shown, these fragments belong 
most probably to the Zephaniah apocalypse. They give descrip- 
tions of heaven and hell, and predictions of the Antichrist. In 
their present form these Christianized fragments are not earlier 
than the 3rd century. (See Schiirer,: Gesch.. des jud. Volkes 3 , 
iii. 271-273.) 

2 Enoch, or the Slavonic Enoch, or the Book of the Secrets of 
Enoch. — This new fragment of theEnochic literaturewas recently 
brought to light through five MSS. discovered in Russia and 
Servia. The book in its present form was written before a.d. 70 
in Greek by an orthodox Hellenistic Jew, who lived in Egypt. 
For a fuller account see Enoch. ' 

Oracles of Hystaspes. — See under N. T. Apocalypses, below. 

Testament of Job. — This book was first printed from one MS. 
by Mai, Script. Vet. Nov. Coll. (1833), VII. i. 180, and translated 
into French in Migne's Diet, des Apocryphes, ii. 403. An 
excellent edition from two MSS. is given by M. R. James, 
Apocrypha Anecdota, ii. pp. lxxii.-cii., 104-137, who holds that the 
book in its present form was written by a Christian Jew in Egypt 
on the basis of a Hebrew Midrash on Job in the 2nd or 3rd cen- 
tury a.d. Kohler (Kohut Memorial Volume, 1897, pp. 264-338) 
has given good grounds for regarding the whole work, with the 
exception of some interpolations, as " one of the most remark- 
able productions of the pre-Christian era, explicable only when 
viewed in the light of Hasidean practice." See Jewish Encycl. 
vii. 200-202. 

Testaments of the III. Patriarchs. — For an account of these 
three Testaments (referred to in the A post. Const, vi. 16), the 
first of which only is preserved in the Greek and is assigned by 
James to the 2nd century a.d., see that scholar's " Testament of 
Abraham," Texts and Studies, ii. 2 (1892), which appears in two 
recensions from six and three MSS. respectively, and Vassiliev's 
Anecdota Graeco-Byzantina (1893), pp. 292-308, from, one MS. 
already used by James. This work was written in Egypt, 
according to James, and survives also in Slavonic, Rumanian, 



Ethiopicj and Arabic' versions. It deals with Abraham's re- 
luctance to die and the means by which his death was brought 
about. James holds that this book is referred to by Origen 
(Horn, in Luc. xxxv.), but this is denied by Schiirer, who also 
questions its Jewish origin. With the exception of chaps. x.-xi., 
it is really a legend and not an apocalypse. An English transla- 
tion of James's texts will be found in the Ante-Nicene Christian 
Library (Clark, 1897), pp. 185-201. The Testaments of Isaac 
and Jacob are still preserved in Arabic and Ethiopic (see James, 
op. cit. 140-161). See Testaments of the III. Patriarchs. 

Sibylline Oracles. — Of the books which have come down to us 
the main part is Jewish, and was written at various . dates, 
iii. 97-829, iv.-v. are decidedly of Jewish authorship, and 
probably xi.-xii., xiv. and parts of i.-ii. The oldest portions are 
in iii., and belong to the 2nd century B.C. , 

III. New Testament Apocalyptic 

When we pass from Jewish literature to that of the New 
Testament, we enter into a new and larger atmosphere at once 
recalling and transcending what had been best in the prophetic 
periods of the past. Again the heavens had opened and the 
divine teaching come to mankind, no longer merely in books 
bearing the names of ancient patriarchs, but ■ on the lips of 
living men, who had taken courage to appear in person as God's 
messengers before His people. But though Christianity was in 
spirit the descendant of ancient Jewish prophecy, it was no less 
truly the child of that Judaism which had expressed its highest 
aspirations and ideals in pseudepigraphic and apocalyptic 
literature. Hence we shall not be surprised to find that' the 
two tendencies are fully represented in primitive Christianity, 
and, still more strange as it may appear, that New Testament 
apocalyptic found a more ready hearing amid the stress and 
storm of the 1st century than the prophetic side of Christianity, 
and that the type of the forerunner on the side of its declared 
asceticism appealed more readily to primitive Christianity than 
that of Him who came " eating and drinking," declaring both 
worlds good and both God's. ■■■■.■/ 

Early Christianity had thus naturally a special fondness for 
this class of literature. It was Christianity that preserved Jewish 
apocalyptic, when it was abandoned by Judaism as it sank into 
Rabbinism, and gave it a Christian character either by a forcible 
exegesis or by a systematic process of interpolation. MdreoVe*; 
it cultivated this form of literature and made it the vehicle of 
its own ideas. Though apocalyptic served its purpose in the 
opening centuries of the Christian era, it must be confessed that 
in many of its aspects its office is transitory, as they belong riot 
to the essence of Christian thought. When once it had taught 
men that the next world was God's world, though it did so at 
the cost of relinquishing the present to Satan, it had achieved 
its real task, and the time had come for it to quit the stage of 
history, when Christianity appeared as the heir of this true 
spiritual achievement. But Christianity was no less assuredly 
the heir of ancient prophecy, and thus as spiritual representative 
of what was true in prophecy and apocalyptic; its essential 
teaching was as that of its Founder that both worlds were of God 
and that both should be made God's; ■ 

(i.) Canonical: — 

Apocalypse in Mark xiii. (Matthew xxiv., Luke xxi.). 

2 Thessalonians ii. 

Revelation. 

(ii.) Extra-Canonical :— 
Apocalypse of Peter. 
Testament of Hezekiah. 
Testament of Abraham. 
Oracles of Hystaspes. 
Vision of Isaiah. 
Shepherd of Hermas. 

5 E2ra. 

6 Ezra. 
Christian Sibyllines. 

Apocalypses of Pa'ul, Thomas and Stephen. 

Apocalypses of Esdras, Paul, John, Peter, The Virgin, 

Sedrach, Daniel. 
Revelations of Bartholomew. 
Questions of Bartholomew. 



t74 



APOCALYPTIC LITERATURE 



Apocalypse in Mark xiii. — According to the teaching of the 
Gospels the second advent was to take the world by surprise. 
Only one passage (Mark xiii. = Matt. xxiv. =Luke xxi.) conflicts 
with this view, and is therefore suspicious. This represents the 
second advent as heralded by a succession of signs which are 
unmistakable precursors of its appearance, such as wars, earth- 
quakes, famines, the destruction of Jerusalem and the like. Our 
suspicion is justified by a further examina tion of Mark xiii. For 
the words " let him that readeth understand " (ver. 14) indicate 
that the prediction referred to appeared first not in a spoken ad- 
dress but in a written form, as was characteristic of apocalypses. 
Again, in ver. 30, it-is declared that this generation shall not pass 
away until all these things be fulfilled, whereas in 32 we have 
an undoubted declaration of Christ " Of that day or of that hour 
knoweth no one, not even the angels in heaven, neither the Son, 
but the Father." On these and other grounds verses 7, 8, 14-20, 
24-27, 30, 31 should be removed from their present context. 
Taken together they constitute a Christian adaptation of an 
originally Jewish work, written a.d. 67-68, during the troubles 
preceding the fall of Jerusalem. The apocalypse consists of 
three Acts: Act i. consisting of verses 7, 8, enumerating the 
woes heralding the parusia, Act ii. describing the actual tribula- 
tion, and Act iii. the parusia itself. (See Wendt, Lehre Jesu, i. 
12-21; Charles, Eschatology, 325 sqq.; H. S. Holtzmann, 
N. T. Theol. 1-325 sqq. with literature there given.) 

2 Thessalonians ii. — The earliest form of Pauline eschatology 
is essentially Jewish. He starts from the fundamental thought 
of Jewish apocalyptic that the end of the world will be brought 
about by the direct intervention of God when evil has reached 
its climax. The manifestation of evil culminates in the Anti- 
christ whose parusia (2 Thess. ii. o) is the Satanic counterfeit of 
that of the true Messiah. But the climax of evil is the immediate 
herald of its destruction; for thereupon Christ will descend from 
heaven and destroy the Antichrist (ii. 8). Nowhere in his later 
epistles does this forecast of the future reappear. Rather under 
the influence of the great formative Christian conceptions he 
parted gradually with the eschatology he had inherited from 
Judaism, and entered on a progressive development, in the course 
of which the heterogeneous elements were for the most part 
silently dropped. 

Revelation. — Since this book is discussed separately we shall 
content ourselves here with indicating a few of the conclusions 
now generally accepted. The apocalypse was written about 
a.d. 96. Its object, like other Jewish apocalypses, was to en- 
courage faith under persecution; its burden is not a call to 
repentance but a promise of deliverance. It is derived from 
one author, who has made free use of a variety of elements, 
some of which are Jewish and consort but ill with their new 
context. The question of the pseudonymity of the book is still 
an open one. 

Apocalypse of Peter. — Till 1892 only some five or more frag- 
ments of this book were known to exist. These are preserved 
in Clem. Alex, and in Macarius Magnes (see Hilgenfeld, N.T. 
extra Can. iv. 74 sqq.; Zahn, Gesch. Kanons, ii. 818-819). It is 
mentioned in the Muratorian Canon, and according to Eusebius 
(H.E. vi. 14. 1) was commented on by Clement of Alexandria. 
In the fragment found at Akhmim there is a prediction of the 
last things, and a vision of the abode and blessedness of the 
righteous, and of the abode and torments of the wicked. 

Testament of Hezekiah. — This writing is fragmentary, and has 
been preserved merely as a constituent of the Ascension of 
Isaiah. To it belongs iii. i3b-iv. 18 of that book. It is found 
under the above name, ALaOriKT] 'Ef &dov, only in Cedrenus i. 1 20- 
121, who quotes partially iv. 12. 14 and refers to iv. 15-18. For 
a full account see Isaiah, Ascension of. 

Testament of Abraham. — This work in two recensions was 
first published by James, Texts and Studies, ii. 2. Its editor is 
of opinion that it was written by a Jewish Christian in Egypt 
in the 2nd century a.d., but that it embodies legends of an earlier 
date, and that it received its present form in the 9th or 10th 
century. It treats of Michaelbeing sent to announce to Abraham 
his death : of the tree speaking with a human voice (iii.) , Michael's 



sojourn with Abraham (iv.-v.) and Sarah's recognition of him as 
one of the three angels, Abraham's refusal to die (vii.), and the 
vision of judgment (x.-xx.). 

Oracles of Hystaspes. — This eschatological work (Xprjaeis 
'Taraairov: so named by the anonymous 5th-century writer in 
Buresch, Klaros, 1889, p. 95) is mentioned in conjunction with 
the Sibyllines by Justin (Apol. i. 20), Clement of Alexandria 
(Strom, vi. 5), and Lactantius (Inst. VII. xv. 19; xviii. 2-3). 
According to Lactantius, it prophesied the overthrow of Rome 
and the advent of Zeus to help the godly and destroy the wicked, 
but omitted all reference to the sending of the Son of God. 
According to Justin, it prophesied the destruction of the world 
by fire. According to the Apocryph of Paul, cited by Clement, 
Hystaspes foretold the conflict of the Messiah with many kings 
and His advent. Finally, an unknown 5th-century writer (see 
Buresch, Klaros, 1889, pp. 87-126) says that the Oracles of 
Hystaspes dealt with the incarnation of the Saviour. The work 
referred to in the last two writers has Christian elements, which 
were absent from it in Lactantius's copy. The lost oracles were 
therefore in all probability originally Jewish, and subsequently 
re-edited by a Christian. 

Vision of Isaiah. — This writing has been preserved in its 
entirety in the Ascension of Isaiah, of which it constitutes 
chaps, vi.-xi. Before its incorporation in the latter work it 
circulated independently in Greek. There are independent 
versions of these chapters in Latin and Slavonic. (See Isaiah, 
Ascension of.) 

Shepherd of Hermas. — In the latter half of the 2nd century 
this book enjoyed a respect bordering on that paid to the writings 
of the New Testament. Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria and 
Origen quote it as Scripture, though in Africa it was not held in 
such high consideration, as Tertullian speaks slightingly of it. The 
writer belongs really to the prophetic and not to the apocalyptic 
school. His book is divided into three parts containing visions, 
commands, similitudes. In incidental allusions he lets us know 
that he had been engaged in trade, that his wife was a termagant, 
and that his children were ill brought up. Various views have 
been held as to the identity of the author. Thus some have 
made him but to be the Hermas to whom salutation is sent at 
the end of the Epistle to the Romans, others that he was the 
brother of Pius, bishop of Rome in the middle of the 2nd century, 
and others that he was a contemporary of Clement, bishop of 
Rome at the close of the 1st century. Zahn fixes the date at 97, 
Salmon a few years later, Lipsius 142. The literature of this 
book (see Hermas, Shepherd of) is very extensive. Among 
the chief editions are those of Zahn, Der Hirt des Hermas (1868) ; 
Gebhardt and Harnack, Patres Apostolici (1877, with full biblio- 
graphical material); Funk, Patres Apost. (1878). Further see 
Harnack, Gesch. d. altchristl. Literatur, i. 49-58; II. i. 257-267, 

437 i- 

5 Ezra. — This book, which constitutes in the later MSS. the 
first two chapters to 4 Ezra, falls obviously into two parts. The 
first (i. 5— ii. 9) contains a strong attack on the Jews whom it 
regards as the people of God; the second (ii. 10-47) addresses 
itself to the Christians as God's people and promises them the 
heavenly kingdom. It is not improbable that these chapters are 
based on an earlier Jewish writing. In its present form it may 
have been written before a.d. 200, though James and other 
scholars assign it to the 3rd century. Its tone is strongly 
anti- Jewish. The style is very vigorous and the materials of 
a strongly apocalyptic character. See Hilgenfeld, Messias 
Judaeorum (1869); James in Bensly's edition of 4 Ezra, pp. 
xxxviii.-lxxx. ; Weinel in Hennecke's N.T. Apokryphen, 331-336. 

6 Ezra.-~- This work consists of chapters xv.-xvi. of 4 Ezra. 
It may have been written as an appendix to 4 Ezra, as it has no 
proper introduction. Its contents relate to the destruction of 
the world through war and natural catastrophes — for the heathen 
a source of menace and fear, but for the persecuted people of God 
one of admonition and comfort. There is nothing specifically 
Christian in the book, which represents a persecution which 
extends over the whole eastern part of the Empire. Moreover, 
the idiom is particularly Semitic. Thus we have xv. 8 nee 



APOCATASTASIS— APOCRYPHAL LITERATURE 



175 



sustinebo in his quae inique exercent, that is a *v:: in qvindicans 
vindicabo: in 22 non parcel dextera mea super peccatores = 
<j>ti<r erai . . . e7ri = Sy . . .Sien\ In verses 9, 19 the manifest 
corruptions may be explicable from a Semitic background. 
There are other Hebraisms in the text. It is true that these 
might have been due to the writer's borrowings from earlier 
Greek works ultimately of Hebrew origin. The date of the book 
is also quite uncertain, though several scholars have ascribed it 
to the 3rd century. 

Christian Sibyllines. — Critics are still at variance as to the 
extent of the Christian Sibyllines. It is practically agreed that 
vi.-viii. are of Christian origin. As for i.-ii., xi.-xiv. most writers 
are in favour of Christian authorship; but not so Geffcken (ed. 
Sibyll., 1902), who strongly insists on the Jewish origin of large 
sections of these books. 

Apocalypses of Paul, Thomas and Stephen. — These are men- 
tioned in the Gelasian decree. The first may possibly be the 
'Avafiariicbv Havkov mentioned by Epiphanius (Haer. xxxviii. 2) 
as current among the Cainites. It is not to be confounded with 
the apocalypse mentioned two sections later. 

Apocalypse of Esdras. — This Greek production resembles the 
more ancient fourth book of Esdras in some respects. The 
prophet is perplexed about the mysteries of life, and questions 
God respecting them. The punishment of the wicked especially 
occupies his thoughts. Since they have sinned in consequence 
of Adam's fall, their fate is considered worse than that of the 
irrational creation. The description of the tortures suffered in 
the infernal regions is tolerably minute. At last the prophet 
consents to give up his spirit to God, who has prepared for him 
a crown of immortality. The book is a poor imitation of the 
ancient Jewish one. It may belong, however, to the 2nd or 3rd 
centuries of the Christian era. See Tischendorf, Apocalypses 
Apocryphae, pp. 24-33. 

Apocalypse of Paul. — This work (referred to by Augustine, 
Tractat. in Joan. 98) contains a description of the things which 
the apostle saw in heaven and hell. The text, as first published 
in the original Greek by Tischendorf {Apocalypses Apocr. 34-69), 
consists of fifty -one chapters, but is imperfect. Internal evidence 
assigns it to the time of Theodosius, i.e. about a.d. 388. Where 
the author lived is uncertain. Dr Perkins found a Syriac MS. 
of this apocalypse, which he translated into English, and printed 
in the Journal of the American Oriental Society, 1864, vol. viii. 
This was republished by Tischendorf below the Greek version in 
the above work. In 1893 the Latin version from one MS. was 
edited by M. R. James, Texts and Studies, ii. 1-42, who shows 
that the Latin version is the completest of the three, and that 
the Greek in its present form is abbreviated. 

Apocalypse of John (Tischendorf, Apocalypses Apocr. 70 sqq.) 
contains a description of the future state, the general resurrection 
and judgment, with an account of the punishment of the wicked, 
as well as the bliss of the righteous. It appears to be the work 
of a Jewish Christian. The date is late, for the writer speaks of 
the " venerable and holy images," as well as " the glorious and 
precious crosses and the sacred things of the churches " (xiv.), 
which points to the 5 th century, when such things were first 
introduced into churches. It is a feeble imitation of the canonical 
apocalypse. 

Arabic Apocalypse of Peter contains a narrative of events from 
the foundation of the world till the second advent of Christ. 
The book is said to have been written by Clement, Peter's 
disciple. This Arabic work has not been printed, but a summary 
of the contents is given by Nicoll in his catalogue of the Oriental 
MSS. belonging to the Bodleian (p. 49, xlviii.). There are 
eighty-eight chapters. It is a late production; for Ishmaelites 
are spoken of, the Crusades, and the taking of Jerusalem. See 
Tischendorf, Apocalypses Apocr. pp. xx.-xxiv. 

The Apocalypse of the Virgin, containing her descent into hell, 
is not published entire, but only several portions of it from Greek 
MSS. in different libraries, by Tischendorf in his Apocalypses 
Apocryphae, pp. 95 sqq.; James, Texts and Studies, ii. 3. 109-126. 

Apocalypse of Sedrach. — This late apocalypse, which M. R. 
James assigns to the 10th or nth century, deals with the subject 



of intercession for sinners and Sedrach's unwillingness to die. 
See James, Texts and Studies,ii. 3. 127-137. 

Apocalypse of Daniel. ■ — See Vassiliev's Anecdota Graeco- 
Byzantina (Moscow, 1893), pp. 38-44; Uncanonical Books of the 
Old Testament (Venice, 1901), pp. 237 sqq., 387 sqq. 

The Revelations of Bartholomew.— Dulaurier published from a 
Parisian Sahidic MS., subjoining a French translation, what is 
termed a fragment of the apocryphal revelations of St Bartholo- 
mew {Fragment des revelations apocryphes de Saint BarthMemy, 
6"c., Paris, 1835), and of thehistory of the religious communities 
founded by St Pachomius. After narrating the pardon obtained 
by Adam, it is said that the Son ascending from Olivet prays the 
Father on behalf of His apostles; who consequently receive 
consecration from the Father, together with the Son and Holy 
Spirit — Peter being made archbishop of the universe. The late 
date of the production is obvious. 

Questions of St Bartholomew.--— See Vassiliev, Anec. Graeco- 
Byzantina (1893), pp. 10-22. The introduction, which is wanting 
in the Greek MS., has been supplied by a Latin translation from 
the Slavonic version (see pp. vii.-ix.). The book contains dis- 
closures by Christ, the Virgin and Beliar and much of the subject- 
matter is ancient. (R. H. C.) 

APOCATASTASIS, a Greek word, meaning " re-establish- 
ment," used as a technical scientific term for a return to a 
previous position or condition. 

APOCRYPHAL LITERATURE. The history of the earlier 
usage of the term "Apocrypha" (from awoKpinrreiv, to hide) 
is not free from obscurity. We shall therefore enter at once on 
a short account of the origin of this literature in Judaism, of its 
adoption by early Christianity, of the various meanings which 
the term " apocryphal " assumed in the course of its history, 
and having so done we shall proceed to classify and deal with the 
books that belong to this literature. The word most generally 
denotes writings which claimed to be, or were by certain sects 
regarded as, sacred scriptures although excluded from the 
canonical, scriptures. 

Apocrypha in Judaism. — Certain circles in Judaism, as the 
Essenes in Palestine (Josephus, B.J. ii. 8. 7) and the Therapeutae 
(Philo, De Vita Contempt, ii. 475, ed. Mangey) in Egypt possessed 
a secret literature. But such literature was not confined to the 
members of these communities, but had been current among the 
Chasids and their successors the Pharisees. 1 To this literature 
belong essentially the apocalypses which were published in fast 
succession from Daniel onwards. These works bore, perforce, the 
names of ancient Hebrew worthies in order to procure them a 
hearing among the writers' real contemporaries. To reconcile 
their late appearance with their claims to primitive antiquity 
the alleged author is represented as " shutting up and sealing " 
(Dan. xii. 4, 9) the book, until the time of its fulfilment had 
arrived; for that it was not designed for his own generation 
but for far-distant ages ( 1 Enochi. 2, cviii. 1.; Ass. Mos. i. 16, 17). 
It is not improbable that with many Jewish enthusiasts this 
literature was more highly treasured than the canonical scrip- 
tures. Indeed, we have a categorical statement to this effect in 
4 Ezra xiv. 44 sqq., which tells how Ezra was inspired to dictate 
the sacred scriptures which had been destroyed in the overthrow 
of Jerusalem: " In forty days they wrote ninety-four books: 
and it came to pass when the forty days were fulfilled that the 
Highest spake, saying : the first that thou hast written publish 
openly that the worthy and unworthy may read it; but keep the 
seventy last that thou mayst deliver them only to such as be 
wise among the people; for in them is the spring of understand- 
ing, the: fountain: of wisdom and the stream of knowledge." 
Such esoteric books are apocryphal in the original conception 
of the term. In due course the Jewish authorities were forced 
to draw up a canon or book of sacred scriptures, and mark them 
off from those which claimed to be such without justification. 

1 Judaism was long accustomed to lay claim to an esoteric tradition. 
Thus though it insisted on the exclusive canonicity of the 24 books, 
it claimed the possession of an oral law handed down from Ivloses, 
and just as the apocryphal books overshadowed in certain instances 
the Canonical scriptures, so often the oral law displaced the written 
in the regard of Judaism. 



176 



APOCRYPHA!. /LM/ERAORURE 



The true scriptures, according to the Jewish canon (Yad. iii. 5;. 
Toseph. Yad. ii. 3), were those which defiled the hands of such as 
touched them. But other scholars, such as Zahn, Schurer, Porter, 
state that the secret books with which we have been dealing 
formed a class by themselves and were called " Genuizim " 
(o't:j), and that this name and idea passed from Judaism 
over into the Greek, and that airoupv^a. j9t(8X(a is a translation 
of emu d'tbd. But the Hebrew verb does not mean "to 
hide " but " to store away," and is only used, of things in them- 
selves precious. Moreover, the phrase is unknown in Talmudic 
literature. The derivation of this idea from Judaism has there- 
fore not yet been established. Whether the Jews had any distinct 
name for these esoteric works we do not know. For writings that 
stood wholly without the pale of sacred books such as the books 
of heretics or Samaritans they used the designation Hisonim, 
Sanh. x. 1 (s'jixn d'ibd and o>j»n ibb). To this class in later 
times even Sirach was relegated, and indeed all books not in- 
cluded in the canon (Midr. r. Num. 14 and on Xoheleth xii. 12; 
cf. Jer. Sabb. 16). l In Aqiba's time Sirach and other apocryphal 
books were not reckoned among the Hisonim; for Sirach was 
largely quoted by rabbis in Palestine tiH the 3rd century a.d. 

Apocrypha in Christianity. — Christianity as it springs from its 
Founder had no secret or esoteric teaching. . It%as essentially 
the revelation or manifestation of the truth of- God. But as 
Christianity took its origin from Judaism, it is not unnatural 
that a large body of Jewish ideas wasincorpbratfedSfi thesystem 
of Christian thought. The bulk of these in due course underwent 
transformation either complete or partial, but there was always 
a residuum of incongruous and inconsistent elements existingiside 
by side with the essential truths of Christianity. This * was no 
isolated phenomenon; for in every progressive period of the 
history of religion we have on the one side the doctrine of God 
advancing in depth and fulness: on the other we have cosmo- 
logical, eschatological and other survivals, which, ' however 
justifiable in earlier stages, are in unmistakable antagonism with 
the theistic beliefs of the time. The eschatology of a nationrr-and 
the most influential portion of Jewish and Christian apocrypha 
are eschatological — -is always the last part of their' religion to 
experience the transforming power of new ideas and new 
facts. ■ 

Now the current religious literature of Judaism outside the 
canon was composed of apocryphal books, the bulk of which 
bore an apocalyptic character, and dealt with the coming 'of 
the Messianic kingdom. These naturally became the popular 
religious books of the rising Jewish-Christian communities; and 
were held by them in still higher esteem, if possible, than by the 
Jews. Occasionally these Jewish writings were re-edited or 
adapted to their new readers by Christian additions, but oh the 
whole it was found sufficient to submit them to a system of 
reinterpretation in order to make them testify to the truth of 
Christianity and foreshadow its ultimate destinies. Christianity, 
moreover, moved by the same apocalyptic tendency as Judaism, 
gave birth to new Christian apocryphs, though, in the case of most 
of them, the subject matter was to a large extent traditional and 
derived from Jewish sources. 

Another prolific source of apocryphal gospels, acts and 
apocalypses was Gnosticism. While the characteristic features 
of apocalyptic literature were derived from Judaism, those of 
Gnosticism sprang partly from Greek philosophy, partly from 
oriental religions. They insisted on an allegorical interpretation 
of the apostolic writings : they alleged themselves to be the 
guardians of a secret apostolic tradition and laid claim to pro- 
phetic inspiration. With them, as with the bulk of < the Christians 
of the 1st and 2nd centuries, apocryphal books as such were 
highly esteemed. They were so designated by those who valued 
them. It was not till later times that the term became One 
of reproach. 

We have remarked above that the Jewish apocrypha-^-especi- 

ally the apocalyptic section and the host of Christian apocryphs — . 

became the ordinary religious literature of the early Christians. 

And this is not strange seeing that of the former such abundant 

1 See Porter in Hastings' Bible Diet. i. 113. 



use was made by the writers of the New Testament. 2 Thus. Jude 
quotes, the Book of Enoch by name, while undoubted use .of this 
book appears in the four gospels and 1 Peter. The influence of 
the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs is still more apparent 
in the Pauline : Epistles and the Gospels, and the same holds 
true of Jubilees and the Assumption of Moses, though in a very 
slight degree. The genuineness and inspiration of Enoch were 
believed in by the writer of the Ep. of Barnabas, Irenaeus, 
Tertullian and Clement of Alexandria. But the high position 
which apocryphal books occupied in the first two centuries was 
undermined by a variety of influences. All claims to the posses- 
sion of a secret tradition were denied (Irenaeus ii. 27. 2, iii. 2. 1, 
3. 1; Tertullian, Praescript. 22-27): true inspiration was limited 
to the apostolic age, and universal acceptance by the church 
was required as a proof of apostolic authorship. Under the 
action of such principles apocryphal books tended to pass 
into the class of spurious and heretical writings. ■ 

The Term "Apocryphal." — Turning now to the consideration 
of the word " apocryphal " itself, we find that in its earliest use 
it was applied in a laudatory sense to writings,; (1) which were 
kept secret because they were the vehicles of esoteric knowledge 
which was too profound or too sacred to be imparted to any save 
the initiated. Thus it occurs in a magical book of Moses, which 
hasheen edited from a Leiden papyrus of the 3rd or 4th century 
by Dieterich {Abraxas, 109). This book, which may be as old as 
the 1st century, is entitled: " A holy and secret Book of Moses, 
called eighth, or holy " (Mtowreow Upa /3i/3Xos air6Kpv<t>os 
tirikuXovfiiwi frySorifj ayia). The disciples of the Gnostic Prodicus 
boasted (Clem. Alex. Strom, i. 15. 69) that they possessed the 
secret (aTOKpvQovs) books of Zoroaster. 4 Ezra is in its author's 
view; a secret work whose value was greater than that of the 
canonical scriptures (xiv. 44 sqq.) because of its transcendent 
revelations of the future. It is in a like laudatory meaning that 
Gregory reckons the New Testament apocalypse as h> airoicpb<f>ois 
(Or'atiovn suam ordinationem, iii. 549, ed. Migne; cf. Epiphanius, 
Haer. Ii. 3). The word enjoyed high consideration among the 
Gnostics (cf. Acts of Thomas, 10, 27, 44). (2) But the word was 
applied to writings ttot were kept from public circulation not 
because of their transcendent, but of, their secondary or question- 
able value. Thus Origen distinguishes between writings which 
were- read by the churches and apocryphal writings; ypatbjj 
pj) <j)epop,e»V fitv h> toIs Koivdis Kal SeBrmoativfiivois 
/3t/3Xtots uk6s 6' on hi a.iroicpv(f>ois' (hepo/thy (Origen's Comm. 
in Malt., x. 18, on Matt. xiii. 57, ed. Lommatzsch iii. 49 sqq.). 
Cf. Epist. ad Africam, ix. (Lommatzsch xvii. 31): Euseb. H.E. ii. 
23, 255 iii. 3, 6. See Zahn, Gesch. Kdnons, i. 126 sqq. Thus the 
meaning of airoicpvcbosis here practically equivalent to "excluded 
from the public use of the church," and prepares the way for the 
third and unfavourable sense of this word. (3) The word came 
finally to mean what is false, spurious, bad, heretical. If we 
may trust the text, this meaning appears in Origen (Prolog, in 
Cant. Cantic, Lommatzsch xiv. 325): " De scripturis his, quae 
appellantur apocryphae, pro eo quod multa in iis corrupta et 
contra fideiri veram inveniuntur a majoribus tradita non placuit 
iis dari locum nee admitti ad auctoritatem." 

In addition to the above three meanings strange uses of the 
term appear in the western church. Thus the Gelasian Decree 
includes the works of Eusebius, Tertullian and Clement of 
Alexandria, under this designation. Augustine ( De Civ. Dei, 
xv. 23) explains it as meaning obscurity of origin, while Jerome 
(Prdogus Galeatus) declares that all books outside the Hebrew 
canoribelong to this class of apocrypha. Jerome's practice, 
however, did not square with his theory. The western church 
did not accept Jerome ? s definition of apocrypha, but retained the 
word in its original meaning, though great confusion prevailed. 
Thus the degree of estimation in which the apocryphal books 
have been held in the church has varied much according to place 
and time. As they stood in the Septuagint or Greek canon, along 

* The New Testament shows undoubtedly an acquaintance with 
several of the apocryphal books. Thus James i. 19 shows depend- 
ence oh Sirach v. 11, Hebrews i. 3 oil Wisdom vii. 26, Romans ix. 21 
on Wisdom xv. 7, 2 Cor. V. I, 4 on Wisdom ix. 15, &c. 



APOCRYPHAL LITERATURE 



177 



with the other books, and with no marks of distinction, they were 
practically employed by the Greek Fathers in the same way as 
the other books; hence Origen, Clement and others often cite 
them as "scripture," "divine scripture," "inspired," and the 
like. On the other hand, teachers connected with Palestine, and 
familiar with the Hebrew canon, rigidly exclude all but the books 
contained there. This view is reflected, for example, in the 
canon of Melito of Sardis, and in the prefaces and letters of 
Jerome. Augustine, however (De Doct. Christ, ii. 8), attaches 
himself to the other side. Two well-defined views in this way 
prevailed, to which was added a third, according to which the 
books, though not to be put in the same rank as the canonical 
scriptures of the Hebrew collection, yet were of value for moral 
uses and to be read in congregations, — and hence they were 
called "ecclesiastical" — a designation first found in Rufinus 
(ob. 410). Notwithstanding the decisions of some councils held 
in Africa, which were in favour of the view of Augustine, these 
diverse opinions regarding the apocryphal books continued to 
prevail in the church down through the ages till the great dog- 
matic era of the Reformation. At that epoch the same three 
opinions were taken up and congealed into dogmas, which may 
be considered characteristic of the churches adopting them. In 
1546 the council of Trent adopted the canon of Augustine, 
declaring " He is also to be anathema who does not receive these 
entire books, with all their parts, as they have been accustomed 
to be read in the Catholic Church, and are found in the ancient 
editions of the Latin Vulgate, as sacred and canonical." The 
whole of the books in question, with the exception of 1st and 
2nd Esdras, and the Prayer of Manasses, were declared canonical 
at Trent. On the other hand, the Protestants universally 
adhered to the opinion that only the books in the Hebrew 
collection are canonical. Already Wycliffe had declared that 
" whatever book is in the Old Testament besides these twenty- 
five (Hebrew) shall be set among the apocrypha, that is, without 
authority or belief." Yet among the churches of the Reforma- 
tion a milder and a severer view prevailed regarding the apocry- 
pha. Both in the German and English translations (Luther's, 
1537; Coverdale's, 1535, &c.) these books are separated from 
the others and set by themselves; but while in some confessions, 
e.g. the Westminster, a decided judgment is passed On them, 
that they are not " to be any otherwise approved or made use 
of than other human writings," a milder verdict is expressed 
regarding them in many other quarters, e.g. in the " argument " 
prefixed to them in the Geneva Bible; in the Sixth Article of the 
Church of England, where it is said that " the other books the 
church doth read for example of life and instruction of manners," 
though not to establish doctrine; and elsewhere. 

Old Testament Apocryphal Books 
We shall now proceed to enumerate the apocryphal books: 
first the Apocrypha Proper, and next the rest of the Old and 
New Testament apocryphal literature. 

1. The Apocrypha Proper, or the apocrypha of the Old 
Testament as used by English-speaking Protestants, consists of 
the following books: 1 Esdras, 2 Esdras, Tobit, Judith, Additions 
to Esther, Wisdom of Solomon, Ecclesiasticus, Baruch, Epistle 
of Jeremy, Additions to Daniel (Song of the Three Holy Children, 
History of Susannah, and Bel and the Dragon), Prayer of 
Manasses, 1 Maccabees, 2 Maccabees. Thus the Apocrypha 
Proper constitutes the surplusage of the Vulgate or Bible of the 
Roman Church over the Hebrew Old Testament. Since this 
surplusage is in turn derived from the Septuagint, from which 
the old Latin version was translated, it thus follows that the 
difference between the Protestant and the Roman Catholic Old 
Testament is, roughly speaking, traceable to, the, difference 
between the Palestinian and the Alexandrian canons of the Old 
Testament. But this is only true with certain reservations; 
for the Latin Vulgate was revised by Jerome according to the 
Hebrew, and, where Hebrew originals were wanting, according to 
the Septuagint. Furthermore, the Vulgate rejects 3 and 4 
Maccabees and Psalm cli., which generally appear in the Septua- 
gint, while the Septuagint and Luther's Bible reject 4 Ezra, 



which is found in the Vulgate and the Apocrypha. Proper. 
Luther's Bible, moreover, rejects also 3 Ezra. It should further 
be observed that the Vulgate adds the Prayer of Manasses and 
3 and 4 Ezra after the New Testament as apocryphal. 

It is hardly possible to form any classification which is not 
open to some objection. In any case the classification must be 
to some extent provisional, since scholars are still divided as to 
the original language, date and place of composition of some of 
the books which must come under our classification. 1 We may, 
however, discriminate (i.) the Palestinian and (ii.) the Hellenistic 
literature of the Old Testament, though even this distinction is 
open to serious objections. The former literature was generally 
written in Hebrew or Aramaic, and seldom in Greek; the latter 
naturally in Greek. Next, within these literatures we shall 
distinguish three or four classes according to the nature of the 
subject with which they deal. Thus the books of which we 
have to treat will be classed as: (a) Historical, (J) Legendary 
(Haggadic), (c) Apocalyptic, (d) Didactic or Sapiential. 
The Apocrypha Proper then would be classified as follows: — 
i. Palestinian Jewish Literature : : — 

(a) Historical. (c) Apocalyptic. 

1 (i.e. 3) Ezra. 2 (i.e. 4) Ezra (see also 

1 Maccabees. under separate article 

on Apocalyptic Lit- 



erature. 
(d) Didactic, 

Sirach (see Ecclesias- 

TICUS). 

Tobit. 



(b) Legendary. 

Book of Baruch (see 

Baruch). 
Judith. 

ii. Hellenistic Jewish Literature: — 

Historical and Legendary. Didactic. 

Additions to Daniel (q.v.). Book of Wisdom (see Wis- 

,, ' ,, Esther (q.v.). dom, Book of.) 

Epistle of Jeremy (q.v.). 
2 Maccabees (q.v.). 
Prayer of Manasses (see Manasses). 

Since, all these books are dealt with in separate articles, they 
call for: no further notice here. 

Literature. — Texts : — Holmes and Parsons, Vet. Test. Graecum 
cumvar. lectionibtis (Oxford, 1798-1827); Swete, Old Testament in 
Greek, i.-iii. (Cambridge, 1887-1894); Fritzsche, Libri Apocryphi 
V. T. Graece (1871). Commentaries: — O. F. Fritzsche and Grimm, 
Kurzgef: exegtt. Handbuch zu den Apok. des A.T. (Leipzig, 1851- 
1.860) I'E.C. Bissellj Apocrypha of the Old Testament (Edinburgh, 
1880),; Zockler, Apok. des A.T, ■ (Miinchen, 1891); Wace, , The 
Apocrypha, (" Speaker's Commentary") (1888). Introduction and 
General Literature: — E. Schiirer 3 , Geschichte des jiid. Volkes, vol. iii. 
l 35 sqq., and his article on " Apokryphen " in Herzog's RealencyUl 
i. 622^653; Porter in Hastings' Bible Die. i. m-123. 

2(a). Other Old Testament Apocryphal Literature: — 

(a) Historical. (c) Apocalyptic. 
History of Johannes Hyr- (See separate article.) 

, canus. 

(b) Legendary. (d) Didactic or Sapiential* 
Book of Jubilees. Pirke Aboth. 
Paralipomena Jeremiae, or 

the Rest of the Words 

of Baruch. 
Martyrdom of Isaiah. 
Pseudo-Philo's Liber 

Antiquitatutn. \ ■ 

Books of Adam. 

Jannes and Jambres. 
oseph and Asenath. 

, (a) Historical. — The History of Johannes , Hyrcanus is meni- 
tioned in 1 Mace. xvi. 23-24, but no trace has been discovered 
of its existence elsewhere. It must have early passed out of 
circulation, as it was unknown to Josephus. , 

. {b) Legendary. — The Book of Jubilees was written in Hebrew 
by a Pharisee between the year of the accession of Hyrcanus to 
the high-priesthood in 135 and his breach with the Pharisees 
some;years before his death in 105 B.C. Jubilees was translated 
into Greek and from Greek into Ethiopk and Latin. It is 
1 Thus some of the additions to Daniel and the Prayer of Manasses 
are most probably derived from a Semitic original written in Pales- 
tine, yet in compliance with the prevailing opinion they are classed 
under Hellenistic Jewish literature. Again, the Slavonic Enoch 
goes back undoubtedly in parts to a Semitic original, though most 
of it was written by a Greek Jew in Egypt. 



17 



8 



APOCRYPHAL LITERATURE 



preserved in its entirety only in Ethiopic. Jubilees is the most 
advanced pre-Christian representative of the midrashic. tend- 
ency, which was already at work in the Old Testament i and 2 
Chronicles. As the chronicler rewrote the history of Israel and 
Judah from the basis of the Priests' Code, so our author re-edited 
from the Pharisaic standpoint of his time the book of Genesis and 
the early chapters of Exodus. Etys work constitutes an enlarged 
targum on these books, and its object is to prove the everlasting 
validity of the law, which, though revealed in time, was superior 
to time. Writing in the palmiest days of the Maccabean 
dominion, he looked for the immediate advent of the Messianic 
kingdom. This kingdom was to be ruled over by a Messiah 
sprung not from Judah but from Levi, that is, from the reigning 
Maccabean family. This kingdom was to be gradually realized 
on earth, the transformation of physical nature going hand in 
hand with the ethical transformation of man. (For a fuller 
account see Jubilees, Book of.) 

Paralipomena Jeremiae, or the Rest of the Words of Baruch.- — • 
This book has been preserved in Greek, Ethiopic, Armenian and 
Slavonic. The Greek was first printed at Venice in 1609, and 
next by Ceriani in 1868 under the title Paralipomena Jeremiae. 
It bears the same name in the Armenian, but in Ethiopic it is 
known by the second title. (See under Baruch.) 

Martyrdom of Isaiah. — This Jewish work has been in part 
preserved in the Ascension of Isaiah. To it belong i. 1, 2 , 6 i '-i3 a ; 
ii. 1-8, 10-iii. 12; v. i c -i4 of that book. It is of Jewish origin, 
and recounts the martyrdom of Isaiah at the hands of Manasseh. 
(See Isaiah, Ascension of.) 

Pseudo-Philo's Liber Antiquitatum Biblicarum. — Though the 
Latin version of this book was thrice printed in the 16th century 
(in 1527, 1550 and 1500)1 it was practically unknown to modern 
scholars till it was recognized by Conybeare and discussed by 
Cohn in the Jewish Quarterly Review, 1898, pp. 279-332. It is 
an Haggadic revision of the Biblical history from Adam to the 
death of Saul. Its chronology agrees frequently with the LXX. 
against that of the Massoretic text, though conversely in a few 
cases. The Latin is undoubtedly translated from the Greek. 
Greek words are frequently transliterated. While the LXX. is 
occasionally followed in its translation of Biblical passages, in 
others the Massoretic is followed against the LXX., and in one 
or two passages the text presupposes a text different from both. 
On many grounds Cohn infers a Hebrew original. The escha- 
tology is similar to that taught in the similitudes of the Book of 
Enoch. In fact, Eth. En. Ii. 1 is reproduced in this connexion. 
Prayers of the departed are said to be valueless. The book was 
written after a.d. 70; for, as Cohn has shown, the exact date of 
the fall of Herod's temple is predicted. 

Life of Adam and Eve. — Writings dealing with this subject 
are extant in Greek, Latin, Slavonic, Syriac, Armenian and 
Arabic. They go back undoubtedly to a Jewish basis, but in 
some of the forms in which they appear at present they are 
christianized throughout. The- oldest and for the most part 
Jewish portion of this literature is preserved to us in Greek, 
Armenian, Latin and Slavonic, (i.) The Greek kayy-qais irepl 
'ASdji /cat Euas (published under the misleading title 'A7roKdXui/<is 
Mcuwrccos in Tischendorf's Apocalypses Apocryphae, 1866) deals 
with the Fall and the death of Adam and Eve. Ceriani edited this 
text from a Milan MS. (Monumenta Sacra et Prof ana, v. 1). 
This work is found also in Armenian, and has been published 
by the Mechitharist community in Venice in their Collection of 
Uncanonical Writings of the Old Testament, and translated by 
Conybeare {Jewish Quarterly Review, vii. 216 sqq., 1895), and by 
Issaverdens in 1901. (ii.) The Vita Adae et Evae is closely related 
and in part identical with (i.). It was printed by W. Meyer in 
Abh. d. Munch. Akad., Philos.-philol. CI. xiv., 1878. (iii.) The 
Slavonic Adam book was published by Jajid along with a Latin 
translation (Denkschr. d. Wien. Akad. d. Wiss. xlii., 1893). 
This version agrees for the most part with (i.). It has, moreover, 
a section, §§ 28-39, which though not found in (i.) is found in (ii.). 
Before we discuss these three documents we shall mention other 
members of this literature, which, though derivable ultimately 
from Jewish sources, are Christian in their present form, (iv.) 



The Book of Adam and Eve, also called the Conflict of Adam and 
Eve with Satan, translated from the Ethiopic (1882) by Malan. 
This was first translated by Dillmann (Das christl. Adambuch 
des Morgenlandes, 1853), and the Ethiopic book first edited by 
Trump {Abh. d. Miinch. Akad. xv., 1870-1881). (v.) A Syriac 
work entitled Die Schalzhohle translated by Bezold from three 
Syriac MSS. in 1883 and subsequently edited in Syriac in 1888. 
This work has close affinities to (iv.), but is said by Dillmann to 
be more original, (vi.) Armenian books on the Death of Adam 
(Uncanonical Writings of O.T. pp. 84 sqq., 1901, translated from 
the Armenian), Creation and Transgression of Adam (op. cit. 
39 sqq.), Expulsion of Adam from Paradise (op. cit. 47 sqq.), 
Penitence of Adam and Eve (op. cit. 71 sqq.) are mainly later 
writings from Christian hands. 

Returning to the question of the Jewish origin of i., ii., iii., we 
have already observed that these spring from a common original. 
As to the language of this original, scholars are divided. The 
evidence, however, seems to be strongly in favour of Hebrew. 
How otherwise are we to explain such Hebraisms (or Syriacisms) 
as iv$ pkei to iXaiov 4£ ovtoO (§ 9), ov tltav . . . n't] (bayetv air' 
awov (§ 21). For others see §§ 23, 35. Moreover, as Fuchs 
has pointed out, in the words tcrfl ec /zaraiois addressed to 
Eve (§ 25) there is a corruption of D'^an into o'^an. Thus 
the words were: " Thou shalt have pangs." In fact, Hebraisms 
abound throughout this book. (See Fuchs, Apok. u. Pseud, 
d. A.T. ii. 511; Jewish Encyc. i. 179 sq.) 

Jannes and Jambres. — These two men are referred to in 
2 Tim. iii. 8 as the Egyptian magicians who withstood Moses. 
The book which treats of them is mentioned by Origen (ad 
Matt, xxiii. 37 and xxvii. 9 [Jannes et Mambres Liber]), and in 
the Gelasian Decree as the Paenitentia Jamnis et Mambre. The 
names in Greek are generally 'lavvrjs naX 'Ia/ij3pi?s ( = Dn20'i b<j<) 
as in the Targ.-Jon. on Exod. i. 15; vii. n. In the Talmud 
they appear as Kioai <jni\ Since the western text of 2 Tim. iii. 8 
has MafiPprjs, Westcott and Hort infer that this form was derived 
from a Palestinian source. These names were known not only 
to Jewish but also to heathen writers, such as Pliny and Apuleius. 
The book, therefore, may go back to pre-Christian times. (See 
Schtirer 3 iii. 292-294; Ency. Biblica, ii. 2327-2329.) 

Joseph and Asenath. — The statement in Gen. xli. 45, 50 that 
Joseph married the daughter of a heathen priest naturally gave 
offence to later Judaism, and gave rise to the fiction that Asenath 
was really the daughter of Shechem and Dinah, and only the 
foster-daughter of Potipherah (Targ.-Jon. on Gen. xli. 45; 
Tractat. Sopherim, xxi. 9; Jalkut Shimoni, c. 134. See Oppen- 
heim, Fabula Josephi et Asenethae, 1886, pp. 2-4). Origen also 
was acquainted with some form of the legend (Selecta in Genesin, 
ad Gen. xli. 45, ed. Lommatzsch, viii, 89-90). The Christian 
legend, which is no doubt in the main based on the Jewish, is 
found in Greek, Syriac, Armenian, Slavonic and Medieval Latin. 
Since it is not earlier than the 3rd or 4th century, it will be 
sufficient here to refer to Smith's Diet, of Christ. Biog. i. 176-177; 
Hastings' Bible Diet. i. 162-163; Schurer, iii. 289-291. 

(d) Didactic or Sapiential. — The Pirke A both, a collection of 
sayings of the Jewish Fathers, are preserved in the 9th Tractate 
of the Fourth Order of the Mishnah. They are attributed to 
some sixty Jewish teachers, belonging for the most part to the 
years a.d. 70-170, though a few of them are of a much earlier 
date. The book holds the same place in rabbinical literature as 
the Book of Proverbs in the Bible. The sayings are often 
admirable. Thus in iv. 1-4, "Who is wise? He that learns 
from every man. . . . Who is mighty? He that subdues his 
nature, ... Who is rich? He that is contented with his lot. 
. . . Who is honoured? He that honours mankind." (See 
further Pirke Aboth.) 

2 (b). New Testament Apocryphal Literature:— 

(a) Gospels: — 

Uncanonical sayings of the Lord in Christian and Jewish 

writings. 
Gospel according to the Egyptians. 

,, ,, ,, Hebrews. 

Protevangel of James. 



APOCRYPHAL LITERATURE 



179 



Gospel of Nicodemus. 
„ Peter. 
,, „ Thomas. 
,, ,, the Twelve. 

Gnostic gospels of Andrew, Apelles, Barnabas, Bartholo- 
mew, Basilides, Cerinthus and some seventeen others. 

(b) Acts and Teachings of the Apostles: — 

Acts of Andrew and later forms of these Acts. 

,, John. 

„ Paul. 
Peter. 
Preaching of Peter. 
Acts of Thomas. 

Teaching of the Twelve Apostles. 
Apostolic constitutions. 

(c) Epistles: — 

The Abgar Epistles. 
Epistle of Barnabas. 

., ,, Clement. 
" Clement's " 2nd Epistle of the Corinthians. 

„ Epistles on Virginity. 

,, ,, to James. 

Epistles of Ignatius. 
Epistle of Polycarp. 

Pauline Epp. to the Laodiceans and Alexandrians. 
3 Pauline Ep. to the Corinthians. 

(d) Apocalypses : see under Apocalyptic Literature. 

(a) Gospels. — Uncanonical Sayings of the Lord in Christian 
and Jewish Sources. — Under the head of canonical sayings not 
found in the Gospels only one is found, i.e. that in Acts xx. 35. 
Of the rest the uncanonical sayings have been collected by 
Preuschen (Reste der ausserkanonischen Evangelien, 1001, pp. 
44-47). A different collection will be found in Hennecke, 
NTliche Apok. 9-1 1. The same subject is dealt with in the 
elaborate volumes of Resch (Aussercanonische Paralleltexte zu 
den Evangelien, vols, i.-iii., 1893-1895). 

To this section belongs also the Fayum Gospel Fragment and the 
Logia published by Grenfell and Hunt. 1 The former contains 
two sayings of Christ and one of Peter, such as we find in the 
canonical gospels, Matt. xxvi. 31-34, Markxiv. 27-30. Thepapy- 
rus, which is of the 3rd century, was discovered by Bickell among 
the Rainer collection, who characterized it (Z. f. kath. Theol., 
1885, pp. 498-504) as a fragment of one of the primitive gospels 
mentioned in Luke i. 1. On the other hand, it has been contended 
that it is merely a fragment of an early patristic homily. (See 
Zahn, Gesch. Kanons, ii. 780-790; Harnack, Texte und Unter- 
suchungen, v. 4; Preuschen, op. cit. p. 19.) The Logia (q.v.) is 
the name given to the sayings contained in a papyrus leaf, by 
its discoverers Grenfell and Hunt. They think the papyrus 
was probably written about a.d. 200. According to Harnack, 
it is an extract from the Gospel of the Egyptians. All the passages 
referring to Jesus in the Talmud are given by Laible, Jesus 
Christus im Talmud, with an appendix, " Die talmudischeri 
Texte," by G. Dalman (2nd ed. 1901). The first edition of this 
work was translated into English by A. W. Streane (Jesus Christ 
in the Talmud, 1893). In Hennecke's NTliche Apok. Handbuch 
(pp.47-71) there is a valuable study of this question by A. Meyer, 
entitled Jesus, Jesu Jiinger und das Evangelium im Talmud und 
verwandten jiidischen Schriflen, to which also a good bibliography 
of the subject is prefixed. 

Gospel according to the Egyptians. — This gospel is first men- 
tioned by Clem. Alex. (Strom, iii. 6. 45; 9. 63, 66; 13. 92), 
subsequently by Origen (Horn, in Luc. i.) and Epiphanius 
(Haer. Ixii. 2), and a fragment is preserved in the so-called 
2 Clem. Rom. xii. 2. It circulated among various heretical 
circles; amongst the Encratites (Clem. Strom, iii. 9), the Naas- 
senes (Hippolyt. Philos. v. 7), and the Sabellians (Epiph. Haer. 
Ixii. 2). Only three or four fragments survive; see Lipsius 
(Smith and Wace, Diet, of Christ. Biog. ii. 712, 713); Zahn, 
Gesch. Kanons, ii. 628-642; Preuschen, Reste d. ausserkanon- 
ischen Evangelien, 1901, p. 2, which show that it was a product 
of pantheistic Gnosticism. With this pantheistic Gnosticism 
is associated a severe asceticism. The distinctions of sex are 

1 These editors have discovered (1907) a gospel fragment of the 
2nd century which represents a dialogue between our Lord and a 
chief priest — a Pharisee. 



one day to come to an end; the prohibition of marriage follows 
naturally on this view. Hence Christ is represented as coming 
to destroy the work of the female (Clem. Alex. Strom, iii. 9. 63). 
Lipsius and Zahn assign it to the middle of the 2nd century. 
It may be earlier. 

Protevangel of James. — This title was first given in the 16th 
century to a writing which is referred to as The Book of James 
(fi ^tjSXos 'laKoifiov) by Origen (torn. xi. in Matt.). Its author 
designates it as 'Ioropta. For various other designations see 
Tischendorf, Evang. Apocr? 1 seq. The narrative extends from 
the Conception of the Virgin to the Death of Zacharias. Lipsius 
shows that in the present form of the book there is side by side 
a strange " admixture of intimate knowledge and gross ignorance 
of Jewish thought and custom," and that accordingly we must 
" distinguish between an original Jewish Christian writing and a 
Gnostic recast of it." The former was known to Justin(Z>ia/. 
78, 101) and Clem. Alex. (Strom, vii. 16), and belongs at latest 
to the earliest years of the 2nd century. The Gnostic recast 
Lipsius dates about the middle of the 3rd century. From these 
two works arose independently the Protevangel in its present 
form and the Latin pseudo-Matthaeus (Evangelium pseudo- 
Mallhaei). The Evangelium de Nativitate Mariae is a redaction 
of the latter. (See Lipsius in Smith's Diet, of Christ. Biog. 
ii. 701-703.) But if we except the Zachariah and John group 
of legends, it is not necessary to assume the Gnostic recast of 
this work in the 3rd century as is done by Lipsius. The author 
had at his disposal two distinct groups of legends about Mary. 
One of these groups is certainly of non-Jewish origin, as it 
conceives Mary as living in the temple somewhat after the 
manner of a vestal virgin or a priestess of Isis. The other group 
is more in accord with the orthodox gospels. The book appears 
to have been written in Egypt, and in the early years of the 
2nd century. For, since Origen states that many appealed to it 
in support of the view that the brothers of Jesus were sons of 
Joseph by a former marriage, the book must have been current 
about a.d. 200. From Origen we may ascend to Clem. Alex, 
who (Strom, vi. 93) shows acquaintance with one of the chief 
doctrines of the book — the perpetual virginity of Mary. Finally, 
as Justin's statements as to the birth of Jesus in a cave and 
Mary's descent from David show in all probability his acquaint- 
ance with the book, it may with good grounds be assigned to 
the first decade of the 2nd century. (So Zahn, Gesch. Kanons, 
i. 485, 499, 502, 504, 539; ii. 774-780.) For the Greek text see 
Tischendorf, Evang. Apocr? 1-50; B. P. Grenfell, An Alex- 
andrian erotic Fragment and other Papyri, 1896, pp. 13-17: 
for the Syriac, Wright, Contributions to Apocryphal Literature 
of the N.T., 1865, pp. 3-7; A. S. Lewis, Studia Sinaitica, xi. 
pp. 1-22. See literature generally in Hennecke, NTliche Apok. 
Handbuch, 106 seq. 

Gospel of Nicodemus.— -This title is first met with in the 13th 
century. It is used to designate an apocryphal writing entitled 
in the older MSS. xm-o^vrnxaTo. rod KvpLov tiimov TrjcroC XpioroO 
-irpaxOtvTa hid Hovriov UlXcltov: also " Gesta Salvatoris 
Domini . . . inventa Theodosio magno imperatore in Ierusalem 
in praetorio Pontii Pilati in codicibus publicis. " See Tischendorf, 
Evang. Apocr? pp. S33SS5- This work gives an account 
of the Passion (i.-xi.), the Resurrection (xii.-xvi.), and the 
Descensus ad Inferos (xvii.-xxvii.). Chapters i.-xvi. are extant, 
in the Greek, Coptic, and two Armenian versions. The two Latin 
versions and a Byzantine recension of the Greek contain i.-xxvii. 
(see Tischendorf, Evangelia Apocrypha 2 , pp. 210-458). All 
known texts go back to a. d. 425, if one may trust the reference 
to Theodosius. But this was only a revision, for as early as 
376 Epiphanius (Haer. i. I.) presupposes the existence of a like 
text. In 325 Eusebius (H.E. ii. 2) was acquainted only with 
theheathen Acts of Pilate, and knew nothing of a Christian, work. 
Tischendorf and Hofmann, however, find evidence of its existence 
in Justin's reference to the "A/cra HiKarov (Apol. i. 35, 48), and in 
Tertullian's mention of the Acta Pilati (Apol. 21), and on this 
evidence attribute our texts to the first half of the 2nd century. 
But these references have been denied by Scholten, Lipsius, and 
Lightfoot. Recently Schubert has sought to derive the elements 



i8o 



APOCRYPHAL LITERATURE 



which are found in the Petrine Gospel, but not in the canonical 
gospels, from the original Acta Pilati, while Zahn exactly reverses 
the relation of these two works. Rendel Harris (1899) advocated 
the view that the Gospel of Nicodemus, as we possess it, is merely 
a prose version of the Gospel of Nicodemus written originally in 
Homeric centones as early as the 2nd century. Lipsius and 
Dobschiitz relegate the book to the 4th century. The question is 
not settled yet (see Lipsius in Smith's Diet, of Christ. Biography, 
ii. 708-709, and Dobschiitz in Hastings' Bible Dictionary, iii. 
544-547). 

Gospel according to the Hebrews. — This gospel was cited by 
Ignatius (Ad Smyrnaeos, iii.) according to Jerome (Viris illus. 
16, and in Jes. lib. xviii.), but this is declared to be untrustworthy 
by Zahn, op. cit. i. 921; ii. 701, 702. It was written in Aramaic 
in Hebrew letters, according to Jerome {Adv. Pelag. iii. 2), and 
translated by him into Greek and Latin. Both these translations 
are lost: A collection of the Greek and Latin fragments that 
have survived, mainly in Origen and Jerome, will be found in 
Hilgenf eld's NT extra Canonem receptum, Nicholson's Gospel 
according to the Hebrews (1&7 a), Westcott's Introd. to the Gospels, 
and Zahn's Gesch. des NTlichen Kanons, ii. 642-723; Preuschen, 
op. cit. 3-8. This gospel was regarded by many in the first 
centuries as the Hebrew original of the canonical Matthew 
(Jerome, in Matt. xii. 13; Adv. Pelag. iii. 1). With the canonical 
gospel it agrees in some of its sayings; in others it is independent. 
It circulated among the Nazarenes in Syria, and was composed, 
according to Zahn (op. cit. ii. 722), between the years 135 and 150. 
Jerome identifies it with the Gospel of the Twelve {Adv. Pelag. 
iii. 2), and states that it was used by the Ebionites {Comm. in 
Matt. xii. 13). Zahn {op. cit. ii. 662, 724) contests both these 
statements. The former he traces to a mistaken interpretation ' 
of Origen {Horn. I. in Luc.). Lipsius, on the other hand, accepts 
the statements of Jerome (Smith and Wace, Diet, of Christian 
Biography, ii. 709-712), and is of opinion that this gospel, in the 
form in which it was known to Epiphanius, Jerome and Origen, 
was " a recast of an older original," which, written originally in 
Aramaic, was nearly related to the Logia used by St Matthew 
and the Ebionitic writing used by St Luke, " which itself was 
only a later redaction of the Logia." 

According to the most recent investigations we may conclude 
that the Gospel according to the Hebrews was current among 
the Nazarenes and Ebionites as early as 100-125, sincelgnatius 
was familiar with the phrase " I am no bodiless demon " — a 
phrase which, according to Jerome {Comm. in Is. xviii.), belonged 
to this Gospel. 

The name " Gospel according to the Hebrews " cannot have 
been original; for if it had been so named because of its general 
use among the Hebrews, yet the Hebrews themselves would not 
have used this designation. It may have been known simply as 
" the Gospel." The language was Western Aramaic, the mother 
tongue of Jesus and his apostles. Two forms of Western 
Aramaic survive: the Jerusalem form of the dialect, in the 
Aramaic portions of Daniel and Ezra; and the Galilean, in 
isolated expressions in the Talmud (3rd century), and in a frag- 1 
mentary 5th century translation of the Bible. The quotations 
from the Old Testament are made from the Massoretic text. 

This gospel must have been translated at an early date into 
Greek, as Clement and Origen cite it as generally accessible, 
and Eusebius recounts that many reckoned it among the received 
books. The gospel is synoptic in character and is closely related 
to Matthew, though in the Resurrection accounts it has affinities 
with Luke. Like Mark it seems to have had no history of the 
birth of Christ, and to have begun with the baptism. (For the 
literature see Hennecke, NTliche Apok. Handbuch, 21-23.) 

Gospel of Peter. — Before 1892 we had some knowlege of this 
gospel. Thus Serapion, bishop of Antioch (a.d. 190-203) found 
it in use in the church of Rhossus in Cilicia, and condemned it as 
Docetic (Eusebius, H.E. vi. 12). Again, Origen (InMatt. torn, 
xvii. 10) says that it represented the brethren of Christ as his 
half-brothers. In 1885 a long fragment was discovered at 
Akhmim, and published by Bouriant in 1892, and subsequently 
by Lods, Robinson, Harnack, Zahn/iSchubert, Swete. 



Gospel of Thomas. — This gospel professes to give an account of 
our Lord's boyhood. It appears in two recensions. The more 
complete recension bears the title Qu>p,a 'IffpariXirov 3>iAo<r6$ou 
prfxa eis ra ircudiKa. rod Kvpiov, and treats of the period from 
the 7th to the 12th year (Tischendorf, Evangelia Apocrypha?, 
1876, 140-157). The more fragmentary recension gives the 
history of the childhood from the 5th to the 8th year, and is 
entitled ^vyypap,fia rod aylov awoaroXov GcojuS irepl Tijs Tra.i8i.Krjs 
avaaTpo4>fjs rod Kvpiov (Tischendorf, op. cit. pp. 158-163). 
Two Latin translations have been published in this work by the 
same scholar — one on pp. 164-180, the other under the wrong 
title, Pseudo-Matthaei Evangelium, on pp. 93-112. A Syriac 
version, with an English translation, was published by Wright 
in 1875. This gospel was originally still more Docetic than it 
now is, according to Lipsius. Its present form is due to an ortho- 
dox revision which discarded, so far as possible, all Gnostic 
traces. Lipsius (Smith's Diet, of Christ. Biog. ii. 703) assigns it 
to the latter half of the 2nd century, but Zahn {Gesch. Kan. ii. 
771), on good grounds, to the earlier half. The latter scholar 
shows that probably it was used by Justin {Dial. 88). At all 
events it circulated among the Marcosians (Irenaeus, Haer. i. 20) 
and the Naasenes (Hippolytus, Refut. v. 7), and subsequently 
among the Manichaeans, and is frequently quoted from Origen 
downwards {Horn. I. in Luc). If the stichometry of Nicephorus 
is right, the existing form of the book is merely fragmentary 
compared with its original compass. For literature see Hennecke, 
NTliche Apokryphen Handbuch, 132 seq. 

Gospel of the Twelve. — 'This gospel, which Origen knew {Horn. 
I. in Luc), is not to be identified with the Gospel according to the 
Hebrews (see above), with Lipsius and others, who have sought 
to reconstruct the original gospel from the surviving fragments 
of these two distinct works. The only surviving fragments of 
the Gospel of the Twelve have been preserved by Epiphanius 
{Haer. xxx. I3*-i6, 22: see Preuschen, op. cit. 9-11). It began 
with an account of the baptism. It was used by the Ebionites, 
and was written, according to Zahn {op. cit. ii. 742), about 
a.d. 170. 

Other Gospels mainly Gnostic and almost all lost.— 
Gospel of Andrew.— This is condemned in the Gelasian Decree, 
and is probably the gospel mentioned by Innocent (1 Ep. iii. 7) 
and Augustine {Contra advers. Leg. et Proph. i. 20). 

Gospel of Apettes.- — Mentioned by Jerome in his Prooem. ad 
Matt. 

Gospel of Barnabas. ---Condemned in the Gelasian Decree (see 
under Barnabas ad fin.). 

Gospel of Bartholomew.— Mentioned by Jerome in his Prooem. 
ad -Matt, and condemned in the Gelasian Decree. 

Gospel of Basilides. — Mentioned by Origen {Tract. 26 in Matt. 
xxxiii. 34, and in his Prooem. in Luc)] by Jerome in his Prooem. 
in Matt. (See Harnack i. 161; ii. 536-537; Zahn, Gesch. 
Kanons, i. 763-774.) 

Gospel of Cerinthus. — Mentioned by Epiphanius (Haer. Ii. 7). 

Gospel of the Ebionites. — A fragmentary edition of the canonical 
Matthew according to Epiphanius (Haer. xxx. 13), used by the 
Ebionites and called by them the Hebrew Gospel. 

Gospel of Eve. — A quotation from this gospel is given by 
Epiphanius {Haer. xxvi. 2, 3). It is possible that this is the 
Gospel of Perfection (EvayyeXiov reXeicocrews) which he touches 
upon in xxvi. 2. The quotation shows that this gospel was the 
expression of complete pantheism. 

Gospel of James the Less— ^Condemned in the Gelasian Decree. 

Wisdom of Jesus Christ. — This third work contained in the 
Coptic MS. referred to under Gospel of Mary gives cosmological 
disclosures and is presumably of Valentiniaii origin. 

Apocryph of John. — This book, which is found in the Coptic 
MS. referred to under Gospel of Mary arid contains cosmological 
disclosures of Christ, is said to have formed the source of Irenaeus' 
account of the Gnostics of Barbelus (i. 29-31). Thus this work 
would have been written before. 170. 

Gospel of Judas Iscariol. — References to this gospel as in use 
among the Cainites are made by Irenaeus (i. 31. 1); Epiphanius 
(xxxviii. 1. 3). 



APOCRYPHAL LITERATURE 



181 



Gospel, The Living (Evangelium Vivum). — This was a gospel 
of the Manichaeans. See Epiphanius, Haer. lxvi. 2; Photius, 
Contra Manich. i. 

Gospel of Marcion. — On this important gospel see Zahn, Gesch. 
Kanons, i. 585-718. 

Descent of Mary (Tkvva Mapias).— This book was an anti- 
Jewish legend representing Zacharias as having been put to 
death by the Jews because he had seen the God of the Jews in 
the form of an ass in the temple (Epiphanius, Haer. xxvi. 12). 

Questions of Mary (Great and Little). — Epiphanius (Haer. 
xxvi. 8) gives some excerpts from this revolting work. 

Gospel of Mary. — This gospel is found in a Coptic MS. of the 
5th century. According to Schmidt's short account, Sitzungs- 
bcrichte d. preuss. Akad. d. Wiss. zu. Berlin (1896), pp. 839 sqq., 
this gospel gives disclosures on the nature of matter (uXij) and 
the progress of the Gnostic soul through the seven planets. 

Gospel of Matthias. — Though this gospel is attested by Origen 
(Horn, in Luc. i.), Eusebius, H.E. iii. 25. 6, and the List of 
Sixty Books, not a shred of it has been preserved, unless with 
Zahn ii. 751 sqq. we are to identify it with the Traditions of 
Matthias, from which Clement has drawn some quotations. 

Gospel of Perfection (Evangelium perfeciionis).—Used by the 
followers of Basilides and other Gnostics. See Epiphanius, Haer. 
xxvi. 2. 

Gospel of Philip. — This gospel described the progress of a 
soul through the next world. It is of a strongly Encratite 
character and dates from the 2nd century. A fragment is pre- 
served in Epiphanius, Haer. xxvi. 13. In Preuschen, Reste, p. 13, 
the quotation breaks off too soon. See Zahn ii. 761-768. 

Gospel of Thaddaeus. — Condemned by the Gelasian Decree. 

Gospel of Thomas. — Of this gospel only one fragment has been 
preserved in Hippolytus, Philos. v. 7, pp. 140 seq. See Zahn, 
op. cit. i. 746 seq.; ii. 768-773; Harnack ii. 503-595. 

Gospel of Truth.— This gospel is mentioned by Irenaeus i. 1 1. 9, 
and was used by the Valentinians. See Zahn i. 748 sqq. 

(b) Acts and Teachings of the Apostles. — Acts of Andrew. 
— These Acts, which are of a strongly Encratite character, have 
come down to us in a fragmentary condition. They belong to 
the earliest ages, for they are mentioned by Eusebius,. H.E: hi. 
25; Epiphanius, Haer. xlvii. 1; Ixi. 1; lxiii. 2; Philaster, 
Haer. Ixviii., as current among the Manichaeans and heretics. 
They are attributed to Leucius, a Docetic writer, by Augustine 
(c. Felic. Manich. ii. 6) and Euodius (De Fide c. Manich. 38). 
Euodius in the passage just referred to preserves two ismall 
fragments of the original Acts. On internal grounds the section 
recounting Andrew's imprisonment (Bonnet, Acta Apostolorur' 
Apocrypha, ii. 38-45) is also probably a constituent of the 
original work. As regards the martyrdom, owing to the confusion 
introduced by the multitudinous Catholic revisions of this 
section of the Acts, it is practically impossible to restore its 
original form. For a complete discussion of the various docu- 
ments see Lipsius, Apokryphen Aposlelgeschichte, i. 543-622; 
also James in Hastings' Bible Diet. i. 92-93; Hennecke, NT. 
Apokryphen, in loc. The best texts are given in Bonnet's Acta 
Apostolorum Apocrypha, 1898, II. i. 1-127. These contain also 
the Acts of Andrew and Matthew (or Matthias) in which Matthew 
(or Matthias) is represented as a captive in the country of the 
anthropophagi. Christ takes Andrew and his disciples with 
Him, and effects the rescue of Matthew. The legend is found also 
in Ethiopic, Syriac and Anglo-Saxon. Also the Acts of Peter and 
Andrew, which among other incidents recount the miracle of a 
camel passing through the eye of a needle. • This work is preserved 
partly in Greek, but in its entirety in Slavonic. 

Acts of John. — Clement of Alexandria in his Hypoiyposes on 
1 John i. 1 seems to refer to chapters xciii. (or lxxxix.) of these 
Acts. Eusebius (H.E. iii. 25. 6), Epiphanius (Haer. xlvii. 1) 
and other ancient writers assign them to the authorship of 
Leucius Charinus. It is generally admitted that they were 
written in the 2nd century. The text has been edited most 
completely by Bonnet, Acta Apostol. Apocr., 1898, 151-216. 
The contents might be summarized with Hennecke as follows: — 
Arrival, and first sojourn of the apostle in Ephesus (xviii.-lv.) ; 



return to' Ephesus and second sojourn (history of Drusiana, 
lviii.-lxxxvi.); account of the crucifixion of Jesus and His 
apparent death (lxxxvii.-cv.) ; the death of John (evi.-exv.). 
There are manifest gaps in the narrative, a fact which we would 
infer from the extent assigned to it (i.e. 2500 stichoi) by Nice- 
phorus. According to this authority one-third of the text is now 
lost. Many chapters are lost at the beginning; there is a gap in 
chapter xxxvii., also before Iviii., not to mention others. The 
encratite tendency in these Acts is not so strongly developed 
as in those of Andrew and Thomas. James (Anecdota, ii. 1-25) 
has given strong grounds for regarding the Acts of John and 
Peter as derived from one and the same author, but there are 
like affinities existing between the Acts of Peter and those of 
Paul. For a discussion of this work see Zahn, Gesch. Kanons, 
ii. 856-865; Lipsius, Apok. Apostelgesck. i. 348-542; Hennecke, 
NT. Apokryphen, 423-432. For bibliography, Hennecke, NT. 
Apok. Handbuch, 492 sq. 

Acts of Paul. — The discovery of the Coptic translation of 
these Acts in 1897, and its publication by C. Schmidt (Acta 
Pauli auS der Heidelberger koptischen Papyrushandschrift 
herausgegeben, Leipzig, 1894), have confirmed what had been 
previously only a hypothesis that the Acts of Thecla had formed 
a part of the larger Acts of Paul. The Acts therefore embrace 
now the following elements: — (a) Two quotations given by 
Origen in his Princip. i. 2. 3 and his comment on John xx. 12. 
From the latter it follows that in the Acts of Paul the death of 
Peter was recounted, (b) Apocryphal 3rd Epistle of Paul to the 
Corinthians and Epistle from the Corinthians to Paul. These two 
letters are connected by a short account which is intended to give 
the historical situation. Paul is in prison on account of Strato- 
nice, the wife of Apollophanes. The Greek and Latin versions of 
these letters have for the most part disappeared, but they have 
been preserved in Syriac, and through Syriac they obtained for 
the time being a place in the Armenian Bible immediately after 
2 Corinthians. Aphraates cites two passages from 3 Corinthians 
as words of the apostle, and Ephraem expounded them in his 
commentary on the Pauline Epistles. They must therefore have 
been regarded as canonical in the first half of the 4th century. 
From the Syriac Bible they made their way into the Armenian 
and mairitained their place without opposition to the 7 th century. 
On the Latin text see Carriere and Berger, Correspondance 
apocr. de S. P. et des Corinthiens, 1891. For a translation of 
Ephraem's commentary see Zahn ii. 592-611 and Vetter, Der 
Apocr. j. Korinthien, 70 sqq., 1894. The Coptic version (C. 
Schmidt, Acta Pauli, pp. 74-82), which is here imperfect, is 
clearly from a Greek original, while the Latin and Armenian are 
from the Syriac. (c) The Acts of Paul and Thecla. These were 
written, according to Tertullian (De Baptismo, 17) by a presbyter 
of Asia, who was deposed from his office on account of his forgery. 
This, the earliest of Christian romances (probably before a.d. 
150), recounts the adventures and sufferings of a virgin, Thecla 
of Icohium. Lipsius discovers Gnostic traits in the story, but 
these are denied by Zahn (Gesch. Kanons, ii. 902). See Lipsius, 
op. cit. ii. 424-467; Zahn (op. cit. ii. 892-910). The best text 
is that of Lipsius, Acta Apostol. Apocr., 1891, i. 235-272. 
There are Syriac, Arabic, Ethiopic and Slavonic versions. 
As we have seen above, these Acts are now recognized as 
belonging originally to the Acts of Paul. They were, however, 
published separately long before the Gelasian Decree (496). 
Jerome also was acquainted with them as an independent work. 
Thecla was most probably a real personage, around whom a 
legend had already gathered in the 2nd century. Of this legend 
the author of the Acts of Paul made use, and introduced into it 
certain historical and geographical facts, (d) The healing of 
Hermocrates of dropsy in Myra. Through a comparison of the 
Coptic version with the Pseudo-Cyprian writing " Caena," 
Rolffs (Hennecke, NT. Apok. 361) concludes that this incident 
formed originally a constituent of our book, (e) The strife with 
beasts at Ephesus. This event is mentioned by Nicephorus 
Callistus (H.E. ii. 25) as recounted in the xepioSoi of Paul. 
The identity of this work with the Acts of Paul is confirmed by 
a remark of Hippolytus in his commentary on Daniel iii. 29. 4, 



i8 2 



APOCRYPHAL LITERATURE 



ed. Bonwetsch 176 (so Rolffs). (/) Martyrdom of Paul. The 
death of Paul by the sentence of Nero at Rome forms the close 
of the Acts of Paul. The text is in the utmost confusion. It 
is best given by Lipsius, Acta Apostol. Apocr. i. 104-117. 

Notwithstanding all the care that has been taken in collecting 
the fragments of these Acts, only about 900 stichoi out of the 
3600 assigned to them in the Stichometry of Nicephorus have as 
yet been recovered. 

The author was, according to Tertullian (De Baptism. 17), a 
presbyter in Asia, who out of honour to Paul wrote the Acts, 
forging at the same time 3 Corinthians. Thus the work was 
composed before 190, and, since it most probably uses the martyr- 
dom of Polycarp, after 155. The object of the writer is to 
embody in St Paul the model ideal of the popular Christianity 
of the 2nd century. His main emphasis is laid on chastity and 
the resurrection of the flesh. The tone of the work is Catholic 
and anti-Gnostic. For the bibliography of the subject see 
Hennecke, NT. Apok. 358-360. 

Acts of Peter. — These acts are first mentioned by Eusebius 
(H.E. iii. 3) by name, and first referred to by the African poet 
Commodian about a.d. 250. Harnack, who was the first to 
show that these Acts were Catholic in character and not Gnostic 
as had previously been alleged, assigns their composition to this 
period mainly on the ground that Hippolytus was not acquainted 
with them; but even were this assumption true, it would not 
prove the non-existence of the Acts in question. According to 
Photius, moreover, the Acts of Peter also were composed by 
this same Leucius Charinus, who, according to Zahn (Gesch. 
Kanons, ii. 864), wrote about 160 {op. cit. p. 848). Schmidt and 
Ficker, however, maintain that the Acts were written about 200 
and in Asia Minor. These Acts, which Ficker holds were written 
as a continuation and completion of the canonical Acts of the 
Apostles, deal with Peter's victorious conflict with Simon Magus, 
and his subsequent martyrdom at Rome under Nero. It is 
difficult to determine the relation of the so-called Latin Actus 
Vercellenses (which there are good grounds for assuming were 
originally called the Hpa£eis Hfrpov) with the Acts of John 
and Paul. Schmidt thinks that the author of the former made 
use of the latter, James that the Acts of Peter and of John were 
by one and the same author, but Ficker is of opinion that their 
affinities can be explained by their derivation from the same 
ecclesiastical atmosphere and school of theological thought. 
No less close affinities exist between our Acts and the Acts of 
Thomas, Andrew and Philip. In the case of the Acts of Thomas 
the problem is complicated, sometimes the Acts of Peter seem 
dependent on the Acts of Thomas, and sometimes the converse. 

For the relation of the Actus Vercellenses to the " Martyrdom of 
the holy apostles Peter and Paul " (Acta Apostol. Apocr. i. 1 18-177) 
and to the " Acts of the holy apostles Peter and Paul" {Acta Apostol. 
Apocr. i. 178-234) see Lipsius ii. I. 84 sqq. The "Acts of Xanthippe 
and Polyxena," first edited by James (Texts and Studies,\i. 3. 1893), 
and assigned by him to the middle of the 3rd century, as well as the 
" Acts of the Disputation of Archelaus. bishop of Mesopotamia, 
and the Heresiarch Manes" (''Acta Disputatioms Archelai Episcopi 
Mesopotamiae et Manetis Haeresiarchae," in Routh's Reliquiae 
Sacrae 2 , v. 36-206), have borrowed largely from our work. 

The text of ■ the Actus Vercellenses is edited by Lipsius, Acta 
Apostol. Apocr. i. 45-79. An independent Latin translation of the 
" Martyrdom of Peter " is published by Lipsius (op. cit. i. 1-22), 
Martyrium beali Petri Apostoli a Lino episcopo conscriptum. On 
the Coptic fragment, which Schmidt maintains is an original con- 
stituent of these Acts, see that writer's work : Die alien Petrusakten 
im Zusammenhang dsr apokryphen Apostelliteratur nebst einem 
neuentdeckten Fragment, and Texte und Untersuch. N.F. ix. I (1903). 
For the literature see Hennecke, Neutestamentliche Apokryphen 
Handbuch, 395 sqq. 

Preaching of Peter. — This book (Tlirpov Kripvy/xa) gave the 
substance of a series of discourses spoken by one person in the 
name of the apostles. Clement of Alexandria quotes it several 
times as a genuine record of Peter's teachings. Heracleon had 
previously used it (see Origen, In Evang. Johann. t. xiii. 17). 
It is spoken unfavourably of by Origen (De Prin. Praef. 8). It 
was probably in the hands of Justin and Aristides. Hence 
Zahn gives its date as 90-100 at latest; Dobschutz, as 100-110; 
and Harnack, as 1 10-130. The extant fragments contain 
sayings of Jesus, and warnings against Judaism and Polytheism. 



They have been edited by Hilgenfeld: Nov. Test, extra Can., 
1884, iv. 51-65, and by von Dobschutz, Das Kerygma Petri, 
1893. Salmon (Diet. Christ. Biog. iv. 329-330) thinks that this 
work is part of a larger work, A Preaching of Peter and a Preach- 
ing of Paul, implied in a statement of Lactantius (Inst. Div. iv. 
21); but this view is contested by Zahn, see Gesch. Kanons, ii. 
820-834, particularly pp. 827-828; Chase, in Hastings' Bible 
Diet. iv. 776. 

Acts of Thomas. — This is one of the earliest and most famous 
of the Gnostic Acts. It has been but slightly tampered with by 
orthodox hands. These Acts were used by the Encratites 
(Epiphanius, Haer. xlvii. 1), the Manichaeans (Augustine, 
Contra Faust, xxii. 79), the Apostolici (Epiphanius lxi. 1) and 
Priscillianists. The work is divided into thirteen Acts, to which 
the Martyrdom of Thomas attaches as the fourteenth. It was 
originally written in Syriac, as Burkitt (Journ. of Theol. Studies, 
i. 278 sqq.) has finally proved, though Macke and Noldeke had 
previously advanced grounds for this view. The Greek and 
Latin texts were edited by Bonnet in 1883 and again in 1903, 
ii. 2; the Greek also by James, Apoc. Anec. ii. 28-45, an d 
the Syriac by Wright (Apocr. Acts of the Gospels, 1871, i. 172- 
333). Photius ascribes their composition to Leucius Charinus — 
therefore to the 2nd century, but Lipsius assigns it to the 
early decades of the 3rd. (See Lipsius, Apokryphen Apostel- 
geschichten, i. 225-347; Hennecke, N.T. Apokryphen, 473-480.) 

Teaching of the Twelve Apostles (Didache). — This important 
work was discovered by Philotheos Bryennios in Constantinople 
and published in 1883. Since that date it has been frequently 
edited. The bibliography can be found in Schaff's and in 
Harnack's editions. The book divides itself into three parts. 
The first (i.-vi.) contains a body of ethical instruction which is 
founded on a Jewish and probably pre-Christian document, 
which forms the basis also of the Epistle of Barnabas. The 
second part consists of vii.-xv., and treats of church ritual and 
discipline; and the third part is eschatological and deals with 
the second Advent. The book is variously dated by different 
scholars: Zahn assigns it to the years a.d. 80-120; Harnack 
to 120-165; Lightfoot and Funk to 80-100; Salmon to 120. 
(See Salmon in Diet, of Christ. Biog. iv. 806-815, also article 
Didache.) 

Apostolical Constitutions. — For the various collections of 
these ecclesiastical regulations — the Syriac Didascalia, Eccle- 
siastical Canons of the Holy Apostles, &c. — see separate article. 

(c) Epistles. — The A bgar Epistles. — These epistles are found in 
Eusebius (H.E. i. 3), who translated them fr<7m the Syriac. 
They are two in number, and purport to be a petition of Abgar 
Uchomo, king of Edessa, to Christ to visit Edessa, and Christ's 
answer, promising after his ascension to send one of his disciples, 
who should " cure thee of thy disease, and give eternal life and 
peace to thee and all thy people." Lipsius thinks that these 
letters were manufactured about the year 200. (See Diet. 
Christ. Biog. iv. 878-881, with the literature there mentioned.) 
The above correspondence, which appears also in Syriac, is 
inwoven with the legend of Addai or Thaddaeus. The best 
critical edition of the Greek text will be found in Lipsius, Acta 
Apostolorum Apocrypha, 1891, pp. 279-283. (See also Abgar.) 

Epistle of Barnabas.— The special object of this epistle was to 
guard its readers against the danger of relapsing into Judaism. 
The date is placed by some scholars as early as 70-79, by others 
as late as the early years of the emperor Hadrian, 117. The 
text has been edited by Hilgenfeld in 1877, Gebhardt and 
Harnack in 1878, and Funk in 1887 and 1901. In these works 
will be found full bibliographies. (See further Barnabas.) 

Epistle of Clement. — The object of this epistle is the restoration 
of harmony to the church of Corinth, which had been vexed by 
internal discussions. The epistle may be safely ascribed to the 
years 95-96. The writer was in all probability the bishop of 
Rome of that name. He is named an apostle and his work was 
reckoned as canonical by Clement of Alexandria (Strom, iv. 17. 
105), and as late as the time of Eusebius (H.E. iii. 16) it was still 
read in some of the churches. Critical editions have been 
published by Gebhardt and Harnack, Patr. A post. Op., 1876, 



APODICTIC— APOLLINARIS 



183 



and in the smaller form in 1900, Lightfoot 2 , 1890, Funk 2 , 1901. 
The Syriac version has been edited by Kennet, Epp. of St 
Clement to the Corinthians in Syriac, 1899, and the Old Latin 
version by Morin, S. Clementis Romani ad Corinthios epistulae 
versio Latina antiquissima, 1894. 

" Clement's " 2nd Ep. to the Corinthians. — This so-called 
letter of Clement is not mentioned by any writer before Eusebius 
(H.E. iii. 38. 4). It is not a letter but really a homily written in 
Rome about the middle of the 2nd century. The writer is a 
Gentile. Some of his citations are derived from the Gospel to 
the Egyptians. 

Clement's Epistles on Virginity. — These two letters are pre- 
served only in Syriac which is a translation from the Greek. 
They are first referred to by Epiphanius and next by Jerome. 
Critics have assigned them to the middle of the 2nd century. 
They have been edited by Beelen, Louvain, 1856. 

Clement's Epistles to James. — On these two letters which are 
found in the Clementine Homilies, see Smith's Diet, of Christian 
Biography, i. 559, 570, and Lehmann's monograph, Die Clemen- 
tischen Schriften, Gotha, 1867, in which references will be found to 
other sources of information. 

Epistles of Ignatius. — There are two collections of letters 
bearing the name of Ignatius, who was martyred between 105 
and 117. The first consists of seven letters addressed by Ignatius 
to the Ephesians, Magnesians, Trallians, Romans, Philadelphians, 
Smyrnaeans and to Polycarp. The second collection consists of 
the preceding extensively interpolated, and six others of Mary 
to Ignatius, of Ignatius to Mary, to the Tarsians, Antiochians, 
Philippians and Hero, a deacon of Antioch. The latter collection 
is a pseudepigraph written in the 4th century or the beginning 
of the 5th. The authenticity of the first collection also has been 
denied, but the evidence appears to be against this contention. 
The literature is overwhelming in its extent. See 7ahn, Patr. 
A post. Op., 1876; Funk 2 , Die apostol. Voter, 1901; Lightfoot 2 , 
Apostolic Fathers, 1889. 

Epistle of Polycarp. — The genuineness of this epistle stands 
or falls with that of the Ignatian epistles. See article in Smith's 
Dictionary of Christian Biography, iv. 423-431; Lightfoot, 
Apostolic Fathers, i. 629-702; also Polycarp. 

Pauline Epistles to the Laodiceans and the Alexandrians. — 
The first of these is found only in Latin. This, according to 
Lightfoot (see Colossians 8 , 272-298) and Zahn, is a translation 
from the Greek. Such an epistle is mentioned in the Muratorian 
canon. See Zahn, op. cit. ii. 566-585. The Epistle to the 
Alexandrians is mentioned only in the Muratorian canon (see 
Zahn ii. 586-592). 

For the Third Epistle of Paid to ike Corinthians, and Epistle from the 
Corinthians to Paul, see under " Acts of Paul " above. (R. H. C.) 

APODICTIC (Gr. airodeiKTiKos, capable of demonstration), a 
logical term, applied to judgments which are necessarily true, 
as of mathematical conclusions. The term in Aristotelian logic 
is opposed to dialectic, as scientific proof to probable reasoning. 
Kant contrasts apodictical with problematic and assertorical 
judgments. 

APOLDA, a town of Germany, in the grand-duchy of Saxe- 
Weimar, near the river Ilm, 9 m. E. by N. from Weimar, on 
the main line of railway from Berlin via Halle, to Frankfort-on- 
Main. Pop. (1900) 20,352. It has few notable public buildings, 
but possesses three churches and monuments to the emperor 
Frederick III. and to Christian Zimmermann (1759-1842), who, 
by introducing the hosiery and cloth manufacture, made Apolda 
one of the most important places in Germany in these branches 
of industry. It has also extensive dyeworks, bell foundries, and 
manufactures of steam engines, boilers and bicycles. 

APOLLINARIS, " the Younger " (d. a.d. 390), bishop of Laodicea 
in Syria. He collaborated with his father Apollinaris the Elder 
in reproducing the Old Testament in the form of Homeric and 
Pindaric poetry, and the New after the fashion of Platonic 
dialogues, when the emperor Julian had forbidden Christians to 
teach the classics. He is best known, however, as a warm 
opponent of Arianism, whose eagerness to emphasize the deity 
of Christ and the unity of His person led him so far as a denial 



of the existence of a rational human soul (vovs) in Christ's 
human nature, this being replaced in Him by a prevailing 
principle of holiness, to wit the Logos, so that His body was a 
glorified and spiritualized form of humanity. Over against this 
the orthodox or Catholic positionmaintained thatChristassumed 
human nature in its entirety including the vovs, for only so 
could He be example and redeemer. It was held that the system 
of Apollinaris was really Docetism (see Docetae), that if the 
Godhood without constraint swayed the manhood there was no 
possibility of real human probation or of real advance in Christ's 
manhood. The position was accordingly condemned by several 
synods and in particular by that of Constantinople (a.d. 381). 
This did not prevent its having a considerable following, which 
after Apollinaris's death divided into two sects, the more con- 
servative taking its name (Vitalians) from Vitalis, bishop of 
Antioch, the other (Polemeans) adding the further assertion 
that the two natures were so blended that even the body of 
Christ was a fit object of adoration. The whole Apollinarian 
type of thought persisted in what was later the Monophysite 
(q.v.) school. 

Although Apollinaris was a prolific writer, scarcely anything has 
survived under his own name. But a number of bis writings an 
concealed under the names of orthodox Fathers, e.g. ij Kara nipoi 
jrio-Tis, long ascribed to Gregory Thaumaturgus. These have beeri 
collected and edited by Hans Lietzirann. 

He must be distinguished from the bishop of Hierapolis who bore 
the same name, and who wrote one of the early Christian " Apolo- 
gies " (c. 170). See A. Harnack, History of Dogma, vols. iii. and iv. 
passim; R. L. Ottley, The Doctrine of the Incarnation; G. Voisin, 
L'Apollinarisme (Louvain, 1901); H. Lietzmann, Apollinaris von 
Laodicea und seine Schule (Tubingen, 1905). 

APOLLINARIS, SULPICIUS, a learned grammarian of 
Carthage, who flourished in the 2nd century a.d. He taught 
Pertinax — himself a teacher of grammar before he was emperor, 
— and Aulus Gellius, who speaks of him in the highest terms 
(iv. 17). He is the reputed author of the metrical arguments to 
the Aeneid and to the plays of Terence and (probably) Plautus 
(J. W. Beck, De Sulpicio Apollinari, 1884). 

APOLLINARIS SIDONIUS, CAIUS SOLLIUS (c. 430-487 or 
488), Christian writer and bishop, was born in Lyons about 
a.d. 430. Belonging to a noble family, he was educated under 
the best masters, and particularly excelled in poetry and polite 
literature. He married (about 452) Papianilla, the daughter of 
Avitus, who was consul and afterwards emperor. But Majori- 
anus, in the year 457, having deprived Avitus of the empire and 
taken the city of Lyons, Apollinaris fell into the hands of the 
enemy. The reputation of his learning led Majorianus to treat 
him with the greatest respect. In return Apollinaris composed 
a panegyric in his honour (as he had previously done for Avitus); 
which won for him a statue at Rome and the title of count. In 
467 the emperor Anthemius rewarded him for the panegyric 
which he had written in honour of him by raising him to the 
post of prefect of Rome, and afterwards to the dignity of a 
patrician and senator. In 472, more for his political than for 
his theological abilities, he was chosen to succeed Eparchius in 
the bishopric of Arverna (Clermont). On the capture of that city 
by the Goths in 474 he was imprisoned, as he had taken an active 
part in its defence; but he was afterwards restored by Euric, 
king of the Goths, and continued to govern his bishopric as before. 
He died in a.d. 487 or 488. His extant works are his Panegyrics 
on different emperors (in which he draws largely upon Statius, 
Ausonius and Claudian) ; and nine books of Letters and Poems, 
whose chief value consists in the light they shed on the political 
and literary history of the 5 th century. The Letters, which are 
very stilted, also reveal Apollinaris as a man of genial temper, 
fond of good living and of pleasure. The best edition is that in 
the Monumenta Germaniae Historica (Berlin, 1887), which gives, 
a survey of the manuscripts. 

Apollinaris Sidonius (the names are commonly inverted by the 
French) is the subject of numerous monographs, historical and 
literary. See, for bibliography, A. Molinier, Sources de Vhistoire.de 
France, no. 136 (vol. i.). S. Dill, Roman Society in the Fifth Century, 
and T. Hodgkin, Italy and her Invaders (vol. vii.), contain interesting 
sections on Apollinaris. See also Teuffel and Ebert's histories of 
Latin literature. 



184 



APOLLO 



APOLLO (Gr. ' AtSWuv ,' AiriWuv) , in Greek mythology, one 
of the most important and many-sided of the Olympian divinities. 
No satisfactory etymology of the name has been given, the least 
improbable perhaps being that which connects it with the Doric 
dxeXXa (" assembly "), 1 so that Apollo would be the god of 
political life (for other suggested derivations, ancient and 
modern, see C. Wernicke in Pauly-Wissowa's Realencyclopadie). 
The derivation of all the functions assigned to him from the idea 
of a single original light- or sun-god, worked out in his Lexikon der 
Mythologie by Roscher, who regards it as " one of the most 
certain facts in mythology," has not found general acceptance, 
although no doubt some features of his character can be readily 
explained on this assumption. 

In the legend, as set forth in the Homeric hymn to Apollo 
and the ode of Callimachus to Delos, Apollo is the son of Zeus 
and Leto. The latter, pursued by the jealous Hera, after long 
wandering found shelter in Delos (originally Asteria)-, where she 
bore a son, Apollo, under a palm-tree at the foot of Mount 
Cynthus. Before this, Delos — like Rhodes, the centre of the 
worship of the sun-god Helios, with whom Apollo was wrongly 
identified in later times— had been a barren, floating rock, but 
now became stationary, being fastened down by chains to the 
bottom of the sea. Apollo was born on the 7th day (efiSonayepris) 
of the month Thargelion according to Delian, of the month 
Bysios according to Delphian, tradition. The 7th and 20th, 
the days of the new and full moon, were ever afterwards held 
sacred to him. In Homer Apollo appears only as the god of 
prophecy, the sender of plagues, and sometimes as a warrior, 
but elsewhere as exercising the most varied functions. He is 
the god of agriculture, specially connected with Aristaeus (q.v.), 
which, originally a mere epithet, became an independent person- 
ality (see, however, Farnell, Cults of the Greek States, iv. 123). 
This side of his character is clearly expressed in the titles Sitalcas 
(" protector of corn"); Erythibius ("preventer of blight"); 
Parnopius (" destroyer of locusts "); Smintheus (" destroyer of 
mice "), in which, however, some modern inquirers see a totem- 
istic significance (e.g. A. Lang, "Apollo and the Mouse,"- in 
Custom and Myth, p. 101; against this, W. W. Fowler, in 
Classical Review, November 1892) ; Erithius (" god of reapers ") ; 
and Pasparius (" god of meal "). He is further the god of 
vegetation generally — Nomios, " god of pastures " (explained, 
however, by Cicero, as " god of law "), Hersos, " sender of the 
fertilizing dew." Valleys and groves are under his protection, 
unless the epithets Napaeus and Hylates belong to a more primi- 
tive aspect of the god as supporting himself by the chase, and 
roaming the gla'des and forests in pursuit of prey. Certain trees 
and plants, especially the laurel, were sacred to him. As the 
god of agriculture and vegetation he is naturally connected with 
the course of the year and the arrangement of the seasons, so 
important in farming queries, and becomes the orderer of
time (Horomedon, " ruler of the seasons "), and frequently 
appears on monuments in company with the Horae. 

Apollo is also the protector of cattle and herds, hence Poimnius 
(" god of flocks "), Tragius (" of goats "), Kereatas (" of horned 
animals "). Carneius (probably " horned ") is considered by 
some to be a pre-Dorian god of cattle, also connected with 
harvest queries, whose cult was grafted on to that of Apollo;
by others, to have been originally an epithet of Apollo, afterwards 
detached as a separate personality (Farnell, Cults, iv. p. 131). 
The epithet Maleatas, which, as the quantity of the first vowel (a) 
shows, 2 cannot mean god of " sheep " or " the apple-tree," is 
probably a local adjective derived from Malea (perhaps Cape 
Malea), and may refer to an originally distinct personality, 
subsequently merged in that of Apollo (see below). Apollo him- 
self is spoken of as a keeper of flocks, and the legends of his 
service as a herdsman with Laomedon and Admetus point in the 
same direction. Here probably also is to be referred the epithet 
Lyceius, which, formerly connected with Xuk- (" shine ") and 
used to support the conception of Apollo as a light-god, is now 

1 Hesychius; who also gives the explanation oijxis ("fold"), in 
which case Apollo would be the god of flocks and herds. 
! The authority for the quantity is Isyllus. 



generally referred to Xiwos (" wolf ") and explained as he who 
keeps away the wolves from the flock (cf. \vKoepyos, \vkqkt6vos)'. 
In accordance with this, the epithet \vKi)ytvi)% will not mean 
" born of " or " begetting light," but rather " born from the 
she- wolf," in which form Leto herself was said to have been 
conducted by wolves to Delos. The consecration of the wolf to 
Apollo is probably the relic of an ancient totemistic religion' 
(Farnell, Cults, i. 41; W. Robertson Smith, Religion of the 
Semites, new ed., 1894, p. 226). 

With the care of the fruits of the earth and the lower animals 
is associated that of the highest animal, man, especially the 
youth on his passage to manhood. As such Apollo is KovpOTpo<t>os 
(" rearer of boys ") and patron of the palaestra. In many places 
gymnastic contests form a feature of his festivals, and he himself 
is proficient in athletic exercises (hvay&vios). Thus he was 
supposed to be the first victor at the Olympic games; he over- 
comes Hermes in the foot-race, and Ares in boxing. 

The transition is easy to Apollo as a warlike god; in fact, the 
earlier legends represent him as engaged in strife with Python, 
Tityus, the Cyclopes and the Aloidae. He is Bo'edromios (" the 
helper "), Eleleus (" god of the war-cry '■'), and the Paean was 
said to have been originally a song of triumph composed by him 
after his victory over Python. In Homer he frequently appears 
on the field, like Ares and Athene, bearing the aegis to frighten 
the foe. This aspect is confirmed by the epithets Argyrotoxos 
("god of the silver bow"), Hecatebolos ("the shooter from 
afar "), Chrysaoros (" wearer of the golden sword "), and his 
statues are often equipped with the accoutrements of war. 3 

The fame of the Pythian oracle at Delphi, connected with the 
slaying of Python by the god immediately after his birth, gave 
especial prominence to the idea of Apollo as a god of prophecy. 
Python, always represented in the form of a snake, sometimes 
nameless, is the symbol of the old chthonian divinity whose 
home was the place of " enquiry " (irvdwdai). When Apollo 
Delphinius with his worshippers from Crete took possession of 
the earth-oracle Python, he received in consequence the name 
Pythius. That Python was no fearful monster, symbolizing the 
darkness of winter which is scattered by the advent of spring, 
is shown by the fact that Apollo was considered to have been 
guilty of murder in slaying it, and compelled to wander for a 
term of years and expiate his crime by servitude and purification. 
Possibly at Delphi and other places there was an old serpent- 1 
worship ousted by that of Apollo, which may account for expia- 
tion for the slaying of Python being considered necessary. In 
the solar explanation, the serpent is the darkness driven away by 
the rays of the sun. (On the Delphian cult of Apollo and its 
political significance, see Amphictyony, Delphi, Oracle; and 
Farnell, Cults, iv. pp. 179-218.) Oracular responses were also 
given at Claros near Colophon in Ionia by means of the w&ter of 
a spring which inspired those who drank of it; at Patara in 
Lycia; and at Didyma near Miletus through the priestly family 
of the Branchidae. Apollo's oracles, which he did not deliver 
on his own initiative but as the mouthpiece of Zeus, were in- 
fallible, but the human mind was not always able to grasp their 
meaning; hence he is called Loxias (" crooked," " ambiguous "). 
To certain favoured mortals he communicated the gift of pro- 
phecy (Cassandra, the Cumaean sibyl, Helenus, Melampus and 
Epimenides). Although his favourite method was by word of 
mouth, yet signs were sometimes used; thus Calchas interpreted 
the flight of birds; burning offerings, sacrificial barley; the arrow 
of the god, dreams and the lot, all played their part in communi- 
cating the will of the gods. 

Closely connected with the god of oracles was the god of the 
healing art, the oracle being frequently consulted in cases of 
sickness. These two functions are indicated by the titles 
latromantis (" physician and seer ") and Oulios, probably 
meaning " health-giving " (so Suidas) rather than " destructive." 
This side of Apollo's character does not appear in Homer, where 
Paieon is mentioned as the physician of the gods. Here again, 
as in the case of Aristaeus and Carneius, the question arises 

* Hence some have derived " Apollo " from Ai-oJAfoai, "to, 
destroy." 



APOLLO 



185 



whether Paean (or Paeon) was originally an epithet of Apollo, 
subsequently developed into an independent personality, or 
an independent deity merged in the later arrival (Farnell, Cults, 
iv. p. 234). According to Wilamowitz-Mollendorff in his edition 
of Isyllus, the epithet Maleatas alluded to above is also connected 
with the functions of the healing god, imported into Athens in 
the 4th century B.C. with other well-known health divinities. 
In this connexion, it is said to mean the " gentle one," who gave 
his name to the rock Malion or Maleas (O. Gruppe, Griechische 
Mythologie, ii. 1442) on the Gortynian coast. Apollo is further 
supposed to be the father of Asclepius (Aesculapius), whose 
ritual is closely modelled upon his. The healing god could 
also prevent disease and misfortune of all kinds: hence he is 
4Xe$iKo/fos (" averter of evil ") and airorpoTratos. Further, 
he is able to purify the guilty and to cleanse from sin (here some 
refer the epithet iarpofiavris, in the sense of " physician of the 
soul "). Such a task can be fitly undertaken by Apollo, since 
he himself underwent purification after slaying Python. Accord- 
ing to the Delphic legend, this took place in the laurel grove of 
Tempe, and after nine years of penance the god returned, as was 
represented in the festival called Stepterion or Septerion (see 
A. Mommsen, Delphika, 1878). Thus the old law of blood for 
blood, which only perpetuated the crime from generation to 
generation, gave way to the milder idea of the expiatory power 
of atonement for murder (cf. the court called to «ri AeX<£u>ico at 
Athens, which retained jurisdiction in cases where justifiable 
homicide was pleaded). 

The same element of enthusiasm that affects the priestess of 
the oracle at Delphi produces song and music. The close con- 
nexion between prophecy and song is indicated in Homer 
{Odyssey, viii. 488), where Odysseus suggests that the lay of the 
fall of Troy by Demodocus was inspired by Apollo or the Muse. 
The metrical form of the oracular responses at Delphi, the 
important part played by the paean and the Pythian nomos in 
his ritual, contributed to make Apollo a god of song and music, 
friend and leader of the Muses (fwv<raykTi]s). He plays the 
lyre at the banquets of the gods, and causes Marsyas to be flayed 
alive because he had boasted of his superior skill in playing the 
flute, and the ears of Midas to grow long because he had declared 
in favour of Pan, who contended that the flute was a better 
instrument than Apollo's favourite, the lyre. 

A less important aspect of Apollo is that of a marine deity, 
due to the spread of his cult to the Greek colonies and islands. 
As such, his commonest name is Delphinius, the "dolphin god," 
in whose honour the festival Delphinia was celebrated in Attica. 
This cult probably originated in Crete, whence the god in the form 
of a dolphin led his Cretan worshippers to the Delphian shore, 
where he bade them erect an altar in his honour. He is Epibaterius 
and Apobalerius (" embarker " and " disembarker "), Nasiotas 
(" the islander "), Euryalus (" god of the broad sea "). Like 
Poseidon, he looks forth over his watery kingdom fr,om lofty 
cliffs and promontories (d/craTos, and perhaps d/cpiras). 

These maritime cults of Apollo are probably due to his import- 
ance as the god of colonization, who accompanied emigrants on 
their voyage. As such he is ayrirup (" leader "), oIkuttt}* 
("founder"), 5wM<mrr)s ("god of the home"). As Agyieus 
(" god of streets and ways "), in the form of a stone pillar with 
painted head, placed before the doors of houses, he let in the good 
and kept out the evil (see Farnell, Cults, iv. p. 150, who takes 
Agyieus to mean " leader ") ; on the epithet Prostaterius, he 
who " stands before the house," hence " protector," see G. M. 
Hirst in Journal of Hellenic Studies, xxii. (1902). Lastly, as the 
originator and protector of civil order, Apollo was regarded as the 
founder of cities and legislation. Thus, at Athens, Apollo Patroos 
was known as the protector of the Ionians, and the Spartans 
referred the institutions of Lycurgus to the Delphic oracle. • 

It has been mentioned above that W. H. Roscher, in the article 
" Apollo " in his Lexikon der Mythologie, derives all the aspects 
and functions of Apollo from the conception of an original light- 
and sun-god. The chief objections to this are the following. It 
cannot be shown that on Greek soil Apollo originally had the 
meaning of a sun-god; in Homer, Aeschylus and Plato, the 



sun-god Helios is distinctly separated from Phoebus Apollo; 
the constant epithet Qoijlas, usually explained as the brightness 
of the sun, may equally well refer to his physical beauty or 
moral purity; \vK7iyevqs has already been noticed. It is not 
until the beginning of the 5th century B.C. that the identification 
makes its appearance. The first literary evidence is a fragment 
of Euripides (Phaethon), in which it is especially characterized 
as an innovation. The idea was taken up by the Stoics, and in 
the Roman period generally accepted. But the fact of the 
gradual development of Apollo as a god of light and heaven, and 
his identification with foreign sun-gods, is no proof of an original 
Greek solar conception of him. Apollo-Helios must be regarded 
as "a late by-product of Greek religion" (Farnell, Cults, iv. 
p. 136; Wernicke in Pauly-Wissowa's Realencyclopadie). For 
the manner in which the solar theory is developed, reference 
must be made to Roscher's article, but one legend may here be 
mentioned, since it helps to trace the spread of the cult of the 
god. It was said that Apollo soon after his birth spent a year 
amongst the Hyperboreans, who dwelt in a land of perpetual 
sunshine, before his return to Delphi. This return is explained 
as the second birth of the god and his victory over the powers 
of winter; the name Hyperboreans is explained as the " dwellers 
beyond the north wind." This interpretation is now, however, 
generally rejected in favour of that of H. L. Ahrens,- — that 
Hyperborei is identical with the Perpherees (" the carriers ") , 
who are described as the servants of Apollo, carriers of cereal 
offerings from one community to another (Herodotus iv. 33), 
This would point to the fact that certain settlements of Apolline 
worship along the northernmost border of Greece (Illyria, Thrace, 
Macedonia) were in the habit of sending offerings to the god to 
a centre of his worship farther south (probably Delphi), advancing 
by the route from Tempe through Thessaly, Pherae and Doris 
to Delphi; while others adopted the route through Illyria, 
Epirus, Dodona, the Malian gulf, Carystus in Euboea, and Tenos 
to Delos (Farnell, Cults, iv. p. 100). 

The most usual attributes of Apollo were the lyre and the 
bow; the tripod especially was dedicated to him as the god of 
prophecy. Among plants, the bay, used in expiatory sacrifices 
and also for making the crown of victory at the Pythian games, 
and the palm-tree, under which he was born in Delos, were sacred 
to him ; among animals and birds, the wolf, the roe, the swan, 
the hawk, the raven, the crow, the snake, the mouse, the grass- 
hopper and the griffin, a mixture of the eagle and the lion 
evidently of Eastern origin. The swan and grasshopper symbolize 
music and song; the hawk, raven, crow and snake have reference 
to his functions as the god of prophecy. 

The chief festivals held in honour of Apollo were the Carneia, 
Daphnephoria, Delia, Hyacinthia, Pyanepsia, Pythia and 
Thargelia (see separate articles). 

Among the Romans the worship of Apollo was adopted from 
the Greeks. There is a tradition that the Delphian oracle was 
consulted as early as the period of the kings during the reign of 
Tarquinius Superbus, and in 430 a temple was dedicated to 
Apollo on the occasion of a pestilence, and during the Second 
Punic War (in 212) the Ludi Apollinares were instituted in his 
honour. But it was. in the time of Augustus, who considered 
himself under the special protection of Apollo and was even said 
to be his son, that his worship developed and he became one of 
the chief gods of Rome. After the battle of Actium, Augustus 
enlarged his old temple, dedicated a portion of the spoil to him, 
and instituted quinquennial games in his honour. He also 
erected a new temple on the Palatine hill and transferred the 
secular games, for which Horace composed his Carmen Saeculare, 
to Apollo and Diana. 

Apollo was represented more frequently than any other deity 
in ancient art. As Apollo Agyieus he was shown by a simple 
conic pillar; the Apollo of Amyclae was a pillar of bronze sur- 
mounted by a helmeted head, with extended arms carrying lance 
and bow. There were also rude idols of him in wood {xoana), in 
which the human form was scarcely recognizable. In the 6th 
century, his statues of stone were naked, stiff and rigid in 
attitude, shoulders square, limbs strong and broad, hair falling 



i86 



APOLLODORUS— APOLLONIUS OF PERGA 



down the back. In the riper period of art the type is softer, and 
Apollo appears in a form which seeks to combine manhood and 
eternal youth. His long hair is usually tied in a large knot above 
his forehead. The most famous statue of him is the Apollo 
Belvidere in the Vatican (found at Frascati, 1455), an imitation 
belonging to the early imperial period of a bronze statue repre- 
senting him, with aegis in his left hand, driving back the Gauls 
from his temple at Delphi (279 B.C.), or, according to another 
view, fighting with the Pythian dragon. In the Apollo Cithar- 
oedus or Musagetes in the Vatican, he is crowned with laurel 
and wears the long, flowing robe of the Ionic bard, and his form 
is almost feminine in its fulness; in a statue at Rome of the 
older and more vigorous type he is naked and holds a lyre in his 
left hand; his right arm rests upon his head, and a griffin is 
seated at his side. The Apollo Sauroctonus (after Praxiteles), 
copied in bronze at the Villa Albani in Rome and in marble at 
Paris, is a naked, youthful, almost boyish figure, leaning against 
a tree, waiting to strike a lizard climbing up the trunk. The 
gigantic statue of Helios (the sun-god), " the colossus of Rhodes," 
by Chares of Lindus, celebrated as one of the seven wonders of 
the world, is unknown to us. Bas-reliefs and painted vases 
reproduce the contests of Apollo with Tityus, Marsyas, and 
Heracles, the slaughter of the daughters of Niobe, and other 
incidents in his life. 

Authorities. — F. L. W. Schwartz, De_ antiguissima Apollinis 
Natura (Berlin, 1843); J. A. Schonborn, Uber das Wesen Apollons 
(Berlin, 1854); A. Milchhofer, Uber den attischen Apollon (Munich, 
l8 73); T. Schreiber, Apollon Pythoktonos (Leipzig, 1879); W. H. 
Roscher, Studien zur vergleichenden Mythologie der Criechen und 
Rbmer, i. (Leipzig, 1873) ; R. Hecker, De Apollinis apud Romanos 
Cultu (Leipzig, 1879) ; G. Colin, Le Culte d' Apollon pythien a Athenes 
(1905); L. Dyer, The Gods in Greece (1891); articles in Pauly- 
Wissowa's Realencyclopddie, W. H. Roscher's Lexikon der Mytho- 
logie, and Daremberg and Saglio's Dictionnaire des antiquites; 
L. Preller, Griechische und romische Mythologie (4th ed. by C. 
Robert); J. Marquardt, Romische Staalsverwaltung, iii. ; G. Wissowa 
Religion und Kultus der Rbmer (1902); D. Bassi, Saggio di Biblio- 
grafia mitologica, i. Apollo (1896); L. Farnell, Cults of the Greek 
States, iv. (1907) ; O. Gruppe, Griechische Mythologie und Religions- 
geschichte, ii. (1906). In the article Greek Art, fig. 9 represents a 



bearded Apollo, playing on the lyre, in a chariot drawn by winged 
horses; fig. 55 (pi. ii.) Apollo of the Belvidere; fig. 76 (pi. v.) a 
nude and roughly executed colossal figure of the god. (J. H. F.) 



APOLLODORUS, an Athenian painter, who flourished at the 
end of the 5th century B.C. He is said to have introduced great 
improvements in perspective and chiaroscuro. What these 
were jt is impossible to say: perspective cannot have been in 
his day at an advanced stage. Among his works were an 
Odysseus, a priest in prayer, and an Ajax struck by lightning. 

APOLLODORUS, an Athenian grammarian, pupil of Aris- 
tarchus and Panaetius the Stoic, who lived about 140 B.C. He 
was a prolific and versatile writer. There is extant under his 
name a treatise on the gods and the heroic age, entitled Bt(3Xto- 
dijKrj, a valuable authority on ancient mythology. Modern 
critics are of opinion that, if genuine, it is an abridgment of a 
larger work by him (Hepl de&v). 

Edition, with commentary> by Heyne (1803); text by Wagner 
(1894) (Mythographi Graeci, vol. i. Teubner series). Amongst other 
works by him of which only fragments remain, collected in Miiller, 
Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum, may be mentioqpd : Xpow/co, 
a universal history from the fall of Troy to 144 B.C. ; IlepiiJYijffis, a 
gazetteer wiitten in iambics; Ilcpi Newv, a work on the Homeric 
catalogue of ships; and a work on etymology ('ErvnoXoyiai.). 

APOLLODORUS, of Carystus in Euboea, one of the most 
important writers of the New Attic comedy, who flourished at 
Athens between 300 and 260 B.C. He is to be distinguished from 
an older Apollodorus of Gela (342-290), also a writer of comedy, 
a contemporary of Menander. He wrote 47 comedies and 
obtained the prize five times. Terence borrowed his Hecyra 
and Phormio from the'Exupd and 'Ewt-SiKa^dfievos of Apollodorus. 

Fragments in Koch, Comicorum Atticorutn Fragmenta, ii. (1884); 
see also Meineke, Historia Critica Comicorum Graecorum (1839). 

APOLLODORUS, of Damascus, a famous Greek architect, who 
flourished during the 2nd century a.d. He was a favourite of 
Trajan, for whom he constructed the stone bridge over the 
Danube (a.d. 104-105). He also planned a gymnasium, a 
college, public baths, the Odeum and the Forum Trajanum, 



within the city of Rome; and the triumphal arches at Bene- 
ventum and Ancona. The Trajan column in the centre of the 
Forum is celebrated as being the first triumphal monument of 
the kind. On the accession of Hadrian, whom he had offended 
by ridiculing his performances as architect and artist, Apollodorus 
was banished, and, shortly afterwards, being charged with 
imaginary crimes, put to death (Dio Cassius lxix. 4). He also 
wrote a treatise on Siege Engines (Ho~KiopKr)nKa) , which was 
dedicated to Hadrian. 

APOLLONIA, the name of more than thirty cities of antiquity. 
The most important are the following: (1) An Illyrian city 
(known as Apollonia ko.t ''Enribaix.vov or xpos 'E7rt5a(Ui>C})) on the 
right bank of the Aous, founded by the Corinthians and Corcy- 
raeans. It soon became a place of increasing commercial 
prosperity, as the most convenient link between Brundusium 
and northern Greece, and as one of the starting-points of the 
Via Egnatia. It was an important military post in the wars 
against Philip and during the civil wars of Pompey and Caesar, 
and towards the close of the Roman republic acquired fame as a 
seat of literature and philosophy. Here Augustus was being 
educated when the death of Caesar called him to Rome. It 
seems to have sunk with the rise of Aulon, and few remains of its 
ruins are to be found. The monastery of Pollina stands on a hill 
which probably is part of the site of the old city. (2) A Thracian 
city on the Black Sea (afterwards Sozopolis, and now Sizeboli), 
colonized by the Milesians, and famous for its colossal statue of 
Apollo by Calamis, which Lucullus removed to Rome. 

APOLLONIUS, surnamed 6 SvctkoXos (" the Surly or Crabbed"), 
a celebrated grammarian of Alexandria, who lived in the reigns 
of Hadrian and Antoninus Pius. He spent the greater part of 
his life in his native city, where he died; he is also said to have 
visited Rome and attracted the attention of Antoninus. He 
was the founder of scientific grammar and is styled by Priscian 
grammaticorum princeps. Four of his works are extant: On 
Syntax, ed. Bekker, 1817; and three smaller treatises, on 
Pronouns, Conjunctions and Adverbs, ed. Schneider, 1878. 

Grammatici Graeci, i. in Teubner series; Egger, Apollonius 
Dyscole (1854). 

APOLLONIUS, surnamed 6 p.aX<xKos ("the Effeminate"), a 
Greek rhetorician of Alabanda in Caria, who flourished about 
120 B.C. After studying under Menecles, chief of the Asiatic 
school of oratory, he settled in Rhodes, where he taught rhetoric, 
among his pupils being Mark Antony. 

APOLLONIUS, surnamed " the Sophist," of Alexandria, a 
famous grammarian, who probably lived towards the end of the 
1st century a.d. He was the author of a Homeric lexicon 
(Ae£e« 'Q(j.T]piKal), the only work of the kind we possess, His 
chief authorities were Aristarchus and Apion's Homeric glossary. 

Edition by Villoison (1773), I. Bekker (1833) ; Leyde, De Apollonii 
Sophistae Lexico Homerico (1885); E. W. B. Nicholson on a newly 
discovered fragment in Classical Review (Nov. 1897). 

APOLLONIUS MOLON (sometimes called simply Molon), 
a Greek rhetorician, who flourished about 70 B.C. He was a 
native of Alabanda, a pupil of Menecles, and settled at Rhodes. 
He twice visited Rome as an ambassador from Rhodes, and 
Cicero and Caesar took lessons from him. He endeavoured 
to moderate the florid Asiatic style and cultivated an " Atticiz- 
ing" tendency. He wrote on Homer, and, according to Josephus, 
violently attacked the Jews. 

See C. Miiller, Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum, iii. ; E. Schiirer, 
History of the Jewish People, iii. (Eng. tr. 1886). 

APOLLONIUS OF PERGA [Pergaeus], Greek geometer of the 
Alexandrian school, was probably born some twenty-five years 
later than Archimedes, i.e. about 262 B.C. He flourished in the 
reigns of Ptolemy Euergetes and Ptolemy Philopator (247-205 
B.C.). His treatise on Conies gained him the title of The Great 
Geometer, and is that by which his fame has been transmitted 
to modern times. All his numerous other treatises have perished, 
save one, and we have only their titles handed down, with general 
indications of their contents, by later, writers, especially Pappus. 
After the Conies in eight Books had been written in a first edition, 
Apollonius brought out a second edition, considerably revised as 
regards Books i.-ii., at the instance of one Eudemus of Pergamum; 



APOLLONIUS OF PERGA 



187 



the first three books were sent to Eudemus at intervals, as re- 
vised, and the later books were dedicated (after Eudemus' 
death) to King Attalus I. (241-197 B.C.). Only four Books have 
survived in Greek; three more are extant in Arabic; the eighth 
has never been found. Although a fragment has been found of a 
Latin translation from the Arabic made in the 13th century, it 
was not until 1661 that a Latin translation of Books v.-vii. 
was available. This was made by Giovanni Alfonso Borelli and 
Abraham Ecchellensis from the free version in Arabic made in 
983 by Abu '1-Fath of Ispahan and preserved in a Florence MS. 
But the best Arabic translation is that made as regards Books 
i.-iv. by Hilal ibn Abl Hilal (d. about 883), and as regards Books 
v.-vii. by Tobit ben Korra (836-901). Halley used for his 
translation an Oxford MS. of this translation of Books v.-vii., 
but the best MS. (Bodl. 943) he only referred to in order to 
correct his translation, and it is still unpublished except for a 
fragment of Book v. published by L. Nix with German transla- 
tion (Drugulin, Leipzig, 1889). Halley added in his edition (1710) 
a restoration of Book viii., in which he was guided by the fact 
that Pappus gives lemmas " to the seventh and eighth books " 
under that one heading, as well as by the statement of Apollonius 
himself that the use of the seventh book was illustrated by the 
problems solved in the eighth. 

The degree of originality of the Conies can best be judged 
from Apollonius' own prefaces. Books i.-iv. form an " ele- 
mentary introduction," i.e. contain the essential principles; the 
rest are specialized investigations in particular directions. For 
Books i.-iv. he claims only that the generation of the curves 
and their fundamental properties in Book i. are worked out 
more fully and generally than they were in earlier treatises, and 
that a number of theorems in Book iii. and the greater part of 
Book iv. are new. That he made the fullest use of his prede- 
cessors' works, such as Euclid's four Books on Confcs, is clear 
from his allusions to Euclid, Conon and Nicoteles. The gener- 
ality of treatment is indeed remarkable; he gives as the funda- 
mental property of all the conies the equivalent of the Cartesian 
equation referred to oblique axes (consisting of a diameter and 
the tangent at its extremity) obtained by cutting an oblique 
circular cone in any manner, and the axes appear only as a 
particular case after he has shown that the property of the conic 
can be expressed in the same form with reference to any new 
diameter and the tangent at its extremity. It is clearly the form 
of the fundamental property (expressed in the terminology of 
the " application of areas ") which led him to call the curves for 
the first time by the names parabola, ellipse, hyperbola. Books 
v.-vii. are clearly original. Apollonius' genius takes its highest 
flight in Book v., where he treats of normals as minimum and 
maximum straight lines drawn from given points to the curve 
(independently of tangent properties), discusses how many 
normals can be drawn from particular points, finds their feet by 
construction, and gives propositions determining the centre of 
curvature at any point and leading at once to the Cartesian 
equation of the evolute of any conic. 

The other treatises of Apollonius mentioned by Pappus are 
— 1st, A670U ctaroTO/iJ7, Cutting of a Ratio; 2nd, Xuplov cbroTO/t^, 
Cutting off an Area; 3rd, Aiupur /xtvr] rofiri, Determinate Section; 
4th, 'E-wa<j>al, Tangencies; 5th, Newms, Inclinations; 6th, Toiroi 
«riir«5oi, Plane Loci. Each of these was divided into two books, 
and, with the Data, the Porisms and Surface-Loci of Euclid and 
the Conies of Apollonius were, according to Pappus, included in 
the body of the ancient analysis. 

1 st. De Rationis Sectione had for its subject the resolution of 
the following problem: Given two straight lines and a point in 
each, to draw through a third given point a straight line cutting 
the two fixed lines, so that the parts intercepted between the 
given points in them and the points of intersection with this 
third line may have a given ratio. 

2nd. De Spatii Sectione discussed the similar problem which 
requires the rectangle contained by the two intercepts to be equal 
to a given rectangle. 

An Arabic version of the first was found towards the end of 
the 17th century in the Bodleian library by Dr Edward Bernard, 



who began a translation of it; Halley finished it and published 
it along with a restoration of the second treatise in 1706. 

3rd. De Sectione Determinata resolved the problem: Given 
two, three or four points on a straight line, to find another point 
on it such that its distances from the given points satisfy the 
condition that the square on one or the rectangle contained by 
two has to the square on the remaining one or the rectangle 
contained by the remaining two, or to the rectangle contained 
by the remaining one and another given straight line, a given 
ratio. Several restorations of the solution have been attempted, 
one by W. Snellius (Leiden, 1698), another by Alex. Anderson of 
Aberdeen, in the supplement to his Apollonius Redivivus (Paris, 
161 2), but by far the best is by Robert Simson, Opera quaedam 
reliqua (Glasgow, 1776). 

4th. De Tactionibus embraced the following general problem: 
Given three things (points, straight lines or circles) in position, 
to describe a circle passing through the given points, and touching 
the given straight lines or circles. The most difficult case, and 
the most interesting from its historical associations, is when the 
three given things are circles. This problem, which is sometimes 
known as the Apollonian Problem, was proposed by Vieta in the 
1 6th century to Adrianus Romanus, who gave a solution by 
means of a hyperbola. Vieta thereupon proposed a simpler 
construction, and restored the whole treatise of Apollonius in a 
small work, which he entitled Apollonius Gallus (Paris, 1600). 
A very full and interesting historical account of the problem is 
given in the preface to a small work of J. W. Camerer, entitled 
Apollonii Pergaei quae super sunt, ac maxime Lemmata Pappi in 
hos Libros, cum Observationibus, &c. (Gothae, 1795, 8vo). 

5th. De Inclinalionibus had for its object to insert a straight 
line of a given length, tending towards a given point, between 
two given (straight or circular) lines. Restorations have been 
given by Marino Ghetaldi, by Hugo d'Omerique (Geometrical 
Analysis, Cadiz, 1698), and (the best) by Samuel Horsley (1770). 

6th. De Locis Planis is a collection of propositions relating to 
loci which are either straight lines or circles. Pappus gives 
somewhat full particulars of the propositions, and restorations 
were attempted by P. Fermat (CEuvres, i., 1891, pp. 3-51), F. 
Schooten (Leiden, 1656) and, most successfully of all, by R. 
Simson (Glasgow, 1749). 

Other works of Apollonius are referred to by ancient writers, 
viz. (1) Ilept rod irvpiov, On the Burning-Glass, where the focal 
properties of the parabola probably found a place; (2) Ilept rod 
KoxAtou, On the Cylindrical Helix (mentioned by Proclus) ; (3) a 
comparison of the dodecahedron and the icosahedron inscribed 
in the same sphere; (4) 'H KadoXov xpay/Kireia, perhaps a work 
on the general principles of mathematics in which were included 
Apollonius' criticisms and suggestions for the improvement of 
Euclid's Elements; (5) 'Qkvtoklov (quick bringing- to-birth), in 
which, according to Eutocius, he showed how to find closer 
limits for the value of ir than the 3-^ and 3-^- of Archimedes; 
(6) an arithmetical work (as to which see Pappus) on a system 
of expressing large numbers in language closer to that of common 
life than that of Archimedes' Sand-reckoner, and showing how 
to multiply such large numbers; (7) a great extension of the 
theory of irrationals expounded in Euclid, Book x., from 
binomial to multinomial and from ordered to unordered irra^ 
tionals (see extracts from Pappus' comm. on Eucl. x., preserved 
in Arabic and published by Woepcke, 1856). Lastly, in 
astronomy he is credited by Ptolemy with an explanation of 
the motion of the planets by a system of epicycles; he also 
made researches in the lunar theory, for which he is said to have 
been called Epsilon (e). 

The best editions of the works of Apollonius are the following : (1) 
Apollonii Pergaei Conicorum libri quatuor, ex versione Frederici 
Commandini (Bononiae, 1566), fol. ;. (2) Apollonii Pergaei Conicorum 
libri octo, et Sereni Antissensis de Sectione Cylindri et Coni libri duo 
(Oxoniae, 1710), fol. (this is the monumental edition of Edmund 
Halley) ; (3) the edition of the first four books of the Conies given in 
1675 by Barrow; (4) Apollonii Pergaei de Sectione Rationis libri duo: 
Accedunt ejusdem de Sectione Spatii libri duo Restituti: Praemittitur , 
&c, Opera et Studio Edmundi Halley (Oxoniae, 1706), 4to; (5) a 
German translation of the Conies by H. Balsam (Berlin, 1861); 
(6) the definitive Greek text of Heiberg (Apollonii Pergaei quae Graece 



1 88 APOLLONIUS OF RHODFS^APOLLOMIUS OF TYRE 



exslant Opera, Leipzig, 1891-1893); (7) T. L. Heath, Apollonius, 
Treatise on Conic Sections (Cambridge, 1 896) ; see also H. G. Zeuthen, 
Die Lekre von den Kegelschnitten im Alterlum (Copenhagen, 1886 
and 1902;. (T. L. H.) 

APOLLONIUS OF RHODES (Rhodius), a Greek epic poet 
and grammarian, of Alexandria, who flourished under the 
Ptolemies Philopator and Epiphanes (222-181 B.C.). He was 
the pupil of Callimachus, with whom he subsequently quarrelled. 
In his youth he composed the work for which he is known— 
Argonautica, an epic in four books on the legend of the Argonauts. 
When he read it at Alexandria, it was rejected through the 
influence of Callimachus and his party. Disgusted with his 
failure, Apollonius withdrew to Rhodes, where he was very 
successful as a rhetorician, and a revised edition of his epic was 
well received. In recognition of his talents the Rhodians 
bestowed the freedom of their city upon him- — the origin of his 
surname. Returning to Alexandria, he again recited his poem, 
this time with general applause. In 196, Ptolemy Epiphanes 
appointed him librarian of the Museum, which office he probably 
held until his death. As to the Argonautica, Longinus' {De 
Sublim. p. 54, 19) and Quintilian's (Inslit. x. 1, 54) verdict of 
mediocrity seems hardly deserved; although it lacks the natural- 
ness of Homer, it possesses a certain simplicity and contains 
some beautiful passages. There is a valuable collection of 
scholia. The work, highly esteemed by the Romans, was 
imitated by Virgil {Aeneid, iv.), Varro Atacinus, and Valerius 
Flaccus. Marianus (about a.d. 500) paraphrased it in iambic 
trimeters. Apollonius also wrote epigrams; grammatical and 
critical works; and Kritras (the foundations of cities). 

Editio Princeps (Florence, 1496) ; Merkel-Keil (with scholia, 1854) ; 
Seaton (1900). English translations: Verse, by Greene (1780); 
Fawkes (1780); Preston (181 1); Way (1901); Prose by Coleridge 
(1889); see a ' so Couat, La Poesie alexandrine; Susemihl, Geschichte 
der griech. Lit. in der alexandrinischen Zeit. 

APOLLONIUS OF TRALLES (in Caria), a Greek sculptor, who 
flourished in the 2nd century B.C. With his brother Tauriscus, 
he executed the marble group known as the Farnese Bull, re- 
presenting Zethus and Amphion tying the revengeful Dirce to 
the tail of a wild bull. 

See Greek Art, pi. i. fig. 51. 

APOLLONIUS OF TYANA, a Greek philosopher of the Neo- 
Pythagorean school, born a few years before the Christian era. 
He studied at Tarsus and in the temple of Asclepius at Aegae, 
where he devoted himself to the doctrines of Pythagoras and 
adopted the ascetic habit of life in its fullest sense. He travelled 
through Asia and visited Nineveh, Babylon and India, imbibing 
the oriental mysticism of magi, Brahmans and gymnosophists. 
The narrative of his travels given by his disciple Damis and 
reproduced by Philostratus is so full of the miraculous that many 
have regarded him as an imaginary character. On his return 
to Europe he was saluted as a magician, and received the greatest 
reverence from priests and people generally. He himself claimed 
only the power of foreseeing the future; yet in Rome it was said 
that he raised from death the body of a noble lady. In the halo 
of his mysterious power he passed through Greece, Italy and 
Spain. It was said that he was accused of treason both by Nero 
and by Domitian, but escaped by miraculous means. Finally 
he set up a school at Ephesus, where he died, apparently at the 
age of a hundred years. Philostratus keeps up the mystery of 
his hero's life by saying, " Concerning the manner of his death, 
if he did die, the accounts are various. ' ' The work of Philostratus 
composed at the instance of Julia, wife of Severus, is generally 
regarded as a religious work of fiction. It contains a number of 
obviously fictitious stories, through which, however, it is not 
impossible to discern the general character of the man. In the 3rd 
century, Hierocles (q.v.) endeavoured to prove that the doctrines 
and the life of Apollonius were more valuable than those of Christ, 
and, in modern times, Voltaire and Charles Blount (1654-1693), 
the English freethinker, have adopted a similar standpoint. Apart 
from this extravagant eulogy, it is absurd to regard Apollonius 
merely as a vulgar charlatan and miracle-monger. If we cut 
away the mass of mere fiction which Philostratus accumulated, 
we have left a highly imaginative, earnest reformer who laboured 



to infuse into the flaccid dialectic of paganism a saner spirit of 
practical morality. 

See L. Dyer, Studies of the Gods in Greece (New York, 1891) ; 

A. Chassang, Le Merveilleux dans I'antiquite (1882) ; D. M. Tredwell, 
Sketch of the Life of Apollonius of Tyana (New York, 18S6) ; F- C. 
Baur, Apollonius von Tyana und t Christus, ed. Ed. Zeller (Leipzig, 
1876, — an attempt to show that Philostratus's story is merely a pagan 
counterblast to the New Testament history) ; J. Jessen, Apollonius 
v. Tyana und sein Biograph Philostratos (Hamburg, 1885) ; J. Gott- 
sching, Apollonius von Tyana (Berlin, 1889); J. A. Froude. Short 
Studies, vol. iv. ; G. R. S. Mead, Apollonius of Tyana (London, 1901) ; 

B. L. Gildersleeve, Essays and Studies (New York, 1896) ; Philo- 
stratus's Life of Apollonius (Eng. trans. New York, 1905) ; O. de B. 
Priaulx, The Indian Travels of Apollonius (1873) ; F. W. G. Camp- 
bell, Apoll. of Tyana (1908); see also Neo-Pythagoreanism. 

APOLLONIUS OF TYRE, a medieval tale supposed to be 
derived from a lost Greek original. The earliest mention of the 
story is in the Carmina (Bk. vi. 8, 11. 5-6) of Venantius For- 
tunatus, in the second half of the 6th century, and the romance 
may well date from three centuries earlier. It bears a marked 
resemblance to the Antheia and Habrokomes of Xenophon of 
Ephesus. The story relates that King Antiochus, maintaining 
incestuous relations with his daughter, kept off her suitors by 
asking them a riddle, which they must solve on pain of losing 
their heads. Apollonius of Tyre solved the riddle, which had 
to do with Antiochus's secret. He returned to Tyre, and, to 
escape the king's vengeance, set sail in search of a place of refuge. 
In Cyrene he married the daughter of King Archistrates, and 
presently, on receiving news of the death of Antiochus, departed 
to take possession of the kingdom of Antipch, of which he was, 
for no clear reason, the heir. On the voyage his wife died^ or 
rather seemed to die, in giving birth to a daughter, and the 
sailors demanded that she should be thrown overboard. Apol- 
lonius left his daughter, named Tarsia, at Tarsus in the care 
of guardians who proved false to their trust. Father, mother, 
and daughter were only reunited after fourteen years' separation 
and many vicissitudes. The earliest Latin MS. of this tale, 
preserved at Florence, dates from the 9th or 10th century. 
The pagan features of the supposed original are by no means 
all destroyed. The ceremonies observed by Tarsia at her nurse's 
grave, and the preparations for the burning of the, body of 
Apollonius's wife, are purely pagan. The riddles which Tarsia 
propounds to her father are obviously interpolated. They are 
taken from the Enigmata of Caelius Firmianus Symposius. The 
many inconsistencies of the story seem to be best explained by 
the supposition (E. Rohde, Der griechische Roman, 2nd ed., 
1900, pp. 435 et seq.) that the Antiochus story was originally 
entirely separate from the story of Apollonius's wanderings, 
and was clumsily tacked on by the Latin author. The romance 
kept its form through a vast number of medieval re-arrangements, 
and there is little change in its outlines as set forth in the Shake- 
spearian play of Pericles. 

The Latin tale is preserved in about 100 MSS., and was printed 
by M.Velser (Augsburg, 1595), by J. Lapaume in Script. Erot. (Didot, 
Paris, 1856), and by A. Riese in the Bibl. Teubneriana (1871, new ed. 
1893). The most widespread versions in the middle ages were those 
of Godfrey of Viterbo in his Pantheon (1185), where it is related as 
authentic history, and in the Gesla Romanorum (cap. 153), which 
formed the basis of the German folk-tale by H. Steinhowel (Augs- 
burg, 1471), the Dutch version (Delft, 1493), the French in Le Violier- 
des histoires romaines (Paris, 1521), the English, by Laurence Twine 
(London, 1576, new ed. 1607), also of the Scandinavian, Czech, and 
Hungarian tales. 

In England a translation was made as early as the nth century 
(ed. B. Thorpe, 1834, and J. Zupitza in Archivfur neuere Sprachen, 
1896); there is a Middle English metrical version (J. O. Halliwelh 
A New Boke about Shakespeare, 1850), by a poet who says he was 
vicar of Wimborne; John Gower uses the tale as an example of the 
seventh deadly sin in the eighth book of his Confessio Amantis; 
Robert Copland translated a prose romance of Kynge Apbllyne of 
Thyre (Wynkyn de Worde, 1510) from the French; Pericles was 
entered at Stationers' Hall in 1607, and was followed in the next 
year by George Wilkins's novel, The Painfull Adventures of Pericles, 
Prynce of Tyre (ed. Tycho Mommsen, Oldenburg, 1857), and George 
Lillo drew his play Marina (1738) from the piece associated with 
Shakespeare; Orendel, by a Middle High German minnesinger, 
contains some of the episodes of Apollonius; Heinrich von Neustadt 
wrote a poem of 20,000 lines on Apollonius von Tyrland (c. 1400) ; 
the story was well known in Spanish, Libre de A polonio (yerse, c. 
1200), and in J. de Timoneda's PatraKuelo (1576) ; in French much 



APOLLOS— APOLOGETICS 



189 



of it was embodied in Jourdain de Blaives (13th cent.), and it also 
appears in Italian and medieval Greek. See A. H. Smyth, Shake- 
speare's Pericles and Apollonius of Tyre (Philadelphia, 1898) ; Elimar 
Klebs, Die Erzahlung von A. aus Tyrus (Berlin, 1899); S. Singer, 
Apollonius von Tyrus (Halle, 1895). 

APOLLOS ('AttoWws; contracted from Apollonius), an 
Alexandrine Jew who after Paul's first visit to Corinth worked 
there in a similar way (1 Cor. iii. 6). He was with Paul at a 
later date in Ephesus (1 Cor. xvi. 12). In 1 Cor. i. 10-12 we read 
of four parties in the Corinthian church, of which two attached 
themselves to Paul and Apollos respectively, using their names, 
though the " division " can hardly have been due to conflicting 
doctrines. (See Paul.) From Acts xviii. 24-28 we learn that he 
spoke and taught with power and success. He may have capti- 
vated his hearers by teaching " wisdom," as P. W. Schmiedel 
suggests, in the allegorical style of Philo, and he was evidently 
a man of unusual magnetic force. There seems to be some con- 
tradiction between Acts xviii. 25 a b and Acts xviii. 25 c, 26 b c; 
and it has been suggested that these latter passages are subse- 
quent accretions. Since Apollos was a Christian and " taught 
exactly," he could hardly have been acquainted only with 
John's baptism or have required to be taught Christianity more 
thoroughly by Aquila and Priscilla. Martin Luther regarded 
Apollos as the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and many 
scholars since have shared his view. 

Jerome says that Apollos was so dissatisfied with the division at 
Corinth, that he retired into Crete with Zenas, a doctor of the law; 
and that the schism having been healed by Paul's letter to the 
Corinthians, Apollos returned to the city, and became its bishop. 
Less probable traditions assign to him the bishopric of Duras, or of 
Iconium in Phrygia, or of Caesarea. 

See the articles in the Encyclopaedia Biblica; Herzog-Haiick, 
Realencyklopadie ; The Jewish Encyclopaedia; Hastings' Dictionary 
of the Bible; and cf. Weizsacker, Das apostolische Zeitalter; A. C. 
McGiffert, History of Christianity, in the Apostolic Age. 

APOLLYON, the " foul fiend " who assaulted Christian on 
his pilgrimage through the Valley of Humiliation in John 
Bunyan's great allegory. The name (Gr. ' AiroWvoiv) , which 
means " destroyer " (airoWbtiv, to destroy), is taken from 
Rev. ix. 11, where it represents the Hebrew word Abaddon (lit. 
" place of destruction," but here personified). The identification 
with the Asmodeus (q.v.) of Tobit iii. 8 is erroneous. 

APOLOGETICS, in theology, the systematic statement of the 
grounds which Christians allege for belief in (at least) a super- 
natural revelation and a divim redemption (cf. e.g. Heb. i. 1-3). 
The majority of apologists in the past have further believed in 
an infallible Bible; but they admit this position can only be 
reached at a late stage in the argument. We should note, how- 
ever, that even a liberal orthodoxy, while saying nothing about 
infallibility, is pledged to the essential authority of the Bible; 
it cannot e.g. simply ignore the Old Testament with F. E. D. 
Schleiermacher. Catholic apologetics must further give a 
central position to Church authority, which Roman Catholics 
explicitly define as infallible; but this position too is debated 
in a late section of their system. On the other hand, there may 
be a Christianity which seeks to extricate the " spiritual " from 
the" supernatural " (Arnold Toynbee, characterizing T.H.Green). 
It would only lead to confusion, however, if we called this method 
" apologetic." Any single effort in apologetics may be termed 
" an apology." More elaborate contrasts have been proposed 
between the two words, but are of little practical importance. 

I. The Word itself. — In Greek, airo\oyia is the defendant's reply 
(personally, not through a lawyer) to the speech for the prosecu- 
tion — Karriyopla. Sometimes defendants' speeches passed into 
literature, e.g. Plato's splendid version of the Apology of Socrates* 
Thus, in view of persecution or slander, the Christian church 
naturally produced literary " Apologies." The word has never 
quite lost this connotation of standing on the defensive and 
rebutting criticism; e.g. Anselm's Apologia contra insipientem 
Gaunilonem (c. 1100); or the Lutheran Apology for the Augsburg 
Confession (1531); or J. H. Newman's Apologia pro vita sua 
(1864); or A. B. Bruce's Apologetics; or Christianity Defensively 
Stated (1892). Of course, defence easily passes into counter- 
attack, as when early apologists denounce Greek and Roman 



religion. Yet the purpose may be defence even then. And 
there is perhaps a reason of a deeper kind for holding Apologetics 
to the defensive. Christianity is a prophetic religion. Now a 
prophet does not argue; he declares what he feels to be God's 
will. For himself, he rests, like the mystic, upon an immediate 
vision of truth; but he differs from most mystics in having a 
message for others; and — again unlike most mystics— he 
addresses the hearer's conscience, which we might call (in one 
sense) the mystic element in every man — or better, perhaps, the 
prophetic. Can the positive grounds for a prophet's message 
be analysed and stated in terms of argument? If so, apologetics 
is literally a science, and it is pedantry to claim the defensive 
and pretend to throw the onus probandi upon objectors. But, 
if not, then apologetics is a mere auxiliary, and is only " a 
science " in so far as it presents a conscious and systematic plea. 
Bruce's title, and his programme of "succouring distressed faith," 
imply the latter alternative; the moral appeal of Christianity, 
primary and essential; its confirmation by argument, secondary. 
The view has its difficulties; but it is hignly suggestive. 

The word airo\oyla is used by Origen (Contra Cel. ii. 65, v. 19) 
of the general Christian defence. But the introduction of the 
adjective " apologetic " and of the substantive " apologetics " is 
recent. They are serviceable as bracketing together (1) Natural 
Theology or Theism, (2) Christian Evidences — chiefly "miracles" 
and "prophecy"; or, on a more modern view, chiefly the 
character and personality of Christ. The lower usage of Apology 
(as expression of regret for a fault) has tipped many a sarcasm 
besides George III.'s on the occasion of Bishop Watson's book, 
" I did not know that the Bible needed an apology! " 

II. Apologetics in the Bible.— The Old Testament does not 
argue in support of its beliefs, unless when (chiefly in parts of 
the Wisdom literature) it seeks to rebut moral difficulties (cf. 
T. K. Cheyne, Job and Solomon; A. S. Peake, Problem of Suffer- 
ing in the Old Testament, 1904). The New Testament reflects 
chiefly controversy with Jews. Great emphasis is laid upon 
alleged fulfilments — striking or fanciful, but very generally 
striking to that age — of Old Testament prophecy (Matt, especi- 
ally; rather differently Ep. to Heb.). The miracles of Jesus are 
also canvassed. Jews do not deny their wonderful character, 
but attribute them to black art (Mark iii. 22 &c, &c). On the 
other hand, Christians and Jews are pretty well agreed on natural 
theology; so the New Testament tends to take its theism for 
granted. However, Rom. i. 20 has had great influence on 
Christian theology (e.g. Thomas Aquinas) in leading it to base 
theism upon reason or argument. One apologetic contention, 
aimed at Gentile readers, is found among the motives of Acts. 
Christianity is not a lawless but an excellent law-abiding faith. 
So (it is alleged) rulers, both Jewish and Gentile, have often 
admitted (xviii. 14; xix. 37; xxiii. 9; xxvi. 32). 

III. Early Christian. — When we leave the New Testament, 
apologetics becomes conspicuous until the political triumph of 
Christianity, and even somewhat later. The atmosphere is no 
longer Jewish but fully Greek. True there are, as always, 
Jewish controversialists. Justin Martyr writes a Dialogue with 
Trypho; Origen deals with many anti-Christian arguments 
borrowed by Celsus from a certain nameless Jew. Yet Greece 
was the sovereign power in all the world of ancient culture. 
And so Christianity was necessarily Hellenized, necessarily 
philosophized. One result was to bring natural theology into 
the forefront. A pure morality, belief in one God, hopes extend- 
ing beyond death— these appealed to the age; the Church 
taught them as philosophically true and divinely revealed. 
But, further still, philosophy offered a vehicle which could be 
applied to the contents of Christianity. The Platonic or eclectic 
theism, which adopted the conception of the Logos, made a 
place for Christ in terms of philosophy within. the Godhead. 
(John i. 1 may or may not be affected by Philo; it is almost or 
quite solitary in the N.T.) Similarly, the immortality of the 
soul may be maintained on Platonic or quasi-Platonic lines, as 
by St Athanasius (Contra Centes, § 33) — a writer who repeatedly 
quotes the Alexandrian Book of Wisdom, in which Platonism 
and the Old Testament had already joined partnership. This 



igo 



APOLOGETICS 



phase of Platonism, however, was much more slowly adopted. 
The earlier apologists dispute the natural immortality of the 
soul; Athanasius himself, in De Incarnatione Dei, §§ 4, 5, tones 
down the teaching of Wisdom; and the somewhat eccentric 
writer Arnobius, a layman — from Justin Martyr downwards 
apologetics has always been largely in the hands of laymen — 
stands for what has recently been called " conditional immor- 
tality " — eternal life for the righteous, the children of God, alone. 

Allied with this more empiricist stand-point is the assertion 
that Greek philosophy borrowed from Moses; but in studying 
the Fathers we constantly find that groundless assertion 
uttered in the same breath with the dominant Idealist view, 
according to which Greek philosophy was due to incomplete 
revelation from the divine Logos. 

On purely defensive lines, early apologists rebut charges of 
cannibalism and sexual promiscuity; the Christians had to 
meet in secret, and the gossip of a rotten age drew malignant 
conclusions. They make counter attacks on polytheism as a 
folly and on the shamefulness of obscene myths. Here they are 
in line with non-Christian writers or culture-mockers like Lucian 
of Samosata; or graver spirits like Porphyry, who champions 
Neo-Platonism as a rival to Christianity, and does pioneer work 
in criticism by attacks on some of the Old Testament books. 
Turning to Christian evidence proper, we are struck with the 
continued prominence of the argument from prophecy. The 
Old Testament was an immense religious asset to the early 
church. Their enemies had nothing like it; and — the N.T. 
canon being as yet but half formed — the Old Testament was 
pushed into notice by dwelling on this imperfect " argument," 
which grew more extravagant as the partial control exercised 
by Jewish learning disappeared. An argument from miracles 
is also urged, though with more reserve. Formally, every one 
in that age admitted the supernatural. The question was, 
whose supernatural ? And how far did it carry you ? Miracle 
could not be to a 3rd century writer what it was to W. Paley — 
a conclusive and well-nigh solitary proof. Other apologies are 
by Aristides (recently recovered in translation), Athenagoras 
("elegant"), Eusebius of Caesarea, Cyril of Alexandria; in 
Latin by Minucius Felix, Tertullian (a masculine spirit and 
phrase-coiner like T. Carlyle, if bitterer still), Lactantius Firmi- 
anus, &c, &C 1 

As Christianity wins the day, a new objection is raised to it. 
The age is full of troubles; Christianity is ruining the empire! 
Besides notices elsewhere, we find the charge specially dealt 
with by St Augustine and his friends. Paulus Orosius argues 
that the world has always been a vale of tears. Salvian contends 
that not the acceptance of Christianity, but the sins of the people 
are bringing trouble upon them; and he gives ugly evidence 
of the continued prevalence of vice. Most impressive of all 
was Augustine's own contribution in The City of God. Powers 
created by worldliness and sin are crumbling, as they well 
may; "the city of God remaineth!" Whether he meant it 
so or not, the saint's argument became a programme and an 
apologia for the imperializing of the Western Church under the 
leadership of Rome during the middle ages. 

IV. Middle Ages. — From the point of view of apologetics, we 
may mass together the long stretch of history which covers the 
period between the disappearance and the re-appearance of free 
discussion. When emperors became converts, the church, so 
lately a victim and a pleader for liberty, readily learned to 
persecute. Under such conditions there is little scope for 
apologetics. Force kills argument and drives doubt below the 
smooth surface of a nominal conformity. But there were two 
influences beyond the bounds or beyond the power of the 
christianized empire. The Jew remained, as always, stubbornly 
unconvinced, and, as often, fond of slanders. Many of the 
principal medieval attempts in apologetics are directed chiefly 
against him, e.g. the Pugio Fidei of Raymond Martini (c. 1280), 

1 While these writings are of great historical value, they do not, 
of course, represent the Christian argument as conceived to-day. 
The Church of Rome prefers medieval or modern statements of its 
position; Protestantism can use only modern statements. 



which became one of Pascal's sources (see V. below), or Peter 
Abelard's Dialogus inter Judaeum Philosophum et Christianum. 
And the Moslem came on the scenes bringing, as a gift for 
Christendom, fuller knowledge of classical, especially Aristo- 
telian, texts. The Jews, less bitterly opposed to Mahommed- 
anism than the Christians were, caught fire more rapidly, 
and in some cases served as an intermediate link or channel 
of communication. These two religions anticipated the dis- 
cussion of the problem of faith and reason in the Christian 
church. According to the great Avicenna and Maimonides, 
faith and the highest reason are sure to coincide (see Arabian 
Philosophy). According to Ghazali, in his Destruction of Philo- 
sophers, the various schools of philosophy cancel each other; 
reason is bankrupt; faith is everything. (So nearly Jehuda 
Halevi.) According to Averroes, reason suffices, and faith, with 
(what he considers) its dreams of immortality and the like, is 
useful only for the ignorant masses. Christian theology, how- 
ever, strikes out a line of its own. Moslems and Jews were 
applying Aristotelian philosophy to rigorously monotheistic 
faiths; Christianity had been encouraged by Platonism in 
teaching a trinity of divine persons, and Platonism of a certain 
order long dominated the middle ages as part of the Augustinian 
tradition. In sympathy with this Platonism, the medieval 
church began by assuming the entire mutual harmony of faith 
and reason. Such is the teaching, along different lines, alike 
of St Anselm and of Abelard. But, when increased knowledge 
of Aristotle's texts (and of the commentaries) led to the victory 
of a supposed Aristotelianism over a supposed Platonism, 
Albertus Magnus, and his still more distinguished pupil Thomas 
Aquinas, mark certain doctrines as belonging to faith but not 
to reason. They adhere to the general position with exceptions 
(in the case of what had been considered Platonic doctrines). 
From the point of view of philosophy, this was a compromise. 
Faith and reason partly agree, partly diverge. The tendency 
of the later middle ages is to add to the number of the doctrines 
with which philosophy cannot deal. Thomas's great rival, Duns 
Scotus, does this to a large extent, at times affirming " two 
truths." The latter position, ascribed by the schoolmen to the 
Averroists, becomes dominant among the later Nominalists, 
William of Occam and his, disciples, who withdraw all doctrines 
of faith from the sphere of reason. This was a second and a 
more audacious compromise. It is not exactly an attempt to 
base Christian faith on rational scepticism. It is a consistent 
policy of harbouring inconsistencies in the same mind. A 
statement may be true in philosophy and false in theology, or 
vice versa. To the standpoint of Aquinas, however, the Church 
of Rome (at least in regard to the basis of doctrine) has more 
and more returned. The councils of Trent and of the Vatican 
mark the Two Truths hypothesis as heretical, when they affirm 
that there is a natural knowledge of God and natural certainty 
of immortality. Along with this affirmation, the Church of 
Rome (if less decisively) has adopted the limitations of the 
Thomist theory by the condemnation of " Ontologism "; 
certain mysterious doctrines are beyond reason. This cautious 
compromise sanctioned by the Church does not represent the 
extremest reaction against nominalism. Even in the nominalistic 
epoch we have Raymond of Sabunde's Natural Theology (accord- 
ing to the article in Herzog-Hauck, not the title of the oldest 
Paris MS., but found in later MSS. and almost all the printed 
editions) or Liber Creaturarum (c. 1435). The book is not what 
moderns (schooled unconsciously in post-Reformation develop- 
ments of Thomist ideas) expect under the name of natural 
theology. It is an attempt once more to demonstrate all 
scholastic dogmas out of the book of creation or on principles 
of natural reason. At many points it follows Anselm closely, 
and, of course, very often " makes light work " of its task. 

The Thomist compromise — or even the more sceptical view 
of "two truths" — has the merit of giving filling of a kind to 
the formula "supernatural revelation" — mysteries inaccessible 
to reason, beyond discovery and beyond comprehension. 
According to earlier views — repeatedly revived in Protestantism 
— revelation is just philosophy over again. Can the choice be 



APOLOGETICS 



191 



fairly stated? If revelation is thought of as God's personal 
word, and redemption as his personal deed, is it reasonable to 
view them either as open to a sort of scientific prediction or as 
capricious and unintelligible? Even in the middle ages there 
were not wanting those — the St Victors, Bonaventura — who 
sought to vindicate mystical if not moral redemption as the 
central thought of Christianity. 

V. Earlier Modern Period. — It will be seen that apologetics by 
no means reissued unchanged from the long period of authority. 
The compromise of Aquinas, though not unchallenged, holds the 
field and that even with Protestants. G. W. Leibnitz devotes 
an introductory chapter in his TheodicSe, 17 10 (as against Pierre 
Bayle), to faith and reason. He is a good enough Lutheran to 
quote as a "mystery" the Eucharist no less than the Trinity, 
while he insists that truths above are not against reason. Stated 
thus baldly, has the distinction any meaning? The more cele- 
brated and central thesis of the book — this finite universe, the 
best of all such that are possible — also restates positions of 
Augustine and Aquinas. 

Before modern philosophy began its career, there was a great 
revival of ancient philosophy at the Renaissance; sometimes 
anti-Christian, sometimes pro-Christian. The latter furnishes 
apologies by Marsilio Ficino, Agostino Steuco, J. L. Vives. 

Early in the modern period occurs the great name of Blaise 
Pascal (1623-1662). A staunch Roman Catholic, but belonging 
to a school of Augustinian enthusiasts (the Jansenists), whom 
the Church put down as heretics, he stands pretty much apart 
from the general currents. His Pensees, published posthumously, 
seems to have been meant for a systematic treatise, but it 
has come to us in fragments. Once again, a lay apologist! A 
layman's work may have the advantage of originality or the 
drawback of imperfect knowledge. Pascal's work exhibits both 
characters. It has the originality of rare genius, but it borrows 
its material (as industrious editors have shown) from very few 
sources — the Pugio Fidei, M. de Montaigne, P. Charron. Ideas 
as well as learning are largely Montaigne's. The latter's cheerful 
man-of-the-world scepticism is transfigured in Pascal to a deep 
distrust of human reason, in part, perhaps, from anti-Protestant 
motives. But this attitude, while not without parallels both 
earlier (Ghazali, Jehuda Halevi) and later (H. L. Mansel), has 
peculiarities in Pascal. It is fallen man whom he pursues with 
his fierce scorn; his view of man's nature — intellect as well as 
character — is to be read in the light of his unflinching Augus- 
tinianism. Again, Pascal, unlike most apologists, belongs to the 
small company of saintly souls. This philosophical sceptic is 
full of humble joy in salvation, of deep love for the Saviour. 

Another French Roman Catholic apologist, P. D. Huet (1630- 
1721) — within the conditions of his age a prodigy of learning 
(in apologetics see his Demonstratio Evangelica) — is not un- 
influenced by Pascal (Traite de lafaiblesse de I' esprit humaine). 

As we might expect, Protestant lands are more busily occupied 
with apologetics. Intolerant reliance upon force presents greater 
difficulties to them; soon it grows quite obsolete. Benedict 
Spinoza, the eminent Jewish pantheist (1632-1677), to whom 
miracle is impossible, revelation a phrase, and who renews 
pioneer work in Old Testament criticism, finds at least a fair 
measure of liberty and comfort in Holland (his birth-land). 
Bayle, the historical sceptic, lectured and published his learned 
Dictionnaire (1696) at Rotterdam. From Holland, earlier, had 
proceeded an apologetic work by a man of European fame. 
Hugo Grotius's De Veritate Chrislianae Religionis (1627) is partly 
the medieval tradition: — Oppose Mahommedans and Jews! 
It is partly practical:- — Arm Christian sailors against religious 
danger! But in its cool spirit it forecasts the coming age, whose 
master is John Locke. His Reasonableness of Christianity (1695) 
is the thesis of " a whole century " of theologians. And his Essay 
on the Human Understanding (1690) is almost a Bible to men of 
education during the same period; its lightest word treasured. 
Locke does not break with the compromise of Aquinas. But he 
transfers attention from contents to proof. Reason proves that a 
revelation has been made — and then submits. Leibnitz has to 
suonlement rather than correct Locke on this point. 



In such an atmosphere, deism readily uttered its protest 
against mysterious revelation. Deism is, in fact, the Thomist 
natural theology (more clearly distinguished from dogmatic 
theology than in the middle ages, alike by Protestants and by 
the post-Tridentine Church of Rome) now dissolving partnership 
with dogmatic and starting in business for itself. Or it is the 
doctrine of unfallen man's " natural state " — a doctrine inten- 
sified in Protestantism — separating itself from the theologians' 
grave doctrine of sin. If Socinianism had challenged natural 
theology — Christ, according to it, was the prophet who first 
revealed the way to eternal life — it had glorified the natural 
powers of man; and the learning of the Arminian divines 
(friends of Grotius and Locke) had helped to modernize Christian 
apologetics upon rational lines. Deism now taught that reason, 
or " the light of nature," was all-sufficient. 

Not to dwell upon earlier continental " Deists " (mentioned by 
Viret as quoted first in Bayle's Dictionary and again in the 
introduction to Leland's View of the Deistical Writers), Lord 
Herbert of Cherbury (De Veritate, 1624; De Religione Gentilium, 
1645? — according to J. G. Walch's Bibliotheca Theologica (1757) 
not published complete until 1663) was universally understood 
as hinting conclusions hostile to Christianity (cf . also T. Hobbes, 
Leviathan, 1651, ch. xxxi.; Spinoza, Tractatus Theologico- 
Polilicus, 1670, ch. xiv.). Professedly, Herbert's contention 
merely is that non-Christians feeling after the " supreme God " 
and the law of righteousness must have a chance of salvation. 
Herbert was also epoch-making for the whole 18th century in 
teaching that priests had corrupted this primitive faith. During 
the 1 8th century deism spread widely, though its leaders were 
" irrepressible men like Toland, men of mediocre culture and 
ability like Anthony Collins, vulgar men like Chubb, irritated 
and disagreeable men like Matthew Tindal, who conformed that 
he might enjoy his Oxford fellowship and wrote anonymously 
that he might relieve his conscience " (A. M. Fairbairn). More 
distinguished sympathizers are Edward Gibbon, who has the 
deistic spirit, and David Hume, the historian and philosophical 
sceptic, who has at least the letter of the deistic creed (Dialogues 
Concerning Natural Religion), and who uses Pascal's appeal to 
" faith " in a spirit of mockery (Essay on Miracles). In France 
the new school found powerful speaking-trumpets, especially 
Voltaire, the idol of his age — a great denier and scoffer, but 
always sincerely a believer in the God of reason — and the deeper 
but wilder spirit of J. J. Rousseau. Others in France developed 
still more startling conclusions from Locke's principles, E. B. 
Condillac's sensationalism — Locke's philosophy purged of its 
more ideal if less logical elements — leading on to materialism in 
J. O. de la Mettrie; and at least one of the Encyclopedists 
(P. H. von Holbach) capped materialism with confessed atheism. 

In Germany the parallel movement of " illumination " (H. S. 
Reimarus; J. S. Semler, pioneer in N.T. criticism; and a 
layman, the great Lessing) took the form of " rationalism " 
within the church— interpreting Bible texts by main force in a 
way which the age thought " enlightened " (H. E. G. Paulus, 
1761-1851, &c). 

Among the innumerable English anti-deistic writers (see 
W. Law, The Case of Reason; R. Bentley, or " Phileleutherus 
Lipsiensis "; &c, &c), three are of chief importance. Nathaniel 
Lardner (Arian, 1684-1768) stands in the front rank of the 
scholarship of his time, and uses his vast knowledge to maintain 
the genuineness of all books of the New Testament and the 
perfect accuracy of its history. Joseph Butler, a very original, 
careful and honest thinker, lifts controversy with deists from 
details to principles in his Analogy of Religion both Natural and 
Revealed to the Constitution and Course of Nature (1736). This 
title introduces us to a new conception. Deists and orthodox 
in those days agreed in recognizing not merely natural theology 
but natural religion — " essential religion," Butler more than 
once styles it; the expression shows how near he stood in- 
tellectually to those he criticized. But morally he stood aloof. 
In part i. — on Natural Religion — he defends a moral or punishing 
Deity against the sentimental softness of the age. The God of 
Nature, whom deists confess- does punish in time, if they will 



192 



APOLOGETICS 



but look at the facts; why not in eternity ? " Morality," as 
others have confessed, is " the nature of things " ! Not the Being 
of God is discussed — Butler will not waste words on triflers (as 
he thinks them) who deny that — but God's character. Un- 
fortunately (perhaps) Butler prefers to argue on admitted 
principles; holds much of his own moral belief in reserve; 
tries to reduce everything to a question of probable fact. If 
this hampers him in part i., the situation appears still worse in 
part ii., which is directly occupied with the defence of Chris- 
tianity. Butler says nothing about incomprehensible mysteries, 
and protests that reason is the only ground we have to proceed 
upon. But by treating the atonement simply as revealed (and 
unexplained) matter of fact — in spite of some partial analogies 
in human experience, a thing essentially anomalous — Butler 
repeats, and applies to the moral contents of Christianity, what 
Aquinas said of its speculative doctrines. (Whether one calls the 
unknowable a revealed mystery or an unexplained and in- 
explicable fact makes little difference.) William Paley (1743- 
1805) borrows from many writers; he borrows Lardner's learning 
and Butler's " particular evidence for Christianity," viz. miracles, 
prophecy and " history "; and he states his points with perfect 
clearness. No man ever filled a typical position more exactly 
than Paley. Eighteenth-century ethics— Hedonism, with a 
theological background. Empiricist Natural Theology — the 
argument from Design. Christian Evidences— the strong 
probability of the resurrection of Christ and the consequent 
authority of his teaching. Horae Paulinae— mutual confirma- 
tions of Acts and Epistles; better, though one-sided. When 
such exclusively " external " arguments are urged, the contents 
of Christianity go for next to nothing. 

VI. Later Modern Period. — Towards the end of the 18th century 
a new epoch of reconstruction begins in the thought and life of 
civilization. The leader in speculative philosophy is Immanuel 
Kant, though he includes many agnostic elements, and draws 
the inference (which some things in the letter of Butler might 
seem to warrant) that the essence of Christianity is an ethical 
theism. While he thus created a new and more ethical " rational- 
ism," Kant's many-sided influence, alike in philosophy and in 
theology, worked to further issues. He (and other Germans, 
but not G. W. F. Hegel) was represented in England in a frag- 
mentary way by S. T. Coleridge (1 772-1834), probably the most 
typical figure of his period — another layman. His general 
thought was that " rationalism " represents an uprising of the 
lower reason or " understanding " against the higher or true 
" reason." The mysteries of theology-are its best part— not 
alien to reason but of its substance, the " logos." This is to 
upset the compromise of Aquinas and go back to a Christian 
platonism. Of course the difficulty revives again: If a philo- 
sophy, why supernaturally revealed? Thomas Arnold, criti- 
cizing Edward Hawkins, appeals rather to the atonement as 
deeper neglected truth. So in Scotland, Thomas Erskine and 
Thomas Chalmers — the latter in contradiction to his earlier 
position — hold that the doctrine of salvation, when translated 
into experience, furnishes " internal evidence " — a somewhat 
broader use of the phrase than when it applies merely to evidence 
of date or authorship drawn from the contents of a book. This 
gives a new and moral filling to the conception of " supernatural 
revelation." The attempt to work out either of the reactions 
against Thomism in new theological systems is pretty much 
confined to Germany. Hegel's theological followers, of every 
shade and party, represent the first, and Schleiermacher's the 
second. Schleiermacher rejects natural religion in favour of the 
positive religions, while the school of A, Ritschl and W. Herrmann 
reject natural theology outright in favour of revelation — a 
striking external parallel to early Socinianism. British and 
American divines, on the other hand, are slow to suspect that a 
new apologetic principle may mean a new system of apologetics, 
to say nothing of a new dogmatic. Among the evangelicals, for 
the most part, natural theology, far from being rejected, is not 
even modified, and certain doctrines continue to be described as 
incomprehensible mysteries. No Protestant, of course, can agree 
with Roman Catholic theology that (supernatural) faith is an 



obedient assent to church authority and the mysteries it dictates. 
To Protestantism, faith is personal trust. But the principle is 
hardly ever carried out to the end. Mysterious doctrines are 
ascribed by Protestants to scripture; so half of revelation is 
regarded as matter for blind assent, if another half is luminous 
in experience. The movement of German philosophy which led 
from Kant to Hegel has indeed found powerful British champions 
(T. H. Green, J. and E. Caird, &c), but less churchly than 
Coleridge (or F. D. Maurice or B. F. Westcott), though churchly 
again in J. R. Illingworth and other contributors to Lux Mundi 
(1890). Before this wave of thought, H. L. Mansel tried (1858) 
to play Pascal's game on Kantian principles, developing the 
sceptical side of 'Kant's many-faceted mind. But as he protested 
against relying on the human conscience — the one element of 
positive conviction spared by Kant — his ingenuity found few 
admirers except H. Spencer, who claims him as justifying anti- 
Christian agnosticism. Butler's tradition was more directly 
continued by J. H. Newman — with modifications on becoming a 
Roman Catholic in the light of the church's decision in favour of 
Thomism. A. M. Fairbairn {Catholicism, Roman and Anglican, 
ch. v., and elsewhere) and E. A. Abbott {Philomythus, and 
elsewhere) suspect Newman of a sceptical leaven and extend the 
criticism to Butler's doctrine of "probability." Yet it seems 
plain that any theology, maintaining redemption as historical 
fact (and not merely ideal), must attach religious importance to 
conclusions which are technically probable rather than proven. 
If we transfer Christian evidence from the " historical " to the 
" philosophical " with H. Rashdall— we surely cut down Chris- 
tianity to the limits of theism. And the inner mind of Butler 
has moral anchorage in the Analogy, quite as much as in the 
Sermons. It is in part ii. more than in part i. of his masterpiece 
that the light seems to grow dim. Another of the Oxford con- 
verts to Rome, W. G. Ward, made vigorous contributions to 
natural theology. 

VII. Contents of Modern Apologetics. — Superficially regarded, 
philosophy ebbs and flows, whatever progress the debate may 
reveal to speculative insight. Old positions re-emerge from 
forgetfulness, and there is always a philosophy to back every 
" case. " More visible dangers arise for the apologist in the region 
of science, historical or physical. There the progress of truth ; 
within whatever limits, is manifest. Essays and Reviews (i860) 
was a vehement announcement of scientific results — startling 
English conservatism awake for the first time. And in the 
scientific region the great apologetic classics, like Butler, are 
hopelessly out of date. The modern apologist must do ephemeral 
work' — unless it should chance that he proves to be the skir- 
misher, pioneering for a modified dogmatic. He holds a watching 
brief. While he must beware of hasty speech, he has often to 
plead that new knowledge does not really threaten faith; or 
that it is not genuinely established knowledge at all; or else, 
that faith has mistaken its own grounds, and will gain strength 
by concentrating on its true field. The work is not always well 
done; but the Christian church needs it. 

1. Apologetics and Philosophy. —The main part of this subject 
is discussed under Theism. Some notes may be added on special 
points, (a) Freewill is generally assumed on the Christian side 
(R.C. Church; Scottish philosophy; H. Lotze; J. Martineau; 
W. G. Ward. Not in a libertarian sense; Leibnitz. New and 
obscure issues raised by Kant). But there is no continuous 
tradition or steady trend of discussion, (b) Personal immortality 
is affirmed as philosophically certain by the Church of Rome 
and many Protestant writers. Others teach "conditional im- 
mortality." Others base the hope on belief in the resurrection 
of Christ, (c) Theodicy — the tradition of Leibnitz is preserved 
(on libertarian lines) by Martineau (A Study of Religion, 1883). 
See also F. R. Tennant's Origin and Propagation of Sin (1902) — 
sin a " bye-product " of a generally good evolution. Others find 
in the gospel of redemption the true theodicy, (d) The problem 
of Christian apologetic has been simplified in the past by the 
prevalence of the Christian ethics and temper even among many 
non-Christians (e.g. J. S. Mill). But hereafter it may not prove 
possible for the apologist to assume as unchallenged the Christian 



APOLOGETICS 



•93 



moral outlook. Germans have suspected an anti-Christian 
strain in Goethe; all the world knows of it in E. von. Hartmann 
or F. Nietzsche. 

2. Apologetics and Physical Science. — (a) Copernicanism has 
won its battles and the Church of Rome would fain have its error 
forgotten. The admission is now general that the Bible cannot 
be expected to use the language of scientific astronomy. Still, 
it is not certain that the shock of Copernicanism on supernatural 
Christianity is exhausted, (b) Geology has also won its battles, 
and few now try to harmonize it with Genesis. (c) Evolution 
came down from the clouds when C. Darwin and A. R. Wallace 
succeeded in displacing the naif conception of special creation 
by belief in the origin of species out of other species through a 
process of natural law. This gave immense vogue to wider and 
vaguer theories of evolutionary process, notably to H. Spencer's 
grandiose cosmic formula in terms of mechanism. Here the 
apologist has more to say. The special Darwinian hypothesis — 
natural " selection " — may or may not be true; it was at least 
a fruitful suggestion. If true, it need not be exhaustive. Again, 
evolution itself need not apply everywhere. We are offered a 
philosophical rather than a scientific speculation when E. Caird 
(Evolution of Religion, 1893) tries to vindicate Christianity as 
the highest working of nature — true just because evolved from 
lower religions. The Christian apologist indeed may himself 
seek, following John Fiske, to philosophize evolution as a re- 
statement of natural theology — " one God, one law, one element 
and one far-off divine event "-^-and as at least pointing towards 
personal immortality. But if evolution is to be the whole truth 
regarding Christianity, we should have to surrender both supers 
natural revelation and divine redemption. And these, it may 
be strongly urged, contain the magic of Christianity. Losing 
them it might sink into a lifeless theory. 

As far as pure science goes, the inference from science in 
favour of materialism has visibly lost much of its plausibility, 
and Protestant apologists would probably be prepared to accept 
in advance all verified discoveries as belonging to a different 
region from that of faith. Roman Catholic apologetic prefers to 
negotiate in detail. 

3. Apologetics and History: — History brings us nearer the 
heart of the Christian position, (a) Old Testament criticism 
won startling victories towards the end of the 19th century. It 
blots out much supposed knowledge, but throws a vivid and 
interesting light on the reconstrued process of history. Most 
Protestants accept the general scheme of criticism; those who 
hang back make not a few concessions (e.g. J. Orr f Problem of 
the O.T., 1006). The Roman Catholic Church again prefers an 
attitude of reserve, (b) New Testament criticism raises even 
more delicate issues. Positively it may be affirmed that the 
recovered figure of the historical Jesus is the greatest asset in 
the possession of modern Christian theology and apologetics. 
The "Lives" of Christ, Roman Catholic and Protestant; 
"critical" (D. F. Strauss, A. Renan, &c.,&c.) and "believing," 
imply this at least. Negatively, "unchallenged historical 
certainties " are becoming few in number, or are disappearing 
altogether, through the industry of modern minds. True, the 
Tubingen criticism of F. C. Baur and his school — important as 
the first scientific attempt to conceive New Testament conditions 
and literature as a whole — has been abandoned. (A. Ritschl's 
Entstehung der alt-katholischen Kirche, 2nd edition, 1857, was an 
especially telling reply.) The synoptic gospels are now treated 
with considerable respect. It is no longer suggested in responsible 
quarters that they are party documents sacrificing truth to 
" tendency." But not all quarters are responsible; and in the 
effort to grasp scientifically, i.e. accurately, the amazing facts of 
Christ and primitive Christianity, every imaginable hypothesis 
is canvassed. Even the Roman Catholic Church produced the 
Abbe Loisy (though he undertakes to play off church certainties 
against historical uncertainties). Hitherto at least the fourth 
gospel has been the touchstone. The authorship of the epistles 
is in many cases a matter of subordinate importance; at least 
for Protestants or for those surrendering Bible infallibility, 
which Rome can hardly do. (c) New Testament history. 

11. 7 



The apologist must maintain (1) that Jesus of Nazareth is a 
real historical«figure — a point well-nigh overlooked by Strauss, 
and denied by some modern advocates of a mythical theory; 
(2) that Jesus is knowable (not one " of whom we really know 
very little "— B. Jowett) in his teaching, example, character, 
historical personality; and that he is full of moral splendour. 
On the other hand, faith has no special interest in claiming that 
we can compose a biographical study of the development of 
Jesus. Certainly no early writer thought of providing material 
for such use. It is a common opinion in Germany that our 
material is in fact too scanty or too self-contradictory. Yet the 
fascination of the subject will always revive the attempt. If it 
succeeds, there will be a new line of communication along 
which that great personality will tell on men's minds and 
hearts. If it fails — -there are other channels; character can be 
known and trusted even when we are baffled by a thing neces- 
sarily so full of mystery as the development of a persoaality. 
Notably, the manifest non-consciousness of personal guilt in 
Jesus suggests to us his sinlessness. (3) Apologists maintain 
that Jesus "claimed" Messiahship. There are speculative 
constructions of gospel history which eliminate that claim; 
and no doubt apologetics could — with more or less difficulty — 
restate its position in a changed form if the paradox of to-day 
became accepted as historical fact to-morrow. The central 
apologetic thesis is the uniqueness of the "only-begotten"; it 
is here that " the supernatural " passes into tie substance of 
Christian faith. But most probably the description of Jesus as 
thus unique will continue to be associated with the allegation- 
He told us so; he claimed Messiahship and "died for the 
claim." (See preface to 5th ed. of Ecce Homo.) Nor did so 
superhuman a claim crush him, or deprive his soul of its balance. 
He' imparted to the title a grander significance out of the riches 
of his personality. (4) In the light of this the " argument from 
prophecy " is reconstructed. It ceases to lay much stress upon 
coincidences between Old Testament predictions or " types " 
and events in Christ's career. It becomes the assertion; historic- 
ally, providentially, the expectation of a unique religious figure 
arose; — " the " Messiah; and Jesus gave himself to be thought 
of as that great figure. ( 5) It is also claimed as certain that Jesus 
had marvellous powers of healing. More reserve is being shown 
towards the other or "nature" miracles. These latter, it may 
be remarked, are more unambiguously supernatural. But, if 
Jesus really cured leprosy or really restored the dead to life, we 
have miracle plainly enough in the region of healing. (6) For 
Jesus' own resurrection several lines of evidence are alleged. 
(i.) All who believe that in any sense Christ rose again insist upon 
the impression which his personality made during life. It was he 
whose resurrection seemed credible! Some practically stop here; 
the apologist proceeds, (ii.) There is the report of the empty 
grave; historically, not easily waved aside, (iii.) We have New 
Testament reports of appearances of the risen Jesus ; subjective? 
the mere clothing of the impression made by his personality 
during life? or objective? "telegrams" from heaven (Th. 
Keim) — "Veridical Hallucinations"? or something even more, 
throwing a ray of light perhaps on the state and powers of the 
happy dead? (iv,) There is the immense influence of Jesus Christ 
in history, associated with belief in him as the risen Son of God. 

In view of the claims of Jesus, different possibilities arise, 
(i.) The evangelists impute to him a higher claim than he 
made. This may be called the rationalistic solution; with 
sympathy in Christ's ethical teaching, there is relief at minimizing 
his great claim. So, brilliantly, Wellhausen's Gospel Com- 
mentaries and Introduction. (Mark fairly historical; other 
gospels' fuller account of Christ's teaching and claims un- 
reliable.) (ii.) The claim was fraudulent (Reimarus; Renan, 
ed. 1; popular anti-Christian agitation). This is a counsel of 
despair, (iii.) He was an enthusiastic dreamer, expecting the 
world's end. This the apologist will recognize as the most 
plausible hostile alternative. He may feel bound to admit an 
element of illusion in Christ's vision' of the future; but he will 
contend that the apocalyptic form did not destroy the spiritual 
Content of Christ's revelations — nay, that it was itself the 

11 



i 9 4 



APOLOGUE— APOPHTHEGM 



vehicle of great truths. So he will argue as the essence of the 
matter that (iv.) he who has occupied Christ's piece in history, 
and won such reverence from the purest souls, was what he 
claimed to be, and that his many-sidedness comes to focus and 
harmony when we recognize him as the Christ of God and the 
Saviour of the world. 

To a less extent, similar problems and alternatives arise in 
regard to the church: — Catholicism a compromise between 
Jewish Christianity and Pauline or Gentile Christianity (F. C. 
Baur, &c); Catholicism the Hellenizing of Christianity (A. 
Ritschl, A. Harnack); the Catholic church for good and evil 
the creation of St Paul (P. Wernle, H. Weinel); the church 
supernaturally guided (R.C. apologetic; in a modified degree 
High Church apologetic); essential — not necessarily exclusive — 
truth of Paulinism, essential error in first principles of Catholicism 
(Protestant apologetic). 

Literature. — Omitting the Christian fathers as remote from the 

g resent day, we recognize as works of genius Pascal's Pensees and 
utler's Analogy, to which we might add J. R. Seeley's Ecce Homo 
(1865). The philosophical, Platonist, or Idealist line of Christian 
defence is represented among recent writers by J. R. Illingworth 
[Anglican], in Personality, Human and Divine (1894), Divine Im- 
manence (1898), Reason and Revelation (1902), who at times seems 
rather to presuppose the Thomist compromise, and A. M. Fairbairn 
[Congregationalist], in Place of Christ in Modern Theology (1893), 
Philosophy of the Christian Religion (1902). The appeal to ethical 
or Christian experience — " internal evidence " — is found especially 
in E. A. Abbott [Christianity supernatural and divine, but not 
miraculous], Through Nature to Christ (1877), The Kernel and the 
Husk (1886), The Spirit on the Waters (1897), &c, or A. B. Bruce, 
Chief End of Revelation (1881), The Miraculous Element in the 
Gospels (1886), Apologetics (1892), and other works; Bruce's 
posthumous article, " Jesus " in Encyc. Bib., was understood by 
some as exchanging Christian orthodoxy for bare theism, but prob- 
ably its tone oi aloofness is due to the attempt to keep well within 
the limits of what the author considered pure scientific history. 
Scholarly and apologetic discussion on the gospels and life of Jesus 
is further represented by the writings of W. Sanday or (earlier) of 
J. B. Lightfoot. Much American work of merit on the character of 
Christ is headed by W. E Channing, and by H. Bushnell (in Nature 
and the Supernatural) . For defence of Christ's resurrection, reference 
may be made to H. Latham's The Risen Lord and R. Mackintosh's 
First Primer of Apologetics. For modification in light of recent 
scholarship of argument from prophecy, to Riehm's Messianic 
Prophecy, Stanton's Jewish and Christian Messiah, and Woods's 
Hope of Israel. Roman Catholic apologetics — of necessity, Thomist 
— is well represented by Professor Schanz of Tubingen. The whole 
Ritschl movement is apologetic in spirit; best English account in 
A. E. Garvie's Ritschlian Theology (1899). See also the chief church 
histories or histories of doctrine (Harnack; Loofs; Hagenbach; 
Shedd) ; A. S. Farrar's Critical History of Free {i.e. anti-Christian) 
Thought (Bampton Lectures, 1862) ; R. C. Trench's Introduction to 
Notes on the Miracles, and F. W. Macran's English Apologetic 
Theology (1905). For the 18th century, G. V. Lechler's Ceschichte 
des englischen Deismus (1841) ; Mark Pattison in Essays and Reviews 
(i860) ; Leslie Stephen's English Thought in 18th Century (agnostic) ; 
John Hunt, Religious Thought in England (3 vols., 1870-1873). 

(R. Ma.) 

APOLOGUE (from the Gr. airoXoyos, a statement or account), 
a short fable or allegorical story, meant to serve as a pleasant 
vehicle for some moral doctrine or to convey some useful lesson. 
One of the best known is that of Jotham in the Book of Judges 
(ix. 7-15) ; others are " The City Rat and Field Rat," by Horace, 
" The Belly and its Members," by the patrician Menenius Agrippa 
in the second book of Livy, and perhaps most famous of all, those 
of Aesop. The term is applied more particularly to a story in 
which the actors or speakers are taken from the brute creation 
or inanimate nature. An apologue is distinguished from a fable 
in that there is always some moral sense present, which there 
need not be in a fable. It is generally dramatic, and has been 
defined as " a satire in action." It differs from a parable in 
several respects. A parable is equally an ingenious tale intended 
to correct manners, but it can be true, while an apologue, with 
its introduction of animals and plants, to which it lends our 
ideas and language and emotions, is necessarily devoid of real 
truth, and even of all probability. The parable reaches heights 
to which the apologue cannot aspire, for the points in which 
brutes and inanimate nature present analogies to man are 
principally those of his lower nature, and the lessons taught 
by the apologue seldom therefore reach beyond prudential 



morality, whereas the parable aims at representing the relations 
between man and God. It finds its framework in the world of 
nature as it actually is, and not in any grotesque parody of it, 
and it exhibits real and not fanciful analogies. The apologue 
seizes on that which man has in common with creatures below 
him, and the parable on that which he has in commpn with God. 
Still, in spite of the difference of moral level, Martin Luther 
thought so highly of apologues as counsellors of virtue that he 
edited and revised Aesop and wrote a characteristic preface to 
the volume. The origin of the apologue is extremely ancient 
and comes from the East, which is the natural fatherland of 
everything connected with allegory, metaphor and imagination. 
Veiled truth was often necessary in the East, particularly with 
the slaves, who dared not reveal their minds too openly. It is 
noteworthy that the two fathers of apologue in the West were 
slaves, namely Aesop and Phaedrus. La Fontaine in France; 
Gay and Dodsley in England; Gellert, Lessing and Hagedorn 
in Germany; Tomas de Iriarte in Spain, and Krilov in Russia, 
are leading modern writers of apologues. Length is not an 
essential matter in the definition of an apologue. Those of La 
Fontaine are often very short, as, for example, " Le Coque et 
la Perle." On the other hand, in the romances of Reynard the 
Fox we have medieval apologues arranged in cycles, and attain- 
ing epical dimensions. An Italian fabulist, Corti, is said to 
have developed an apologue of " The Talking Animals " to the 
bulk of twenty-six cantos. La Motte, writing at a time when 
this species of literature was universally admired, attributes 
its popularity to the fact that it menage et flatte I' amour-propre 
by inculcating virtue in an amusing manner without seeming 
to dictate or insist. This was the ordinary 18th-century view 
of the matter, but Rousseau contested the educational value of 
instruction given in this indirect form. 

A work by P. Soulle, La Fontaine et ses devanciers (1866), is a 
history of the apologue from the earliest times until its final triumph 
in France. 

APOLOGY (from Gr. a.Tro\oy'ia, defence), in its usual sense, an 
expression of regret for something which has been wrongfully 
said or done; a withdrawal or retraction of some charge or 
imputation which is false. In an action for libel, the fact that 
an apology has been promptly and fully made is a plea in mitiga- 
tion of damages. The apology should have the same form of 
publicity as the original charge. If made publicly, the proper 
form is an advertisement in a newspaper; if made within the 
hearing of a few only, a letter of apology, which may be read 
to those who have heard what was said, should be sufficient. By 
the English Libel Act 1843, s. 2, it was enacted that in an action 
for libel contained in a newspaper it is a defence for the defendant 
to plead that the libel was inserted without actual malice and 
without gross negligence, and that before the commencement of 
the action and at the earliest opportunity afterwards he inserted 
in the newspaper a full apology for the libel, or, where the news- 
paper in which the libel appeared was published at intervals 
exceeding one week, he offered to publish the apology in any 
newspaper selected by the plaintiff. The apology must be full 
and must be printed in as conspicuous a place and manner as the 
libel was. 

The word " apology " or " apologia " is also used in the sense 
of defence or vindication, the only meaning of the Greek 
cnroXoyia, especially of the defence of a doctrine or system, or 
of religious or other beliefs, &c, e.g. Justin Martyr's Apology 
or J. H. Newman's Apologia pro vita sua. (See Apologetics.) 

APONEUROSIS (Gr. cbro, away, and vevpov, a sinew), in 
anatomy, a membrane separating muscles from each other. 

APOPHTHEGM (from the Gr. air6<j>6ey fia) , a short and pointed 
utterance. The usual spelling up to Johnson's day was apothegm, 
which Webster and Worcester still prefer; it indicates the pro- 
nunciation — i.e. " apothem " — better than the other, which, 
however, is more usual in England and follows the derivation. 
Such sententious remarks as " Knowledge is Power " are 
apophthegms. They become " proverbs " by age and accept- 
ance. Plutarch made a famous collection in his Apophlhegmata 
Laconica. 



APOPHYGE— APOPLEXY 



195 




Fig. 1. 



Fig. 2. 



APOPHYGE (Gr. a-Ko^wyi), a flying off), in architecture, the 
lowest part of the shaft of an Ionic or Corinthian column, or the 
highest member of its base if the column be considered as a 
whole. The apophyge is the inverted cavetto or concave sweep, 
on the upper edge of which the diminishing shaft rests. 

APOPHYLLITE, a mineral often classed with the zeolites, 
since it behaves like these when heated before the blowpipe 
and has the same mode of occurrence; it differs, however, from 
the zeolites proper in containing no aluminium. It is a hydrous 
potassium and calcium silicate, HrKCa^SiOs^+^HjO. A 
small amount of fluorine is often present, and it is one of the few 
minerals in which ammonium has been detected. The tempera- 
ture at which the water is expelled is higher than is usually the 
case with zeolites; none is given off below 200°, and only about 
half at 250°; this is slowly reabsorbed again from moist air, 
and is therefore regarded as water of crystallization, the remainder 
being water of constitution. When heated before the blowpipe, 
the mineral exfoliates, owing to loss of water, and on this account 
was named apophyllite by R. J. Haiiy in 1806, from the Greek 
airo, from, and <j>(i\Xov, a leaf. 

Apophyllite always occurs as distinct crystals, which belong 
to the tetragonal system. The form is either a square prism 

terminated by the basal 
planes (fig. 2), or an acute 
pyramid (fig. 1). A promi- 
nent feature of the mineral 
is its perfect basal cleavage, 
on which the lustre is 
markedly pearly, present- 
ing, in white crystals, some- 
what the appearance of 
the eye of a fish after 
boiling, hence the old name 
fish-eye-stone or ichthyophthalmite for the mineral. On 
other surfaces the lustre is vitreous. The crystals are usually 
transparent and colourless, sometimes with a greenish or 
rose-red tint. Opaque white crystals of cubic habit have 
been called albine; xylochlore is an olive-green variety. 
The hardness is 45, and the specific gravity 2-35. 

The optical characters of the mineral are of special interest, 
and have been much studied. The sign of the double refraction 
may be either positive or negative, and some crystals are divided 
into optically biaxial sectors. The variety known as leucocyclite 
shows, when examined in convergent polarized light, a peculiar 
interference figure, the rings being alternately white and violet- 
black and not coloured as in a normal figure seen in white light. 
Apophyllite is a mineral of secondary origin, commonly 
occurring, in association with other zeolites, in amygdaloidal 
cavities in basalt and melaphyre. Magnificent groups of greenish 
and colourless tabular crystals, the crystals several inches 
across, were found, with flesh-red stilbite, in the Deccan traps 
of the Western Ghats, near Bombay, during the construction of 
the Great Indian Peninsular railway. Groups of crystals of a 
beautiful pink colour have been found in the silver veins of 
Andreasberg in the Harz and of Guanaxuato in Mexico. Crystals 
of recent formation have been detected in the Roman remains 
at the hot springs of Plombieres in France. (L. J.S.) 

APOPHYSIS (Gr. air64>v<ns, offshoot), a bony protuberance, 
in human physiology; also a botanical term for the swelling of 
the spore-case in certain mosses. 

APOPLEXY (Gr. airoirXijfia, from aic<nr\i)a<Ta.v, to strike down, 
to stun), the term employed by Galen to designate the " sudden 
loss of feeling and movement of the whole body, with the excep- 
tion of respiration," to which, after the time of Harvey, was 
added " and with the exception of the circulation." Although 
the term is occasionally employed in medicine with other significa- 
tions, yet in its general acceptation apoplexy may be defined as a 
sudden loss of consciousness, of sensibility, and of movement with- 
out any essential modification of the respiratory and circulatory 
functions occasioned by some brain disease. It was discovered 
that the majority of the cases of apoplexy were due to cerebral 
haemorrhage, and what looked like cerebral haemorrhage, red 



softening; and the idea for a long time prevailed that apoplexy 
and cerebral haemorrhage could be employed as synonymous 
terms, and that an individual who, in popular parlance, " had 
an apoplectic stroke," had necessarily suffered from haemorrhage 
into his brain. A small haemorrhage may not, however, cause 
an apoplectic fit, nor is an apoplectic fit always caused by 
haemorrhage; it may be due to sudden blocking of a large 
vessel by a clot from a distant part (embolism), or by a sudden 
clotting of the blood in the vessel itself (thrombosis). Owing 
to the prevailing idea in former times that cerebral haemorrhage 
and apoplexy were synonymous terms, the word apoplexy- was 
applied to haemorrhage into other organs than the brain; thus 
the terms pulmonary apoplexy, retinal apoplexy and splenic 
apoplexy were used. 

The term " apoplexy " is now used in clinical medicine to 
denote that form of coma or deep state of unconsciousness 
which is due to sudden disturbance of the cerebral circulation 
occasioned by a local cause within the cranial cavity, as distinct 
from the loss of consciousness due to sudden failure of the 
heart's action (syncope) or the coma of narcotic or alcoholic 
poisoning, of status epilepticus, of uraemia or of head injury. 

The sudden coma of sunstroke and heat-stroke might be 
included, although owing to the suddenness with which a 
person may be struck down, the term heat apoplexy is frequently 
used, and, from an etymological point of view, quite justifiably. 
The older writers use the term simple apoplexy for a sudden 
attack which could not be explained by any visible disease. 
Again, congestive apoplexy was applied to those cases of coma 
where, at the autopsy, nothing was found to account for the 
coma and death except engorgement of the vessels of the brain 
and its membranes. In senile dementia and in general paralysis 
the brain is shrunken and the convolutions atrophied, the 
increased space in the ventricles and between the convolutions 
being filled up with the cerebro-spinal fluid. In these diseases 
apoplectic states may arise, terminating fatally; the excess of 
fluid found in such cases was formerly thought to be the cause 
of the symptoms, consequently the condition was called serous 
apoplexy. Such terms are no longer used, owing to the better 
knowledge of the pathology of brain disease. 

Having thus narrowed down the application of the term 
" apoplexy," we are in a position to consider its chief features, 
and the mechanism by which it is produced. Apoplexy may be 
rapidly fatal, but it is very seldom instantly fatal. The onset is 
usually sudden, and sometimes the individual may be struck 
down in an instant, senseless and motionless, " warranting those 
epithets, which the ancients applied to the victims of this 
disease, of atloniti and siderati, as if they were thunder-stricken 
or planet-struck " (Sir Thomas Watson). The attack, however, 
may be less sudden and, not infrequently, attended by a con- 
vulsion; while occasionally, in the condition termed ingravescent 
apoplexy, the coma is gradual in its onset, occupying hours in its 
development. Although unexpected, various warning symptoms, 
sometimes slight, sometimes pronounced, occur in the majority 
of cases. Such are, fulness in the head, headache, giddiness, 
noises in the ears, mental confusion, slight lapses of consciousness, 
numbness or tingling in the limbs. A characteristic apoplectic 
attack presents the following phenomena: the individual falls 
down suddenly and lies without sense or motion, except that 
his pulse keeps beating and his breathing continues. He 
appears to be in a deep sleep, from which he cannot be roused; 
the breathing is laboured and stertorous, and is accompanied 
with puffing out of the cheeks; the pulse may be beating more 
strongly than natural, and the face is often flushed and turgid. 
The reflexes are abolished. Although apoplexy may occur with- 
out paralysis, and paralysis without apoplexy, the two, owning 
the same cause, very frequently co-exist, or happen in immediate 
sequence and connexion; consequently there is in most cases 
definite evidence of paralysis affecting usually one side of the 
body in addition to the coma. Thus the pupils are unequal; 
there may be asymmetry of the face, or the limbs may be more 
rigid or flaccid on one side than on the other. These signs of 
localized disease enable a distinction to be made from the coma 



196 



APOROSE— APOSTLE 



of narcotic poisoning and alcoholic intoxication. It must be 
borne in mind that a person smelling strongly of liquor and 
found lying in the street in a comatose state may be suffering 
from apoplexy, and the error of sending a dying man to a police 
cell may be avoided by this knowledge. 

If the fit is only moderately severe, the reflexes soon return, and 
the patient may in a few hours show indications of returning 
consciousness by making some movements or opening his eyes 
when spoken to, although later it may be found that he is 
unable to speak, or may be paralysed or mentally afflicted (see 
Paralysis). In severe cases the coma deepens and the patient 
dies, usually from interference with the breathing, or, less 
commonly, from arrest of the heart's action. 

The mechanism by which apoplexy is produced has been a 
matter of much dispute; the condition was formerly ascribed 
to the pressure exerted by the clot on the rest of the brain, but 
there is no increase of intracranial pressure in an apoplectic fit 
occurring as a result of the sudden closure of a large vessel by 
embolism or thrombosis. Suddenness of the lesion appears to 
be, then, the essential element common to all cases of apoplexy 
from organic brain disease. It is the sudden shock to the delicate 
mechanism that produces the unconsciousness; but seeing that 
the coma is usually deeper and more prolonged in cerebral 
haemorrhage than when occasioned by vascular occlusion, and 
that an ingravescent apoplexy coma gradually develops and 
deepens as the amount of haemorrhage increases, we may presume 
that increase of intracranial pressure does play an important 
part in the degree and intensity of the coma caused by the 
rupture of a vessel. Apoplexy seldom occurs under forty years 
of .age, but owing to the fact that disease of the cerebral vessels 
may exist at any age, from causes which are fully explained in 
the article Neuropathology, no period of life is exempt; 
consequently cases of true apoplexy are not wanting even in 
very young children. Recognizing that there are two causes of 
apoplexy in advanced life, viz. (1) sudden rupture of a diseased 
vessel usually associated with high arterial pressure, enlarged, 
powerfully acting heart and chronic renal disease, and (2) the 
sudden clotting of blood in a large diseased vessel favoured by a 
low arterial pressure due to a weak-acting heart, it is obvious 
that the character of the pulse forms a good guide to the diagnosis 
of the cause, the prevention and warding off of an attack, and 
the treatment of such should it occur. 

Anything which tends directly or indirectly to increase 
arterial pressure within the cerebral blood-vessels may bring 
on an attack of cerebral haemorrhage; and although the 
identification of an apoplectic habit of body with a stout build, 
a short neck and florid complexion is now generally discredited, 
it being admitted that apoplexy occurs as frequently in thin 
and spare persons who present no such peculiarity of conforma- 
tion, yet a plethoric habit of body, occasioned by immoderate 
eating or drinking associated with the gouty diathesis, leads to a 
general arterio-sclerosis and high arterial pressure. All condi- 
tions which can give rise to a local intracranial or a general 
bodily increase of the arterial pressure, i.e. severe exertion of 
body and mind, violent emotions, much stooping, overheated 
rooms, exposure to the sun, sudden shocks to the body, constipa- 
tion and straining at stool, may, by suddenly increasing the 
strain on the wall of a diseased vessel, lead to its rupture. 

The outlook of apoplexy' is generally unfavourable in cases 
where the coma is profound; death may take place at different 
intervals after the onset. If the patient, after recovering from 
the initial coma, suffers with continual headache and lapses 
into a drowsy state, the result is likely to be serious ; for such a 
condition probably indicates that an inflammatory change has 
taken place about the clot or in the area of softening. 

Treatment. — The patient should be placed in the recumbent 
position with the head and shoulders slightly raised. He should 
be moved as little as possible from the place where the attack 
occurred. The medical man who is summoned will probably 
give the following directions: an ice-bag to be applied to the 
head; a few grains of calomel or a drop of croton oil in butter 
to be placed on the tongue, or an enema of castor oil to be 



administered. He may find it necessary to draw off the water 
with a catheter. The practice of blood-letting, once so common 
in this disease, is seldom resorted to, although in some cases, 
where there is very high arterial tension and a general state of 
plethora, it might be beneficial. Depletives are not employed 
where there is evidence of failure of the heart's action; indeed 
the cautious administration of stimulants may be necessary, 
either subcutaneously or by the mouth (if there exist a power of 
swallowing), together with warm applications to the surface of 
the body; a water-bed may be required, and careful nursing is 
essential to prevent complications, especially the formation of 
bedsores. • (F. W. Mo.) 

APOROSE (from Gr. d, without, and xopos, passage), a 
biological term meaning imperforate, or not porous: there is a 
group of corals called Aporosa. 

APOSIOPESIS (the Greek for " becoming silent "), a rhetorical 
device by which the speaker or writer stops short and leaves 
something unexpressed, but yet obvious, to be supplied by 
the imagination. The classical example is the threat, " Quos 
ego !" of Neptune (in Virgil, Aen. i. 135). 

APOSTASY (airocTTCuns, in classical Greek a defection or 
revolt from a military commander), a term generally employed 
to describe a complete renunciation of the. Christian faith, or 
even an exchange of one form of it for another, especially if the 
motive be unworthy. In the first centuries of the Christian era, 
apostasy was most commonly induced by persecution, and was 
indicated by some outward act, such as offering incense to a 
heathen deity or blaspheming the name of Christ. 1 In the 
Roman Catholic Church the word is also applied to the renun- 
ciation of monastic vows (apostasis a monachatu), and to the 
abandonment of the clerical profession for the life of the world 
(apostasis a clericatu). Such defection was formerly often 
punished severely. 

APOSTIL, or Apostille (possibly connected with Lat. 
appositum, placed near), a marginal note made by a commentator. 

APOSTLE (AxoffToXos, one sent forth on a mission, an envoy, 
as in Is. xviii. 2; Symmachus, airoo-TeWuv &iroaTo\ovs; Aquila, 
irpe<r($evT&s), a technical term used in the New Testament and in 
Christian literature generally for a special envoy of Jesus Christ. 
How far it had any similar use in Judaism in Christ's day is 
uncertain; but in the 4th century a.d., at any rate, it denoted 
responsible envoys from the central Jewish authority, especially 
for the collection of religious funds. In its first and simplest 
Christian form, the idea is present already in Mark iii. 14 i., 
where from the general circle of his disciples Jesus " made 
twelve (' whom he also named apostles,' Luke vi. 13, but 
doubtful in Mark), that they should be with him, and that he 
might from time to time send them forth (Iva. axoa-reAAfl) to 
preach and to have authority to cast out demons." Later on 
(vi. 6 ff.), in connexion with systematic preaching among the 
villages of Galilee, Jesus begins actually to " send forth " the 
twelve, two by two; and on their return from this mission 
(vi. 30) they are for the first time described as " apostles " or 
missionary envoys. Matthew (x. 1 ff.) blends the calling of the 
twelve with their actual sending forth, while Luke (vi. 13) 
makes Jesus himself call them "apostles" (for Luke's usage 
cf. xi. 49, ■" prophets and apostles," where Matthew, xxiii. 34, 
has " prophets and wise men and scribes "). But it is doubtful 
whether Jesus ever used the term for the Twelve, in relation to 
their temporary missions, any more than for the " seventy 
others " whom he " sent forth " later (Luke x. 1). Even the 
Fourth Gospel never so describes them. It simply has " a 
servant is not greater than his lord, neither an apostle (envoy) 
greater than he that sent him " (xiii. 16); and applies the idea 
of " mission " alike to Jesus (cf. Heb. iii. 1, " Jesus, the apostle 
. . . of our profession") and to his disciples, generally, as 
represented by the Twelve (xvii. 18, with 3, 6 ff.). But while 
ideally all Christ's disciples were " sent " with the Father's 
Name in charge, there were different degrees in which this 

1 The readmission of such apostates to the church was a matter 
that occasioned serious controversy. The emperor Julian's 
" Apostasy " is discussed under Julian. 



APOSTLE 



*97 



applied in practice; and so we find " apostle " used in several 
senses, once it emerges as a technical term. 

i. In the Apostolic age itself, "apostle" often denotes 
simply an " envoy," commissioned by Jesus Christ to be a 
primary witness and preacher of the Messianic Kingdom. This 
wide sense was shown by Lightfoot (in his commentary on 
Galatians, 1865) to exist in the New Testament, e.g. in 1 Cor. 
xii. 28 f., Eph. iv. n, Rom. xvi. 7; and his view has since been 
emphasized 1 by the discovery of the Teaching of the Twelve 
Apostles (see Didache), with its itinerant order of " apostles," 
who, together with " prophets " (cf. Eph. ii. 20, iii. 5) and 
" teachers," constituted a charismatic and seemingly unordained 
ministry of the Word, in some part of the Church (in Syria?) 
during the early sub-apostolic age. Paul is our earliest witness, 
as just cited; also in 1 Cor. xv. 5 ff., where he seems to quote the 
language of Palestinian tradition, in saying that Christ " appeared 
to Cephas; then to the Twelve; then ... to James; then to 
the apostles one and all (to is airoaToXois iraaiv) ; and last of all 
... to me also." The appearance to " all the Apostles " must 
refer to the final commission given by the risen Christ to certain 
assembled disciples (Acts i. 6 ff., cf. Luke xxiv. 33), including not 
only the Twelve and the Lord's brethren (i. 13 f.), but also some 
at least of the Seventy. Of this wider circle of witnesses, taken 
from among personal disciples during Jesus's earthly ministry, 
we get a further glimpse in the election of one from their number 
to fill Judas's place among the Twelve (i. 21 ff.), as the primary 
official witnesses of Messiah and his resurrection. Many of the 
120 then present (Acts i. 15), and not only the two set forward 
for final choice, must have been personal disciples, who by the 
recent commission had been made " apostles." Among such we 
may perhaps name Judas Barsabbas and Silas (Acts xv. 22, cf. 
i. 23), if not also Barnabas (1 Cor. ix. 6) and Andronicus and 
Junia (Rom. xvi. 7). 

So far, then, we gather that the original Palestinian type of 
apostleship meant simply (a) personal mission from the risen 
Christ (cf. 1 Cor. ix. 1), following on (b) some preliminary inter- 
course with Jesus in his earthly ministry. It was pre-eminence 
in the latter qualification that gave the Twelve their special 
status among apostles (Acts i. 26, ii. 14, vi. 2; in Acts generally 
they are simply " the apostles "). Conversely, it was Paul's 
lack in this respect which lay at the root of his difficulties as an 
apostle. 

It is possible, though not certain, that even those Judaizing 
missionaries at Corinth whom Paul styles " false-apostles " or, 
ironically, "the superlative apostles" (2 Cor. xi. 5, 13; xii. 11), 
rested part of their claim to superiority over Paul on (b), possibly 
even as having done service to Christ when on earth (2 Cor. xi. 18, 23). 
There is no sign in 2 Cor. that they laid claim to (a). If this be 
so, they were " Christ's apostles " only indirectly, " through men " 
(as some had alleged touching Paul, cf. Gal. i. 1), i.e. as sent forth 
on mission work by certain Jerusalem leaders with letters of intro- 
duction (2 Cor. iii. 1 ; E.^von Dobschtitz, Probleme der apost. Zeitalters, 
p. 106). 

2. The Twelve. — When Jesus selected an inner circle of 
disciples for continuous training by personal intercourse, his 
choice of " twelve " had direct reference to the tribes of Israel 
(Matt. xix. 28; Luke xxii. 30). This gave them a symbolic or 
representative character as a closed body (cf. Rev. xxi. 14), 
marking them off as the primary religious authority (cf. Acts 
ii. 42, " the apostles' teaching ") among the " disciples " or 
" brethren," when these began to assume the form of a com 7 
munity or church. The relationship which other " apostles " 
had enjoyed with the Master had been uncertain; they had been 
his recognized intimates, and that as a body. Naturally, then, 
they took the lead, collectively — in form at least, though really 
the initiative lay with one or two of their own number, Peter in 
particular. The process of practical differentiation from their 
fellow-apostles was furthered by the concentration of the Twelve, 
or at least of its most marked representatives, in Jerusalem, 
for a considerable period (Acts viii. 1, cf. xii. 1 ff. ; an early 
tradition specifies twelve years). Other apostles soon went forth 

1 By analogy, that is; for the wider sense of "apostle" in the 
Apostolic age need not be identical with a sub-apostolic use of the 
term (see below, 4 fin.). 



on their mission to " the cities of Israel " (cf. Acts ix. 31), and 
so exercised but little influence on the central policy of the 
Church. Hence their shadowy existence in the New Testament, 
though the actual wording of Matt. x. 5-42, read in the light of 
the Didachl, may help us to conceive their work in its main 
features. 

3. "Pillar" Apostles. — But in fact differentiation between 
apostles existed among the Twelve also. There were " pillars," 
like Peter and John (and his brother James until his death), 
who really determined matters of grave moment, as in the 
conference with Paul in Gal. ii. 9 — a conference which laid the 
basis of the latter's status as an apostle even in the eyes of 
Jewish Christians. Such pre-eminence was but the sequel of 
personal distinctions visible even in the preparatory days of 
discipleship, and it warns us against viewing the primitive facts 
touching apostles in the official light of later times. 

Consciousness of such personal pre-eminence has left its marks 
on the lists of the Twelve in the New Testament. Thus (1) 
Peter, James, John, Andrew, always appear as the first four, 
though the order varies, Mark representing relative prominence 
during Christ's ministry, and Acts actual influence in the Apos- 
tolic Church (cf. Luke viii. 51, ix. 28). (2) The others also stand 
in groups of four, the first name in each being constant, while the 
order of the rest varies. 

The same lesson emerges when we note that one such apostolic 
" pillar " stood outside the Twelve altogether, viz. James, the 
Lord's brother (Gal. ii. 9, cf. i. 19); and further, that "the 
Lord's brethren " seem to have ranked above " apostles " 
generally, being named between them and Peter in 1 Cor. ix. 5. 
That is, they too were apostles with the addition of a certain 
personal distinction. 

4. Paul, the " Apostle of the Gentiles."— So far apostles are 
only of the Palestinian type, taken from among actual hearers 
of the Messiah and with a mission primarily to Jews — apostles 
"of, the circumcision" (Gal. ii. 7-9). Now, however, emerges a 
new apostleship, that to the Gentiles; and with the change of 
mission goes also some change in the type of missionary or 
apostle. Of this type Paul was the first, and he remained its 
primary, and in some senses its only, example. Though he 
could claim, on occasion, to satisfy the old test of having seen 
the risen Lord (1 Cor. ix. 1, cf. xv. 8), he himself laid stress not 
on this, but on the revelation within his own soul of Jesus as 
God's Son, and of the Gospel latent therein (Gal. i. 16). This 
was his divine call as "apostle of the Gentiles " (Rom. xi. 13); 
here lay both his qualification and his credentials, once the fruits 
of the divine inworking were manifest in the success of his 
missionary work (Gal. ii. 8 f.; 1 Cor. xi. 1 f.; 2 Cor. iii. 2 f., xii. 12). 
But this new criterion of apostleship was capable of wider 
application, one dispensing altogether with vision of the risen 
Lord — which could not even in Paul's case be proved so fully 
as in the case of the original apostles— but appealing to the 
" signs of an apostle " (1 Cor. ix. 2 ; 2 Cor. xii. 1 2), the tokens of 
spiritual gift visible in work done, and particularly in the planting 
of the Gospel in fresh fields (2 Cor. x. 14-18). It may be in this 
wide charismatic sense that Paul uses the term in 1 Cor. xii. 28 f., 
Eph. ii. 20, iii. .5, iv. n, and especially in Rom. xvi. 7, " men of 
mark among the apostles" (cf. 2 Cor. xi. 13, "pseudo-apostles" 
masquerading as " apostles of Christ," and perhaps 1 Thess. ii. 6, 
of himself and Silas). That he used it in senses differing with 
the context is proved by 1 Cor. xv. 9, where he styles himself 
" the least of apostles," although in other connexions he claims 
the very highest rank, co-ordinate even with the Twelve as a 
body (Gal. ii. 7 ff,), in virtue of his distinctive Gospel. 

This point of view was not widely shared even in circles 
appreciative of his actual work. To most he seemed but a 
fruitful worker within lines determined by " the twelve apostles 
of the Lamb " as a body (Rev. xxi. 14). So we read of " the 
plant (Church) which the twelve apostles of the Beloved shall 
plant " (Ascension of Isaiah, iv. 3); "those who preached the 
Gospel to us (especially Gentiles) . . . unto whom He gave 
authority over the Gospel, being twelve for a witness to the 
tribes" (Barn. viii. 3, cf. v. 9); and the going forth of the 



198 



APOSTLE 



Twelve, after twelve years, beyond Palestine " into the world," 
to give it a chance to hear (Preaching of Peter, in Clem. Alex. 
Strom, vi. 5. 43; 6. 48). Later on, however, his own claim told 
on the Church's mind, when his epistles were read in church as a 
collection styled simply " the Apostle." 

As the primary medium of the Gentile Gospel (Gal. i. 16, cf. 
i. 8, ii. 2) Paul had no peers as an " apostle of the Gentiles " 
(Rom. xi. 13, cf. xv. 15-20, and see 1 Cor. xv. 8, " last of all to 
me "), unless it were Barnabas who shares with him the title 
" apostle " in Acts xiv. 4, 14 — possibly with reference to the 
special " work " on which they had recently been " sent forth 
by the Spirit " (xiii. 2, 4). Yet such as shared the spiritual gift 
(charisma) of missionary power in sufficient degree, were in fact 
apostles of Christ in the Spirit (1 Cor. xii. 28, 11). Such a 
secondary type of apostolate — answering to " apostolic mission- 
aries " of later times (cf. the use of lepawdaroXos in this sense by 
the Orthodox Eastern Church to-day) — would help to account 
for the apostolic claims of the missionaries censured in Rev. ii. 2, 
as also for the " apostles '' of the second generation implied in 
the Didac/ie. 

In the sub-apostolic age, however, the class of " missionaries " 
enjoying a charisma such as was conceived to convey apostolic 
commission through the Spirit, soon became distinguished from 
" apostles " (cf . Hermas, Sim. ix. 1 5. 4, " the apostles and teachers 
of the message of the Son of God," so 25. 2; in 17. r the apostles 
are reckoned as twelve), as the title became more and more 
confined by usage to the original apostles, particularly the 
Twelve as a body (e.g. Ascension of Isaiah and the Preaching of 
Peter), or to them and Paul (e.g. in Clement and Ignatius), and 
as reverence for these latter grew in connexion with their story 
in the Gospels and in Acts. 1 Thus Eusebius describes as " evan- 
gelists " (cf. Philip the Evangelist in Acts xxi. 8, also Eph. iv. 11, 
2 Tim. iv. s) those who " occupied the first rank in the succession 
to the Apostles " in missionary work (Hist. Eccl. iii. ,37, cf. v. 10). 
Yet the wider sense of " apostle " did not. at once die out even 
in the third and fourth generations. It lingered on as applied 
to the Seventy 2 — by Irenaeus, Tertullian, Clement and Origen — 
and even to Clement of Rome, by Clem. Alex. (? as a " fellow- 
worker " of Paul, Phil. iv. 3); while the adjective " apostolic " 
was applied to men like Poly carp (in his contemporary Acts of 
Martyrdom) and the Phrygian, Alexander, martyred at Lyons in 
a.d. 177 (Eus. v. 1), who was " not without share of apostolic 
charisma." 

The authority attaching to apostles was essentially spiritual in 
character and in the conditions of its exercise. Anything like 
autocracy among his followers was alien to Jesus's own teaching 
(Matt, xxiii. 6-1 1). All Christians were "brethren," and the 
basis of pre-eminence among them was relative ability for service. 
But the personal relation of the original Palestinian apostles to 
Jesus himself as Master gave them a unique fitness as authorized 
witnesses, from which flowed naturally, by sheer spiritual in- 
fluence, such special forms of authority as they came gradually 
to exercise in the early Church. " There is no trace in Scripture 
of a formal commission of authority for government from Christ 
Himself " (Hort, Chr. Eccl. p. 84) given to apostles, save as 
representing the brethren in their collective action. Even the 
" resolutions " (Soynara) of the Jerusalem conference were not 
set forth by the apostles present simply in their own name, nor 
as ipso facto binding on the conscience of the Antiochene Church. 
They expressed " a claim to deference rather than a right to be 
obeyed " (Hort, op. cit. 81-85). Such was the kind of authority 
attaching to apostles, whether collectively or individually. It 
was not a fixed notion, but varied in quantity and quality with 

1 The tendency is already visible in the Lucan writings. An 
analogous process is seen in the use of " disciple," applicable in 
the apostolic age to Christians at large, but in the course of the sub- 
apostolic age restricted to personal " disciples of the Lord " or to 
martyrs (Papias in Eus. iii. 39, cf. Ignatius, Ad Eph. i. 2). 

2 In the Edessene legend of Abgar, in Eus. i. 12, we read that 
" Judas, who is also Thomas, sent Thaddaeus as apostle — one of the 
Seventy," where simply an authoritative envoy of Jesus seems in- 
tended. For traces of the wider sense of " apostle " in Gnostic, 
Marcionite and Montanist circles, see Monnier (as be?ow). 



the growing maturity of converts. This is how Paul, from whom 
we gather most on the point, conceives the matter. The exercise 
of his spiritual authority is not absolute, lest he " lord it over 
their faith "; consent of conscience or of " faith " is ever requisite 
(2 Cor. i. 24; cf. Rom. xiv. 23). But the principle was elastic in 
application, and would take more patriarchal forms in Palestine 
than in the Greek world. The case was essentially the same as 
on the various mission-fields to-day, where the position of the 
" missionary " is at first one of great spiritual initiative and 
authority, limited only by h ; s own sense of the fitness of things, 
in the light of local usages. So the notion of formal or constitu- 
tional authority attaching to the apostolate, in its various senses, 
is an anachronism for the apostolic age. The tendency, however, 
was for their authority to be conceived more and more on formal 
lines, and, particularly after their deaths, as absolute. 

The authority attaching to apostles as writers, which led 
gradually to the formation of a New Testament Canon — " the 
Apostles " side by side with " the Books " of the Old Testament 
(so 2 Clement xiv., c. a.d. 120-140) — is a subject by itself (see 
Bible). 

This change of conception helped to further the notion of a 
certain devolution qf apostolic powers to successors constituted 
by act of ordination. The earliest idea of an apostolical succession 
meant simply the re-emergence in others of the apostolic spirit of 
missionary enthusiasm. " The first rank in the succession of the 
apostles " consisted of men eminent as disciples of theirs, and so 
fitted to continue their labours (Euseb. iii. 37); and even under 
Commodus (a.d. 180-193) there were " evangelists of the word " 
possessed of " inspired zeal to emulate apostles " (v. 10). Such 
were perhaps the " apostles " of the Didache. Of the notion of 
apostolic succession in ministerial grace conferred by ordination, 
there is little or no trace before Irenaeus. The famous passage 
in Clement of Rome (xliv. 2) refers simply to the succession of 
one set of men to another in an office of apostolic institution. 
The grace that makes Polycarp " an apostolic and prophetic 
teacher " (Mart. Polyc. 16) is peculiar to him personally. But 
Irenaeus holds, apparently on a priori grounds, that " elders " 
who stand in orderly succession to the apostolic founders of the 
true tradition in the churches, have, " along with the succession 
of oversight," also an " assured gift of (insight into) truth " 
by the Father's good pleasure (" cum episcopatus succes- 
sione charisma veritatis certum secundum placitum Patris 
acceperunt "), in contrast to heretics who wilfully stand outside 
this approved line of transmission (adv. Haer. iv. 26. 2). So far, 
indeed, the succession is not limited to the monarchical episcopate 
as distinct from the presbyteral order to which it belonged (cf. 
"presbyterii ordo, principalis consessio " in the same context, 
and see iii. 14. 2), though the bishops of apostolic churches, as 
capable of being traced individually (iii. 3. 1), are specially 
appealed to as witnesses (cf. iv. 33. 8, v. 19. 2) — as earlier by 
Hegesippus (Euseb. iv. 22). Nor is there mention of sacerdotal 
grace attaching to the succession in apostolic truth. 3 But once 
the idea of supernatural grace going along with office as such 
(of which we have already a trace in the Ignatian bishop, though 
without the notion of actual apostolic succession) arose in con- 
nexion with successio ab apostolis, the full development of the 
doctrine was but a matter of time. 4 

Literature. — In England the modern treatment of the subject 
dates from J. B. Lightfoot's dissertation in his Commentary on 
Galatians, to which Dr F. J. A. Hort's The Christian Ecclesia added 
elements of value; see also T. M. Lindsay, The Church and the 
Ministry, and articles in Hastings' Dictionary of the Bible and the 
Ency. Biblica; A. Harnack, Die Lehre der Apostel, pp. 93 ff., and 

3 The above is substantially the view taken by J. B. Lightfoot 
in his essay on " The Christian Ministry " (Comm. on Philippians, 
6th ed., pp. 239, 252 f.), and by T. M. Lindsay, The Church and the 
Ministry (1 902), pp. 224-228, 278 ff. Even C. Gore, The Church and 
the Ministry (1889), pp. 119 ff., while inferring a sacerdotal element 
in Irenaeus's conception of the episcopate, says: " But it is mainly 
as preserving the catholic traditions that Irenaeus regards the 
apostolic succession " (p. 120). 

4 See Lightfoot's essay for Cyprian's contribution, as also for that 
of the Clementines, which fix on the twofold position of James at 
Jerusalem, as apostle and bishop, as bearing on apostolic succession 
in the episcopate. 



APOSTLE SPOONS— APOSTOLICAL CONSTITUTIONS 199 



Dogmengeschichte (3rd ed.), i- 153 ff. ; E. Haupt, Zum Verstdndnis 
d. Apostolats in NT. (Halle, 1896); and especially H. Monnier, 
La Notion de Vapostolat, des origines a Irenee (Paris, 1903). The later 
legends and their sources are examined by T. Schermann, Propheten- 
und Apostellegenden (Leipzig, 1907). (J. V. B.) 

APOSTLE SPOONS, a set of spoons, usually of silver or silver 
gilt, with the handles terminating in figures of the apostles, each 
bearing their distinctive emblem. They were common baptismal 
gifts during the 15th and 16th centuries, but were dying out by 
1666. Often single spoons were given, bearing the figure of the 
patron or name saint of the child. Sets of the twelve apostles are 
not common, and complete sets of thirteen, with the figure of our 
Lord on a larger spoon, are still rarer. The Goldsmiths' Company 
in London has one such set, all by the same maker and bearing 
the hall-mark of 1626, and a set of thirteen was sold at Christie's 
in 1904 for £4900. 

See William Hone, The Everyday Book and Table Book (1831); 
and W. J. Cripps, Old English Plate (9th ed., 1906). 

APOSTOLICAL CONSTITUTIONS (Aiartryai or Aiard^eis r&v 
ayluiv airooroXoiv bia KX17 fievros tov 'Fufiaioiv ino-KOTrov re /cat 
toWitov. Ka0oXi/cj) 8i8ao-Ka\La), a collection of ecclesiastical 
regulations in eight books, the last of which concludes with the 
eighty-five Canons of the Holy Apostles. By their title the Con- 
stitutions profess to have been drawn up by the apostles, and 
to have been transmitted to the Church by Clement of Rome; 
sometimes the alleged authors are represented as speaking 
jointly, sometimes singly. From the first they have been very 
variously estimated; the Canons, as a rule, more highly than the 
rest of the work. For example, the Trullan Council of Constanti- 
nople (quini-sextum) , a.d. 692, accepts the Canons as genuine by 
its second canon, but rejects the Constitutions on the ground 
that spurious matter had been introduced into them by heretics; 
and whilst the former were henceforward used freely in the East, 
only a few portions of the latter found their way into the Greek 
and oriental law-books. Again, Dionysius Exiguus (c. a.d. 500) 
translated fifty of the Canons into Latin, 1 although under the 
title Canones qui dicuntur Apostolorum, and thus they passed 
into other Western collections; whilst the Constitutions as a 
whole remained unknown in the West until they were published 
in 1563 by the Jesuit Turrianus. At first received with en- 
thusiasm, their authenticity soon came to be impugned; and 
their true significance was largely lost sight of as it began to be 
realized that they were not what they claimed to be. Vain 
attempts were still made to rehabilitate them, and they were, 
in general, more highly estimated in England than elsewhere. 
The most extravagant estimate of all was that of Whiston, who 
calls them " the most sacred standard of Christianity, equal in 
authority to the Gospels themselves, and superior in authority 
to the epistles of single apostles, some parts of them being our 
Saviour's own original laws delivered to the apostles, and the 
other parts the public acts of the apostles " (Historical preface 
to Primitive Christianity Revived, pp. 85-86). Others, however, 
realized their composite character from the first, and by degrees 
some of the component documents became known. Bishop 
Pearson was able to say that " the eight books of the Apostolic 
Constitutions have been after Epiphanius's time compiled and 
patched together out of the didascaliae or doctrines which went 
under the names of the holy apostles and their disciples or suc- 
cessors " ( Vind. Ign. i. cap. 5) ; whilst a greater scholar still, 
Archbishop Usher, had already gone much further, and con- 
cluded, forestalling the results of modern critical methods, that 
their compiler was none other than the compiler of the spurious 
Ignatian epistles (Epp. Polyc. el Ign. p. lxiii. f., Oxon. 1644). 
The Apostolical Constitutions, then, are spurious, and they are 
one of a long series of documents of like character. But we 
have not really gauged their significance by saying that they 
are spurious. They are the last stage and climax of a gradual 
process of compilation and crystallization, so to speak, of un- 
written church custom; and a short account of this process will 
show their real importance and value. 

1 Why he did not go on to give the remaining thirty-five is not 
clear; they belong to the same date as, and are not inferior to, the 
first fifty. 



These documents are the outcome of a tendency which is 
found in every society, religious or secular, at some point in its 
history. The society begins by living in accordance 
with its fundamental principles. By degrees these andreai 
translate themselves into appropriate action. Diffi- nature. 
culties are faced and solved as they arise; and when 
similar circumstances recur they will tend to be met in the 
same way. Thus there grows up by degrees a body of what 
may be called customary law. Plainly, there is no particular 
point of time at which this customary law can be said to have 
begun. To all appearance it is there from the first in solution 
and gradually crystallizes out; and yet it is being continually 
modified as time goes on. Moreover, the time comes when 
the attempt is made, either by private individuals or by the 
society itself, to put this " customary law " into writing. Now 
when this is done, two tendencies will at once show themselves. 

(a) This "customary law " will at once become more definite:, 
the very fact of putting it into writing will involve an effort 
after logical completeness. There will be a tendency on the part 
of the writer to fill up gaps; to state local customs as if they 
obtained universally; to introduce his personal equation, and 
to add to that which is the custom that which, in his opinion, 
ought to be. (b) There will be a strong tendency to fortify that 
which has been written with great names, especially in days 
when there is no very clear notion of literary property. This is 
done, not always with any deliberate consciousness of fraud 
(although it must be clearly recognized that truth is not one of 
the " natural virtues," and that the sense of the obligations of 
truthfulness was far from strong), but rather to emphasize the 
importance of what was written, and the fact that it was no 
new invention of the writer's. In a non-literary age fame 
gathers about great names; and that which, ex hypothesi, has 
gone on since the beginning of things is naturally attributed to 
the founders of the society. Then come interpolations to make 
this ascription more probable, and the prefixing of a title, then 
or subsequently, which states it as a fact. This is precisely the 
way in which the Apostolical Constitutions and other kindred 
documents have come into being. They are attempts, made in 
various places and at different times, to put into writing the 
order and discipline and character of the Church; in part for 
private instruction and edification, but in part also with a view 
to actual use; frequently even with an actual reference to 
particular circumstances. In this lies their importance, to a 
degree which is only just being adequately realized. They 
contain evidence of the utmost value as to the order of the 
Church in early days; evidence, however, which needs to be 
sifted with the greatest care, since the personal preferences of 
the writer and the customs of the local church to which he belongs 
are continually mixed up with things which have a wider preval- 
ence. It is only by careful investigation, by the method of 
comparisons, that these elements can be disentangled; but as 
the number of documents of this class known to us is continually 
increasing, their value increases even more than proportionately. 
And whilst their local and fugitive character must be fully 
recognized and allowed for, is it unjustifiable to set them aside 
or leave them out of account as heretical, and therefore negligible. 

It will be sufficient here to mention shortly the chief collections 
of this kind which came into existence during the first four 
centuries; generally as the work of private individuals, 
and having, at any rate, no more than a local authority jectioas. " 
of some kind, (a) The earliest known to us is the 
Didache or Teaching of the Twelve Apostles, itself compiled from 
earlier materials, and dating from about 120 (see Didache). 

(b) The Apostolic Church Order (aposlolische Kirchenordnung of 
German writers); Ecclesiastical Canons of the Holy Apostles of 
one MS.; Sententiae Apostolorum of Pitra: of about 300, and 
emanating probably from Asia Minor. Its earlier part, cc. 1-14, 
depends upon the Didache, and the rest of it is a book of discipline 
in which Harnack has attempted to distinguish two older frag- 
ments of church law {Texte u. Unters. ii. 5). (c) The so-called 
Canones Hippolyti, probably Alexandrian or Roman, and of the 
first half of the 3rd century. It will be observed that these 



200 



APOSTOLICAL CONSTITUTIONS 



make no claim to apostolic authorship; but otherwise their 
origin is like that of the rest, unless indeed, as has been suggested, 
they represent the work of an actual Roman synod, id) The 
so-called Egyptian Church Order, in Coptic from a Greek pre- 
Nicene original (c. 310). It is part of the Egyptian Heptateuch 
and contains neither communion nor ordination forms, (e) The 
Ethiopic Church Order, perhaps twenty years later than id), and 
forming part of the Ethiopic Statutes. (/) The Verona Latin 
Fragments, discovered and published by Hauler, portions of 
a form akin to («), which may be dated c. 340, though possibly 
earlier. It has a preface which refers to a treatise Concerning 
Spiritual Gifts as having immediately preceded it. (g) The 
recently discovered Testament of the Lord, which is somewhat 
later in date (c. 35°), and likewise depends upon the Canones 
Hippolyli. (h) The so-called Canons of Basil. This is an Arabic 
work perhaps based on a Coptic and ultimately on a Greek 
original, embodying with modifications large portions of the 
Canons of Hippolytus. (On the relations between the six last- 
named, see Hippolytus, Canons of.) 

Here also may be noticed the Didascalia Apostolorum, originally 
written in Greek, but known through a Syriac version and a frag- 
mentary Latin one published by Hauler. It is of the middle of the 
3rd century — in fact, a passage in the Latin translation seems to give 
us the date A.D. 254. It emanates from Palestine or Syria, and is 
independent of the documents already mentioned ; and upon it the 
Constitutions themselves very largely depend. It is a mixture of 
moral and ecclesiastical instruction. The Sacramentary of Serapion 
(c 350), T)ie Pilgrimage of Etheria (Silvia) (c. 385), and The Cate- 
chetical Lectures of Cyril of Jerusalem (348) are also of value in this 
connexion. In the (so-called) Constitutions through Hippolytus we 
have possibly a preliminary draft of the famous 8th book of the 
Apostolical Constitutions. 1 

The Constitutions themselves fall into three main divisions, 
(i.) The first of these consists of books i.-vi., and throughout runs 
Contents. P ara Uel to the Didascalia. Bickell, indeed, held that 
this latter was an abbreviated form of books i.-vi.; 
but it is now agreed on all hands that the Constitutions are based 
on the Didascalia and not vice versa, (ii.) Then follows book vii., 
the first thirty-one chapters of which are an adaptation of the 
Didache, whilst the rest contain various liturgical forms of which 
the origin is still uncertain, though it has been acutely suggested 
by Achelis, and with great probability, that they originated in 
the schismatical congregation of Lucian at Antioch. (iii.) Book 
viii. is more composite, and falls into three parts. The first two 
chapters, irepl x^P^^o-Tiiiv, may be based upon a lost work of 
St Hippolytus, otherwise known only by a reference to it in the 
preface of the Verona Latin Fragments; and an examination 
shows that this is highly probable. The next section, cc. 3-27, 
irepl x^poTOVicov, and cc. 28-46, irtpl kclvovuiv, is twofold, and 
is evidently that upon which the writer sets most store. The 
apostles no longer speak jointly, but one by one in an apostolic 
council, and the section closes with a joint decree of them all. 
They speak of the ordination of bishops (the so-called Clementine 
Liturgy is that which is directed to be used at the consecration 
of a bishop, cc. 5-15), of presbyters, deacons, deaconesses, sub- 
fieacons and lectors, and then pass on to confessors, virgins, 
Jvidows and exorcists; after which follows a series of canons on 
various subjects, and liturgical formulae. With regard to this 
section, all that can be said is that it includes materials which 
are also to be found elsewhere — in the Egyptian Church Order 
and other documents already spoken of — and that the precise 
relation between them is at present not determined. The third 
section consists of the Apostolic Canons already referred to, the 
last and most significant of which places the Constitutions and 
the two epistles of Clement in the canon of Scripture, and omits 
the Apocalypse. They are derived in part from the preceding 
Constitutions, in part from the canons of the councils of Antioch, 
341, Nicaea, 325, and possibly Laodicaea, 363. 

1 At a later date various collections were made of the documents 
above mentioned, or some of them, to serve as law-books in different 
churches — e.g. the Syrian Octateuch, the Egyptian Heptateuch, 
and the Ethiopic Sinodos. These, however, stand on an entirely 
different footing, since they are simply collections of existing docu- 
ments, and no attempt is made to claim apostolic authorship for 
them. 



A comparison of the Constitutions with the material upon 
which they are based will illustrate the compiler's method. 
(a) To begin with the Didascalia already mentioned. It is un- 
methodical and badly digested, homiletical in style, and abound- 
ing in biblical quotations. There is no precise arrangement; 
but the subjects, following a general introduction, are the bishop 
and his duties, penance, the administration of the offerings, 
the settlement of disputes, the divine service, the order of widows, 
deacons and deaconesses, the poor, behaviour in persecution, 
and so forth. The compiler of the Constitutions finds here 
material after his own heart. He is even more discursive and 
more homiletical in style; he adds fresh citations of the Scrip- 
tures, and additional explanations and moral reflexions; and 
all this with so little judgment that he often leaves confusion 
worse confounded (e.g. in ii. 57, where, upon a symbolical 
description of the Church as a sheepfold, he has superimposed 
the further symbolism of a ship), (b) Passing on to books vii. 
and viii., we observe that the compiler's method of necessity 
changes with his new material. In the former book he still 
makes large additions and alterations, but there is less scope for 
his prolixity than before; and in the latter, where he is no 
longer dealing with generalities, but making actual definitions, 
the Constitutions of necessity become more precise and statutory 
in form. Throughout he adopts and adapts the language of his 
sources as far as possible, " only pruning in the most pressing 
cases," but towards the end he cannot avoid making larger 
alterations from time to time. And his alterations throughout 
are not made aimlessly. Where he finds things which would 
obviously clash with the customs of his own day, he unhesitatingly 
modifies them. An account of the Passion, with a curiously 
perverted chronology, the object of which was to justify the 
length of the Passion-tide fast, is entirely revised for this reason 
(v. 14) ; the direction to observe Easter according to the Jewish 
computation is changed into the exact contrary for the same 
reason (v. 17) ; and where his archetype lapses into speaking of a 
lull in persecution he naively informs us that the Romans have 
now given up persecuting and have adopted Christianity (vi. 26), 
forgetting altogether that he is speaking in the character of the 
apostles. Above all, he both magnifies the office of the Christian 
ministry as a whole and alters what is said of it in detail (for 
example, the deaconess loses rank not a little), to make it agree 
with the circumstances of his day in general, and with his own 
ideas of fitness in particular. It is here that his evidence is at 
once most valuable and needs to be used with the greatest care. 
To give one striking example of the value of these documents. 
The Canones Hippolyli (vi. 43) provide that one who has been 
a confessor for the faith may be received as a presbyter by 
virtue of his confessorship and not by the laying on of the 
bishop's hands; but if he be chosen a bishop, he is to be ordained. 
This provision passes on into the Egyptian Ecclesiastical Canons 
and other kindred documents, and even into the Testamentum 
Domini. But the corresponding passage in the Apostolical 
Constitutions (viii. 23) entirely reverses it: "A confessor is not 
ordained, for he is so by choice and patience, and is worthy of 
great honour. . . . But if there be occasion, he is to be ordained 
either a bishop, priest, or deacon. But if any one of the con- 
fessors who is not ordained snatches to himself any such dignity 
upon account of his confession, let the same person be deprived 
and rejected; for he is not in such an office, since he has denied 
the constitution of Christ, and is worse than an infidel." 

Who, then, is the author of the Constitutions, and what can be 
inferred with regard to him? (i.) By separating off the sources 
which he used from his own additions to them, it at Author- 
once becomes clear that the latter are the work of one ship, 
man: the style is unmistakable, and the method of P' ac « 
working is the same throughout. The compiler of a<,< * rfate< 
books i.-vi. is also the compiler of books vii., viii. (ii.) As to 
his theological position, different views have been held. Funk 
suggests Apollinarianism, which is tiie retuge of tile destitute; 
and Achelis inclines in the same direction. But the affinities of 
the author are quite otherwise, the most pronounced of them 
being a strong subordinationist tendency, denial of a human 



APOSTOLIC CANONS— APOSTOLIC FATHERS 



20I 



soul to Christ, and the like, which suggest not indeed Arianism 
but an inclination towards Arianism. Above all, his polemic is 
directed against the dying heresies of the 3rd century; and he 
writes with an absence of constraint which is not the language 
of one who lives amidst violent controversies or who is conscious 
of being in a minority. All this points to the position of a 
" conservative " or semi-Arian of the East, one who belongs, 
perhaps, to the circle of Lucian of Antioch and writes before the 
time of Julian. It is hard to think of any other time or circum- 
stances in which a man could write like this, (iii.) The indica- 
tions of time have been held to point to a different conclusion. 
On the one hand, the fact that the attempt to rebuild the, temple 
by Julian in 363 is not mentioned in vi. 24 points to an earlier 
date; and the fact that the /co-marai, are not mentioned amongst 
the church officers points in the same direction, for elsewhere they 
are first mentioned in a rescript of Constantius in a.d. 357. On 
the other hand, in the cycle of feasts occur the names of several 
which are probably of later date — e.g. Christmas and St Stephen, 
which were introduced at Antioch c. a.d. 378 and 379 respectively. 
Again, Epiphanius (c. a.d. 374) appears to be unacquainted with 
it; he still quotes from the Didascalia, and elaborately explains 
it away where it is contrary to the usages of his own day. But 
as regards the former point, it is possible that the Apostolical 
Constitutions constantly gave rise to these festivals ; or, on 
the other hand, that the two passages were subsequently intro- 
duced either by the writer himself or by some other hand, 
when the last book of the Constitutions was being used as a 
law-book. And as regards the latter, the fact that Epiphanius 
does not use the Constitutions is no proof that they had not yet 
been compiled, (iv.) As to the region of composition there is no 
real doubt. It was clearly the East, Syria or Palestine. Many 
indications are against the latter, and Syria is strongly suggested 
by the use of the Syro- Macedonian calendar. Moreover, the 
writer represents the Roman Clement as the channel of com- 
munication between the apostles and the Church. This fact 
both supplies him with the name by which he is commonly 
known, Pseudo-Clement, and also furnishes corroboration of his 
Syrian birth; since the other spurious writings bearing the 
name of Clement, the Homilies and Recognitions, are likewise of 
Syrian origin. Moreover, the spurious Ignatian epistles, which 
are also Syrian, depend throughout upon the Constitutions, 
(v.) But this is not all. It was long ago noticed that Pseudo- 
Clement bears a very close resemblance to Pseudo-Ignatius, the 
interpolator of the Ignatian Epistles in the longer Greek recen- 
sion. Usher, as we have seen, identified them, and modern 
criticism accepts this identification as a fact (Lagarde, Harnack, 
Funk, Brightman). Lightfoot, indeed, still hesitated (Ap. 
Fathers, 11. i. 266 n.) on the ground that Pseudo-Ignatius occasion- 
ally misunderstands the Constitutions, that the two writings give 
the Roman succession differently, and that Pseudo-Clement 
shows no knowledge of the Christological controversies of Nicaea. 
But as regards the first of these, it is rather a case of condensed 
citation than of misinterpretation; the second is explained by 
the writer's carelessness as shown in other passages, and all are 
solved if a considerable interval of time elapsed between the com- 
pilation of the Constitutions and the spurious Ignatian epistles. 
It seems clear then that the compiler was a Syrian, and that 
he also wrote the spurious Ignatian epistles; he was likewise 
probably a semi-Arian of the school of Lucian of Antioch. His 
date is given by Harnack as a.d. 340—360, with a leaning to 
340-343; by Lightfoot as the latter half of the 4th century; 
by Brightman, 370-380; by Maclean, 375; and by Funk as the 
beginning of the 5th century. 

Authorities. — \V. Ueltzen, Constitutiones Apostolicae (Schwerin, 
1853); P. A. de Lagarde, Didascalia Apostolorum Syriace (Leipz., 
1854); Constitutiones Apostolorum (Leipz. and Lond., 1862); M. D. 
Gibson, Didascalia Apost. Syriace, with F.ng. trans. (Florae Semiticae, 
i. and ii., Cambridge, 1903) ; J. B. Pitra, Juris Ecclesiastici Graecorum 
Historia et Monumenta, i. (Rome, 1864); Hauler, Didascaliae 
Apostolorum Fragmenta Ueronensia Latina (Leipzig, 1900); Bickell, 
Geschichte des Kirchenrechts, i. (Giessen, 1843); F. X. Funk, Die 
apostolischen Konstitutionen (Rottenb., 1891) ; A. Harnack, Geschichte 
d. altchrisil. Litteratur, i. 515 ff. (Leipz., 1893); F. E. Brightman, 



Liturgies Eastern and Western, I. xvii. ff. (Oxford, 1896); H. 
Achelis, in Hauck's Realencyklopddie, i. 734 f., art. " Apostolische 
Konstitutionen und Kanones " (Leipz., 1896); A. S. Maclean, 
Recent Discoveries illustrating Early Christian Worship (Lond., 1904) ; 
J. Wordsworth, The Ministry of Grace, pp. 18 ff ; J. P. Arendzen, 
"The Apostolic Church Order" (Syriac Text, Eng. trans, and notes) 
in Journ. of Theol. Studies, iii. 59. Trans, of Apost. Constitutions, 
book viii., in Ante-Nicene Christian Library. (W. E. Co.) 

APOSTOLIC CANONS, a collection of eighty-five rules for the 
regulation of clerical life, appended to the eighth book of the 
Apostolical Constitutions (q.v.). They are couched in brief 
legislative form though on no definite plan, and deal with the 
vexed questions of ecclesiastical discipline as they were raised 
towards the end of the 4th century. At least half of the canons 
are derived from earlier constitutions, and probably not many 
of them are the actual productions of the compiler, whose aim 
was to gloss over the real nature of the Constitutions, und secure 
their incorporation with the Epistles of Clement in the New 
Testament of his day. The Codex Alexandrinus does indeed 
append the Clementine Epistles to its text of the New Testament. 
The Canons may be a little later in date than the preceding 
Constitutions, but they are evidently from the same Syrian 
theological circle. 

APOSTOLIC FATHERS, a term used to distinguish those early 
Christian writers who were believed to have been the personal 
associates of the original Apostles. While the title " Fathers " 
was given from at least the beginning of the 4th century to 
church writers of former days, as being the parents of Christian 
belief and thought for later times, the expression " Apostolic 
Fathers" dates only from the latter part of the 17th century. 
The idea of recognizing these " Fathers " as a special group 
exists already in the title " Patres aevi apostolici, sive SS. 
Patrum qui temporibus apostolicis floruerunt . . . opera," under 
which in 1672 J. B. Cotelier published at Paris the writings 
current under the names of Barnabas, Clement of Rome, Hermas, 
Ignatius and Polycarp. But the name itself is due to their next 
editor, Thomas Ittig (1643-1710), in his Bibliotheca Patrum 
Apostolicorum (1699), who, however, included under this title 
only Clement, Ignatius and Polycarp. Here already appears 
the doubt as to how many writers can claim the title, a doubt 
which has continued ever since, and makes the contents of the 
"Apostolic Fathers" differ so much from editor to editor. 
Thus the Oratorian Andrea Gallandi (1709-1779), in re-issuing 
Cotelier's collection in his Bibliotheca Veterum Patrum (1765- 
1781), included the fragments of Papias and the Epistle to 
Diognetus, to which recent editors have added the citations 
from the " Elders " of Papias's day found in Irenaeus and, 
since 1883, the Didache. 

The degree of historic claim which these various writings 
have to rank as the works 1 of Apostolic Fathers varies greatly 
on any definition of " apostolic." Originally the epithet was 
meant to be taken strictly, viz. as denoting those whom history 
could show to have been personally connected, or at least coeval, 
with one or more apostles; and an effort was made, as by 
Cotelier, to distinguish the writings rightly and wrongly assigned 
to such. Thus editions tended to vary with the historical views 
of editors. But the convenience of the category " Apostolic 
Fathers " to express not only those who might possibly have 
had some sort of direct contact with apostles — such as " Bar- 
nabas," Clement, Ignatius, Papias, Polycarp — but also those 
who seemed specially to preserve the pure tradition of apostolic 
doctrine during the sub-apostolic age, has led to its general use 
in a wide and vague sense. 

Conventionally, then, the title denotes the group of writings 
which, whether in date or in internal character, are regarded as 
belonging to the main stream of the Church's teaching during 
the period between the Apostles and the Apologists (i.e. to 
c. a.d. 140). Or to put it more exactly, the '' Apostolic Fathers " 
represent, chronologically in the main and still more from the 
religious and theological standpoint, . the momentous process of 

1 Cotelier included the Acts of Martyrdom of Clement, Ignatius 
and Polycarp; and those of Ignatius and Polycarp are still often 
printed by editors. 



202 



APOSTOLIC FATHERS 



transition from the type of teaching in the New Testament to 
that which meets us in the early Catholic Fathers, from the last 
quarter of the 2nd century onwards. The Apologists no doubt 
show us certain fresh factors entering into this development; 
but on the whole the Apostolic Fathers by themselves go a long 
way to explain the transition in question, so far as knowledge of 
this saeculum obscurum is within our reach at all. It is true that 
they do not include the whole even of the ecclesiastical literature 
of the sub-apostolic age, not to mention what remains of Gnostic 
and other minority types. The Preaching and Apocalypse of 
Peter, for instance, are quite typical of the same period, and help 
us to read hetween the lines of the Apostolic Fathers. Yet 
they do not really add much to what is there already, and they 
have the drawbacks of pseudonymity; they lack concrete and 
personal qualities; they are general expressions of tendencies 
which we cannot well locate or measure, save by means of 
the Apostolic Fathers themselves or of their earliest Catholic 
successors. 

(A) In external features the group is far from homogeneous, 
a fact which has led to their being disintegrated as a group in 
certain histories of early Christian literature {e.g. those of 
Harnack and Kriiger), and classed each under its own literary 
type — so sacrificing to outer form, which is quite secondary in 
primitive Christian writings, the more significant fact of religious 
affinity. Its original members, those still best entitled to their 
name in any strict sense, are epistles, and in this respect also 
most akin to Apostolic writings. Indeed Ignatius takes pleasure 
in saluting his readers " after the apostolic stamp " {ad Trail. 
inscr.), while yet disclaiming all desire to emulate the apostolic 
manner in other respects, being fully conscious of the gulf between 
himself and apostles like Peter and Paul in claim to authority 
{ib. iii. 3, ad Rom. iv. 3). The like holds of Polycarp, who, in 
explaining that he writes to exhort the Philippians only at their 
own request, adds, " for neither am I, nor is any other like me, 
able to follow the wisdom of the blessed and glorious Paul " 
(iii. 2). Clement's epistle, indeed, conforms more to the elaborate 
and treatise-like form of the Epistle to the Hebrews, on which 
it draws so largely; and the same is true of " Barnabas." But 
one and all are influenced by study of apostolic epistles, and 
witness to the impression which these produced on the men of 
the next generation. Unconsciously, too, they correspond to 
the apostolic type of writing in another respect, viz. their occa- 
sional and practical character. They are evoked by pressing 
ri_'eds of the hour among some definite body of Christians and 
ho* by any literary motive. 1 This is a universal trait of primitive 
Ch/istian writings; so that to speak of primitive Christian 
" literature " at all is hardly accurate, and tends to an artificial 
handling of their contents. These sub-apostolic epistles are 
veritable " human documents," with the personal note running 
through them. They are after all personal expressions of 
Christianity, in which are discernible also specific types of local 
tradition. To such spontaneous actuality a large part of their 
interest and value is due. 

Nor is this pre-literary and vital quality really absent even 
from the writing which is least entitled to a place among 
" Apostolic Fathers," the Epistle to Diognetus. This beautiful 
picture of the Christian life as a realized ideal, and of Christians 
as " the soul " of the world, owes its inclusion to a double error: 
first, to the accidental attachment at the end of another fragment 
(§ n), which opens with the writer's claim to stand forth as a 
teacher as being " a disciple of apostles "; and next, to mistaken 
exegesis of this phrase as implying personal relations with 
apostles, rather than knowledge of their teaching, written or oral. 
Whether in form addressed to Diognetus, the tutor of Marcus 
Aurelius, as a typical cultured observer of Christianity, or to 
some other eminent person of the same name in the locality 
of its origin, or, as seems more likely, to cultured Greeks gener- 
ally, personified under the significant name " Diognetus " 
(" Heaven-born," cf. Acts xvii. 28 along with § iii. 4) — the 

1 See G. A. Deissmann, Bible Studies, pp. 1-60, for this distinction 
between the genuine " letter " and the literary " epistle," as applied 
to the New Testament in particular. 



epistle is in any case an " open letter " of an essentially literary 
type. Further, its opening seems modelled on the lines of the 
preface to Luke's Gospel, to which, along with Acts, it may owe 
something of its very conception as a reasoned appeal to the 
lover of truth. But while literary in form and conception, its 
appeal is in spirit so personal a testimony to what the Gospel 
has done for the writer and his fellow Christians, that it is akin 
to the piety of the Apostolic Fathers as a group. It is true 
that it has marked affinities, e.g. in its natural theology, with the 
earliest Apologists, Aristides and Justin, even as it is itself in 
substance an apology addressed not to the State, but to thoughtful 
public opinion. But this only means that we cannot draw a hard 
and fast line between groups of early Christian writings at a time 
when practical religious interests overshadowed all others. 

If thus related to the Apologists of the middle of the 2nd 
century, the Epistle to Diognetus has also points of contact 
with one of the most practical and least literary writings found 
among our Apostolic Fathers, viz. the homily originally known 
as the Second Epistle of Clement (for this ascription, as for other 
details, see Clementine Literature). The recovery of its 
concluding sections in the same MS. which brought the Didache 
to light, proves beyond question that we have here the earliest 
extant sermon preached before a Christian congregation, about 
a.d. 120-140 (so J. B. Lightfoot). Its opening section, recalling 
to its hearers the passing of the mists of idolatry before the revela- 
tion in Jesus Christ, is markedly similar in tone and tenor to 
passages in the Epistle to Diognetus. Far closer, however, are 
the affinities between the homily and the Shepherd of Hernias, 
" the first Christian allegory," which as a literary whole dates 
from about a.d. 140, but probably represents a more or less 
prolonged prophetic activity on the part of its author, the brother 
of Pius, the Roman bishop of his day {c. 139-154). In both the 
primary theme is repentance, as called for by serious sins, after 
baptism has placed the Christian on his new and higher level of 
responsibility. Thus both are' hortatory writings, the one 
argumentative in form, the other prophetic, after the manner 
of later Old Testament prophets whose messages came in visions 
and similitudes. This prophetic and apocalyptic note, which char- 
acterizes Hermas among the Apostolic Fathers (though there are 
traces of it also in the Didache and in Ignatius, ad Eph. xx.), 
is a genuinely primitive trait and goes far to explain the vogue 
which the Shepherd enjoyed in the generations immediately suc- 
ceeding, as also the influence of its disciplinary policy, which 
is its prophetic " burden " (see Hermas, Shepherd of). 

We come finally to the anonymous Teaching of the Twelve 
Apostles and Papias's Exposition of Oracles of the Lord, so far as 
this is known to us. The former, besides embodying catechetical 
instruction in Christian conduct (the " Two Ways "), which goes 
back in substance to the early apostolic age and is embodied 
also in " Barnabas," depicts in outline the fundamental usages of 
church life as practised in some conservative region (probably 
within Syria) about the last quarter of the 1st century and 
perhaps even later. The whole is put forth as substantially the 
apostolic teaching {Didache) on the subjects in question. This 
is probably a bona fide claim. It expresses the feeling common 
to the Apostolic Fathers and general in the sub-apostolic 
age, at any rate in regions where apostles had once laboured, 
that local tradition, as held by the recognized church leaders, did 
but continue apostolic doctrine and practice. Into later develop- 
ments of this feeling an increasing element of illusion entered, 
and all other written embodiments of it known to us take the 
form of literary fictions, more or less bold. It is in contrast to 
these that the Didache is justly felt to be genuinely primitive 
and of a piece with the Apostolic Fathers. Thus while its form 
would by analogy tend per se to awaken suspicion, its contents 
remove this feeling; and we may even infer from this surviving 
early formulation of local ecclesiastical tradition, that others of 
somewhat similar characcer came into being in the sub-apostolic 
age, but failed to survive save as embodied in later local teaching, 
oral or written, very much as if the Didache had perished and its 
literary offspring alone remained (see Didache) . 

As regards Papias's Exposition, which Lightfoot describes 



APOSTOLIC FATHERS 



!03 



as "among the earliest forerunners of commentaries, partly 
explanatory, partly illustrative, on portions of the New Testa- 
ment," we need here only remark that, whatever its exact form 
may have been — as to which the extant fragments still leave 
room for doubt — it was in conception expository of the historic 
meaning of Christ's more ambiguous Sayings, viewed in the light 
of definitely ascertained apostolic traditions bearing on the 
subject. The like is true also of the fragments of the Eiders 
preserved in Irenaeus (so far as these do not really come from 
Papias). Both bodies of exposition represent the traditional 
principle at work in the sub-apostolic age, making for the preser- 
vation in relative purity, over against merely subjective inter- 
pretations — those of the Gnostics in particular — of the historic 
or original sense of Christ's teaching, just as Ignatius stood for 
the historicity of the facts of His earthly career in their plain, 
natural sense. 

(B) Here the question of external form passes readily over 
into that of the internal character and spirit. Indeed much has 
already been said or suggested bearing on these. The relation 
of these writers to the apostolic teaching generally has become 
pretty evident. It is one of absolute loyalty and deference, 
as to the teaching of inspiration. They are conscious, as are we 
in reading thern, that they are not moving on the same level of 
insight as the Apostles; they are sub-apostolic in that sense 
also. Hence there appear constant traces of study of the 
Apostolic writings, so far as these were accessible in the locality 
of each writer at his date of writing (for the details of this subject, 
and its bearing on the history of the Canonical Scriptures of the 
New Testament, see The New Testament in the Apostolic Fathers, 
Oxford, 1905). As Lightfoot points out {Apostolic Fathers, 
pt. i. vol. i. p. 7), however, personality, with its variety of 
temperament and emphasis, largely colours the Apostolic 
Fathers, especially the primary group. Clement has all the 
Roman feeling for duly constituted order and discipline; 
Ignatius has the Syrian or semi-oriental passion of devotion, 
showing itself at once in his mystic love for his Lord and his 
over-strained yearning to become His very " disciple " by drink- 
ing the like cup of martyrdom; Polycarp is, above all things, 
steady in his allegiance to what had first won his conscience 
and heart, and his " passive and receptive character " comes 
out in the contents of his epistle. Of the rest, whose personalities 
are less known to us, Papias shares Polycarp's qualities and 
their limitations, the anonymous homilist and Hermas are 
marked by intense moral earnestness, while the writer to Diog- 
netus joins to this a profound religious insight. These personal 
traits determine by selective affinity, working under conditions 
given by the special local type of tradition and piety, the elements 
in the Apostolic writings which each was able to assimilate and 
express — though we must allow also for variety in the occasions 
of writing. Thus one New Testament type is echoed in one and 
another in another; or it may be several in turn. The latter 
is the case in Clement, Ignatius and Polycarp; perhaps also in 
" Barnabas." In Hermas there is special affinity to the language 
and thought of the epistle of James, and in the homilist to those 
of Paul. Yet their very use of the same terms or ideas makes 
us the more aware of " a marked contrast to the depth and clear- 
ness of conception with which the several Apostolic writers place 
before us different aspects of the Gospel " (Lightfoot). While 
Apostolic phrases are used, the sense behind them is often 
different and less evangelic. They have not caught the Apostolic 
meaning, because they have not penetrated to the full religious 
experience which gave to the words, often words with long and 
varied history both in the Septuagint and in ordinary Greek 
usage, their specific meaning to each apostle and especially to 
Paul. This phenomenon was noted particularly by E. Reuss, in 
his Histoire de la theologie chretienne au siecle apostolique (3rd 
ed., 1864). Take for instance Clement. Lightfoot, indeed, dwells 
on the all-round " comprehensiveness " with which Clement, 
as the mouthpiece of the early Roman Church, utters in succes- 
sion phrases or ideas borrowed impartially from Peter and Paul 
and James and the Epistle to Hebrews. He admits, however, 
that such mere co-ordinalion of the language of Paul and James, 



for instance, as appears in his twice bracketing " faith and 
hospitality " as grounds of acceptance with God (the cases are 
those of Abraham and Rahab, in chs. x. and xii.), is " from a 
strictly dogmatic point of view " his weakness. But the weakness 
is more than a dogmatic one; it is one of religious experience, as 
the source of spiritual insight. It is not merely that " there is no 
dogmatic system in Clement " or in any other of the Apostolic 
Fathers; that may favour, not hinder, religious insight. There 
is a want of depth in Christian experience, in the power of 
realizing relative spiritual values in the light of the master prin- 
ciple involved in the distinctively Christian consciousness, such 
as could raise Clement above a verbal eclecticism, rather than 
comprehensiveness, in the use of Apostolic language. As R. W. 
Dale remarks, in a note on Reuss's too severe words (Eng. trans, 
ii. 295): " The vital force of the Apostolic convictions gave to 
Apostolic thought a certain organic and consistent form." It is 
lack of this organic quality in the thought, not only of Clement 
but also of the Apostolic Fathers generally — with the possible 
exception of Ignatius, who seems to share the Apostolic experi- 
ence more fully than any other, to which Reuss rightly directs 
attention. In virtue of this defect, due largely to the failure to 
enter into the Apostolic experience of mystic union with Christ, 
he can rightly speak of " an immense retrogression " in theology 
visible " at the end of the century, and in circles where it might 
have been least expected" (ii. p. 294, cf. 541). 

In fact the perspective of the Gospel was seriously changed 
and its most distinctive features obscured. This was specially 
the case with the experimental doctrines of grace. Here the 
central glory of the Cross as " the power of God unto salvation " 
suffered some eclipse, although the passion of Christ was felt to 
be a transcendent act of Divine Grace in one way or another. 
But even more serious was the loss of an adequate sense of 
the contrast between "grace" and "works" as conditions of 
salvation. There was little or no sense of the danger of the 
legal principle, as related to human egoism and the instinct to 
seek salvation as a reward for merit. The passages in which 
these things are laid bare by Paul's remorseless analysis of his 
own experience " under Law " seem to have made practically 
no impression on the Apostolic Fathers as a whole. Gentile 
Christians had not felt the fang of the Law as the ex-Pharisee 
had occasion to feel it. Even if first trained in the Hellenistic 
synagogues of the Dispersion, as was often the case, they appre- 
hended the Law on its more helpful and less exacting side, 
and had not been brought " by the Law to die unto the Law," 
that they might " live unto God." The result was too great a 
continuity between their religious conceptions before and after 
embracing the Gospel. Thus the latter seemed to them simply 
to bring forgiveness of past sins for Christ's sake, and then an 
enhanced moral responsibility to the New Law revealed in 
Him. Hence a new sort of legalism, known to recent writers as 
Moralism, underlies much of the piety of the Apostolic Fathers, 
though Ignatius is quite free from it, while Polycarp and 
" Barnabas " are less under its influence than are the Didache, 
Clement, the Homilist and Hermas. It conceives salvation as 
a " wages " duados) to be earned or forfeited; and regards 
certain good works, such as prayer, fasting, alms — especially 
the last — as efficacious to cancel sins. The reality of this 
tendency, particularly at Rome, betrays itself in Hermas, who 
teaches the supererogatory merit of alms gained by the self- 
denial of fasting (Sim. v. 3. 3 ff.). Marcion's reaction, too, 
against the Judaic temper in the Church as a whole, in the 
interests of an extravagant Paulinism, while it suggests that 
Paul's doctrines of grace generally were inadequately realized in 
the sub-apostolic age, points also to the prevalence of such 
moralism in particular. 

(C) In attempting a final estimate of the value of the Apostolic 
Fathers for the historian to-day, we may sum up under these 
heads: ecclesiastical, theological, religious, (a) As a mine of 
materials for reconstructing the history of Church institutions, 
they are invaluable, and that largely in virtue of their spon- 
taneous and " esoteric " character, with no view to the public 
generally or to posterity, (b) Theologically, as a stage in the 



204 



APOSTOLICI 



history of Christian doctrine, their value is as great negatively 
as positively. Impressive as is their witness to the persistence 
of the Apostolic teaching in its essential features, amidst all 
personal and local variations, perhaps the most striking thing 
about these writings is the degree in which they fail to appreciate 
certain elements of the Apostolic teaching as embodied in the 
New Testament, and those its higher and more distinctively 
Christian elements. 1 This negative aspect has a twofold bearing. 
Firstly, it suggests the supernormal level to which the Apostolic 
consciousness was raised at a bound by the direct influence of 
the Founder of Christianity, and justifies the marking-off of the 
Apostolic writings as a Canon, or body of Christian classics of 
unique religious authority. To this principle Marcion's Pauline 
Canon is a witness, though in too one-sided a spirit. Secondly, 
it means that the actual development of ecclesiastical doctrine 
began, not from the Apostolic consciousness itself, but from a 
far lower level, that of the inadequate consciousness of the sub- 
apostolic Church, even when face to face with their written words. 
This theological " retrogression " is of much significance for the 
history of dogma, (c) On the other hand, there is great religious 
and moral continuity, beneath even theological discontinuity, in 
the life working below all conscious apprehension of the deeper 
ideas involved (E. yon Dobschutz, Christian Life in the Primitive 
Church, 1005). There is continuity in character; the Apostolic 
Fathers strike us as truly good men, with a goodness raised to a 
new type and power. This is what the Gospel of Christ aims 
chiefly at producing as its proper fruit; and the Apostolic 
Fathers would have desired no better record than that they 
were themselves genuine " epistles of Christ." 

Literature. — This is too large to indicate even in outline, but 
is given fully in the chief modern editions, viz. of Gebhardt, Harnack 
and Zahn jointly (1875-1877), J. B. Lightfoot (1 885-1 890) and 
F. X. Funk (1901); also in O. Bardenhewer, Gesch. der altkirchlichen 
Litteratur (1902), Band i., and in Ncutsstamentliche Apokryphen, 
with Handbuch thereto, edited by E. Hennecke (Tubingen, 1904). 
The fullest discussion in English of the teaching of Barnabas, 
Clement, Ignatius and Polycarp is by J. Donaldson, The Apostolical 
Fathers (1874), which, however, suffers from the imperfect state of 
the texts when he wrote. The most useful edition for ready refer- 
ence, containing critical texts (up to date) and good translations, 
is Lightfoot's one-volume edition, The Apostolic Fathers (London, 
1891). (J.V. B.) 

APOSTOLICI, Apostolic Brethren, or Apostles, the 
names given to various Christian heretics, whose common 
doctrinal feature was an ascetic rigidity of morals, which made 
them reject property and marriage. The earliest Apostolici 
appeared in Phrygia, Cilicia, Pisidia and Pamphylia towards 
the end of the 2nd century or the beginning of the 3rd. Accord- 
ing to the information given by Epiphanius (Haer. 61) about 
the doctrines of these heretics, it is evident that they were 
connected with the Encratites and the Tatianians. They con- 
demned individual property, hence the name sometimes given to 
them of A potactites or Renuntiatores. They preserved an absolute 
chastity and abstained from wine and meat. They refused to 
admit into their sect those Christians whom the fear of martyr- 
dom had once restored to paganism. As late as the 4th century 
St Basil (Can. 1 and 47) knew some Apostolici. After that 
period they disappeared, either becoming completely extinct, 
or being confounded with other sects (see St Augustine, Haer. 
40; John of Damascus, Haer. 61). 

Failing a more exact designation, the name of Apostolici has 
been given to certain groups of Latin heretics of the 12 th century. 
It is the second of the two sects of Cologne (the first being com- 
posed very probably of Cathari) that is referred to in the letter 
addressed in 1146 by Everwin, provost of Steinfeld, to St Bernard 
(Mabillon, Vet. Anal. iii. 452). They condemned marriage (save, 
perhaps, first marriages), the eating of meat, baptism of children, 
veneration of saints, fasting, prayers for the dead and belief in 
purgatory, denied transubstantiation, declared the Catholic 
priesthood worthless, and considered the whole church of their 
time corrupted by the " negotia saecularia " which absorbed all 

1 One result is their inability to form a true theory of Judaism 
and of the Old Testament in relation to the Gospel, a matter of great 
moment for them and for their successors. 



its zeal (cf. St Bernard, Serm. 65 and 66 in Cantic.). They do 
not seem to have been known as Apostles or Apostolici: St 
Bernard, in fact, asks his hearers: " Quo nomine istos titulove 
censebis?" (Serm. 66 in Cantic). Under this designation, too, 
are included the heretics of Perigueux in France, alluded to in 
the letter of a certain monk Heribert (Mabillon, Vet. Anal. iii. 
467). Heribert says merely: " Se dicunt apostolicam vitam 
ducere." It is possible that they were Henricians (see Henry 
of Lausanne). During his mission in the south-east of France 
in 1146-1147 St Bernard still met disciples of Henry of Lausanne 
in the environs of Perigueux. The heretics of whom Heribert 
speaks condemned riches, denied the value of the sacraments 
and of good works, ate no meat, drank no wine and rejected 
the veneration of images. Their leader, named Pons, gathered 
round him nobles, priests, monks and nuns. 

In the second half of the 13th century appeared in Italy the 
Order of the Apostles or Apostle Brethren (see especially the Chron. 
of Fra Salimbene) . This was a product of the mystic fermenta- 
tion which proceeded from exalted Franciscanism and from 
Joachimism (see Fraticelli and Joachim). It presents great 
analogies with groups of the same character, e.g. Sachets, 
Bizocchi, Flagellants, &c. The order of the Apostles was founded 
about 1 260 by a young workman from the environs of Parma, 
Gerard Segarelli, who had sought admission unsuccessfully to 
the Franciscan order. To make his life conform to that of 
Christ, his contemporaries say that he had himself circumcisjd, 
wrapped in swaddling clothes and laid in a cradle, and that he 
then, clad in a white robe and bare-footed, walked through 
the streets of Parma crying ■" Penitenz agite!" (" Poenitentiam 
agite!"). He was soon followed by a throng of men and women, 
peasants and mechanics. All had to live in absolute poverty, 
chastity and idleness. They begged, and preached penitence. 
Opizo, bishop of Parma, protected them until they caused 
trouble in his diocese. Their diffusion into several countries 
of Christendom disturbed Pope Honorius IV., who in 1286 
ordered them to adhere to an already recognized rule. On their 
refusal, the pope condemned them to banishment and Opizo 
imprisoned Segarelli. The councils of Wurzburg (1287) and 
Chichester (1289) took measures against the Apostles of Germany 
and England. But in 1291 the sect reappeared, sensibly in- 
creased, and Pope Nicholas IV. published anew the bull of 
Honorius IV. From that day the Apostles, regarded as rebels, 
were persecuted pitilessly. Four were burned in 1294, and 
Segarelli, as a relapsed heretic, went to the stake at Parma in 
1300. 

They had had close relations with the dissident Franciscans, 
but the Spirituals often disavowed them, especially when the 
sect, which in Segarelli's time had had no very precise doctrinal 
character, became with Dolcino frankly heterodox. Dolcino of 
Novara was brought up at Vercelli, and had been an Apostle 
since 1291. Thrice he fell into the hands of the Inquisition, and 
thrice recanted. But immediately after Segarelli's death he 
wrote an epistle, soon followed by a second, in which he declared 
that the third Joachimite age began with Segarelli and that 
Frederick of Sicily was the expected conqueror (Hist. Dulcini 
and Addit. ad Hist. Dulcini in Muratori, Scriptores, vol. ix.). 
He gave himself out as an angel sent from God to elucidate the 
prophecies. Soon he founded an Apostolic congregation at whose 
head he placed himself. Under him were his four lieutenants, 
his " mystic sister," Margherita di Franck, and 4000 disciples. 
He taught almost the same principles of devotion as Segarelli, 
but the Messianic character which he attributed to himself, 
the announcement of a communistic millennial kingdom, and, 
besides, an aggressive anti-sacerdotalism, gave to Dolcino's sect 
a clearly marked character, analogous only to the theocratic 
community of the Anabaptists of MUnster in the 16th century. 
On the 5th of June 1305 Pope Clement V., recognizing the 
impotence of the ordinary methods of repression, issued bulls 
for preaching a crusade against the Dolcinists. But four 
crusades, directed by the bishop of Vercelli, were required to 
reduce the little army of the heresiarch, entrenched in the 
mountains in the neighbourhood of Vercelli. Not till the 23rd 



APOSTOLIC MAJESTY— APOTHECARY 



205 



of March 1307 were the sectaries definitively overcome. The 
Catholic crusaders seized Dolcino in his entrenchments on 
Mount Rubello, and the pope at once announced the happy 
event to King Philip the Fair. At Vercelli Dolcino suffered a 
horrible punishment. He was torn in pieces with red-hot 
pincers — the torture lasting an entire day — while Margherita 
was burned at a slow lire. Dante mentions Dolcino's name 
(Inferno, c. xxviii.), and his memory is not yet completely effaced 
in the province of Novara. The Apostles continued their 
propaganda in Italy, Languedoc, Spain and Germany. In turn 
they were condemned by the councils of Cologne (1306), Treves 
(1310) and Spoleto (1311). The inquisitor of Languedoc, 
Bernard Gui, persecuted them unremittingly (see Gui's Practice 
Inquisitionis). From 1316 to 1322 the condemnations of 
Apostles increased at Avignon and Toulouse. They disappeared, 
however, at a comparatively late date from those regions (council 
of Lavaur, 1368; council of Narbonne, 1374). In Germany 
two Apostles were burned at Liibeck and Wismar at the beginning 
of the 15th century (1402-1403) by the inquisitor Eylard. 

Several controversialists, including Gotti, Krohn and Stock- 
mann, have mentioned among the innumerable sects that have 
sprung from Anabaptism a group of individuals whose open-air 
preaching and rigorous practice of poverty gained them the name 
of Apostolici. These must be carefully distinguished from the 
Aposloolians, Mennonites of Frisia, who followed the teachings of 
the pastor Samuel Apostool (1638-beginning of 18th century). 
In the Mennonite church they represent the rigid, conservative 
party, as opposed to the Galenists, who inclined towards the 
Arminian latitudinarianism and admitted into their community 
all those who led a virtuous life, whatever their doctrinal 
tendencies. (P. A.) 

APOSTOLIC MAJESTY, a title borne by the kings of Hungary. 
About a.d. 1000 it was conferred by Pope Silvester II. upon 
St Stephen (975-1038), the first Christian king of Hungary, in 
return for his zeal in seeking the conversion of the heathen. It 
was renewed by Pope Clement XIII. in 1758 in favour of the 
empress Maria Theresa and her descendants. The emperor of 
Austria bears the title of apostolic king of Hungary. 

APOSTOLIUS, MICHAEL (d. c. 1480), a Greek theologian and 
rhetorician of the 15th century. When, in 1453, the Turks 
conquered Constantinople, his native city, he fled to Italy, and 
there obtained the protection of Cardinal Bessarion. But 
engaging in the great dispute that then raged between the up- 
holders of Aristotle and Plato, his zeal for the latter led him to 
speak so contemptuously of the more popular philosopher and of 
his defender, Theodoras Gaza, that he fell under the severe 
displeasure of his patron. He afterwards retired to Crete, 
where he earned a scanty living by teaching and by copying 
manuscripts. Many of his copies are still to be found in the 
libraries of Europe. One of them, the Icones of Philostratus at 
Bologna, bears the inscription: " The king of the poor of this 
world has written this book for his living." Apostolius died 
about 1480, leaving two sons, Aristobulus Apostolius and 
Arsenius. The latter became bishop of Malvasia (Monemvasia) 
in the Morea. 

Of his numerous works a few have been printed: Hapm/tlai 
(Basel, 1538), now exceedingly rare; a collection of proverbs in 
Greek, of which a fuller edition appeared at Leiden, " Curante 
Heinsio," in 1619; " Oratio Panegyrica ad Fredericum III." in 
Freher's Scriptores Rerum Cermanicarum, vol. ii. (Frankfort, 1624); 
Georgii Gemisthi Plethonis et Mich. Apostolii Orationes funebres duae 
in quibus de Immortalitate Animae exponitur (Leipzig, 1793) ; and a 
work against the Latin Church and the council of Florence in 
Le Moine's Varia Sacra. 

APOSTROPHE (Gr. iwoa-Tpo^v, turning away; the final e 
being sounded), the name given to an exclamatory rhetorical 
figure of speech, when a speaker or writer breaks off and addresses 
some one directly in the vocative. The same word (representing, 
through the French, the Greek a.Tr6<7Tpo<j>os Tpovy&La, the 
accent of elision) means also the sign (') for the omission of a 
letter or letters, e.g. in " don't." In physiology, " apostrophe " 
is used more precisely in connexion with its literal meaning of 
" turning away," e.g. for movement away from the light, in the 



case of the accumulation of chlorophyll-corpuscles on the cells of 
leaves. 

APOTACTITES, or Apotactici (from Gr. curoTa/cros, set 
apart), a sect of early Christians, who renounced all their worldly 
possessions. (See Apostolici ad init.) 

APOTHECARY (from the Lat. apothecarius, a keeper of an 
apotheca, Gr. cnro&j/oj, a store), a word used by Galen to denote 
the repository where his medicines were kept, now obsolete in 
its original sense. An apothecary was one who prepared, sold 
and prescribed drugs, but the preparing and selling of drugs 
prescribed by others has now passed into the hands of duly 
qualified and authorized persons termed " chemists and drug- 
gists," while the apothecary, by modern legislation, has become 
a general medical practitioner, and the word itself, when used at 
all, is applied, more particularly in the United States and in 
Scotland, to those who in England are called " pharmaceutical 
chemists." The Apothecaries' Society of London is one of the 
corporations of that city, and both by royal charters and acts of 
parliament exercises the power of granting licences to practise 
medicine. The members of this society do not possess and 
never have possessed any exclusive power to deal in or sell 
drugs; and until 1868 any person whatever might open what is 
called a chemist's shop, and deal in drugs and poisons. In that : 
year, however, the Pharmacy Act was passed, which prohibits 
any person from engaging in this business without being 
registered. 

From early records we learn that the different branches of 
the medical profession were not regularly distinguished till the 
reign of Henry VIII., when separate duties were assigned to 
them, and peculiar privileges were granted to each. In 1518 
the physicians of London were incorporated, and the barber- 
surgeons in 1 540. But, independently of the physicians and the 
surgeons, there were a great number of irregular practitioners, 
who were more or less molested by their legitimate rivals, and it 
became necessary to pass an act in 1 543 for their protection and 
toleration. As many of these practitioners kept shops for the 
sale of medicines, the term " apothecary " was used to designate 
their calling. 

In April 1606 James I. incorporated the apothecaries as one 
of the city companies, uniting them with the grocers. On their 
charter being renewed in 16 17 they were formed into a separate 
corporation, under the title of the " Apothecaries of the City of 
London." These apothecaries appear to have prescribed 
medicines in addition to dispensing them, and to have claimed 
an ancient right of acting in this double capacity; and it may 
be mentioned that Henry VIII. , after the grant of the charter 
to the College of Physicians, appointed an apothecary to the 
Princess Mary, who was delicate and unhealthy, at a salary of 
40 marks a year, " pro meliore cura et consider atione sanitatis 
suae." During the 17th century, however, there arose a warm 
contest between the physicians and the apothecaries, — the 
former accusing the latter of usurping their province, and the 
latter continuing and justifying the usurpation until the dispute 
was finally set at rest by a judgment of the House of Lords in 
1703 (Rose v. College of Physicians, 5 Bro. P. C. 553), when it was 
decided that the duty of the apothecary consisted not only in 
compounding and dispensing, but also in directing and ordering 
the remedies employed in the treatment of disease. In 1722 
an act was obtained empowering the Apothecaries' Company to 
visit the shops of all apothecaries practising in London, and to 
destroy such drugs as they found unfit for use. In 1748 great 
additional powers were given to the company by an act authoriz- 
ing them to appoint a board of ten examiners, without whose 
licence no person should be allowed to dispense medicines in 
London, or within a circuit of 7 m. round it. In 1815, however, 
an act of parliament was passed which gave the Apothecaries' 
Society a new position, empowering a board, consisting of twelve 
of their members, to examine and license all apothecaries 
throughout England and Wales. It.also enacted that, from the 
1st of August of that year, no persons except those who were so 
licensed should have the right to act as apothecaries, and it 
gave the society the power of prosecuting those who practised 



2o6 



APOTHEOSIS 



without such licence. But the act expressly exempted from 
prosecution all persons who were then in actual practice, and it 
distinctly excluded from its operation all persons pursuing the 
calling of chemists and druggists. It was also provided that 
the act should in no way interfere with the rights or privileges 
of the English universities, or of the English College of Surgeons 
or the College of Physicians; and indeed a clause imposed 
severe penalties on any apothecaries who should refuse to com- 
pound and dispense medicines on the order of a physician, 
legally qualified to act as such. It is therefore clear that the 
act contemplated the creation of a class of practitioners who, 
while having the right to practise medicine, should assist and 
co-operate with the physicians and surgeons. 

Before this act came into operation the education of the 
medical practitioners of England and Wales was entirely optional 
on their own part, and although many of them possessed degrees 
or licences from the universities or colleges, the greater number 
possessed no such qualification, and many of them were wholly 
illiterate and uneducated. The court of examiners of the 
Apothecaries' Society, being empowered to enforce the acquisition 
of a sufficient medical education upon its future licentiates, 
specified from time to time the courses of lectures or terms of 
hospital practice to be attended by medical students before their 
examination, and in the progress of years regular schools of 
medicine were organized throughout England. 

As it was found that, notwithstanding the stringent regulations 
as to medical acquirements, the candidates were in many 
instances deficient in preliminary education, the court of 
examiners instituted, about the year 1850, a preliminary 
examination in arts as a necessary and indispensable prerequisite 
to the medical curriculum, and this provision has been so ex- 
panded that, at the present day, all medical students in the 
United Kingdom are compelled to pass a preliminary examination 
in arts, unless they hold a university degree. An act of parlia- 
ment, passed in 1858, and known as the Medical Act, made 
very little alteration in the powers exercised by the Apothecaries' 
Society, and indeed it confirmed and in some degree amplified 
them, for whereas by the act of 181 5, the licentiates of the society 
were authorized to practise as such only in England and Wales, 
the new measure gave them the same right in Scotland and 
Ireland. The Medical Act 1886 extended the qualifications 
necessary for registration under the medical acts, by making it 
necessary to pass a qualifying examination in medicine, surgery 
and midwifery. (See Medical Education.) 

An act, passed in 1874, related exclusively to the Apothecaries' 
Society, and is' termed the Apothecaries' Act Amendment Act. 
By this measure some provisions of the act of 1815, which had 
become obsolete or unsuitable, were repealed, and powers were 
given to the society to unite or co-operate with other medical 
licensing bodies in granting licences to practise. The act of 
1815 had made it compulsory on all candidates for a licence to 
have served an apprenticeship of five years to an apothecary, 
and although by the interpretation of the court of examiners 
of the society this term really included the whole period of 
medical study, yet the regulation was felt as a grievance by many 
members of the medical profession. It was accordingly repealed, 
and no apprenticeship is now necessary. The restriction of the 
choice of examiners to the members of the society was also 
repealed, and the society was given the power (which it did not 
before possess) to strike off from the list of its licentiates the 
names of disreputable persons. The act of 1874 also specified 
that the society was not deprived of any right or obligation they 
may have to admit women to examination, and to enter their 
names on the list of licentiates if they acquit themselves 
satisfactorily. 

The Apothecaries' Society is governed by a master, two 
wardens and twenty-two assistants. The members are divided 
into three grades, yeomanry or freemen, the livery, and the court. 
Women are not, however, admitted to the freedom. The hall 
of the society, situated in Water Lane, London, and covering 
about three-quarters of an acre, was acquired in 1633. It was 
destroyed by the great fire, but was rebuilt about ten years later 



and enlarged in 1786. This is the only property possessed by 
the society. In 1673, the society established a botanic and physic 
garden at Chelsea, and in 1722 Sir Hans Sloane, who had become 
the ground owner, gave it to the society on the condition of 
presenting annually to the Royal Society fifty dried specimens 
of plants till the number should reach 2000. This condition was 
fulfilled in 1774. Owing to the heavy cost of maintenance and 
other reasons, the "physic garden" was handed over in 1902, 
with the consent of the Charity Commissioners, to a committee 
of management, to be maintained in the interests of botanical 
study and research. 

See C. R. B. Barrett, The History of the Society of Apothecaries of 
London (1905). 

APOTHEOSIS (Gr. awoBeovv, to make a god, to deify), literally 
deification. The term properly implies a clear polytheistic 
conception of gods in contrast with men, while it recognizes that 
some men cross the dividing line. It is characteristic of poly- 
theism to blur that line in several ways. Thus the ancient Greek 
religion was especially disposed to belief in heroes and demigods. 
Founders of cities, and even of colonies, received worship; the 
former are, generally speaking, mythical personages and, in 
strictness, heroes. But the worship after death of historical 
persons, such as Lycurgus, or worship of the living as true 
deities, e.g. Lysander and Philip II. of Macedon, occurred 
sporadically even before Alexander's conquests brought Greek 
life into contact with oriental traditions. It was inevitable, too, 
that ancient monarchies should enlist polytheistic conceptions of 
divine or half -divine men in support of the dynasties; " Seu deos 
regesve canit deorum Sanguinem," Horace {Odes, iv. 2, 11. 12, 13) 
writes of Pindar; though the reference is to myths, yet the 
phrase is significant. In the East all such traits are exaggerated, 
a result perhaps rather of the statecraft than of the religions of 
Egypt and Persia. Whatever part vanity or the flattery of 
courtiers may have played with others, or with Alexander, it is 
significant that the dynasties of Alexander's various successors 
all claim divine honours of some sort (see Ptolemies, Seleucid 
Dynasty, &c). Theocritus {Idyll 17) hails Ptolemy Philadelphus 
as a demigod, and speaks of his father as seated among the 
gods along with Alexander. Ancestor worship, or reverence for 
the dead, was a third factor. It may work even in Cicero's 
determination that his daughter should enjoy " cbrod£to<ns " — 
as he writes to Atticus— or receive the " honour " of consecratia 
(fragment of his De Consolatione). Lastly, we need not speak of 
mere sycophancy. Yet it was common; Verres was worshipped 
before he was impeached ! 

The Romans had, up to the end of the Republic, accepted 
only one official apotheosis; the god Quirinus, whatever his 
original meaning, having been identified with Romulus. But 
the emperor Augustus carried on the tradition of ancient 
statecraft by having Julius Caesar recognized as a god {divus 
Julius), the first of a new class of deities proper {divi). The 
tradition was steadily followed and was extended to some ladies 
of the imperial family and even to imperial favourites. Worship 
of an emperor during his lifetime, except as the worship of his 
genius, was, save in the cases of Caligula and Domitian, confined 
to the provinces. Apotheosis after his death, being in the hands 
of the senate, did not at once cease, even when Christianity was 
officially adopted. The Latin term is consecratio, which of course 
has a variety of senses, including simple burial. (Inscription in 
G. Boissier, La Religion romaine; Renier, Inscriptions d' Algiers, 
2510.) The Greek term Apotheosis, probably a coinage of the 
Hellenistic epoch, becomes more nearly technical for the deifica- 
tion of dead emperors. But it is still used simply for the erection 
of tombs (clearly so in some Greek inscriptions, Corpus Inscript. 
Graec. 2831, 2832, quoted in Pauly-Wissowa, s.v. Apotheosis). 
Possibly there is a trace of ancestor worship even here; but the 
two usages have diverged. The squib of the philosopher Seneca 
on the memory of Claudius (d. a.d. 54), Apocolocyntosis {" pump- 
kinification "), is evidence that, as early as Seneca's lifetime, 
apotheosis was in use for the recognition of a departed emperor 
as a god. It also indicates how much contempt might be 
associated with this pretended worship. The people, savs 



APPALACHIAN MOUNTAINS 



207 



Suetonius (Jul. Caes. c. 88), fully believed in the divinity of 
Julius Caesar, hinting at the same time that this was by no 
means the case with the majority of the apotheoses subsequently 
decreed by the senate. Yet we learn from Capitolinus that 
Marcus Aurelius was still worshipped as a household divinity in 
the time of Diocletian, and was believed to impart revelations in 
dreams ( Vit. M. Ant. c. 18). Antinous, the favourite of Hadrian, 
was adored in Egypt a century after his death (Origen, Contra 
Celstim, iii. 36) , though, according to Boissier, his worship never 
had official sanction. The ceremonies attendant on an imperial 
apotheosis are very fully described by Herodianus (bk. iv. c. 2) 
on occasion of the obsequies of Severus, which he appears to 
have witnessed. The most significant was the liberation, at the 
moment of kindling the funeral pyre, of an eagle which was 
supposed to bear the emperor's soul to heaven. Sharp-sighted 
persons had actually beheld the ascension of Augustus (Suet. 
August, c. 100), and of Drusilla, sister of Caligula. Representa- 
tions of apotheoses occur on several works of art; the most im- 
portant are the apotheosis of Homer on a relief in the Townley col- 
lection of the British Museum, that of Titus on the arch of Titus, 
and that of Augustus on a magnificent cameo in the Louvre. 

In China at the present day many Taoist gods are (or are 
given out as) men deified for service to the state. This again 
may be statecraft. In India, the (still unexplained) rise of the 
doctrine of transmigration hindered belief. Apotheosis can 
mean nothing to those who hold that a man may be reborn as a 
god, but still needs redemption, and that men on earth may 
win redemption, if they are brave enough. Curiously, Buddhism 
itself is ruled by the ghost or shadowy remainder of belief in 
transmigration — Karma. 

Apotheosis may also be used in wider senses, (a) Some (e.g. 
Herbert Spencer) hold that most gods are deified men, and most 
myths historical traditions which have been grotesquely distorted. 
This theory is known as Euhemerism (see Euhemerus). It is 
needless to say that the attitude of those holding the Euhemerist 
theory is at the farthest pole from belief in apotheosis. Accord- 
ing to the latter, some men may become gods. According to 
the former, all gods are but men; or, some men have been 
"erroneously supposed tojiecome gods. The Euhemerist theory 
mainly appeals to ancestor worship — a fact of undoubted 
importance in the history of religion, especially in China and 
in ancient Rome. In India, too, a dead person treated with 
funeral honours becomes a guardian spirit — if neglected, a 
tormenting demon. But whether the great gods of polytheism 
were really transfigured ancestors is very doubtful, (b) Again, 
there is a tendency to offer something like worship to the 
founders of religions. Thus more than human honour is 
paid to Zoroaster and Buddha and even to the founders of 
systems not strictly religious, e.g. to Confucius and Auguste 
Comte. It is noticeable that this kind of worship is not accorded 
in rigidly monotheistic systems, e.g. to Moses and Mahomet. 
Nor is it accurate to speak of apotheosis in cases where the 
founder is in his lifetime regarded as the incarnation of a god 
(cf. Ali among Shi'ite Mahommedans; the Bab in Babism; the 
Druse Hakim). Most Christians on this ground repudiate the 
application of the term to the worship of Jesus Christ. Curiously, 
Apotheosis is used by the Latin Christian poet, Prudentius 
(c. 400), as the title of a poem defending orthodox views on the 
person of Christ and other points of doctrine — the affectation 
of a decadent age. (c) The worship paid to Saints, in those 
Christian churches which admit it, is formally distinguished as 
dulia (8ov\eia) from true worship or latria Xarpeia). Even the 
Virgin Mary, though she is styled Mother of God and Queen of 
Heaven, receives only dulia or at most hyperdulia. 

(R. G.; R. Ma.) 

APPALACHIAN MOUNTAINS, the general name given to a 
vast system of elevations in North America, partly in Canada, 
but mostly in the United States, extending as a zone, from 100 
to 300 m. wide, from Newfoundland, Gaspe Peninsula and New 
Brunswick, 1500 m. south-westward to central Alabama. The 
whole system may be divided into three great sections: the 
Northern, from Newfoundland to the Hudson river; the Central, 



from the Hudson Valley to that of New river (Great Kanawha), 
in Virginia and West Virginia; and the Southern, from New 
river onwards. The northern section includes the Shickshock 
Mountains and Notre Dame Range in Quebec, scattered eleva- 
tions in Maine, the White Mountains and the Green Mountains; 
the central comprises, besides various minor groups, the Valley 
Ridges between the Front of the Allegheny Plateau and the 
Great Appalachian Valley, the New York-New Jersey Highlands 
and a large portion of the Blue Ridge; and the southern con- 
sists of the prolongation of the Blue Ridge, the Unaka Range, 
and the Valley Ridges adjoining the Cumberland Plateau, with 
some lesser ranges. 

The Chief Summits. — The Appalachian belt includes, with the 
ranges enumerated above, the plateaus sloping southward to the 
Atlantic Ocean in New England, and south-eastward to the 
border of the coastal plain through the central and southern 
Atlantic states; and on the north-west, the Allegheny and 
Cumberland plateaus declining toward the Great Lakes and the 
interior plains. A remarkable feature of the belt is the longi- 
tudinal chain of broad valleys— the Great Appalachian Valley — 
which, in the southerly sections divides the mountain system 
into two subequal portions, but in the northernmost lies west 
of all the ranges possessing typical Appalachian features, and 
separates them from the Adirondack group. The mountain 
system has no axis of dominating altitudes, but in every portion 
the summits rise to rather uniform heights, and, especially in 
the central section, the various ridges and intermontane valleys 
have the same trend as the system itself. None of the summits 
reaches the region of perpetual snow. Mountains of the Long 
Range in Newfoundland reach heights of nearly 2000 ft. In the 
Shickshocks the higher summits rise to about 4000 ft. elevation. 
In Maine four peaks exceed 3000 ft., including Katahdin (5200 
ft.), Mount Washington, in the White Mountains (6293 ft.), 
Adams (5805), Jefferson (5725), Clay (5554), Monroe (539°). 
Madison (5380), Lafayette (5269); and a number of summits 
rise above 4000 ft. In the Green Mountains the highest point, 
Mansfield, is 4364 ft.; Lincoln (4078), Killington (4241), Camel 
Hump (4088); and a number of other heights exceed 3000 ft. 
The Catskills are not properly included in the system. The Blue 
Ridge, rising in southern Pennsylvania and there known as 
South Mountain, attains in that state elevations of about 2000 
ft.; southward to the Potomac its altitudes diminish, but 30 m. 
beyond again reach 2000 ft. In the Virginia Blue Ridge the 
following are the highest peaks east of New river: Mount 
Weather (about 1850 ft.), Mary's Rock (3523), IJeaks of Otter 
(4001 and 3875), Stony Man (4031), Hawks Bill (4066). In 
Pennsylvania the summits of the Valley Ridges rise generally to 
about 2000 ft., and in Maryland Eagle Rock and Dans Rock are 
conspicuous points reaching 3162 ft. and 2882 ft. above the sea. 
On the same side of the Great Valley, south of the Potomac, 
are the Pinnacle (3007 ft.) and Pidgeon Roost (3400 ft.). In the 
southern section of the Blue Ridge are Grandfather Mountain 
(5964 ft.), with three other summits above 5000, and a dozen 
more above 4000. The Unaka Ranges (including the Black 
and Smoky Mountains) have eighteen peaks higher than 5000 ft., 
and eight surpassing 6000 ft. In the Black Mountains, Mitchell 
(the culminating point of the whole system) attains an altitude 
of 6711 ft., Balsam Cone, 6645, Black Brothers, 6690, and 6620, 
and Halfback, 6403. In the Smoky Mountains we have Cling- 
man's Peak (6611), Guyot (6636), Alexander (6447), Leconte 
(6612), Curtis (6588), with several others above 6000 and many 
higher than 5000. 

In spite of the existence of the Great Appalachian Valley, the 
master streams are transverse to the axis of the system. The 
main watershed follows a tortuous course which crosses tie 
mountainous belt just north of New river in Virginia; south of 
this the rivers head in the Blue Ridge, cross the higher Unakas, 
receive important tributaries from the Great Valley, and travers- 
ing the Cumberland Plateau in spreading gorges, escape by 
way of the Cumberland and Tennessee rivers to the Ohio and 
Mississippi, and thus to the Gulf of Mexico; in the central section 
the rivers, rising in or beyond the Valley Ridges, flow through 



208 



APPANAGE 



great gorges (water gaps) to the Great Valley, and by south- 
easterly courses across the Blue Ridge to tidal estuaries penetrat- 
ing the coastal plain ; in the northern section the water-parting 
lies on the inland side of the mountainous belt, the main lines of 
drainage running from north to south. 

Geology. — The rocks of the Appalachian belt fall naturally 
into two divisions; ancient (pre-Cambrian) crystallines, including 
marbles, schists, gneisses, granites and other massive igneous 
rocks, and a great succession of Paleozoic sediments. The 
crystallines are confined to the portion of the belt east of the 
Great Valley where Paleozoic rocks are always highly meta- 
morphosed and occur for the most part in limited patches, 
excepting in New England and Canada, where they assume 
greater areal importance, and are besides very generally intruded 
by granites. The Paleozoic sediments, ranging in age from 
Cambrian to Permian, occupy the Great Valley, the Valley 
Ridges and the plateaus still farther west. They are rarely 
metamorphosed to the point of recrystallization, though locally 
shales are altered to roofing slates, sandstones are indurated, 
limestones slightly marblized, and coals, originally bituminous, 
are changed to anthracite in northern Pennsylvania, and to 
graphite in Rhode Island. Igneous intrusions consist only of 
unimportant dikes of trap. The most striking and uniformly 
characteristic geologic feature of the mountains is their internal 
structure, consisting of innumerable parallel, long and narrow 
folds, always closely appressed in the eastern part of any cross- 
section (Piedmont Plateau to Great Valley), less so along a 
central zone (Great Valley and Valley Ridges), and increasingly 
open on the west (Allegheny and Cumberland Plateaus). 
Asymmetry of the folds is a marked characteristic in the zones 
of closer folding, the anticlines having long gently inclined 
easterly limbs, and short, steep and even . overturned limbs 
upon the west. The effect of such folds is often exaggerated by 
thrusts, and faulting of this sort is prominent in the southern 
section, where the existence of over- thrusts measured by several 
miles has been established. 

What may be termed the ancestral Appalachian system was 
formed during the post-carboniferous revolution, though certain 
of its elements had been previously outlined, and perhaps at 
different dates. Folding of the rocks resulted from the operation 
of great compressive forces acting tangentially to the figure of 
the earth. Extensive and deep-seated crumpling was necessarily 
accompanied by vertical uplift throughout the zone affected, 
but once at least since their birth the mountains have been worn 
down to a lowtend, and the mountains of to-day are the combined 
product of subsequent uplift of a different sort, and dissection 
by erosion. Produced by long-continued subaerial decay and 
erosion, in later Cretaceous times this lowland extended from 
the Atlantic Ocean well toward the interior of North America; 
since then the whole continent has been generally elevated, and 
by successive steps the Appalachian belt has been raised to form 
a wide but relatively low arch. The crosswise courses of the 
greater rivers result from the rivers being older than the moun- 
tains, which indeed have been produced by circumdenudation. 
The master streams of the present have inherited their channels 
from the drainage systems of the Cretaceous lowland, and though 
raised athwart the courses of the lowland trunk streams the 
great arch was developed so slowly that these channels could be 
maintained through pari passu deepening. Former tributaries 
have given place to others developed with reference to the 
distribution of more or less easily eroded strata, the present 
longitudinal valleys being determined by the out-crop of soft 
shales or soluble limestones, and the parallel ridges upheld by 
hard sandstones or schists. Parallelism of mountain ridges 
and intervening valleys is thus attributable to the folding of the 
rocks, but the origin of the interior structure of the mountains 
is to be kept distinct from the origin of the mountains as features 
of topography. 

Flora and Fauna. — Much of the region is covered with forest 
yielding quantities of valuable timber, especially in Canada and 
northern New England. The most valuable trees for lumber 
are spruce, white pine, hemlock, cedar, white birch, ash, maple 



and basswood; all excepting pine and hemlock and poplar in 
addition are ground into wood pulp for the manufacture of 
paper. In the central and southern parts of the belt oak and 
hickory constitute valuable hard woods, and certain varieties 
of the former furnish quantities of tan bark. The tulip tree 
produces a good clear lumber known as white wood or poplar, 
and is also a source of pulp. In the south both white and yellow 
pine abounds. Many flowering and fruit-bearing shrubs of the 
heath family add to the beauty of the mountainous districts, 
rhododendron and kalmia often forming impenetrable thickets. 
Bears, mountain lions (pumas), wild cats (lynx) and wolves 
haunt the more remote fastnesses of the mountains; foxes 
abound; deer are found in many districts and moose in the 
north. 

Influence on History. — For a century the Appalachians were a 
barrier to the westward expansion of the English colonies; the 
continuity of the system, the bewildering multiplicity of its 
succeeding ridges, the tortuous courses and roughness of its 
transverse passes, a heavy forest and dense undergrowth all 
conspired to hold the settlers on the seaward-sloping plateaus 
and coastal plains. Only by way of the Hudson and Mohawk 
valleys, and round about the southern termination of the system 
were there easy routes to the interior of the country, and these 
were long closed by hostile aborigines and jealous French or 
Spanish colonists. In eastern Pennsylvania the Great Valley 
was accessible by reason of a broad gateway between the end of 
South Mountain and the Highlands, and here in the Lebanon 
Valley settled German Moravians, whose descendants even now 
retain the peculiar patois known as " Pennsylvania Dutch." 
These were late comers to the New World forced to the frontier 
to find unclaimed lands. With their followers of both German 
and Scotch-Irish origin, they worked their way southward and 
soon occupied all of the Virginia Valley and the upper reaches of 
the Great Valley tributaries of the Tennessee. By 1755 the 
obstacle to westward expansion had been thus reduced by half; 
outposts of the English colonists had penetrated the Allegheny 
and Cumberland plateaus, threatening French monopoly in the 
transmontane region, and a conflict became inevitable. Making 
common cause against the French to^determine the control of 
the Ohio valley, the unsuspected strength of the colonists was 
revealed, and the successful ending of the French and Indian 
War extended England's territory to the Mississippi. To this 
strength the geographic isolation enforced by the Appalachian 
mountains had been a prime contributor. The confinement of 
the colonies between an ocean and a mountain wall led to the 
fullest occupation of the coastal border of the continent, which 
was possible under existing conditions of agriculture, conducing 
to a community of purpose, a political and commercial solidarity, 
which would not otherwise have been developed. As early as 
1700 it was possible to ride from Portland, Maine, to southern 
Virginia, sleeping each night at some considerable village. In 
contrast to this complete industrial occupation, the French 
territory was held by a small and very scattered population, its 
extent and openness adding materially to the difficulties of a 
disputed tenure. Bearing the brunt of this contest as they did, 
the colonies were undergoing preparation for the subsequent 
struggle with the home government. Unsupported by shipping, 
the American armies fought toward the sea with the mountains 
at their back protecting them against Indians leagued with the 
British. The few settlements beyond the Great Valley were 
free for self-defence because debarred from general participation 
in the conflict by reason of their position. 

See the separate articles on the states, and also the following 
references: — Topographic maps and Geologic Folios of the United 
States Geological Survey; Bailey Willis, " The Northern Appa- 
lachians," and C. W. Hayes, " The Southern Appalachians," both in 
National Geographic Monographs, vol. i. ; and chaps, iii., iv. and v. 
of Miss E. C. Semple's American History and its Geographic Conditions 
(Boston, 1903). " (A. C. Sp.) 

APPANAGE, or Apanage (a French word from the late Lat. 
apanagium, formed from apanare, i.e. panem porrigere, to give 
bread, i.e. sustenance), in its original sense, the means of 
subsistence given by parents to their younger children as distinct 



APPAREL— APPARITIONS 



209 



frotu the rights secured to the eldest born by the custom of 
primogeniture. In its modern usage it is practically confined to 
the money endowment given to the younger children of reigning 
or mediatized houses in Germany and Austria, which reverts 
to the state or to the head of the family on the extinction of the 
line of the original grantee. In English history the system of 
appanages never played any great part, and the term is now 
properly applied only to the appanages of the crown: the duchy 
of Cornwall, assigned to the king's eldest son at birth, or on his 
father's accession to the crown, and the duchy of Lancaster. 
In the history of France, however, the appanage was a very 
important factor. The word denotes in very early French law 
the portion of lands or money given by fathers and mothers to 
their sons or daughters on marriage, and usually connotes a 
renunciation by the latter of any future inheritance; or it may 
denote the portion given by the eldest son to his brothers and 
sisters when he was sole inheritor. The word apanage is still 
employed in this sense in French official texts of some Customs; 
but it was in old public law that it received its definite meaning 
and importance. Under the kings of the third dynasty, the 
division of the kingdom among the sons of the dead monarch 
which had characterized the Merovingian and . Carolingian 
dynasties, ceased. The eldest son alone succeeded to the crown; 
but at the same time a custom was established by which the king 
made territorial provision suitable to their rank for his other 
children or for his brothers and sisters; custom forbade their 
being left landless. Lands and lordships thus bestowed con- 
stituted the appanages, which interfered so greatly with the 
formation of ancient France. While the persevering policy of 
the Capets, which armed at reuniting the great fiefs, duchies, 
countships, baronies, &c, to the domain of the crown, gradually 
reconstructed for their benefit a territorial sovereignty over 
France, the institution of the appanage periodically subtracted 
large portions from it. Louis XI., in particular, had to struggle 
against the appanaged nobles. The old law, however, never 
abolished this institution. The edict of Moulins (1566) main- 
tained it, as one of the exceptions to the inalienability of the 
crown-lands; only it was then decided that daughters of France 
should be appanaged in money, or that if, in default of coin, 
lands were assigned to them, these lands should be redeemable 
by the crown in perpetuity. The efforts of the kings to minimize 
this evil, and of the old jurisprudence to deal with the matter, 
resulted in two expedients: (1) the reversion of the appanage 
to the crown was secured as far as possible, being declared in- 
alienable and transmissible only to male descendants in the 
male line of the person appanaged; (2) originally the person 
appanaged had possessed all the rights of a duke or count — 
that is to say, in the middle ages nearly all the attributes of 
sovereignty; the more important of these attributes were now 
gradually reserved to the monarch, including public authority 
over the inhabitants of the appanage in all essential matters. 
However, it is evident from the letters of appanage, dated April 
177 1, in favour of the count of Provence, how many functions 
of public authority an appanaged person still held. The 
Constituent Assembly, by the law dated the 22nd of November 
1790, decided that in future there should be no appanages in 
real estate, and that younger sons of monarchs, married and 
over twenty-five years of age, should be provided for by yearly 
grants (rentes apanageres) from the public funds. The laws of the 
13th of August and the 21st of December 1790 revoked all the 
existing appanages, except those of the Luxembourg Palace and 
the Palais Royal. To each person hitherto appanaged an annual 
income of one million livres was assigned, and two millions for the 
brothers of the king. All this came to an end with the monarchy. 
Napoleon, by the senatus-consulte of the 30th of January 1810, 
resolved to create appanages for the emperor's princely descend- 
ants, such appanages to consist for the most part of lands on 
French soil. The fall of the empire again annulled this enact- 
ment. The last appanage known in France was that enjoyed 
by the house of Orleans. Having been re-established, or 
recognized as' still existing, by the Restoration, it was formally 
confirmed by the law of the 15th of January 1825- On th* 



accession of Louis Philippe it was united to the national property 
by the law of the 2nd of March 1832. 

For appanages in ancient law see the Essai sur les apanages ou 
memoires historiques de leur etablissement, attributed to Du Vaucel. 
about 1780. (J. p. E.) 

APPAREL (from 0. Fr. aparail, aparailler, mod. appareil, from 
Low Lat. adpariculare,. to make fit or equal), equipment, outfit, 
things furnished for the proper performance of anything, now 
chiefly used of dress. The word is also applied to the " orphreys," 
i.e. embroidered strips or borders, on ecclesiastical vestments. 

APPARITIONS. An apparition, strictly speaking, is merely 
an appearance (Lat. apparere, to appear), the result of perception 
exercised on any stimulus of any of the senses. But in ordinary 
usa,ge the word apparition denotes a perception (generally 
through the sense of sight) which cannot, as a rule, be shown to 
be occasioned by an object in external nature. We say " as a 
rule " because many so-called apparitions are merely illusions, 
i.e. misconstructions of the perceptive processes, as when a 
person in a bad light sees a number of small children leading a, 
horse, and, finds, on nearer approach, that he sees two men 
carrying bee-hives suspended from a pole. Again, Sir Walter 
Scott's vision of Byron, then lately dead, proved to be a mis- 
construction of certain plaids and cloaks hanging in the hall at 
Abbotsford, or so Sir Walter declared. Had he not discovered 
the physical basis of this illusion (which, while it lasted, was an 
apparition, technically speaking), he and others might have 
thought that it was an apparition in the popular sense of the 
word, a ghost. In popular phraseology a ghost is understood 
to be a phantasm produced in some way by the spirit of a dead 
person, the impression being usually visual, though the ghost, 
or apparition, may also affect the sense of hearing (by words, 
knocks, whistles, groans and so forth), or the sense of touch, 
or of weight, as in the case of the " incubus." In ordinary 
speech an apparition of a person not known to the percipient 
to be dead is called a wraith, in the Highland phrase, a spirit of 
the living. The terms ghost and wraith involve the hypothesis 
that the false perceptions are caused by spirits, a survival of the 
archaic animistic hypothesis (see Animism), an hypothesis as 
difficult to prove as to disprove. Apparitions, of course, are not 
confined to anthropomorphic phantasms; we hear of phantom 
coaches (sometimes seen, but more frequently heard), of phantom 
dogs, cats, horses, cattle, deer, and even of phantom houses. 

Whatever may be the causes of these and other false percep- 
tions, — most curious when the impression is shared by several 
witnesses, — they may best be considered under the head of 
hallucination (q.v.). Hallucinations may be pathological, i.e. 
the result of morbid conditions of brain or nerve, of disease, of 
fever, of insanity, of alcoholism, of the abuse of drugs. Again, 
they may be the result of dissociation, or may occur in the 
borderland of sleep or waking, and in this case they partake 
of the hallucinatory nature of dreams (q.v.}. Again, hallucina- 
tions may, once or twice in a lifetime, come into the experience 
of the sane, the healthy, and, as far as any tests can be applied, 
of the wide-awake. In such instances the apparition (whether 
it take the form of a visual phantasm, of a recognized voice, of a 
touch, or what not) may be coincidental or non-coincidental. 
The phantasm is called coincidental if it represents a known and 
distant person who is later found to have been dying or in some 
other crisis at the moment of the percipient's experience. When 
the false perception coincides with nothing of the sort, it is 
styled non-coincidental. Coincidental apparitions have been 
explained by the theory of telepathy (q.v.}, one mind or brain 
impressing another in some unknown; way so as to beget an 
hallucinatory apparition or phantasm. On the evidence, so far 
as it has been collected and analysed, it seems that the mind 
which, on the hypothesis, begets the hallucinations, usually 
does so without conscious effort (see Subliminal Self). There 
are, however, a few cases in which the experiment of begetting, 
in another, an hallucination from a. distance, is said to have been 
experimentally and consciously made, with success. 

If the telepathic theory of coincidental hallucinations be 
accepted, we have still to account for the much more common 



2lO 



APPARITOR— APPEAL 



non-coincidental apparitions of the living who do not happen 
to be in any particular crisis. In these instances it cannot be 
demonstrated that telepathy has not been at work, as when a 
person is seen at a place which he thought of visiting, but did 
not visit. F. W. Myers even upheld a theory of psychorhagy, 
holding that the spirits of some persons have a way of manifesting 
themselves at a distance by a psychic invasion. This involves, 
as he remarked, paleolithic psychology, and the old savage 
doctrine of animism, rather than telepathy (see Myers, Human 
Personality). Of belief in coincidental hallucinations or wraiths 
amon b savages, records are scanty; the belief, however, is found 
among Maoris and Fuegians (see Lang, Making of Religions). 
The perception of apparitions of distant but actual scenes and 
occurrences is usually called clairvoyance (q.v.). The belief is 
also familiar under the name of second sight( see Second Sight), 
a term of Scots usage, though the belief in it, and the facts 
if accepted, are of world-wide diffusion. The apparitions may 
either represent actual persons and places, or may be symbolical, 
taking the form of phantasmic lights, coffins, skeletons, shrouds 
and so forth. Again, the appearances may either represent 
things, persons and occurrences of the past (see Retrocogni- 
tion), or of the present (clairvoyance), or of the future (see 
Premonition). When the apparitions produce themselves in 
given rooms, houses or localities, and are exhibited to various 
persons at various times, the locality is popularly said to be 
haunted by spirits, that is, of the dead, on the animistic hy- 
pothesis (see Hauntings). Like the other alleged facts, these 
are of world-wide diffusion, or the belief in them is world-wide, 
and peculiar to no race, age, or period of culture. A haunted 
place is a centre of permanent possibilities of hallucinations, or is 
believed to be so. A distinct species of hauntings are those in 
which unexplained sounds and movements of objects, apparently 
untouched, occur. The German term Poltergeist (q.v.) has been 
given to the supposed cause of these occurrences where the 
cause is not ascertained to be sportive imposture. In the per- 
formances of modern spiritualists the Poltergeist appears, as it 
were, to be domesticated, and to come at the call of the medium. 

An intermittent kind of ominous haunting attached, not to 
places, but to families, is that of the banshee (Celtic) or family 
death omen, such as the white bird of the Oxenhams, the Airlie 
drummer, the spectral rider of Clan Gilzean, the rappings of the 
Woodde family. These apparitions, with fairies and djinns 
(the Arab form of fairy), haunt the borderland between folk-lore 
and psychical research. 

So far we have been concerned with spontaneous apparitions, 
or with the belief in them. Among induced apparitions may be 
reckoned the materialized forms of spiritual seances, which have 
a material basis of veils, false moustaches, wigs and the corpus 
vile of the medium. It is also possible that mere expectancy 
and suggestion induce hallucinatory perceptions among the 
members of the circle. That apparitions of a sort can be induced 
by hypnotic and posthypnotic suggestion is certain enough (see 
Hypnotism). Savages produce apparitions in similar ways by 
suggestion, accompanied by dances, fumigations, darkness, 
fasting, drugs, and whatever can affect the imaginations of the 
onlookers (see Magic). Both in savage and civilized life, some 
persons can provoke themselves into beholding apparitions 
usually fantastic, but occasionally coincidental, by sedulously 
staring into any clear deep water, a fragment of rock crystal, a 
piece of polished basalt or obsidian, a mirror, a ring, a sword 
blade, or a glass of sherry (see Crystal Gazing). Indeed any 
object, a wall, the palm of the hand, the shoulder-blade-bone of a 
sheep, may be, and has been used to this end (see Divination). 

Almost all known apparitions may accommodate themselves 
to one or other of the categories given, whether they be patho- 
logical, coincidental or spontaneous, induced, permanently 
localized, or sporadic. 

Seegenerally.SpiRlTUALlSMandPsYCHicAL Research. (A.L.) 

APPARITOR, or Apparator (Latin for a servant of a public 
official, from apparere, to attend in public), an attendant who 
executed the orders of a Roman magistrate; hence a beadle in a 
•iniversity, a pursuivant or herald; particularly, in English 



ecclesiastical courts, the official who serves the processes of the 
court and causes defendants to appear by summons. 

APPEAL, in law. In the old English common law the term 
" appeal " was used to describe a process peculiar to English 
criminal procedure. It was a right of prosecution possessed as a 
personal privilege by a party individually aggrieved by a felony, 
a privilege of which the crown could not directly or indirectly 
deprive him, since he could use it alike when the prisoner was 
tried and acquitted, and when he was convicted and pardoned. 
It was chiefly known in practice as the privilege of the nearest 
relation of a murdered person. When in 1729 (after Colonel 
Oglethorpe's inquiry and report on the London prisons) Ban- 
bridge and other gaolers were indicted for their treatment of 
prisoners, but were acquitted for deficiency of evidence, appeals 
for murder were freely brought by relatives of deceased prisoners. 
In the case of Slaughterford (1708) the accused was charged with 
murdering a woman whom he had seduced; the evidence was 
very imperfect, and he was acquitted on indictment. But 
public indignation being aroused by the atrocities alleged to 
have been perpetrated, an appeal was brought, and on conviction 
he was hanged, as his execution was a privilege belonging to the 
prosecutor, of which the crown could not deprive him by a 
pardon. In 1818 an appeal was ingeniously met by an offer of 
battle, since if the appellee were an able-bodied man he had the 
choice between combat or a jury (see Wager). This neutralizing 
of one obsolete and barbarous process by another called the 
attention of the legislature to the subject, and appeal in criminal 
cases, along with trial by battle, was abolished in 1819. The 
history of this appeal is fully dealt with in Pollock and Maitland, 
History of English Law, 1898. 

In its usual modern sense the term appeal is applied to the 
proceeding by which the decision of a court of justice is brought 
for review before another tribunal of higher authority. In 
Roman jurisprudence it was used in this and in other significa- 
tions; it was sometimes equivalent to prosecution, or the calling 
up of an accused person before a tribunal where the accuser 
appealed to the protection of the magistrate against injustice or 
oppression. The derivation from appellare (" call ") suggests 
that its earliest meaning was an urgent outcry or prayer against 
injustice. During the republic the magistrate was generally 
supreme within his sphere, and those who felt themselves out- 
raged by injustice threw themselves on popular protection by 
provocatio, instead of looking to redress from a higher official 
authority. Under the empire different grades of jurisdiction 
were established, and the ultimate remedy was an appeal to 
the emperor; thus Paul, when brought before Fes tus, appealed 
unto Caesar. Such appeals were, however, not heard by the 
emperor in person but by a supreme judge representing him. 
In the Corpus Juris the appeal to the emperor is called in- 
discriminately appellatio and provocatio. A considerable portion 
of the 49th book of the Pandects is devoted to appeals; but 
little of the practical operation of the system is to be deduced 
from the propositions there brought together. 

During the middle ages full scope was afforded for appeals 
from the lower to the higher authorities in the church. In 
matters ecclesiastical, including those matrimonial, testamentary 
and other departments, which the church ever tried to bring 
within the operation of the canon law, there were various grades 
of appeal, ending with the pope. The claims of the church to 
engross appeals in matters trenching on the temporal rights of 
princes led to continual conflicts between church and state, 
terminated in England at the reformation by the suppression in 
1534 of appeals to Rome, which had previously been discouraged 
by legislation of Edward III. and Richard II. 

In temporal, as distinct from spiritual matters, it became 
customary for ambitious sovereigns to encourage appeals from 
the courts of the crown vassals to themselves as represented by 
the supreme judges, and Charlemagne usually enjoys the credit 
of having set the example of this system of centralization by 
establishing missi dominici. It is not improbable that his claim 
was suggested or justified by the practice of the Roman empire, 
Ao the sovereignty whereof he claimed to be successor. 



APPEAL 



211 



England. — When the royal authority in England grew strong 
as against that of the tenants in capite, the king's courts in 
England were more effectively organized, and their net swept 
wider so as to draw within their cognizance matters previously 
adjudged in courts baron or courts leet or in the county court, 
and they acquired authority to supervise and review the decisions 
of the inferior and local courts, to control and limit their claims 
to exercise jurisdiction, and to transfer causes from the local to 
the royal courts. The machinery by which this process was 
usually effected, under the common law, was not by what is now 
known as appeal, but by the process of certiorari or writs of 
error or prohibition. Recourse was also had against the decisions 
of the royal courts by appeal to the great council of the king, or 
to parliament as a whole. The supremacy of the king's courts 
over all causes, as well ecclesiastical as civil, has been completely 
established since the reign of Henry VIII., and they have 
effectually asserted the power to regulate and keep within their 
proper jurisdiction all other tribunals within the realm. Since 
that date the organization of judicial tribunals has gradually 
been changed and improved with the object (i) of creating a 
judicial hierarchy independent of executive control; (2) of 
ensuring that all decisions on questions of law shall be co-ordinated 
and rendered systematic by correction of the errors and vagaries 
of subordinate tribunals; and (3) of securing so far as possible 
uniformity in the judicial interpretation and administration of 
the law, by creating a supreme appellate tribunal to whose 
decisions all other tribunals are bound to conform. It would be 
undesirable to detail at length the history of appellate jurisdic- 
tion in England, involving as it would the discussion in great 
detail of the history and procedure of English law, and it may 
suffice to indicate the system of appeals as at present organized, 
beginning with the lowest courts. 

Justices of the Peace. — The decisions of justices of the peace 
sitting as courts of summary jurisdiction are subject to review 
on questions of law only by the High Court of Justice. This 
review is in a sense consultative, because it is usually effected by 
means of a case voluntarily stated by the justices at the request 
of the aggrieved party, in which are set forth the facts as deter- 
mined by the justices, the questions of law raised and their 
decision thereon, as to the correctness whereof the opinion of the 
High Court is invited. The procedure is equally open in criminal 
and civil matters brought before the justices. But when the 
justices decline to state a case for the opinion of the High Court, 
the latter, if review seems desirable, may order the justices to 
state a case. And the High Court has also power to control the 
action of justices by prohibiting them from acting in a case 
beyond their jurisdiction, ordering them to exercise jurisdiction 
where they have improperly declined {mandamus), or bringing 
up for review and quashing orders or convictions which they have 
made in excess of jurisdiction, or in cases in which interested 
or biassed justices have adjudicated {certiorari). None of these 
regulative processes exactly corresponds to what is popularly 
known as an appeal, but in effect if not in form an appeal is 
thus given. 

There is also another form of appeal, in the fullest sense of 
the term, from the decision of justices sitting as a court of 
summary jurisdiction to the justices of the same county sitting 
in general or quarter sessions, or in the case of a borough to 
the recorder as judge of the borough court of quarter sessions. 
This form of appeal is in every case the creation of statute: 
and even in text-books it is hardly possible to find a really 
complete list of the matters in respect of which such appeal 
lies. But as regards criminal cases there is an approximately 
general rule, given by § 19 of the Summary Jurisdiction Act 
1879, v i z - lnat an appeal to quarter sessions lies from the con- 
viction or order of a court of summary jurisdiction directing 
imprisonment without the option of a fine as a punishment for 
an offence, or for failing to do or to abstain from doing any 
act required to be done or left undone other than an order for 
the payment of money, or to find sureties or give security or to 
enter into a recognizance, or a conviction made on a plea of 
guilty or admission of the truth of the matter of comDlaint. 



As a general rule, subject to particular statutory exceptions, 
appeals of this kind are by way of rehearing, i.e. the actor or 
prosecutor must before the appellate tribunal call his witnesses 
and prove his case just as if no previous hearing had taken 
place before the court appealed from (Pritchard, Quarter Sessions 
Practice, 2nd ed., 461). The only limit is that the appellant 
must confine himself to the grounds of appeal stated in the notice 
of appeal given by him. 

Justices in Quarter Sessions. — This tribunal has under the 
commission of the peace and under statute power to refer 
questions of difficulty arising before it for decision to the High 
Court. The old mode of exercising this power was by sending 
on to assizes indictments raising difficult questions which had 
been presented at quarter sessions. The High Court has ex 
officio power to transfer such indictments where the nature of the 
case and the demands of justice call for such transfer. The 
quarter sessions had also power under statute on trying an 
indictment to refer to the court for crown cases reserved 
(Crown Cases Act 1848), abolished by the Criminal Appeal Act 
1907, questions of law which had arisen at the trial, and in all 
civil cases the quarter sessions has power of its own volition 
and subject to no direct compulsion to consult the High Court 
on legal questions of difficulty which have arisen. Until 1894 
this jurisdiction was regarded as consultative only. It was and 
is exercised by stating the facts, of which the court of quarter 
sessions is the sole judge, and indicating the questions of law 
arising on the facts, and the view of quarter sessions thereon, 
and inviting the opinion of the High Court. Under the Judi- 
cature Act 1894 cases stated in this way are now treated as 
"appeals" in the popular sense. 

Inferior Courts of purely Civil Jurisdiction. — An appeal also 
lies as a general rule to the High Court from the judgment of a 
county court or of any inferior tribunal having civil jurisdiction. 

(a) County Courts. Any party to an action or matter in a 
county court who is dissatisfied with the determination or 
direction of the judge in law or equity, or upon the admission or 
rejection of any evidence, may appeal against the decision in the 
following cases: (1) if the amount of claim or counter-claim in 
the proceeding exceeds £20; or (2) in all equity matters or cases 
in which an injunction has been given; or (3) in actions to 
recover possession of land where questions of title are involved 
(County Courts Act 1888, § 120). In the case of a claim below 
£20 no appeal lies except by the leave of the county court. 
The old practice of appeal by way of special case as in appeals 
from justices has been abolished, and the present procedure is by 
notice of motion (R.S.C. O. LIX. rr. 10-18). 

These appeals are heard in the king's bench division, except 
in the case of appeals from judgments of a county court sitting 
in the exercise of admiralty jurisdiction, which are heard by 
two or more judges sitting in the probate, divorce and admiralty 
division. The chancery division has never sat to hear 
" appeals " from a county court exercising equity jurisdiction; 
but at times, by prohibition or certiorari, has, in effect, reviewed 
or restrained excess of jurisdiction by county courts in equity 
matters. 

The decision of the High Court on county court appeals is 
final unless an appeal to the court of appeal is brought by 
leave of that court or of the High Court (Judicature Act 1894, 
§ 1, sub. sect. 5; Judicature Act 1873, § 45). 

{b) Other inferior courts of civil jurisdiction. Appeals from 
the local courts of record which still survive in certain cities, 
towns and districts are in a somewhat anomalous position. The 
general rule is that, unless a statute regulates such appeal, it 
may be brought in the king's bench division of the High Court 
on notice of motion in any case in which, before the Judicature 
Acts, the court of king's bench could have reviewed the decision 
of the inferior court by writ of error. The history of this question 
is dealt with in Darlow v. Shuttle-worth, 1902, 1 K.B. 721. 

In the case of the mayor's court of London, under the local 
and general statutes regulating that court, the appeal is usually 
to the king's bench division, but where there is what is termed 
" error " on the face of the proceedings of the mayor's court, 



212 



APPEAL 



the appeal lies direct to the court of appeal as successor of the 
court of exchequer chamber. Appeals from the Liverpool court 
of passage and from the chancery courts of the duchies of 
Lancaster and Durham lie by statute direct to the court of 
appeal. 

High Court of Justice. — Until the Supreme Court of Judicature 
Acts of 1873 and 1875 came into operation, the superior courts 
in England were imperfectly co-ordinated both as to jurisdiction 
and appeals. The effect of these acts was to create a Supreme 
Court of Judicature divided into two main branches, the High 
Court of Justice, which is an appellate court with respect to the 
inferior courts already mentioned, and to certain other special 
courts and persons; and the court of appeal, which is mainly 
concerned with appeals from the High Court of Justice. 

The High Court of Justice acts as an appellate court or court 
of consultation with reference to courts of summary jurisdiction 
or quarter sessions and to county courts and other inferior 
courts of civil jurisdiction in the cases already indicated. The 
three divisions of the court are somewhat differently placed 
with reference to appeals. 

In the chancery division (made up, in 1908, of six single 
judge courts) no appeals are heard except from subordinate 
officials (masters) of the court, or an occasional interference 
by certiorari or prohibition with a county court. 

In the probate, divorce and admiralty division, besides 
the supervision which may be exercised by a single judge over 
the subordinate officers of the court (registrars), divisional 
courts (of two judges) hear appeals from decisions of the county 
court in admiralty causes, and appeals from justices in cases 
between husband and wife under the Summary Jurisdiction 
(Married Women) Act 1895, as amended by the Licensing Act 
1902. In the first of these cases the appeal is on law only as 
in the case of other county court appeals; in the second, the 
procedure is by rehearing, or reconsideration of the facts 
as minuted in the court appealed from, and of the law there 
applied to these facts. 

The bulk of the appellate work of the High Court is conducted 
in the king's bench division — which, as successor of the old 
court of king's bench in the duties of custos morum of the 
realm, still retains supervisory power over all inferior courts 
in all cases in which that supervision has not been transferred 
to the other divisions of the High Court or to the court of appeal, 
or to the court of criminal appeal. 

The king's bench division exercises appellate jurisdiction 
in the following cases. 

With respect to decisions of justices of the peace sitting at 
quarter sessions, or as a court of summary jurisdiction, except 
in the case above stated, the subject matter of appeal is for 
the most part of a criminal or quasi-criminal character, the civil 
jurisdiction of justices being comparatively limited. The 
appeal in such cases is as to matters of law only, the justices' 
decision on facts not being subject to review. 

In the case of the courts above named, the appeal is brought 
by writ of certiorari, where the jurisdiction of quarter sessions 
to give the judgment challenged is denied in toto, or in some cases 
by writ of habeas corpus, where the appellant is in custody 
under an order of the court appealed from (Judicature Act 
1894, § 2). The best example of this is the right of a fugitive 
criminal committed for extradition .to challenge the legality 
of the decision of the committing magistrate by writ of habeas 
corpus. Save in cases of want of jurisdiction or refusal to 
exercise it, no appeal lies from quarter sessions except by consent 
of the court appealed from, which states the facts as ascertained 
by the inferior court, and invites the review of the superior 
court upon the questions of law raised by the facts as found. 

Decisions of justices sitting in the exercise of summary 
jurisdiction are subject to review by a special case in which 
the justices state the facts found by them and their decision 
on the points of law, and invite the review of the appellate 
court on these grounds. Such cases for appeal are usually 
stated by consent of the justices, but in the event of their 
refusal the appellate court may order that a case shall be stated. 



Decisions of justices in the exercise of summary jurisdiction 
may also be challenged by writ of certiorari as having been 
wholly outside their jurisdiction; and in such proceeding 
the appellate tribunal may review the evidence taken below 
so far as to ascertain whether the justices have by an erroneous 
finding of fact enabled themselves to assume a jurisdiction 
which upon the true facts they did not possess. 

Where the decision appealed from is in a criminal cause 
or matter the decision of the High Court is final. Where it 
is in a civil matter a further appeal also lies to the court of 
appeal by leave of the High Court or of the court of appeal 
(Judicature Act 1873, § 45). 

Appeals in criminal cases tried on indictment, criminal 
information or coroner's inquisition, stand on a different footing 
from other appeals. 

For many years the question of criminal appeal in general 
had been a matter of great controversy. As early as 1844 a 
bill had been unsuccessfully introduced for the purpose of 
establishing appeal in criminal cases, and from that time up 
to 1906 nearly thirty bills were brought forward with the same 
object, but none succeeded in passing. In 1892 the question 
was referred to the council of judges and favourably reported 
upon by them. It may be remarked that England was practi- 
cally the only civilized country in which there was no appeal 
in criminal cases. It is true there was an appeal on questions 
of law arising at the trial. But the procedure was intricate 
and technical, being either (1) by writ of error, issued by the 
consent of the attorney-general (expressed by his fiat) , to review 
errors of law appearing in the record of the trial, or (2) by special 
case, stated by the judge presiding at the trial, with respect 
to a question of law raised at the trial. These appeals were 
heard by the king's bench division. Meanwhile there had 
been a considerable development of public opinion in favour 
of the establishment of criminal appeal, a development 
undoubtedly hastened by the report of a committee of inquiry 
in the case of Adolf Beck (1904), showing clearly that the home 
office was not a satisfactory tribunal of final appeal. In 1906 
the lord chancellor (Lord Loreburn) introduced another criminal 
appeal bill, which passed the House of Lords, but was dropped 
in the House of Commons after a first reading. The next year 
the act (Criminal Appeal Act 1907), which was ultimately 
carried, was introduced into the House of Commons. By this 
act a court is established consisting of the lord chief justice 
and eight judges of the king's bench division, the jurisdiction 
of the court for crown cases reserved being transferred to the 
new court. The court to be duly constituted must consist 
of not less than three judges and of an uneven number of judges. 
The court may sit in two or more divisions if the lord chief 
justice so directs. Its sittings are held in London unless special 
directions are given by the lord chief justice that it shall sit 
at some other place. The opinion of the majority of those 
hearing the case determines any question before the court, 
and judgment is pronounced by the president (who is the lord 
chief justice or senior member present), unless in questions 
of law, when, if it is convenient that separate judgments should 
be pronounced by the members of the court, they may be so 
pronounced. The judgment of the court of criminal appeal 
is final, except where the decision involves a point of law of 
exceptional public importance, and a certificate must be obtained 
from the attorney-general to that effect. The court of criminal 
appeal is a superior court of record. An appeal may be made 
either against conviction or agains t sentence. A person convicted 
on indictment may appeal either on a question of law alone 
or of fact alone, or on a question of mixed law and fact. On 
a point of law a prisoner has an unqualified right of appeal, 
on a question of fact or of mixed law and fact there is a right 
of appeal only if leave be obtained from the court of criminal 
appeal or a certificate be granted by the judge who tried the 
prisoner that it is a fit case for appeal. The court is given a 
wide discretion as to whether a conviction may be sustained 
or set aside. The court may allow the appeal if they think 
that the verdict of the jury should be set aside because it is. 



APPEAL 



213 



unreasonable, or because it cannot be supported having regard 
to the evidence, or that the judgment should be set aside 
on the ground of a wrong decision on any point of law, or 
that on any ground there was a miscarriage of justice. Power is 
given to the court to dismiss the appeal if they consider that no 
substantial miscarriage of justice has occurred, even though 
they are of opinion that the point raised in the appeal 
might be decided in favour of the appellant. The sentence 
passed at the trial may be quashed by the appeal court and 
such other sentence (whether more or less severe) warranted 
in law by the verdict substituted. Notice of appeal or notice 
of application for leave to appeal must be given within ten 
days of the date of conviction; where a conviction involves 
sentence of death or corporal punishment the sentence must 
not be executed until after the expiration of ten days, and, if 
notice of appeal is given, not until after the determination 
of the appeal or the final dismissal of the application for leave 
to appeal. The act gives the court power to order any witnesses 
who would have been compellable witnesses at the trial to attend 
and be examined before the court, and to receive the evidence, 
if tendered, of any witness who is a competent but not com- 
pellable witness. If any question arises on the appeal involving 
prolonged examination of documents or accounts or any scientific 
or local investigation, which the court thinks cannot be con- 
veniently conducted before it, the matter may be referred to 
a special commissioner appointed by the court, and the court 
may act on the report of that commissioner if it thinks fit. 
An appellant is given the right to be present on the hearing 
of his appeal, if he desires it, except where the appeal is on 
some ground involving a question of law alone, but rules of court 
may provide for his presence in such a case, or the court may give 
him leave. The act requires shorthand notes to be taken of 
the proceedings at the trial of any person, who, if convicted, 
would have a right to appeal under the act. Nothing in the act 
affects the prerogative of mercy, and the home secretary may, 
if he thinks fit, at any time refer a case to the court of criminal 
appeal. 

The Court of Appeal. — The court of appeal, constituted under 
the Judicature Acts, is one of the two permanent divisions of the 
Supreme Court of Judicature. As now constituted the court 
consists of ex officio members and five ordinary members, styled 
lords justices of appeal. The ex officio members are the lord 
chancellor, every person who has held that office, the lord chief 
justice, the master of the rolls, and the president of the probate, 
&C, division. 

The ordinary business of the court is carried on by the lords 
justices under the presidency of the master of the rolls, who in 
1881 ceased to be a judge of the High Court (Judicature Act 
1 88 1, § 2). The court usually sits in two divisions of three 
judges, but on occasion a third court can be formed, with the 
assistance of the other ex officio judges, in the absence of the 
ordinary judges from illness or public engagements, or to deal 
with arrears of business. The quorum for final appeals is three, 
for interlocutory appeals two judges. 

The court of appeal has succeeded to the appellate authority 
exercised (1) in the case of equity and bankruptcy matters by 
the lord chancellor and the lords justices of appeal in chancery 
(Judicature Act 1873, § 18); (2) in the case of common law 
matters, by the court of exchequer chamber, as a court of error, 
and the superior courts of common law sitting to review the 
decisions of single judges of these courts sitting with or without 
a jury at first instance in civil actions; (3) in the case of divorce 
or probate causes by the full court of divorce (Judicature Act 
1 88 1, § 9); (4) in the case of admiralty causes by the king in 
council or the judicial committee of the privy council; (5) in 
the case of applications for new trials in jury actions by the 
king's bench division (Judicature Act 1890, §1). 

The court never had jurisdiction to hear an appeal in any 
criminal cause or matter, but was able to review by writ of error 
decisions of the king's bench division in such cases, unless the 
court for crown cases reserved had dealt with the question 
under the Crown Cases Act 1848. This Dr>>cedure has been 



abolished by the Criminal Appeal Act 1907. Instances of 
procedure by writ of error were rare. Those best worth notice 
are the cases of the Tichborne claimant on his conviction of 
perjury, and the case of C. Bradlaugh on the sufficiency of the 
indictment against him for publishing the Fruits of Philosophy. 

The appellate jurisdiction of the court as now exercised 
entitles the court to hear and determine (1) appeals from every 
judgment or decree of every division of the High Court in all 
civil cases in which such judgment is not declared final by 
statute; (2) applications for a new trial in civil cases tried in 
the king's bench division by judge and jury which, until 1800, 
were dealt with by two or more judges in that division; (3) 
appeals in matters of civil practice and procedure from decisions 
of a single judge in chambers, which, until 1894, were dealt with 
in a divisional court or by a judge in open court; (4) appeals 
from the chancery courts of Durham (Palatine Court of Durham 
Act 1889) and Lancaster (act of 1890, c. 23) and the Liverpool 
court of passage (Anderson v. Dean, 1894, 2 Q.B. 222), and on 
error in a record of the mayor's court of London (Le Blanche v. 
Heaton Telegram Co., 1876, 1 Ex.D. 408); and from county 
courts under the Agricultural Holdings Acts and Workmen's 
Compensation Acts; (5) appeals on questions of law from 
decisions of the railway commissioners in England (Railway and 
Canal Traffic Act 1888). 

The court of appeal also exercises the lunacy jurisdiction of the 
lord chancellor, but in regard to this the jurisdiction of the court 
is for the most part original and not appellate. 

The jurisdiction of the court of appeal is excluded or limited 
in the following cases: — (1) judgments of the High Court — (a) 
where its jurisdiction is consultative only; (b) where there is an 
appeal to the High Court from an inferior court of civil jurisdic- 
tion; (c) where there is an appeal to the High Court from any 
court of person, unless in cases (b) and (c) leave be obtained 
of the court by which the order is made, or of the court of appeal; 
(2) orders of the High Court in registration and election cases 
except with the like leave; (3) orders made by consent of parties, 
or as to costs only which by law are left to the discretion of the 
court; (4) certain interlocutory orders mentioned in § 1 of 
the Supreme Court of Judicature (Procedure) Act 1894, except 
by leave of the judge appealed from or of the court of appeal 
(5) orders of the admiralty division in cases of prize, the appeal 
from which lies to His Majesty in Council; (6) where the decision 
of any court whose jurisdiction was transferred to the High Court 
is declared by statute to be final; (7) matters which from their 
nature were not appealable to any court before the Judicature 
Acts, or in which the court of appeal has no means of enforcing 
or executing its judgment. For example, it was held in the 
House of Lords, in Cox v. Hakes, 1890, 15 A.C. 506, that no 
appeal lies from the order of a judge discharging a prisoner under 
a writ of habeas corpus. " If," said Lord Herschell, " the conten- 
tion of the respondent is to prevail, the statute has effected a 
grave constitutional change "; and later, " if " the High Court 
" has inherited the combined powers of the courts whose functions 
were transferred to it, but done of them had any jurisdiction or 
authority to review a discharge by a competent court under a 
writ of habeas corpus, or to enforce the arrest of one thus freed 
from custody ... it seems to me to follow, that however wrong 
the court of appeal might think a discharge to have been, it 
would have been powerless to order a rearrest, or at least tc 
enforce such an order." 

The procedure of the court of appeal is regulated by the rules 
of the Supreme Court. A distinction is drawn between appeals 
from a final judgment or order (which, unless the parties consent 
to a smaller quorum, must be heard by three judges) and an 
appeal from an interlocutory order (which may be determined 
by two judges of the court of appeal) . 

In the case of appeals from a final or interlocutory " judg- 
ment," or from an order, including applications for a new trial, 
the appeal must be brought within three months from the time 
when the judgment or order is signed, entered or otherwise 
perfected, or in the case of refusal of an application from the 
date of refusal. The appeal is by notice of motion, which. 



214 



APPEAL 



except in cases of application for a new trial, need not state 
the grounds of appeal. Fourteen clear days' notice of the 
motion must be given by the appellant to the other party, the 
respondent. 

In the case of appeals from an interlocutory order, or from a 
final order, or from an order made in any matter which is not an 
action, or from an order made in chambers, the appeal must be 
brought within fourteen days by motion, of which four clear 
days' notice must be given by the appellant to all parties directly 
affected by the appeal. Controversies have arisen as to the 
meaning of the term " interlocutory," which (in the absence of 
any authoritative definition) the court of appeal settles as they 
arise. The test most generally accepted is that a judgment or 
order is final if, as made, it finally disposes of the rights of the 
parties in a manner equally conclusive between them. The 
court may by special leave allow appeals of either class to be 
brought after the time above limited. The respondent may by 
proper notice bring a cross appeal against any portion of the 
judgment or order made below with which he is dissatisfied. 
The court has power to order the appellant to find security for 
the costs of an appeal, if special circumstances, such as in- 
solvency or poverty or foreign domicile or the like, make the 
giving of security desirable. The court of appeal " rehears " 
the case. Under ordinary circumstances it does not permit a 
new case to be set up inconsistent with the case as presented 
below; and it is content with the judges' notes, or a transcript 
of the evidence given below, and with a note or transcript of the 
judgment appealed from, but has power on special grounds to 
receive fresh evidence either viva voce or on affidavit. The court 
may call in for its assistance assessors who are experts on the 
matters of fact or science involved in the appeal, and usually 
does so in cases arising out of collisions at sea. 

The court of appeal may make any order which it deems just 
as to the costs of the whole or any part of an appeal, except 
possibly in the case of certain appeals in matters on the crown 
side of the High Court, as to which some doubt still exists. In 
practice the costs follow the event, unless the court in a particular 
case makes an order to the contrary. 

A decision of the court of appeal is final in appeals from 
the High Court in bankruptcy, unless leave be given to appeal 
to the House of Lords (§ 104, Bankruptcy Act 1883), and in 
divorce appeals, except where the decision either is upon the 
grant or refusal of a decree for dissolution or nullity of marriage, 
or for a declaration of legitimacy, or is upon any question of law 
on which the court gives leave to appeal (Supreme Court of 
Judicature Act i88r, § 9); but no further appeal to the House 
of Lords lies, even with leave of the court of appeal, on appeals 
from the High Court sitting as a court of appeal from county 
courts in bankruptcy. With these exceptions there is now a right 
of appeal from every order of the court of appeal to the House 
of Lords. 

The House of Lords. — The House of Lords has for centuries 
been the court of last resort, and is still the final court of appeal 
from the chief courts in the United Kingdom. The origin of the 
appellate jurisdiction of the House of Lords was undoubtedly 
of that partly feudal and partly popular character already 
alluded to, which made the suitor seek from the high court of 
parliament the justice denied elsewhere in the baronial courts or 
by the king's judges. The lords exercised the mixed function of 
jurymen and judges, and, as in judgments on impeachment, 
might be influenced by private or party considerations, debating 
and dividing on the question before the House. A revolution 
was silently accomplished, however, by which the function of 
reviewing the decisions of the courts fell entirely to the lawyers 
raised to the peerage, while the unprofessional lords only attended 
to give the sanction of a quorum to the proceedings, and the 
House has always had the right to invoke the assistance of the 
judges of the superior courts to advise on the questions of law 
raised by an appeal. The letters and memoirs, so late as Queen 
Anne's reign, show that party or personal influence and per- 
suasion were employed to procure votes on appeals, as they have 
been in later times on railway or other local bills. The last 



instance probably in which a strong division of opinion was 
manifested among the unprofessional lords was the celebrated 
Douglas cause in 1769, when the House was addressed by the 
dukes of Newcastle and Bedford, but was led by the authoritative 
opinion of Lord Mansfield on the effect of the evidence — an 
opinion which was treated rather as that of a political partisan 
than of a judge. The case of Daniel O'Connell and others, 
brought up on writ of error from the queen's bench in Ireland 
in 1844, may be said to have finally established the precedent 
that the judgments of the House of Lords were to be given solely 
by the law lords. On that occasion there was a difference of 
opinion among the law lords themselves. The judgment of the 
majority of the House was strongly against the political feeling 
of the government and of the peers as a body, while the law lords 
who carried the decision had been appointed by previous govern- 
ments opposed in politics to the existing cabinet. But all these 
temptations to a party vote by the unprofessional members were 
resisted. 

By § 20 of the act of 1873, the appellate jurisdiction of the 
House of Lords (so far as it affects England) was abolished, but 
this section was repealed by the Appellate Jurisdiction Act 1876. 
Under that act and an amending act of 1887, the appellate 
business of the House of Lords is conducted solely by the law 
lords, though lay peers may still sit (Bradlaugh v. Clarke, 1882, 
8 App. Cas. 354). No appeal may be heard or determined 
except in the presence of not less than three of the following 
persons: — (1) the lord chancellor; (2) the lords of appeal, four 
of whom are appointed under the act from among persons who 
hold, or have held, high judicial office, or, at the date of appoint- 
ment, have been in practice for not less than fifteen years as 
barristers in England or Ireland, or as advocates in Scotland; 
(3) such peers of parliament as hold, or have held, high judicial 
office. By " high judicial office " is meant the office of lord 
chancellor of Great Britain or Ireland, lord of appeal in ordinary, 
paid judge of the judicial committee or member of that com- 
mittee, or judge of one of the superior courts of Great Britain 
or Ireland. 

An appeal lies to the House of Lords (1) from any order or 
judgment of the court of appeal in England except as above 
stated; (2) from a judgment or order of any court in Scotland 
or Ireland from which error or an appeal to the House of Lords 
lay by common law or statute immediately before the 1st of 
November 1876. No appeals are heard from the decision of 
courts in criminal cases. The House of Lords has an indirect 
power by standing orders to admit appeals from Scotland or 
Ireland which under former law or practice could not be admitted 
(Appellate Jurisdiction Act 1876, § 12). The procedure on 
appeals is regulated by standing orders of the House. The 
proceedings are commenced by petition of appeal, which must 
be lodged with the clerk of the parliaments within one year from 
the date of the last judgment it appealed from. Security for 
costs (£200) must be given by bond or lodgment of the money, 
unless dispensed with by the House on the ground of poverty 
(act of 1893). Each party lodges a printed case signed and 
certified by counsel, containing a resume of the matters to be 
discussed and of the contentions for or against the allowance of 
the appeal. The hearing is before three or more law lords, who may 
call in nautical assessors in admiralty cases (acts of 1 893 and 1 894) . 
It is not public in the full sense of the term, as persons not con- 
cerned in the appeal can attend only by consent of the House. 
The House pronounces the judgment which in the opinion of the 
majority of the law lords should have been pronounced below, 
and has jurisdiction in the case of all appeals to give or refuse 
costs to the successful party. The costs of the appeal if given 
are taxed by the officers of the House. The jurisdiction as to 
costs does not directly arise under any statute (see West Ham 
Guardians v. Bethnal Green Churchwardens, 1896, A.C. 477). 

Appeals to the King in Council. — The decisions of ecclesiastical 
courts when acting within the limits of their jurisdiction, and 
the decisions of courts in the king's dominions outside the 
United Kingdom, and of courts in foreign countries set up under 
the Foreign Jurisdiction Acts, cannot be dealt with by the 



APPEAL 



215 



House of Lords or any of the ordinary tribunals of any part of 
the United Kingdom. The power once claimed by the court 
of king's bench in England to control the courts of Ireland has 
lapsed, and its power to intervene in colonial cases is limited 
to the grant of the writ of habeas corpus to a possession in which 
no court exists having power to issue that writ or one of like 
effect (Habeas Corpus Act 1862). As regards all British posses- 
sions, the appeal to the king in council is in its origin and nature 
like that of the provincials unto Caesar, and flows from the 
royal prerogative to admit appeals. With the growth of the 
British empire it has been found necessary to create a com- 
paratively constant and stable tribunal to advise the king in 
the exercise of this prerogative. For this purpose the judicial 
committee of the privy council was created in 1833. In 1851, 
and again in 1870, it was reorganized, and by acts of 1876, 
1887 and 1898 it received its present form. The committee 
consists of the president of the council, and of the following 
persons, if privy councillors — the lord chancellor and ex- 
chancellors of Great Britain and of Ireland, the four lords of 
appeal in ordinary, the lords justices of appeal in England or 
retired lords justices of appeal in England, and persons who 
hold or have held the office (a) of judge of the High Court of 
Justice or the court of appeal in England or Ireland, or of the 
court of session in Scotland; (b) any person who is or has been 
chief justice or a judge of the Supreme Court of Canada or of a 
superior court of any province of Canada, of any of the Australian 
states (except Fiji and Papua), or of New Zealand or the Cape 
of Good Hope or Natal. The number of persons of this class 
who may be members at once is limited to five (1895, c. 44); 
(c) provision is also made for the payment of two privy councillors 
who have been judges in India who attend the privy council. 

Numerous as are the members of the committee, the quorum 
is three. One or more of the lords of appeal in ordinary usually 
attend at every hearing, but the composition of the committee 
is very fluctuating. Appeals from the British dominions abroad 
lie in criminal as well as civil matters. The right of appeal is 
regulated as to most possessions by order in council, and in some 
cases is limited by imperial or colonial statute. Appeals are on 
fact as well as on law, but the committee rarely if ever disturbs 
the concurrent judgments on facts of two colonial courts. In 
the case of admiralty appeals from colonial or consular courts, 
naval assessors may be called in. The committee also hears 
(with the aid of ecclesiastical assessors) appeals from ecclesiastical 
courts. The judgment of the committee is in the form of a 
report and advice to the king, which is read by one of the members 
sitting, and no indication is given as to whether the members 
present are unanimous. Effect is given to the advice by orders 
in council dismissing or allowing the appeal, and giving direction 
as to the payment of costs and as to the further proceedings to 
be taken in trie colonial courts. 

The procedure of the committee is on the same lines as that on 
appeals to the House of Lords ; no well-arranged code of practice 
existed however up to the end of 1908, and new rules were 
then being proposed on the subject. The appeal is commenced 
by a petition of appeal, and by the giving of security for costs. In 
colonial appeals printed cases are lodged containing a summary 
of the contentions of the parties, and with this a printed copy of 
the record of the proceedings and documents used in the courts 
appealed from. The hearing is in the privy council chamber 
and is not public. When an appeal is called on, the counsel and 
parties are summoned into the chamber, and when the arguments 
are concluded they are requested to retire. The appeals to the 
king in council from colonial states having a federal constitution, 
like Canada and Australia, stand in an exceptional position. 
The act creating the Supreme Court of Canada purports to make 
the decision of that court final. But it is still the practice to 
admit by special leave a prerogative appeal from the court, and 
to entertain appeals from courts of the provinces of Canada 
direct to the king in council, without requiring them to go to 
the Supreme Court. The constitution of the Australian Common- 
wealth contemplates (§73) the possibility of restricting appeals 
to the king in council from the supreme courts of Australia, 



and sec. 74 forbids appeals to the king in council except by 
leave of the High Court of Australia from decision of that court 
on any question however arising as to the limits inter se of the 
constitutional powers of the commonwealth and those of any 
state or states, or as to the limits inter se of the constitutional 
powers of any two or more states. The exact effect of these 
enactments and of Australian legislation under § 73 is a matter 
of controversy. 

Scotland. — In Scotland the ordinary appellate tribunal for 
decisions of inferior courts and of the lords ordinary is the court 
of session, which for appellate purposes sits in two divisions. 
Appeals from inferior tribunals in criminal cases go before the 
judges of the court of session sitting in the High Court of 
Justiciary. The court of session was in its original constitution 
a committee of parliament for the performance of its judicial 
functions, and an appeal to parliament was consequently 
anomalous. In the reign of Charles II., however, the courts 
grew so intolerably corrupt that a determined effort was made 
to have their judgments overturned, by an appeal which was 
strictly of the old character of a cry for protection against 
flagrant injustice. It was called a " protest for remeid of law," 
and was inserted as one of the national claims in the Petition of 
Right at the revolution. The treaty of union is silent as to 
appeals, though definitely excluding the right of English courts 
to interfere with Scottish courts or cases. The House of Lords 
has since the Union acted without challenge as the final appellate 
tribunal for Scotland in civil causes; but has always declined 
jurisdiction in Scottish criminal cases. 

Ireland. — The Supreme Court of Judicature (Ireland) Acts 
have remodelled the courts and appellate system of Ireland on 
the same lines as those of England. The High Court of Justice 
in Ireland now consists of two divisions only, the chancery 
division, which has little or no appellate functions, and the 
king's bench division, which has for Ireland substantially the 
same power of reviewing and correcting the decisions of inferior 
courts as has the corresponding court in England. To this there 
is one exception, that appeals from a county court in Ireland 
may be heard on circuit by a single judge of assize. In Ireland 
there is also a court of appeal, created in 1877, whose jurisdiction 
and procedure follow the same lines as that of the English court 
of appeal. 

France. — The court of last resort in France for all cases, 
whether civil or criminal (en matiere criminelle, correctionnelle 
et de police), is the cour de cassation, which sits in Paris. It is a 
court of error for the review of all judgments of tribunals of last 
resort (except juges de paix in certain cases), and for the transfer 
of causes from one court to another when justice so demands, 
and to determine conflicts of jurisdiction (Law 1 Dec. 1790). 
Ordinarily it is confined to errors of law and procedure, but 
where evidence not available below is brought before the court, it 
may send the case back for retrial or give the appropriate final 
judgment, as in the case of Dreyfus (1906). It also hears appeals 
from courts martial. 

Next to the cour de cassation are the courts of appeal, which 
have jurisdiction to hear appeals (1) in civil matters from courts 
of first instance, juges de paix, and where the amount in dispute 
exceeds £60 from commercial courts, tribunaux de commerce 
(Civil Proc. Code, arts. 443-475); (2) in criminal matters from 
tribunaux correclionnels (Com. Proc. Code, arts. 202-235). The 
appeal is both on fact and on law, and applies to interlocutory or 
preparatory as well as to final judgments. 

Spain. — In Spain the jurisdiction and procedure with reference 
to appeals is on the same lines as in France. As regards civil 
matters it is regulated by title 21 of the Civil Procedure Code. 
The appeal to the supreme court is for the most part on questions 
of law (por infraccion de ley de doctrina) ; but the court has 
also power to review judgments on materials not available at 
the first hearing (arts. 1796, 1801). 

British India. — In British India complete and systematic 
provision is made for appeals both in civil and in criminal cases 
by the Procedure Codes (Civil of 1882, with subsequent amend- 
ments, and Criminal of 1898), and also to some extent by the 



2l6 



APPEAL 



charters of the high courts of Calcutta, Bombay and Madras 
(see Ilbert, Government of India, Oxford, 1898, p. 137). In 
addition, the decisions of subordinate tribunals may be revised 
by a superior tribunal proprio motu, or reviewed in a proper case 
by the tribunal which has given them; and provision is made 
for the consultation of a superior by an inferior tribunal in cases 
of legal difficulty. The policy of admitting so many appeals 
has been criticized. But with an enormous population which 
has no representative institutions it has been deemed wise to 
provide ample means of correcting judicial errors at the instance 
not only of the aggrieved person but also at the instance of the 
supervising judicial authorities, as a means of ensuring regularity 
and propriety in the conduct of judicial business by subordinate 
judges in out-of-the-way districts. 

Civil Appeals. — (1) Except where otherwise expressly pro- 
vided by the Civil Procedure Code, or by any other law for the 
time being in force, an appeal lies from the whole or part of any 
decree, whether made ex parte or inter partes, of a court exercis- 
ing original jurisdiction (Civil Procedure Code, § 540). By 
" decree " is meant the final expression of an adjudication upon 
a right claimed or defence set up in a civil court, when such 
adjudication, so far as regards the court expressing it, decides 
the suit (§2). The appeal is both on facts and on law. "The 
procedure on the appeal is prescribed by c. 41 of the Civil 
Procedure Code, and the directions of the code deal even with 
the language of the judgment on appeal and the matters to be 
stated therein. (2) Decrees passed on an appeal to any court in 
India subordinate to a High Court are as a general rule subject 
to appeal to the High Court on the grounds (a) that they are 
contrary to a specified law, or usage having the force of law; 
(b) that they have failed to determine some material issue of law, 
or usage having the force of law; (c) of substantial error or defect 
in procedure prescribed by the code or other law. which might 
possibly have produced error or defect in the decision of the case 
upon the merits (§ 584). The procedure on these appeals is 
regulated by c. 42 of the Civil Procedure Code. (3) Appeals from 
orders which do not fall within the definition of decrees are 
allowed in the cases specified in § 588 of the code. The procedure 
with respect to these appeals is on the same lines as that on 
appeals against decrees (§ 590). Provision is made (by c. 44) 
for allowing appeals in forma pauperis after certain preliminary 
inquiries. In the High Courts appeals lie from the decision of 
one judge to two or more judges of the High Court, whose decision 
has effect as a judgment of the full court. Appeals, in civil 
cases, from the courts of India to the king in council are 
regulated by c. 45 of the Civil Procedure Code. The appealable 
amount is for most cases Rs.io,ooo or a claim or question as 
to property of like amount. 

Besides the provisions stated as to appeals, Indian courts 
have power in certain contingencies to review their own decisions 
(§ 623). An inferior court may also refer cases of difficulty to the 
High Court On a statement of the facts as found in the referring 
court and of the opinion thereon of that Court (§§ 617-620); 
and in cases in which no appeal lies to the High Court, that court 
may call for the record of any case in which the court below 
appears to have acted without jurisdiction or failed to exercise 
its jurisdiction, or to have exercised its jurisdiction illegally or 
with material illegality (§622). 

Criminal Matters. — Criminal jurisdiction in India is exercised 
by magistrates of the first, second and third class, by sessions 
courts, and the high or chief courts of the presidencies or 
provinces (Criminal Procedure Code of 1 898) . The higher judges 
in a district have the power of revising those decisions which 
are not absolutely summary of the judges of the classes below 
them in the same district; i.e. the sessions judge can revise the 
decisions of a first-class magistrate, and the High Court those 
of a sessions judge (§ 43 s). Inferior tribunals can also refer 
questions of law to the High Court (§§ 432, 4.33); and where a 
sentence of death is passed, or a sessions judge differs from the 
jury (§307), the matter must be referred to the High Court. 
On matters of reference or revision the parties have no right to 
be heard. 



Provision is also made for appeals by c. 31 of the Code. 
Appeals from second- or third-class magistrates are dealt with 
by the district (first-class) magistrate (§ 407). Persons con- 
victed on trial by assistant sessions judges or first-class magis- 
trates, except in cases where the punishment is very small, have 
an appeal to the sessions judge (§§ 408, 413). A person convicted 
on trial by the sessions judge has an appeal to the High Court 
(§ 410), but where he has pleaded guilty the only point on which 
appeal is open is the legality or extent of sentence (§412). 
Special provision is made as to appeals by persons born in 
Europe (whether British subjects or not) and Americans (§§ 408, 
415, and c. 33). 

In criminal cases there is a right of appeal to the king in 
council in certain cases provided for by the charters of the 
chartered high courts (see Ilbert, Government of India, Oxford, 
1898, p. 137). 

An appeal also lies in certain cases from the courts of British 
officers in feudatory states of India to a high court in India, 
and from the courts of Aden and Zanzibar and British East Africa 
to the High Court of Bombay. Appeals do not lie from the courts 
of native states to British courts in India, though in some cases 
there is an appeal of a political rather than judicial nature from 
the judicial tribunals of feudatory states; e.g. in the case of 
Kathiawar (Hemchand Derchand v. Azam Sakarlal; 1906. L.R. 
A.C. 212). 

Canada.— In Canada each province has the regulation of its 
own courts of justice. In Ontario the judiciary are organized, 
under the Provincial Judicature Acts, in much the same manner 
as in England; and the review of decisions of inferior courts (by 
appeal or other proceedings based on English practice) is in the 
hands of the High Court of Justice, subject to appeal to the 
provincial court of appeal. In Quebec the highest court (king's 
bench) , besides its original jurisdiction, has appellate jurisdiction 
over the superior court (see Quebec Civil Procedure Code, art. 
1 1 14 et seq.). The jurisdiction is exercised by writ of error or 
by appeal, according to the nature of the decision appealed from. 
The judges of the superior court have also, under art. 494, power 
to review before three judges decisions of a judge of that court 
or of a circuit court (arts. 494-504). Nova Scotia, New Bruns- 
wick, Manitoba and British Columbia have supreme courts 
with appellate authority over decisions of single judges of the 
court and over inferior tribunals in the province. Appeals lie 
from the highest courts of each province, in civil matters, to the 
Supreme Court of Canada, or to the king in council in cases 
falling within the orders in council applying to each province, 
but in criminal matters to the king in council. From the 
Supreme Court of Canada no appeal lies as of right to the king 
in council (Dominion Act 1875, 38 Vic. c. n, § 47), and the royal 
prerogative of granting special leave to appeal is sparingly exer- 
cised. The principles on which the judicial committee acts in 
advising for or against the grant of special leave in civil cases 
are stated in Daily Telegraph Newspaper Co. v. M' Laughlin f 
1904, L.R. A.C. 776, It is, however, as before, quite common 
for appeals to be brought direct to the privy council from 
the provincial courts without resort to the Dominion court (se* 
Wheeler, Privy Council Law, p. 955). 

Australia.— Each of the states of the Australian Common, 
wealth has its own supreme court. The Commonwealth parlia- 
ment constituted in 1903 a High Court for Australia, which, 
besides its original federal jurisdiction, is also a court of appeal 
from the supreme courts of the constitutional states, or from any 
state court from which an appeal lay to the king in council at 
the establishment of the Commonwealth. The jurisdiction of the 
court is defined by the Judiciary Act of 1903, by which it is 
created. The right of appeal is given both as to criminal and 
civil matters. 

South Africa.— In Cape Colony and Natal the appellate courts 
are the supreme courts, subject to further appeal in certain cases 
to the king in council. The superior courts of Cape Colony are 
empowered to review the proceedings of all inferior courts in 
the colony and its dependencies in cases where no appeal lies. 
There was for a time an appeal from the High Court of Orange 



APPEARANCE— APPENDICITIS 



217 



River Colony to the supreme court of the Transvaal, and from 
that court (whether acting for its own colony or on appeal from 
the Orange Colony), an appeal to the king in council. In other 
colonies the provisions as to appeal follow more or less closely 
the lines of English law and procedure as to appeals, and in all 
cases the ultimate appeal is to the king in council. 

United States.- — In the American courts the term " appeal " 
covers (1) a removal of a cause to a higher court for retrial on 
all the questions of law or fact involved, or (2) taking up points 
of law only by proceedings in error, for revision by a higher court. 
Decrees in admiralty, bankruptcy and equity, in the federal 
courts, are the subjects of an appeal; judgments in actions at 
law, of a writ of error. On an equity appeal the evidence taken 
at the original hearing is reported at length to the appellate court, 
and it has the right to review the conclusions of fact reached by 
the court below and come to different ones. This, however, is 
seldom done, the appeal being almost always decided on points of 
law based upon the conclusions of fact reached in the original 
hearing. In admiralty appeals the conclusions of fact reached by 
the trial court are specially set forth, and are final. 

" Appeal " in many of the states is the general term for 
reviewing any judgment of an inferior court on assignments of 
error. It is also often used to signify a mode of reviewing pro- 
ceedings of municipal bodies, affecting the interests of particular 
persons, e.g. in matters of licences or assessments. 

In criminal prosecutions an appeal, or writ of error on points 
of law, is almost everywhere allowed by statute to the defendant, 
and often to the state. (United States v. Sanges, 144 United 
States Reports, 310; State v. Lee, 65 Connecticut Reports, 265.) 

By the constitution of the United States the Supreme Court 
is vested with " appellate jurisdiction, both as to law and fact, 
with such exceptions, and under such regulations, as the Congress 
shall make." This provision is held not to create but only to 
authorize the creation of the jurisdiction. In the words of 
Chancellor Kent, " If congress had not provided any rule to 
regulate the proceedings in appeal, the court could not exercise 
an appellate jurisdiction: and, if a rule be provided, the court 
could not depart from it." In pursuance of this principle, the 
Supreme Court decided in Clarke v. Bazadone that a writ of error 
did not lie to that court from a court of the United States territory 
north-west of the Ohio, because the act had not authorized an 
appeal or writ of error from such a court (Commentaries, i. 324). 
The appellate jurisdiction of the court is now regulated by title 
13 chap. ii. of the Revised Statutes of the United States (1873), 
§§ 690-710; and by the acts enumerated at p. 001 of the Revised 
Statutes, United States, 1873 to 1801. Under these statutes the 
Supreme Court may entertain appeals from the highest court of a 
state of the Union, but only (1) where the state court has decided 
against the validity of a treaty or statute of the United States, 
or of an authority exercised under the United States; (2) where 
a state court has affirmed the validity of a statute, or of an 
authority exercised which has been challenged on the ground of 
repugnance to the constitution, laws or treaties of the United 
States; (3) where the state court has decided against the 
existence of a title, right, privilege, or immunity claimed or set 
up under the constitution of, or under any statute, treaty, 
commission or authority of the United States. 

The appeal from state courts is by writ of error, i.e. on law 
only; and applies as well in criminal as in civil cases. The 
Supreme Court will not act unless the federal question was 
raised in the court below (Chicago U. S. Mail Co. v. McGuire, 
1904, 196, U.S. 128). The circuit court of appeals, established 
in 1891, deals with appeals from the district and circuit courts of 
the United States, except where other provision is made, e.g. 
where the jurisdiction of the court appealed from is in question; 
in prize causes and convictipns of capital crimes (U.S. Statutes, 
1801. c. 54. § 5) ; in cases involving the construction or application 
jr the constitution; in cases arising in district or circuit courts 
involving the constitutional questions already stated as subject 
of appeal from state courts. 

The review by the circuit court of appeals is effected by 
appeal or by writ of error, and its decision is final, with certain 



exceptions but with power to certify cases to the Supreme Court 
for instructions (1891, c. 511, § 6). 

The Supreme Court hears appeals from the circuit court 
of appeals within the limits above stated, and appeals from 
the circuit and district courts in cases in which an appeal 
does not lie to the circuit court of appeals, and has power 
to issue a certiorari to transfer a case from the circuit court of 
Appeals. (W. F. C.) 

APPEARANCE (from Lat. apparere, to appear), in law, the 
coming into court of either of the parties to a suit; the formal 
act by which a defendant submits himself to the jurisdiction of 
the court. The defendant in an action in the High Court of 
England enters his appearance to the writ of summons by 
delivering, either at the central office of the Supreme Court, or 
a district registry, a written memorandum either giving his 
solicitor's name or stating that he defends in person. He must 
also give notice to the plaintiff of his appearance, which ought, 
according to the time limited by the writ, to be within eight 
days after service; a defendant may, however, appear any time 
before judgment. The Rules of the Supreme Court, orders xii. 
and xiii., regulate the procedure with respect to the entering of 
an appearance, the giving of notice, the limit of time, the setting 
aside and the general effect of default of appearance. In 
county courts there is no appearance other than the coming 
into court of the parties to the suit. In criminal cases the 
accused appears in person. In civil cases infants appear by 
their guardians ad litem; lunatics by their committee; com- 
panies by a solicitor; friendly societies by the trustee or other 
officer appointed to sue or be sued on behalf thereof. 

APPENDICITIS, the modern medical term for inflammation 
of that part of the intestine which is known as the " appendix." 
Though not a new disease, there can be no doubt that it is far 
commoner than it used to be, though the explanation of this 
increased frequency is not yet forthcoming. Amongst the 
virulent micro-organisms associated with the disease no one 
specific germ has hitherto been found. It may be remarked that 
the theories that influenza, or the use of preserved foods, may 
be connected with the disease as cause and effect, have supporters. 
Sometimes the disease is due to the impaction of a pin, shot-corn, 
tooth-brush bristle, or fish-bone in the appendix, which has set 
up inflammation and ulceration. In many cases a patch of 
mortification with perforation of the appendix is caused by the 
presence of a hard faecal concretion, or " stercolith," which from 
its size, shape and appearance has been mistaken by a casual 
observer for a date-stone or cherry-stone. 

Apart from the fact of the more frequent occurrence of 
appendicitis, the disease is now better understood and more 
promptly recognized. It was formerly included under the term 
" perityphlitis "—that is, inflammation connected with the 
caecum or blind portion of the large intestine. But in the vast 
majority of cases the inflammation begins in the appendix, not 
in the intestine proper. It is apt to extend and set up a localized 
peritonitis, which in the worst cases may become general. 

Appendicitis is more often met with in the young than the old, 
and in boys rather than girls; and in some families there is a 
strange predisposition towards it. It is often started by a chill, 
or by over-exertion, and sometimes the attack follows a blow or 
strain, or some other direct injury, after which the virulent 
micro-organisms seize on the mucous membrane and involve the 
appendix in acute inflammation. 

The appendix is a narrow tube, about the size of a goose-quill, 
with an average length of 3 in. It terminates in a blunt point, 
and from its worm-like shape is called vermiformis. It is an 
appendage of the large intestine, into which it opens, and is 
regarded as the degenerate relic, surviving in man and other 
mammals, of an earlier form of intestine. Foreign bodies passing 
down the intestinal canal may find their way into the appendix 
and lodge there. Frequently the diseased appendix is found 
blocked by hard faeces or undigested particles of food, such a» 
nuts, fibrous vegetable matter, and other imperfectly masticated 
substances; inflammation may occur, however, without the 
presence of any impacted material. The appendix may be 



2l8 



APPENDICITIS 



twisted, bent, or otherwise strangulated, or its orifice may be 
blocked, so that the tube is distended with mucus which can find 
no outlet; or ulceration of tuberculous or malignant origin 
may occur. Inflammation started in the appendix is liable to 
spread to the peritoneum, and herein lies the gravity of the 
affection and the indication for treatment. The symptoms vary 
from " indigestion," and slight pain and sickness, which pass off 
in a few short days, to an exceedingly violent illness, which may 
cause death in a few hours. Pain is usually first felt in the 
belly, low down on the right side or across the region of the 
navel; sometimes, however, it is diffuse, and at other times it is 
scarcely complained of. There is some fever, the temperature 
rising to ioi° or 102 F., with nausea, and very likely with 
vomiting. The abdomen is tender to pressure, and the tenderness 
may be referred to the spot mentioned above. Some swelling 
may also be made out in that region. The attack may last for 
two, three or four days, and then subside. There are, however, 
other cases less well defined, in which the mischief pursues a 
latent course, producing little more than a vague abdominal 
uneasiness, until it suddenly advances into a violent stage. In 
some chronic cases the trouble continues, on and off, for months 
or even for years. 

On paper it is easy to arrange cases of appendicitis into three 
classes — catarrhal, ulcerative and mortifying — but in actual 

practice this is neither desirable 
nor possible. Such classification 
is based upon the symptoms, and 
in appendicitis symptoms may be 
actually misleading. The three 
conditions to which the surgeon 
chiefly looks for guidance are 
the aspect of the patient, the 
rate of his pulse and the degree 
of fever as shown by the ther- 
mometer. But in certain cases 
of appendicitis, though the sur- 
geon knows intuitively, or, at 
least, suspects, that the general 
condition is extremely serious, 
the patient looks fairly well and 
says that he is not in pain, his 
pulse-rate being but little quick- 
ened and his temperature being 
but slightly above normal. Nevertheless, when the surgeon 
has opened the belly in the appendix region, he finds the 
appendix swollen, perforated end mortified, and lying in a 
stinking abscess, whilst inflammation has already spread to 
the neighbouring coils of intestine. Unfortunately, the surgeon 
can no more tell what he is going to find at his operation in 
some of these cases than he can foretell the course which any 
particular case is going to run. 

We may most usefully give here the symptoms as they are 
likely to be found in an ordinary case of appendicitis, and 
as they may be observed by one who is not a member of the 
medical profession, in a way that may prove helpful to him when 
circumstances have awakened his interest in the disease. 

The case taken shall be that of a boy at school, for, as already 
stated, boys are more prone to the disease than girls. The boy 
has had, may be, occasional attacks of " indigestion " which 
have duly passed away under the influence of aperient medicines, 
and, being heated at play, he has sat down upon the cold ground. 
Or he has got wet through or over-tired during a long walk or 
ride. At any rate, his vital powers have been suddenly lowered, 
and the micro-organisms teeming in his bowel have seized upon 
the lining membrane of the appendix. He feels out of sorts, and 
if he manages to eat a meal he very likely vomits it soon after, 
for the whole nervous system of his abdomen is disturbed by 
the local inflammation. The act of vomiting gives slight relief, 
however, and probably he begins to complain of pains in his 
head as well as in his abdomen, and possibly he has an attack of 
shivering — the result of disturbance of his general nervous 
system. By this time he may be attacked with intense pain in 




Large Intestine showing Ver- 
miform Appendix (v.a.) and 
Caecum (c). 



the part of his abdomen a little above the middle of the right 
groin, and at that spot there may be a tenderness, and a feeling 
of resistance may be made out by the gentle pressure of the 
finger. In order to relax the pressure upon the tender area he 
probably lies with his right thigh slightly bent. By this time 
he may look ill, his face being slightly flushed, or pale and anxious. 
If the clinical thermometer is placed under his tongue, the index 
may rise a degree or two, perhaps several degrees, above normal, 
and his pulse may be quickened to 00 or 100 beats a minute. 
Perhaps it is a good deal quicker than this. Later, the skin of 
the lower part of the right side of the abdomen may be flushed 
or reddened. 

This clinical picture leaves no room for doubt. The boy has 
an attack of acute septic inflammation of his appendix. Let it 
be that the symptoms have come on quickly, and that the 
affection is not more than ten or twelve hours old; no one can 
tell precisely what course the disease is going to run. It may be 
that with rest in bed, constant fomentations, and absolute 
starvation, the inflammation will subside; but it is just as 
likely that in spite of this judicious treatment the symptoms 
will go from bad to worse, and that a belated operation will fail 
to rescue the boy from a general peritonitis which may end 
fatally. But at present, so far as one can tell, the disease is still 
limited to the appendix. And what, at this moment, is the best 
line of treatment? Some practitioners would answer — " Let 
the acute attack settle down,and then, after a week or ten days, 
when everything is quiet, remove the appendix, for statistics 
show that when the operation is done in the quiet interval the 
results are extremely favourable, whilst if it is done in the acute 
stage the outlook is not so bright." This is quite right. But 
one cannot be sure that the " quiet interval " will ever arrive. 
The case in question may be one of those which rapidly go on 
from bad to worse, and mortification and perforation of the 
appendix having taken place over some hard faecal concretion, 
general peritonitis is inevitable, with distension of the bowel and 
hopeless blood-poisoning. If it were certain that the attack of 
appendicitis would subside and become quiescent, it would be 
wise to wait. But it too often happens that the first attack is, 
indeed, the last. Acute appendicitis is one thing; relapsing; 
appendicitis is another. The latter condition is very manageable. 

Inasmuch, then, as it is impossible to know what direction 
the disease will take, whether to quiescence or to disaster, it is 
for the greatest good in the greatest number of cases that the 
inflamed appendix be removed by operation whilst the disease 
is still limited to the appendix. It is highly probable that if 
every available hospital surgeon were asked if he had ever had 
cause to regret having advised early operation in a case of 
appendicitis the answer would be "No "; on the other hand, 
every surgeon would be able to recall cases in which delay had 
been followed by disaster — which an early resort to operation 
would, in all probability, have prevented. 

If the disease is going to assume the severe form, all the 
symptoms, as a rule, increase in severity. The facial expression 
becomes more anxious, and the accumulation of gas in the 
paralysed intestine causes an increase in the abdominal disten- 
sion, so that the patient lies with his knees drawn up. The 
vomiting continues. The pulse quickens to 1 20 or 140 a minute, 
and the temperature rises, perhaps to 104 F. The swelling and 
tenderness increase on the right side of the abdomen, and if the 
abscess does not find escape externally it probably bursts into 
the general peritoneal cavity, and the patient becomes bathed 
in profuse sweat, the result of blood-poisoning. Death is likely 
to follow within two days, the result of blood-poisoning and 
exhaustion. 

Catarrhal and Relapsing Appendicitis. — Some cases of appendi- 
citis run a mild course, giving rise to no worse symptoms, perhaps, 
than those of " indigestion " and nausea, with a feeling of general 
discomfort in the abdomen, and, probably, some local tenderness. 
The attack may be preceded or accompanied by constipation. 
The administration of a mild aperient or an enema, rest, 
starvation and fomentation will probably put matters right 
again — at any rate for a time. 



APPENDICITIS 



219 



This form of the disease may be due to the presence of 
" bolted," unchewed or indigestible food in that part of the 
large intestine into which the appendix opens. And these mild 
recurrent attacks may sometimes be got rid of altogether by 
having the teeth put in order, and by inducing the individual 
to choose his food with discretion, to chew it carefully, to take 
his meals regularly and to eat slowly. 

Obviously, these attacks are very different from those of 
the acute septic form of the disease described above, though 
there is no telling that one of them may not develop into the 
acute form. Some of the mild attacks are due to a kink in the 
appendix, or to some other condition which temporarily prevents 
the secretions of the appendix from finding their way into the 
large intestine. Others of them are caused by a passing catarrhal 
inflammation of the lining of the appendix and have a distant 
resemblance to a recurring " sore throat." 

After undergoing one or two of these mild attacks the patient 
would be well advised to have his appendix removed when it has 
once more got into the " quiet stage." Experience abundantly 
shows that the operation can then be performed with but slight 
disturbance of the patient, and with the smallest possible amount 
of risk. And until his vulnerable appendix has been removed 
he is never safe. 

In the chronic form of the disease though the patient is never 
desperately ill he is never quite well. He has pains and dis- 
comfort in the abdomen, with slight tenderness and nausea, 
with " indigestion," as he may call it. And as one can never tell 
when the smouldering inflammation may break out into con- 
flagration, he is well advised to submit himself to operation 
without further delay. To carry about a diseased appendix is to 
run the constant risk of being laid up at a time most inconvenient, 
as when travelling or when staying in some place where skilled 
assistance is far distant or absolutely unobtainable. But having 
made up his mind that the appendix had better be removed, 
the patient can choose time, place and surgeon, and, having 
undergone a week's careful training for the ordeal, can safely 
count on being back at work again in a month or six weeks' 
time. 

As regards treatment, the greatest safety consists in the prompt 
removal of the inflamed appendix, and statistics show that if the 
operation can be done in the first or second day of even an acute 
attack, the result is generally favourable— that is to say, if the 
appendix can be removed whilst the disease is still shut up 
within its tissues. But in some cases ulceration and perforation, 
or mortification, may have taken place over a hard faecal 
concretion within the first twenty-four or forty-eight hours, 
and. the septic germs having been let loose, peritonitis may 
have already set in, and operation may be followed by dis- 
appointment. Still, if the case had been left unoperated on, 
no other result could have been expected. It was not to the 
operation, but to the intensely acute disease that the calamity 
must be attributed. 

Nature is marvellously clever in some of these cases in shutting 
off the area of the disease by glueing together the neighbouring 
coils of intestine, the limited local peritonitis causing the tissues 
to build themselves into a wall which securely shuts in the 
abscess cavity. But in other cases she seems helpless, no barrier 
being formed for limiting the area of disturbance. In such a 
case it is inevitable that disappointment must result from the 
surgeon delaying operation in the hope that delimitation might 
take place. And when at last he makes his incision he sees that 
the disease has had so long a start that his own chance of success 
is but a poor one. In a less severe attack, under the influence' of 
rest, starvation and fomentation, and in cases of chronic and of 
relapsing disease, the surgeon may watch and wait and choose 
his own time for operating. But when the symptoms are steadily 
increasing in severity he should urge an immediate incision. 
When, as often happens, the inflammation begins suddenly and 
severely, and, under the influence of treatment, steadily quiets 
down, the surgeon does well to delay operation. But in a fort- 
night or so, when everything has become once more quiet, he 
will urge the removal of the appendix, for this one attack is 



more than likely to be the forerunner of other attacks if the 
diseased appendix is left. 

The most serious cases are those in which the aspect, the 
pulse, and the temperature of the patient fail to give warning 
of a very advanced state of disease. Every surgeon of experience 
has met with cases in which, though there is nothing pointing 
to the fact that the patient is on the brink of a disaster, the 
operation has shown that the appendix is mortified, and that it 
is surrounded with abundant foul matter. It is then that he 
regrets not having operated a day or two earlier. Consequently 
it is a good rule to operate in all doubtful cases. In cases in 
which one happens to know that previous attacks have passed 
off under palliative treatment, there is no need for immediate 
operation; the quiet interval may be safely waited for. But 
in cases in which there is " no history," and in which the surgeon 
has nothing to guide him, the greatest safety is in prompt 
operation. 

If an attack of acute appendicitis is allowed to take its course 
unoperated on, abscess forms in the peritoneal cavity in the 
region of the appendix, but if already inflammation has happily 
glued the intestines together around that area, the pus is confined 
within definite limits. But as the abscess increases in size the 
demand for its evacuation becomes urgent. The pus, under the 
influence of a natural law, seeks its escape by the path of least 
resistance; sometimes this is into the intestine, and occasionally 
into the bladder. The most satisfactory course which it can take 
is through the wall of the abdomen and out above the right groin. 
As it is making its way in this direction the skin over that part 
becomes red, swollen, hot and tender, and the tissues between it 
and the skin become swollen and brawny. Rarely is fluctuation 
to be made out until the pus has worked its way close to the 
surface. Later, ulceration takes place in the undermined skin, 
and the stinking contents of the abscess escape, greatly to the 
relief of the patient. But long before this could happen the 
surgeon should have made an incision through the inflamed 
tissues in order to give nature some greatly needed help. For 
in many cases she allows the pus blindly to discover that the 
course of least resistance is not towards the surface of the 
abdomen but through the inflammatory barrier formed by the 
adherent coils of bowel, and so into the general peritoneal cavity. 
This unfortunate issue may give temporary relief to the patient, 
so that he says that he feels much better, and that his pain has 
nearly gone. But though his temperature may fall, his pulse is 
apt to quicken — an ominous coupling of symptoms; the para- 
lysed bowels become further distended, so that the lungs are 
pressed upon and breathing is embarrassed ; hiccough comes on ; 
and whether operation is now resorted to or not, a fatal end is 
highly probable. In other cases, the escaping pus finds its way 
up towards the liver and forms an abscess below the base of the 
lungs. 

If operation is performed when appendicitis has run on to 
the formation of abscess, and the diseased appendix presents 
itself, it should of course be removed; but if it does not present 
itself the surgeon should abstain from making a determined 
search for it, as in so doing he may break down the barrier which 
nature has provided, and thus himself become the means of 
spreading a septic peritonitis. Nor should he attempt to make 
clean the foul abscess cavity. All that he should do is to provide 
for efficient drainage. A large proportion of these cases do 
extremely well with incision and drainage, and in the subsequent 
healing of the cavity the wreckage of the appendix either under- 
goes disintegration or is rendered harmless for further anxiety. 

In some cases, however, the damaged appendix remains as a 
smouldering ember, ready at any moment to cause further con- 
flagration. This is made manifest by lingering pains, and by 
tenderness and warnings after the abscess has healed, and the 
patient will be well advised to have what is left of the appendix 
removed by operation at a time of quiescence. The operation, 
however, may turn out to be a very difficult one. Sometimes 
the wound by which the abscess has been evacuated, by nature 
or by art, refuses to heal 4 completely, a little discharge of a faecal 
odour continuing to escape. The small wound leads into a 



220 



APPENDICULATA— APPENZELL 



faecal fistula, and a bent probe passed along it would probably 
find its way into the bowel. The wound is likely to close of itself 
in due course; but if after many weeks of disappointment it 
still continues to discharge, the surgeon may advise an operation 
for its obliteration. 

It occasionally happens that after operation the scar of the 
wound in the abdominal wall yields under the pressure from 
within, and a bulging of the intestines beneath the skin occurs. 
This is called a ventral hernia, and if the patient cannot be made 
comfortable by wearing a truss with a large flat pad, an operation 
may be deemed advisable. 

If, in a case of appendicitis, for one reason or another operation 
is to be delayed, what treatment should be resorted to ? The 
patient should be put to bed with his knees resting over a pillow, 
and a large fomentation under oil silk should be laid over the 
lower part of the abdomen. No food should be given beyond 
an occasional sip of hot water. Purgatives should not be 
administered, as this would be to set in movement an inflamed 
piece of bowel. If the case is not acute, a large enema of soap 
and water with turpentine may be given, or, possibly, a dose of 
castor oil by the mouth. As a rule, however, it is unwise to set 
the bowels in vigorous action .until the diseased appendix has 
been removed. No opium should be given. 

Acute intestinal obstruction, cancer of the intestine, inflam- 
mation of the ovary, typhoid fever and renal and gallstone 
colic, are affections which are apt to be mistaken for appendicitis. 
The first of these resembles it most closely, and diagnosis is 
sometimes impossible without resort to operation. And it is a 
fortunate thing that, when error of diagnosis has been made, 
the operation which was designed for dealing with an inflamed 
appendix may be directed with equal advantage to the morbid 
condition which is found on opening the abdomen. In typhoid 
fever the characteristic temperature, the general condition of 
the patient, and the presence of delirium are differentiating 
signs of importance; in renal and gallstone colic the situation 
and the more paroxysmal character of the pain are usually 
distinctive. (E. O.*) 

APPENDICULATA, a zoological name introduced by E. Ray 
Lankester (preface to the English edition of C. Gegenbaur's 
Comparative Anatomy), and employed by the same writer in the 
oth edition of this encyclopaedia (article "Zoology") to denote the 
eighth phylum, or major division, of coelomate animals. The 
animals thus associated, the Rotifera, Chaetopoda and Arthro- 
poda, are composed of a larger or smaller number of hollow rings, 
each ring possessing typically a pair of hollow lateral appendages, 
moved by intrinsic muscles and penetrated by blood-spaces. 

APPENDINI, FRANCESCO MARIA (1768-1837), Italian 
historian and philologist, was born at Poirino, near Turin, on 
the 4th of November 1768. Educated at Rome, he took orders 
and was sent to Ragusa, where he was appointed professor of 
rhetoric. When the French seized Ragusa, Napoleon placed 
Appendini at the head of the Ragusan academy. After the 
Austrian Occupation he was appointed principal of a college at 
Zara, where he died in 1837. Appendini's chief work was his 
Nolizie I storico-critiche sulle Antichita, Storia, e Letter atura dei 
Ragusci (1802-1803). 

APPENZELL, one of the cantons of north-east Switzerland, 
entirely surrounded by the canton of St Gall; both were formed 
out of the dominions of the prince abbots of St Gall, whence the 
name Appenzell (abbatis cello). It is an alpine region, particu- 
larly in its south portion, where rises the Alpstein limestone 
range (culminating in the Santis, 8216 ft.), though towards the 
north the surface is composed rather of green hills, separating 
green hollows in which nestle neat villages and small towns. 
It is mainly watered by two streams that descend from the 
Santis, the Urnasch joining the Sitter (on which is the capital, 
Appenzell), which later flows into the Thur. There are light 
railways from Appenzell to St Gall either (i2§.m.) past Gais.or 
(20J m.) past Herisau, as well aslines from St Gall to Trogen 
(6 m.) and from Rorschach to Heiden (4J m.). Since 1597 it has 
been divided, for religious reasons, into two half-cantons, which 
are quite independent of each other, and differ in many points. 



The north and west portion or Ausser Rhoden has a total area 
of 93-6 sq. m. (of which 90-6 are classed as "productive"; 
forests covering 22-5 sq. m. and glaciers -038 sq. m.), with a 
population (in 1900) of 55,281, mainly German-speaking, and 
containing 49,797 Protestants as against 5418 Romanists. Its 
political capital is Trogen (q.v.), though the largest town is 
Herisau (q.v.), while Teufen has 4595 inhabitants, and Heiden 
(3745 inhabitants) in the north-east corner is the most frequented 
of the many goats' whey cure resorts for which the entire canton 
is .famous (Urnasch and Gais are also in Ausser Rhoden). This 
half-canton is divided into three administrative districts, 
comprising twenty communes, and is mainly industrial,the manu- 
facture of cotton goods, muslins, and embroidery being very 
flourishing. It sends one member (elected by the Landsgemeinde) 
to the federal Stdnderalh and three to the federal Nationalrath 
(elected by a direct popular vote). 

The south or more mountainous portion of Appenzell forms 
the half -canton of Appenzell, Inner Rhoden. It has a total area 
of 66-7 sq. m. (of which 62-8 sq. m. are classed as " productive," 
forests covering 12-8 sq. m. and glaciers -38 sq. m.), and a total 
population of 13,499, practically all German-speaking, and all but 
833 Romanists. Its political capital is Appenzell (q.v.), which is 
also the largest village, while Weissbad (near it) and Gonten are 
the best-known goats' whey cure resorts. Embroidery and 
muslins are made in this half-canton, though wholly at home by 
the work-people. But it is very largely pastoral, containing 168 
mountain pastures or "alps," maintaining each summer 4000 
cows, and of an estimated capital value of 2,682,955 francs (the 
figures for Ausser Rhoden are respectively 100 alps, 2800 cows, 
and 1,749,900 francs). Inner Rhoden is extremely conservative, 
and has the reputation of always rejecting any federal Referen- 
dum. For similar reasons it has preserved many old customs 
and costumes, those of the women being very elaborate and 
picturesque, while the herdsmen have retained their festival 
attire of red waistcoats, embroidered braces and canary-coloured 
shorts. It sends one member (named by the Landsgemeinde) to 
the federal Standerath, and one also to the federal Nationalrath, 
while it forms but a single administrative district, though divided 
into six communes. 

To the outer world the canton of Appenzell is best known by 
its institution of Lands gemeinden, or primitive democratic 
assemblies held in the open air, in which every male citizen 
(not being disqualified) over twenty years of age must (under a 
money penalty) appear personally: each half -canton has such 
an assembly of its own, that of Inner Rhoden always meeting 
at Appenzell, and that of Ausser Rhoden in the odd years at 
Hundwil (near Herisau) and in the even years at Trogen. This 
institution is of immemorial antiquity, and the meetings in either 
case are always held on the last Sunday in April. The Lands- 
gemeinde is the supreme legislative authority, and elects both the 
executive (in Inner Rhoden composed of nine members and called 
Standeskommission, and in Ausser Rhoden of seven members 
and called Regierungsrath) and the president or Landammann; 
in each half-canton there is also a sort of standing committee 
(composed of the members of the executive and representatives 
from the communes — in Inner Rhoden one member per 250 or 
fraction over 125 of the population, and in Ausser Rhoden one 
member per 1000 of the inhabitants) which prepares business for 
the Landsgemeinde and decides minor matters; in Inner Rhoden 
it is named the Grossrath and in Ausser Rhoden the Kantonsrath. 
As various old-fashioned ceremonies are observed at the meetings 
and the members each appear with his girded sword, the sight of 
a meeting of the Landsgemeinde is most striking and interesting. 
The existing constitution of Inner Rhoden dates mainly from 
1872, and that of Ausser Rhoden from 1876. 

By the middle of the nth century the abbots of St Gall had 
established their power in the land later called Appenzell, which, 
too, became thoroughly teufonized, its early inhabitants having 
probably been romanized Raetians-. But as early as 1377, this 
portion of the abbots' domains formed an alliance with the 
Swabian free imperial cities and adopted a constitution of its 
own. The repeated attempts of the abbots to put down ttys 



APPENZELL— APPIAN 



221 



independence of their rule were defeated in the battles of Vbgelin- 
segg (1403), north-west of Trogen, and of the Stoss (1405), 
the pass leading from Gais over to Altstatten in the Rhine valley. 
In 141 1 Appenzell was placed under the "protection" of the 
Swiss Confederation, of which, in 1452, it became an " allied 
member," and in 1513 a full member. Religious differences 
broke up the land after the Reformation into two portions, each 
called Rhoden, a term that in the singular is said to mean a 
" clearing," and occurs in 1070, long before the final separation. 
From 1 798 to 1 803 Appenzell, with the other domains of the abbot 
of St Gall, was formed into the canton Santis of the Helvetic 
Republic, but in 1803, on the creation of the new canton of St 
Gall, shrank back within its former boundaries. The oldest 
codes of the laws and customs of the land date from 1409 and 
1585, the original MS. of the latter (called the " Silver Book " 
from its silver clasps) being still used in Inner Rhoden when, at 
the close of the annual Lands gemeinde, the newly elected Landatn- 
mann first takes the oath of office, and the assembled members 
then take that of obedience to him, in either case with uplifted 
right hands. 

See also Appenzellische Jahrbilcher (3 series from 1854, Trogen); 
G. Baumberger, " Juhu-Juuhu " — Appenzellerland und Appen- 
zelkrleut' (Einsiedeln. 1903) ; J. G. Ebel, Schilderung d. Gebirgsvolker 
d. Schweiz, vol. i. (Leipzig, 1798); W. Kobelt, Die Alpwirthschaft 
im Kant. App. Inner Rhoden (Soleure, 1899); I. B. Richman, 
Appenzell (London, 1895); H. Ryffel, Die schweiz. Landsgemeinden 
(Zurich, 1903); J. J. Tobler and A. Striiby, Die Alpwirthschaft im 
Kant. App. Atisser Rhoden (Soleure, 1900); J. C. Zellweger, 
Geschichte d. app. Volkes (to 1597), 6 vols in 11 parts (Trogen, 
1830-1838); J.C. Zellweger, junior, Der Kant. App. (Trogen, 1867); 
A. Tobler, Das Volkslied im Appenzellerland (Basel, 1906) ; J. J. 
Blumer, Stoats- und Rechtsgeschichle d. schweiz. Demokratien (3 vols. 
St Gall, 1850-1859). (W. A. B. C.) 

APPENZELL, the political capital of the Inner Rhoden half 
of the Swiss canton of Appenzell. It is built in a smiling green 
hollow on the left bank of the Sitter stream, which is formed by 
the union of several mountain torrents descending from the 
Santis. By light railways it is 125 m. from St Gall past Gais or 
20J m. past Herisau. Its chief streets are paved, but it is rather 
a large village than a town, though in 1900 it had 4574 inhabit- 
ants, practically all German-speaking and Romanists. It has a 
stately modern parish church (attached to a Gothic choir), a 
small but very ancient chapel of the abbots of St Gall (whose 
summer residence was this village), and two Capuchin convents 
(one for men, founded in 1588, and one for women, founded in 
1613). Among the archives, kept in the sacristy of the church, 
are several banners captured by the Appenzellers in former 
days, among them one taken in 1406 at Imst, near Lanedeck, 
with the inscription Hundert Teufel, though popularly this 
number is multiplied a thousandfold. In the principal square 
the Lands gemeinde (or cantonal democratic assembly) is held 
annually in the open air on the last Sunday in April. The 
inhabitants are largely employed in the production of embroidery, 
though also engaged in various pastoral occupations. About 
2 5 m. by road south-east of Appenzell is Weissbad, a well-known 
goat's whey cure establishment, while if hours above it is the 
quaint little chapel of Wildkirchli, built (1648) in a rock cavern, 
on the way to the Santis. (W. A. B. C.) 

APPERCEPTION (Lat. ad and percipere, perceive), in 
psychology, a term used to describe the presentation of an 
object on which attention is fixed, in relation to the sum of 
consciousness previous to the presentation and the mind as a 
whole. The word was first used by Leibnitz, practically in the 
sense of the modern Attention (q.v.), by which an object is 
apprehended as " not-self " and yet in relation to the self. In 
Kantian terminology apperception is (1) transcendental — the 
perception of an object as involving the consciousness of the 
pure self as subject, and (2) empirical— the cognition of the self 
in its concrete existence. In (1) apperception is almost equivalent 
to self -consciousness; the existence of the ego may be more 
or less prominent, but it is always involved. According to J. F. 
Herbart {q.v.) apperception is that process by which an aggregate 
or" mass " of presentations becomes systematized {a-p perceptions- 
system) by the accretion of new elements, either sense-given or 



product of the inner workings of the mind. He thus emphasizes 
in apperception the connexion with the self as resulting from 
the sum of antecedent experience. Hence in education the 
teacher should fully acquaint himself with the mental develop- 
ment of the pupil, in order that he may make full use of what 
the pupil already knows. 

Apperception is thus a general term for all mental processes 
in which a presentation is brought into connexion with an 
already existent and systematized mental conception, and 
thereby is classified, explained or, in a word, understood; 
e.g. a new scientific phenomenon is explained in the light of 
phenomena already analysed and classified. The whole in- 
telligent life of man is, consciously or unconsciously, a process 
of apperception, inasmuch as every act of attention involves the 
appercipient process. 

See Karl Lange, Ueber Apperception (6th ed. revised, Leipzig, 
1899; trans. E. E. Brown, Boston, 1893); G. F. Stout, Analytic 
Psychology (London, 1896), bk. ii. ch. viii., and in general textbooks 
of psychology; also Psychology. 

APPERLEY, CHARLES JAMES (1 777-1843), English sports- 
man and sporting writer, better known as " Nimrod," the 
pseudonym under which he published his works on the chase 
and the turf, was born at Plasgronow, near Wrexham, in Denbigh- 
shire, in 1777. Between the years 1805 and 1820 he devoted 
himself to fox-hunting. About 182 1 he began to contribute to 
the Sporting Magazine, under the pseudonym of " Nimrod," a 
series of racy articles, which helped to double the circulation 
of the magazine in a year or two. The proprietor, Mr Pittman, 
kept for " Nimrod " a stud of hunters, and defrayed all expenses 
of his tours, besides giving him a handsome salary. The death 
of Mr Pittman, however, led to a law-suit with the proprietors 
of the magazine for money advanced, and Apperley, to avoid 
imprisonment, had to take up his residence near Calais (1830), 
where he supported himself by his writings. He died in London 
on the 19th of May 1843. The most important of his works are: 
Remarks on the Condition of Hunters, the Choice of Horses, &c. 
(1831); The Chase, the Turf, and the Road (originally written for 
the Quarterly Review), (1837); Memoirs of the Life of the Late 
John Mytton (1837); Nimrod's Northern Tour (1838); Nimrod 
Abroad (1842); The Horse and the Hound (a reprint from the 
seventh edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica) (1842) ; Hunting 
Reminiscences (1843). 

APPERT, BENJAMIN NICOLAS MARIE (1797-1847), French 
philanthropist, was born in Paris on the 10th of September 1797. 
While a young man he introduced a system of mutual instruction 
into the regimental schools of the department of the Nord. The 
success which it obtained induced him to publish a Manual 
setting forth his system. While engaged in teaching prisoners at 
Montaigu, he fell under the suspicion of having connived at the 
escape of two of them, and was thrown into the prison of La 
Force. On his release he resolved to devote the rest of his life 
to bettering the condition of those whose lot he had for a time 
shared, and he travelled much over Europe for the purpose of 
studying the various systems of prison discipline, and wrote 
several books on the subject. After the revolution of 1830 he 
became secretary to Queen Marie Amelie, and organized the 
measures taken for the relief of the needy. He was decorated 
with the Legion of Honour in 1833. 

His brother, Francois Appert (d. 1840), was the inventor of 
the method of preserving food by enclosing it in hermetically 
sealed tins; he left a work entitled Art de conserver les substances 
animates et vtgHables. 

APPIAN (Gr. ' Airmavos) , of Alexandria, Roman historian, 
flourished during the reigns of Trajan, Hadrian and Antoninus 
Pius. He tells us that, after having filled the chief offices in 
his native place, he repaired to Rome, where he practised as an 
advocate. When advanced in years, he obtained, by the good 
offices of his friend Fronto, the dignity of imperial procurator — 
it is supposed in Egypt. His work ('Pco/xtmcd) in twenty-four 
books, written in Greek, is rather a number of monographs than 
a connected history. It gives an account of various peoples and 
countries from the earliest times down to their incorporation 



222 



APPI ANI —APPLAUSE 



into the Roman empire. Besides a preface, there are extant 
eleven complete books and considerable fragments. In spite of 
its unattractive style, the work is very valuable, especially for 
the period of the civil wars. 

Editio princeps, 1551; Schweighauser, 1785; Bekker, 1852; 
Mendelssohn, 1878-1905. English translations: by W. B., 1578 
(black letter); J. D[avies], 1679; H. White, 1899 (Bohn's Classical 
Library); bk. i. ed. by J. L. Strachan-Davidson, 1902. 

APPIANI, ANDREA (1 754-181 7), the best fresco painter of his 
age, was born at Milan. He was made pensioned artist to the 
kingdom of Italy by Napoleon, but lost his allowance after the 
events of 1814 and fell into poverty. Correggio was his model, 
and his best pieces, which are in the church of Santa Maria presso 
San Celso and the royal palace at Milan, almost rival those of 
his great master. He also painted Napoleon and the chief 
personages of his court. Among the most graceful of his oil- 
paintings are his " Venus and Love," and " Rinaldo in the 
Garden of Armida." He is known as " the elder," to distinguish 
him from his great-nephew Andrea Appiani (1817-1865), an 
historical painter at Rome. Other painters of the same name 
were Niccolo Appiani (fl. 1510) and Francesco Appiani (1704- 
1792). 

APPIA, VIA, a high-road leading from Rome to Campania 
and lower Italy, constructed in 312 B.C. by the censor Appius 
Claudius Caecus. It originally ran only as far as Capua, but was 
successively prolonged to Beneventum, Venusia, Tarentum and 
Brundusium, though at what dates is unknown. Probably it 
was extended as far as Beneventum not long after the coloniza- 
tion of this town in 268 B.C., and it seems to have reached 
Venusia before 190 B.C. Horace, in the journey to Brundusium 
described in Sat. i. 5, followed the Via Appia as far as 
Beneventum, but not beyond. 

The original road was no doubt only gravelled (glarea strata) ; 
in 298 b.c. a footpath was laid saxo quadrato from the Porta 
Capena, by which it left Rome, to the temple of Mars, about 1 m. 
from the gate. Three years later, however, the whole road was 
paved with silex from the temple to Bovillae, and in 191 B.C. 
the first mile from the gate to the temple was similarly treated. 
The distance from Rome to Capua was 132 m. For the first few 
miles the road is flanked by an uninterrupted series of tombs 
and other buildings (see L. Canina, Via Appia, Rome, 1853). 
As far as Terracina it ran in an almost entirely straight line, 
even through the Alban Hills, where the gradients are steep. 
A remarkably fine embankment belonging to it still exists at 
Aricia. At Forum Appii it entered the Pomptine Marshes; 
that this portion (19 m. long, hence called Decennovium) belonged 
to the original road was proved by the discovery at Ad Medias 
(Mesa) of a milestone of about 250 B.C. (Ch. Hiilsen, in Rbmische 
Mitteilungen, 1889, 83; 1895, 301). A still older road ran along 
the foot of the Volscian mountains past Cora, Norba and Setia; 
this served as the post road until the end of the 18th century. 
At the time of Strabo and Horace, however, it was the practice 
to travel by canal from Forum Appii to Lucus Feroniae; to 
Nerva and Trajan were due the paving of the road and the repair 
of the bridges along this section. Theodoric in a.d. 486 ordered 
the execution of similar repairs, the success of which is recorded 
in inscriptions, but in the middle ages it was abandoned and 
impassable, and was only renewed by Pius VI. The older road 
crossed the back of the promontory at the foot of which Terracina 
stands; in imperial times, probably, the rock was cut away 
perpendicularly for a height of 120 ft. to allow the road to pass. 
Beyond Fundi it passed through the mountains to Formiae, the 
engineering of the road being noteworthy; and thence by 
Minturnae and Sinuessa (towns of the Aurunci which had been 
conquered in 314 B.C.) 1 to Capua. The remains of the road in 
this first portion are particularly striking. 

Between Capua and Beneventum, a distance of 32 m., the 
road passed near the defile of Caudium (see Caudine Forks). 
The modern highroad follows the ancient line, and remains of the 

1 It is important to note how the Romans followed up every 
victory with a road. 



latter, with the exception of three well-preserved bridges, which 
still serve for the modern highroad, are conspicuous by their 
absence. The portion of the road from Rome to Beneventum is 
described by Sir R. Colt Hoare, Classical Tour through Italy, 
57 seq. (London, 1819). He was accompanied on his journey, 
made in 1789, by the artist Carlo Labruzzi, who executed a series $ 
of 226 drawings, the greater part of which have not been pub- 
lished; they are described by T. Ashby in Melanges de I Ecole 
Francaise de Rome (1903), p. 375 seq., and Atti del Congresso Inter- 
nazionale per le Scienze Storiche, vol. v. (Rome, 1904), p. 125 seq. 
From Beneventum to Brundusium by the Via Appia, through 
Venusia and Tarentum, was 202 m. A shorter route, but more 
fitted for mule traffic, though Horace drove along part of it, 2 
ran by Aequum Tuticum, Aecae, Herdoniae, Canusium, Barium, 
and Gnatia (Strabo vi. 282); it was made into a main road bj 
Trajan, and took the name Via Traiana. The original road, too, 
adopted in imperial times a more devious but easier route by 
Aeclanum instead of by Trevicum. This was restored by 
Hadrian for the 15 m. between Beneventum and Aeclanum. 
Under Diocletian and Maximian a road (the Via Herculia) was 
constructed from Aequum Tuticum to Pons Aufidi near Venusia, 
where it crossed the Via Appia and went on into Lucania, passing 
through Potentia and Grumentum, and joining the Via Popilia 
near Nerulum. Though it must have lost much of its importance 
through the construction of the Via Traiana, the last portion 
from Tarentum to Brundusium was restored by Constantine 
about a.d. 315. 

The Via Appia was the most famous of Roman roads ; Statius, 
Silvae, ii. 2. 12, calls it longarum regina viarum. It was administered 
under the empire by a curator of praetorian rank, as were the other 
important roads of Italy. A large number of milestones and other 
inscriptions relating to its repair at various times are known. See 
Ch. Hiilsen in Pauly-Wissowa, Realencyclopadie, ii. 238 seq. (Stutt- 
gart, 1896). (T. As.) 

APPIN, a coast district of Argyllshire, Scotland, bounded W. 
by Loch Linnhe, S. by Loch Creran, E. by the districts of Bender- 
loch and Lome, and N. by Loch Leven. It lies north-east to 
south-west, and measures 14 m. in length by 7 m. in breadth. 
The scenery of the coast is extremely beautiful, and inland the 
country is rugged and mountainous. The principal hills are 
the double peaks of Ben Vair (3362 ft. and 3284 ft.) and Creag 
Ghorm (2372 ft.) in the north, and Fraochie (2883 ft.), Meall 
Ban (2148 ft.) and Ben Mhic na Ceisich (2093 ft.) near the right 
flank of Glen Creran. The chief streams are the Coe and Laroch, 
flowing into Loch Leven, the Duror and Salachan flowing into 
Loch Linnhe, and the Iola and Creran flowing into Loch Creran. 
The leading industries comprise slate and granite quarries and 
lead mining. Ballachulish, Duror, Portnacroish, Appin and 
Port Appin are the principal villages. Ballachulish and Port 
Appin are ports of call for steamers, and the Caledonian railway 
company's branch line from Connel Ferry to Ballachulish runs 
through the coast land and has stations at Creagan, Appin, 
Duror, Kentallen and Ballachulish Ferry. Appin was the country 
of a branch of the Stewarts. 

APPLAUSE (Lat. applaudere, to strike upon, clap), primarily 
the expression of approval by clapping of hands, &c; generally 
any expression of approval. The custom of applauding is doubt- 
less as old and as widespread as humanity, and the variety of its 
forms is limited only by the capacity for devising means of 
making a noise. Among civilized nations, however, it has at 
various times been subject to certain conventions. Thus the 
Romans had a set ritual of applause for public performances, 
expressing degrees of approval: snapping the finger and thumb, 
clapping with the flat or hollow palm, waving the flap of the toga, 

2 From Beneventum he followed the older line of the Via Appia 
to Trevicum ; thence, leaving the main road at Aquilonia, he went to 
Ausculum (" quod versu dicere non est "), the mod. Ascoli Satriano, 
by a by-road, for the milestones which have been found there, 
though they probably belong to the Via Traiana, cannot be in their 
original position, but must have been transplanted thither (Th. 
Mommsen in Corp. Inscrip. Lat., ix. 1883, No. 6016) — and on to 
Herdoniae (why Mommsen says that he left Herdoniae on the left, 
op. cit. p. 592, is not clear), where he joined the line of the later'Via 
Traiana. 



APPLE 



223 



for which last the emperor Aurelian substituted a handkerchief 
(orarium), distributed to all Roman citizens (see Stole). In 
the theatre, at the close of the play, the chief actor called out 
" Valete et plaudite! ", and the audience, guided by an unofficial 
choregus, chaunted their applause antiphonally. This was 
often organized and paid for (Bottiger, Uber das Applaudieren 
im Theater bei den Alten, Leipz., 1822). When Christianity 
became fashionable the customs of the theatre were transferred 
to the churches. Eusebius {Hist. Eccl. vii. 30) says that Paul 
of Samosata encouraged the congregation to applaud his preach- 
ing by waving linen cloths (odovais), and in the 4th and 5th 
centuries applause of the rhetoric of popular preachers had 
become an established custom. Though, however, applause 
may provide a healthy stimulus, its abuse has led to attempts 
at abolishing or restricting it even in theatres. The institution 
of the claque, people hired by performers to applaud them, has 
largely discredited the custom, and indiscriminate applause has 
been felt as an intolerable interruption to serious performances. 
The reverential spirit which abolished applause in church h?" 
tended to spread to the theatre and the concert-room, largtiy 
under the influence of the quasi-religious atmosphere of the 
Wagner performances at Baireuth. In Germany (e.g. the court 
theatres at Berlin) applause during the performance and 
" calling before the curtain " have been officially forbidden, but 
even in Germany this is felt to be in advance of public opinion. 
(See also Acclamation and Cheering.) 

APPLE (a common Teut. word, A.S. aepl, aeppel, O.H.G. aphul, 
aphal, apfal, mod. Ger. Apfel), the fruit of PyrusMalus, belonging 
to the sub-order Pomaceae, of the natural order Rosaceae. It 
is one of the most widely cultivated and best-known and appreci- 
ated of fruits belonging to temperate climates. In its wild state 
it is known as the crab-apple, and is found generally distributed 
throughout Europe and western Asia, growing in as high a 
latitude as Trondhjem in Norway. The crabs of Siberia belong 
to different species of Pyrns. The apple-tree as cultivated is a 
moderate-sized tree with spreading branches, ovate, acutely 
serrated or crenated leaves, and flowers in corymbs. The fruit is 
too well known to need any description of its external character- 
istics. The apple is successfully cultivated in higher latitudes 
than any other fruit tree, growing up to 65 N., but notwith- 
standing this, its blossoms are more susceptible of injury from 
frost than the flowers of the peach or apricot. It comes into 
flower much later than these trees, and so avoids the night 
frost which would be fatal to its fruit-bearing. The apples which 
are grown in northern regions are, however, small, hard, and 
crabbed, the best fruit being produced in hot summer climates, 
such as Canada and the United States. Besides in Europe and 
America, the fruit is now cultivated at the Cape of Good Hope, 
in northern India and China, and in Australia and New 
Zealand. 

Apples have been cultivated in Great Britain probably since 
the period of the Roman occupation, but the names of many 
varieties indicate a French or Dutch origin of much later date. 
In 1688 Ray enumerated seventy-eight varieties in cultivation 
in the neighbourhood of London, and now it is calculated that 
about 2000 kinds can be distinguished. According to the 
purposes for which they are suitable, they can be classed as — 
1st, dessert; 2nd, culinary; and 3rd, cider apples. The 
principal dessert apples are the Pippins (pepins, seedlings), of 
which there are numerous varieties. As culinary apples, besides 
Rennets and other dessert kinds, Codlins and Biffins are culti- 
vated. In England, Herefordshire and Devonshire are famous 
for the cultivation of apples, and in these counties the manu- 
facture of cider (q.v.) is an important industry. Cider is also 
extensively prepared in Normandy and in Holland. Verjuice is 
the fermented juice of crab apples. 

A large trade in the importation of apples is carried on in 
Britain, imports coming chiefly from French, Belgian and Dutch 
growers, and from the United States and British North America. 
Dried and pressed apples are imported from France for stewing, 
under the name of Normandy Pippins, and similarly prepared 
fruits come also from America. 



The apple may be propagated by seeds to obtain stocks for 
grafting, and also for the production of new varieties. The 
established sorts are usually increased by grafting, the method 
called whip-grafting being preferred. The stocks should be at 
least as thick as the finger; and should be headed back to where 
the graft is to be fixed in January, unless the weather is frosty, 
but in any case before vegetation becomes active. The scions 
should be cut about the same time, and laid in firmly in a trench, 
in contact with the moist soil, until required. 

The tree will thrive in any good well-drained soil, the best 
being a good mellow calcareous loam, while the less iron there is in 
the subsoil the better. The addition of marl to soils that are not 
naturally calcareous very much improves them. The trees are 
liable to canker in undrained soils or those of a hot sandy nature. 
Where the soil is not naturally rich enough, it should be well 
manured, but not to the extent of encouraging over-luxuriance. 
It is better to apply manure in the form of a compost than to use 
it in a fresh state or unmixed. 

To form an orchard, standard trees should be planted at from 
2 5 to 40 ft. between the rows, according to the fertility of the soil 
and other considerations. The trees should be selected with 
clean, straight, self-supporting stems, and the head should be 
shapely and symmetrical, with the main branches well balanced. 
In order to obtain such a stem, all the leaves on the first shoot 
from the graft or bud should be encouraged to grow, and in the 
second season the terminal bud should be allowed to develop a 
further leading shoot, while the lateral shoots should be allowed 
to grow, but so that they do not compete with the leader, on 
which the growth of leaves should be encouraged in order that 
they may give additional strength to the stem below them. The 
side shoots should be removed gradually ; so that the diminution of 
foliage in this direction may not exceed the increase made by the 
new branches and shoots of the upper portion. Dwarf pyramids, 
which occupy less space than open dwarfs, if not allowed to grow 
tall, may be planted at from 10 to 12 ft. apart. Dwarf bush trees 
may be planted from 10 to 15 ft. apart, according to the variety 
and the soil. Dwarf bushes on the Paradise stock are both orna- 
mental and useful in small gardens, the trees being always 
conveniently under control. These bush trees, which must be 
on the proper stock — the French Paradise — may be planted at 
first 6 ft. apart, with the same distance between the rows, the 
space being afterwards increased, if desired, to 12 ft. apart, by 
removing every alternate row. 

" Cordons " are trees trained to a single shoot, the laterals of 
which are kept spurred. They are usually trained horizontally, 
at about ij ft. from the ground, and may consist of one stem or 
of two, the stems in the latter case being trained in opposite 
directions. In cold districts the finer sorts of apples may be 
grown against walls as upright or oblique cordons. From these 
cordon trees very fine fruit may often be obtained. The apple may 
also be grown as an espalier tree, a form which does not require 
• much lateral space. The ordinary trained trees for espaliers and 
walls should be planted 20 ft. apart. 

The fruit of the apple is produced on spurs which form on the 
branchlets of two years old and upwards, and continue fertile for 
a series of years. The principal pruning should be performed in 
summer, the young shoots if crowded being thinned out, and the 
superabundant laterals shortened by breaking them half through. 
The general winter pruning of the trees may take place any time 
from the beginning of November to the beginning of March, in 
open weather. The trees are rather subject to the attacks of the 
American blight, the white cottony substance found on the bark 
and developed by an insect (Eriosoma malt), somewhat similar 
to the green-fly of the garden, but not a true aphis. It may be 
removed by scrubbing with a hard brush, by painting the affected 
spots with any bland oil, or by washing them with dilute paraffin 
and soft soap. ; 

The apple-blossom weevil (Anthonomus pomorum), a small 
reddish-brown beetle, often causes serious damage to the flowers. 
The female bores and lays an egg in the unopened bud, and the 
maggot feeds on the stamens and pistil. The weevil hibernates 
in the crannies of the bark or in the soil at the base of the trees, 



224 



APPLEBY— APPLETON 



and bandages of tarred cloth placed round the stem in spring 
will prevent the female from crawling up. 

The codlin moth (Carpocapsa pomonana) lays its eggs in May 
in the calyx of the flowers. The young caterpillar, which is 
white with black head and neck, gnaws its way through the fruit, 
and pierces the rind. When nearly full grown it attacks the core, 
and the fruit soon drops. The insect emerges and spins its 
cocoon in a crack of the bark. 

To check this disease the apples which fall before ripening 
should be promptly removed. A loosely made hay-band twisted 
round the stem about a foot from the ground is of use. The 
grubs will generally choose the bands in which to make their 
cocoon; at the end of the season the bands are collected and 
burned. 

The following are a few of the most approved varieties of the 
apple tree, arranged in order of their ripening, with the months 
in which they are in use:— 

Dessert Apples. 

White Juneating July 

Early Red Margaret Aug. 

Irish Peach Aug. 

Devonshire Quarrenden Aug., Sept. 

Duchess of Oldenburg Aug., Sept. 

Red Astrachan Sept. 

Kerry Pippin Sept., Oct. 

Peasgood's Nonesuch Sept.-Nov. 

Sam Young Oct.-Dec. 

King of the Pippins Oct.-Jan. 

Cox s Orange Pippin Oct.-Feb. 

Court of Wick Oct.-Mar. 

Blenheim Pippin Nov.-Feb. 

Sykehouse Russet Nov.-Feb. 

Fearn's Pippin Nov.-Mar. 

Mannington's Pearmain Nov.-Mar. 

Margil Nov.-Mar. 

Ribston Pippin Nov.-Mar. 

Golden Pippin Nov.-Jan. 

Reinette de Canada Nov.-Apr. 

Ashmead's Kernel Nov.-Apr. 

White Winter Calville (grown under glass) . Dec-Mar. 

Braddick's Nonpareil Dec-Apr. 

Court-pendu Plat Dec -Apr. 

Northern Spy Dec-May 

Cornish Gilliflower Dec-May 

Scarlet Nonpareil Jan.-Mar. 

Cockle's Pippin Jan.-Apr. 

Lamb Abbey Pearmain Jan.-May 

Old Nonpareil Jan.-May 

Duke of Devonshire Feb.-May 

Sturmer Pippin Feb.-June 

Kitchen Apples. 

Keswick Codlin . . . . . . Aug.-Sept. 

Lord Suffield Aug.-Sept. 

Manks Codlin Aug.-Oct. 

Ecklinville Seedling Aug.-Nov. 

Stirling Castle Aug.-Nov. 

New Hawthornden Sept.-Oct, 

Stone's Seedling Sept.-Nov. 

Emperor Alexander Sept.-Dec. 

Waltham Abbey Seedling Sept.-Jan. 

Cellini Oct., Nov. 

Gravenstein Oct.-Dec. 

Hawthornden Oct.-Dec. 

Baumann's Red Winter Reinette . . Nov.-Mar. 

Mere de Manage Oct.-Mar. 

Beauty of Kent Oct.-Feb. 

Yorkshire Greening Oct.-Feb. 

Gloria Mundi . , Nov.-Jan. 

Blenheim Pippin Nov.-Feb. 

Tower of Glammis Nov.-Feb. 

Warner's King Nov.-Mar. 

Alfriston Nov.-Apr. 

Northern Greening Nov.-Apr. 

Reinette de Canada Nov.-Apr. 

Bess Pool Nov.-May 

Winter Queening Nov.-May 

Lane's Prince Albert Oct.-May 

Norfolk Beaufin . . . . Nov.-July 

Apples for table use should have a sweet juicy pulp and rich 
aromatic flavour, while those suitable for cooking should possess 
the property of forming a uniform soft pulpy mass when boiled 
or baked. In their uncooked state they are not very digestible, 



but when cooked they form a very safe and useful food, exercising 
a gentle laxative influence. 

According to Hutchison their composition is as follows: — 



Fresh . 
Dried . 


Water. 


Pro- 
teid. 


Ether 
Extract. 


Carbo- 
hydrate. 


Ash. 


Cellu- 
lose. 


Acids. 


82-5 
3&-2 


0-4 
1-4 


o-5 
3-0 


12-5 
49-1 


0-4 
1-8 


2-7 
4'9 


1-0 

3-6 



Many exotic fruits, having nothing in common with the apple ; 
are known by that name, e.g. the Balsam apple, Momordica 
Balsamina; the custard apple (q.v.), Anona reticulata; the egg 
apple, Solatium esculentum; the rose apple, various species of 
Eugenia; the pineapple (q.v.), Ananas sativus; the star apple, 
Chrysophyllum Cainito; and the apples of Sodom, Solanum 
sodomeum. (A. B.-R.) 

APPLEBY, a market town and municipal borough, and 
the county town of Westmorland, England, in the Appleby 
parliamentary division, 276 m. N.N.W. from London, on the 
Midland and a branch of the North Eastern railways. Pop. 
(iqoi) 1764. It is picturesquely placed in the valley of the Eden, 
which is richly wooded, and flanked on the north-east by spurs of 
Milburn Forest and Dufton and other fells, which rise up to 
2600 ft. On a hill above the town stands the castle, retaining a 
fine Norman keep and surrounded by a double moat, now partly 
laid out as gardens. The remainder of the castle was rebuilt as a 
mansion in the 17th century. It was held for the royalists in the 
civil wars by Sir Philip Musgrave, and was the residence of Anne, 
countess of Pembroke, the last of the family of Clifford, which 
had great estates in this part of England. St Ann's hospital 
for thirteen poor women (1654) was of her foundation. The 
grammar school (1453) was refounded by Queen Elizabeth. 
The modern incorporation dates from 1885, with a mayor, four 
aldermen and twelve councillors. Area, 1876 acres. 

Appleby is not mentioned in any Saxon records, but after 
the Conquest it rose to importance as the head of the barony 
of Appleby which extended over the eastern portion of the 
present county of Westmorland. This barony formed part of 
the province of Carlisle granted by Henry I. to Ranulf Meschin, 
who erected the castle at Appleby and made it his place of 
residence. Appleby is a borough by prescription, and the old 
charter of incorporation, granted in the first year of James II., 
was very shortly abandoned. In 1292 we find the mayor and 
commonalty claiming the right to elect a coroner and to have 
tolls of markets and fairs. In 1 68 5 the governing body comprised 
a mayor, aldermen, a town clerk, burgesses of the common 
council, a coroner and subordinate officers. An undated charter 
from Henry II. conceding to the burgesses the customs of York, 
Was confirmed in 1 John, 16 Henry III., 14 Edward I., and 
5 Edward III. John granted the borough to the burgesses for 
a fee-farm rent. The impoverishment caused by the Scottish 
raids led to its seizure by Edward II. for arrears of payment, 
but Edward III. restored it on the same terms as before. Henry 
VIII. reduced the fee-farm rent from 20 marks to 2 marks, after 
an inquisition which found that Appleby was burnt by the Scots 
in 1388 and that part of it still lay in ruins. The town, however, 
never seems to have regained its prosperity, and 16th and 17th 
century writers speak of it as a poor and insignificant village. 
Appleby returned two members to parliament from 1295 until 
disfranchised by the Reform Act of 1832. The market and the 
St Lawrence fair are held by prescription. James I. granted an 
additional fair on the second Thursday in April. In the early 
1 8th century Appleby was celebrated for the best corn-market 
in the country. 

See Victoria County History, Westmorland; W. Hewitson, Appleby 
Charters (Cumberl. and Westm. Antiq. and Archaeol. Soc, Transac- 
tions, xi. 279-285; Kendal, 1891). 

APPLETON, NATHAN (1779-1861) American merchant and 
politician, was born in New Ipswich, New Hampshire, on the 
6th of October 1779. He was educated in the New Ipswich 
Academy, and in 1794 entered mercantile life in Boston, in the 
employment of his brother, Samuel (1766-1853), a successful and 
benevolent man of business, with whom he was in partnership 



APPLETON— -APPOINTMENT 



2 25 



from 1800 to 1800. He co-operated with Francis C.Lowell and 
others in introducing the power-loom and the manufacture of 
cotton on a large scale into the United States, a factory being 
established at Waltham, Massachusetts, in 1814, and another 
in 1822 at Lowell, Massachusetts, of which city he was one of 
the founders. He was a member of the general court of Massa- 
chusetts in 1816, 1821, 1822, 1824 and 1827, and in 1831-1833 
and 1842 of the national House of Representatives, in which he 
was prominent as an advocate of protective duties. He died in 
Boston on the 14th of July 1861. 

His son, Thomas Gold Appleton (181 2-1884), who graduated 
at Harvard in 1831, had some reputation as a writer, an artist 
and a patron of the fine arts, but was better known for his 
witticisms, one of which, the oft-quoted " Good Americans, 
when they die, go to Paris," is sometimes attributed to Oliver 
Wendell Holmes. He published some poems and, in prose, 
Nile Journal (1876), Syrian Sunshine (1877), Windfalls (1878), 
and Chequer-Work (1879). 

See the memoir of Nathan Appleton by Robert C. Winthrop 
(Boston, 1861); and Susan Hale's Life and Letters of Thomas Gold 
Appleton (New York, 1885). 

APPLETON, a city and the county-seat of Outagamie county, 
Wisconsin, U.S.A., on the lower Fox river, about 90 m. N. of 
Milwaukee. Pop. (1890) 11,869; {^9°°) i5>o85, of whom 3605 
were foreign-born; (1910, census) 16,773. It is served by the 
Chicago & North-Western, and the Chicago, Milwaukee & St 
Paul railways, and by steamboats on the Fox river, by means of 
which it meets lake transportation at De Pere arid Green Bay. 
Appleton was one of the first cities in the United States to have 
an electric street railway line in operation; and electric street 
railways now traverse the entire Fox river valley as far as 
Fond du Lac on the south and Green Bay on the north. The 
city is attractively laid out on high bluffs above the river. 
It has several beautiful parks, two hospitals, a number of fine 
churches and school buildings, and a public library. The city 
is the seat of Lawrence college (changed from university in 1908), 
an interdenominational (originally a Methodist Episcopal) 
co-educational institution, founded in 1847 as the Lawrence 
Institute of Wisconsin and named in honour of Amos Adams 
Lawrence (1814-1886) of Boston, son of Amos Lawrence, and 
giver of $10,000 for the founding of the Institute. The college 
comprises an academy, a college of liberal arts, a school of 
expression, a school of commerce, schools of music and of art, 
and a school of correspondence; and in 1007-1908 had 33 
instructors, 575 students and a library of 24,400 volumes. The 
Fox river furnishes about 10,000 h.p., which is largely utilized 
for the manufacture of paper (of which Appleton is one of the 
largest producers in the United States), wood-pulp, sulphite 
fibre, machinery, wire screens, woollen goods, knit goods, furni- 
ture, dyes and flour. The total value of factory products in 
1905 was $6,672,457, an increase of 72-8 % over the product 
value of 1900. Appleton was first permanently settled in 1833, 
and was named in honour of Samuel Appleton of Massachusetts, 
who owned part of the original town plot. It was incorporated 
as a village in 1853, and received in 1857 a city charter, which 
was revised in 1887 and in 1905. 

APPOGGIATURA (from Ital. appoggiare, to lean upon), a 
musical term for a melodic ornament, a grace-note prefixed to a 
principal note and printed in small character. The effect is 
to suspend the principal note, by taking away the time-value of 
the appoggiatura prefixed to it. There are two kinds, the long 
appoggiatura, now usually printed as played, and the short, 
where the suspension of the principal note is scarcely perceptible; 
this is often called acciatura, a word properly applied to an 
ornament now obsolete, in which a principal note in a melody is 
struck together with the note immediately below, the lower note 
being at once released and the other held on. 

APPOINTMENT, POWER OF, in English law, an authority 
reserved by or limited to a person, to dispose, either wholly or 
partially, of real or personal property, either for his own benefit 
or for that of others. Thus if A settle property upon trustees 
to such uses as B shall by deed or will appoint and in default of 



and until such appointment to the use of C and his heirs, B, 
though he has no interest in the property, can at any time 
appoint the property to any one he pleases, including himself, 
and C's interest which has hitherto been vested in him will be 
divested. In the above case A is said to be the donor, B the 
donee, and the persons in whose favour the appointment is 
exercised are called the appointees. Such powers are either 
general or limited. A general power is one which the appointor 
may exercise in favour of any person he pleases. It is obvious 
that such a power is very nearly equivalent to ownership, and 
consequently property which is the subject of a general power 
has been made to share the liabilities of ownership. By the 
Judgments Act 1838 all hereditaments over which a judgment 
debtor has such a power may be seized by the sheriff under a 
writ of elegit, and by the Bankruptcy Act 1883 similar property 
will vest in the trustees of a bankrupt. By the Finance Act 1894 
property of which the deceased had a general power of appoint- 
ment is subject to the payment of estate duty, even though the 
power has not been exercised. A limited power is one which 
can only be exercised in favour of certain specified persons or 
classes; such a power is frequently inserted in marriage settle- 
ments in which after life estates to the husband and wife a power 
is given to appoint among the children of the marriage. In such 
a case no appointment to any one but children of the marriage is 
valid. Formerly it was held that the intention of the donor of 
such a power was that each of the class which are the objects of 
the power should take some part of the fund, and from this arose 
the equitable doctrine of illusory appointments, by which the 
courts of equity set aside an appointment which was good at 
law on the ground that a merely nominal share had been 
appointed to one of the objects. The great difficulty of deciding 
what was a nominal or illusory share caused the passing of the 
Illusory Appointments Act of 1830, whereby it was enacted 
that no appointment should be set aside merely on the ground 
that a share appointed was illusory. It was still necessary, 
however, that some share should be appointed to each object, 
and consequently it was possible in the popular phrase to be 
" cut off with a shilling," but now by the Powers Amendment Act 
1874 the appointor is no longer obliged to appoint a share to 
each object of the power. 

It is a general rule that every circumstance required by the 
instrument creating the power to accompany the execution of it 
must be strictly observed. Thus it might be required that the 
appointment should be by an instrument witnessed by four 
witnesses, or that the consent in writing of some third party 
should be signified. The general rule, however, has been modified 
both by statute and by the rules of equity. By the Wills Act 1837 
a will made pursuant to the requirements of that statute shall be 
a valid execution of a power of appointment by will, notwith- 
standing that some additional form or solemnity shall have been 
required by the instrument creating the power, and by the Wills 
Act 1 86 1 a will made out of the United Kingdom by a British 
subject according to the forms required by the law of the place 
where the will was made shall, as regards personal estate, be 
held to be well executed and admitted to probate ; consequently 
it has been held that an appointment made by such a will is a 
valid exercise of the power. As regards appointments by deed 
the Law of Property Amendment Act 1859 enacts that a deed 
attested by two witnesses shall, so far as execution and attesta- 
tion go, be a valid exercise of a power to appoint by deed. The 
courts of equity also will interfere in some cases of defective 
execution in order to carry out the intentions of the settlor. 
The principle upon which the court acts is obscure, but the rule 
has been thus stated:—" Whenever a man having power over 
an estate, whether ownership or not, in discharge of moral or 
natural relations, shows an intention to execute such power, 
the court will operate upon the conscience of the heir (or of the 
persons entitled in default) to make him perfect this intention." 
Equity, however, only relieves against defects not of the essence 
of the power, such as the absence of seal or execution by will 
inste?td of deed, but where the defect is of the essence of the 
power, as where a consent is not obtained, equity will not assist, 

11 



226 



APPOMATTOX COURT HOUSE— APPORTIONMENT 



nor will it relieve where a power to appoint by will is purported 
to be exercised by deed. A power of appointment if exercised 
must be exercised bona fide, otherwise it will be void as fraudu- 
lent; thus it has been frequently decided that where a father, 
having a limited power of appointment among his children, 
appoints the whole fund to an infant child, who is in no need 
of the appointment and who is ill, in the expectation of the 
death of the child whereby the fund will come to him as next of 
kin, such appointment is void as a fraud upon the power. Where 
an execution is partly fraudulent and partly valid the court will, 
if possible, separate the two and only revoke that which is 
fraudulent; if, however, the two parts are not separable the 
whole is void. The same rule is applied in cases of excessive 
execution where the power is exercised in favour of persons 
some of whom are and some of whom are not objects of the power. 
The doctrine of Election (q.v.) applies to appointments under 
powers, but there must be a gift of free and disposable property 
to the persons entitled in default of appointment. 

The appointment must in law be read into the instrument 
creating the power in lieu of the power itself. Thus an appointor 
under a limited power cannot appoint to any person to whom the 
donor could not have appointed by reason of the rule against 
perpetuities, but this is not so in the case of a general power, 
for there the appointor is virtually owner of the property 
appointed. In applying this rule to appointments a distinction 
arises between powers created by deed and will, for a deed 
speaks from the date of its execution but a will from the death 
of the testator, and so limitations bad when the will was made 
may have become good when it comes into operation. Since the 
Conveyancing Act 1881 all powers may be released by the 
donees thereof, unless the power is coupled with a trust in 
respect of which there is a duty cast on the donee to exercise it; 
and this is so even though the donee gets a benefit by such 
release as one entitled in default of appointment, for this is not 
a fraud upon the power. (E. S. M. B.) 

APPOMATTOX COURT HOUSE, a village of Appomattox 
county, Virginia, U.S.A., 25 m. E. of Lynchburg, in the S. 
part of the state. It is served by the Norfolk & Western railway. 
The village was the scene of the surrender of the Confederate 
Army of Northern Virginia under General Robert E. Lee to 
the Federal forces under Lieutenant-General U. S. Grant on 
Sunday the 9th of April 1865. The terms were: " the officers to 
give their individual paroles not to take up arms against the 
government of the United States until properly exchanged, 
and each company or regimental commander to sign a like 
parole for the men of their commands," . . . neither " side arms 
of the officers nor their private horses or baggage " to be sur- 
rendered; and, as many privates in the Confederate Army 
owned horses and mules, all horses and mules claimed by men 
in the. Confederate Army to be left in their possession. 

APPONYI, ALBERT, Count (1846- ), Hungarian states- 
man, the most distinguished member of an ancient noble family, 
dating back to the 13th century, and son of the chancellor 
Gyorgy Apponyi (1808-1899) and the accomplished and saintly 
Countess Julia Sztaray, was born at Pesth on the 29th of May 
1846. Educated at the Jesuit seminary at Kalksburg and at the 
universities of Vienna and Pesth, a long foreign tour completed 
his curriculum, and at Paris he made the acquaintance of 
Montalembert, a kindred spirit, whose influence on the young 
Apponyi was permanent. He entered parliament in 1872 as a 
liberal Catholic, attaching himself at first to the Deak party; 
but the feudal and ultramontane traditions of his family circle 
profoundly modified, though they could never destroy, his 
popular ideals. On the break up of the Deak party he attached 
himself to the conservative group which followed Baron Pal 
Senynyey (1824-1888) and eventually became its leader. Until 
1905 Count Albert was constantly in opposition, but in May of 
that year he consented to take office in the second Wekerle 
ministry. A lofty and magnetic orator, his speeches were 
published at Budapest in 1896; and he is the author of an 
interesting dissertation, Esthetics and Politics, the Artist and the 
Statesman (Hung.) (Budapest, 1895). 



APPORTIONMENT (Fr. apportionment; Med. Lat. appor- 
tionamentum; derived from Lat. portio, share), distribution or 
allotment in proper shares; a term used in law in a variety of 
senses. (1) Sometimes it is employed roughly and with no 
technical meaning to indicate the distribution of a benefit (e.g. 
salvage or damages under the Fatal Accidents Act 1846, § 2), or 
liability (e.g. general average contributions, or tithe rent-charge), 
or the incidence of a duty (e.g. obligations as to the maintenance 
of highways). (2) In its strict legal interpretation apportion- 
ment falls into two classes, " apportionment in respect of 
estate " and " apportionment in respect of time." 

1. Apportionment in respect of Estate may result either from the 
act of the parties or from the operation of law. Where a lessee 
is evicted from*, or surrenders or forfeits possession of part of 
the property leased to him, he becomes liable at common law 
to pay only a rent apportioned to the value of the interest which 
he still retains. So where the person entitled to the reversion of 
an estate assigns part of it, the right to an apportioned part of the 
rent incident to the whole reversion passes to his assignee. The 
lessee is not bound, however, by an apportionment of rent 
made upon the grant of part of the reversion unless it is made 
either with his consent or by the verdict of a jury. The assignee 
of the reversion of part of demised premises could not, at common 
law, re-enter for breach of a condition, inasmuch as a condition 
of re-entry in a lease could not at common law be apportioned. 
But this has now been altered by statute both in England (Law 
of Property Amendment Act 1859, § 3; Conveyancing Act 1881, 
§ 1 2) and in many of the British colonies (e.g. Ontario, Rev. Stats., 
1897, c. 170, § 9; Barbados, No. 12 of 1891, § 9). In the cases 
just mentioned there is apportionment in respect of estate by act 
of the parties. 

Apportionment by operation of law may be brought about where 
by act of law a lease becomes inoperative as regards its subject- 
matter, or by the " act of God " (as, for instance, where part of an 
estate is submerged by the encroachments of the sea). To the same 
category belongs the apportionment of rent which takes place under 
various statutes (e.g. the Lands Clauses Consolidation Act 1845, 
§ 119, when land is required for public purposes; the Agricultural 
Holdings Act 1883, § 41, in the case of a tenant from year to year 
receiving notice to quit part of a holding; and the Irish Land Act 
I9°3> § 61, apportionment of quit and crown rents). 

2. Apportionment in respect of Time. — At common law, there 
was no apportionment of rent in respect of time. Such apportion- 
ment was, however, in cef tain cases allowed in England by the 
Distress for Rent Act 1737, and the Apportionment Act 1834, 
and is npw allowed generally under the Apportionment Act 1870. 
Under that statute (§ 2) all rents, annuities, dividends and other 
periodical payments in the nature of income are to be considered 
as accruing from day to day and to be apportionable in respect 
of time accordingly. It is provided, however, that the appor- 
tioned part of such rents, &c, shall only be payable or recover- 
able in the case of a continuing payment, when the entire portion 
of which it forms part itself becomes payable, and, in the case 
of a payment determined by re-entry, death or otherwise, only 
when the next entire portion would have been payable if it had 
not so determined (§ 3). Persons entitled to apportioned parts 
of rent have the same remedies for recovering them when payable 
as they would have had in respect of the entire rent; but a lessee 
is not to be liable for any apportioned part specifically. The rent 
is recoverable by the heir or other person who would, but for the 
apportionment, be entitled to the entire rent, and he holds it 
subject to distribution (§ 4). The Apportionment Act 1870 
extends to payments not made under any instrument in writing 
(§2), but not to annual sums made payable in policies of insurance 
(§ 6). Apportionment under the act can be excluded by express 
stipulation. 

The apportionment created by this statute is " apportionment 
in respect of time." The cases to which it applies are mainly 
cases of either (A) apportionment of rent due under leases where 
at a time between the dates fixed for payment the lessor or lessee 
dies, or some other alteration in the position of parties occurs; 
or (B) apportionment of income between the representatives of a 
limited owner and the remainder-man when the limited interest 



APPORTIONMENT BILL— APPREHENSION 



227 



determines at a time between the date when such income became 
due. 

(A) With regard to the former of these classes, it may be noticed 
that although apportioned rent becomes payable only when the 
whole rent is due, the landlord, in the case of the bankruptcy of an 
ordinary tenant, may prove for a proportionate part of the rent up 
to the date of the receiving order (Bankruptcy Act 1883, Sched. ii. 
r. 19); and that a similar rule holds good in the winding up of a 
company (in re South Kensington Co-operative Stores, 1881, 17 
Ch.D. 161); and further that the act of 1870 applies to the liability 
to pay, as well as to the right to receive, rent (in re Wilson, 1893, 
62 L.J.Q.B. 628, 632). Accordingly where an assignment of a 
lease is made between two half-yearly rent-days, the assignee is not 
liable to pay the full amount of the half-year's rent falling due on the 
rent-day next after the date of the assignment, but only an appor- 
tioned part of that half-year's rent, computed from the last men- 
tioned date (Glass v. Patterson, 1902, 2 Ir.R. 660). 

(B.) With regard to the apportionment of income, the only points 
requiring notice here are that all dividends payable by public 
companies are apportionable, whether paid at fixed periods or not, 
unless the payment is, in effect, a payment of capital (§ 5). 

The Apportionment Act 1870 extends to Scotland and Ireland. 
It has been followed in many of the British colonies (e.g. Ontario, 
Rev. Stats., 1897, c. 170, §§ 4-8; New Zealand, No. 4 of 1886; 
Tasmania, No. 8 of 1871; Barbados, No. 12 of 1891, §§ 9-12). 
Similar legislation has been adopted in many of the states of the 
American Union, where, as in England, rent was not, at common 
law, apportionable as to time (Kent, Comm. iii. 469-472). 

An equitable apportionment, apart from statute law, arises where 
property is bequeathed on trust to pay the income to a tenant 
for life and the reversion to others, and the realization of the 
property in the form of a fund capable of producing income is 
postponed for the benefit of the estate. In such cases there is an 
ultimate apportionment between the persons entitled to the 
income and those entitled to the capital of the accumulations 
for the period of such postponement. The rule followed is this: 
the proceeds, when realized, are apportionable between capital 
and income by ascertaining the sum which, put out and accumu- 
lated at 3 % per annum from the day of the testator's death 
(with yearly rents and deducting income tax) would have pro- 
duced at the day of receipt the sum actually received. The sum 
so ascertained should be treated as capital and the residue as 
income. (In re Earl of Chesterfield's Trusts, 1883, 24 Ch.D. 
643; In re Goodenough, 1895, 2 Ch. 537; Rowlls v. Bebb, 1900, 
2 Ch. 107.) 

In addition to the authorities cited in the text, see Stroud, Jtid. 
Diet. (2nd ed., London, 1903), s.v. "Apportion"; Bouvier, Law 
Diet. (London and Boston, 1897), s.v. "Apportionment"; Ruling 
Cases (London, 1895), tit. "Apportionment"; Fawcett, Landlord 
and Tenant (London, 1905), pp. 238 et seq.; Foa, Landlord and 
Tenant (3rd ed., London, 1901), pp. 112 et seq. (A. W. R.) 

APPORTIONMENT BILL, an act passed by the Congress of 
the United States after each decennial census to determine the 
number of members which each state shall send to the House 
of Representatives. The ratio of representation fixed by 







Census. 


Apportionment. 


Whole 
Number of 

Repre- 
sentatives. 




Year. 


Population. 


Year. 


Ratio. 


Constitution 
First Census 
Second Census 
Third Census 
Fourth Census 
Fifth Census 
Sixth Census 
Seventh Census 
Eighth Census 
Ninth Census 
Tenth Census 
Eleventh Census 
Twelfth Census 




1790 
1800 
1810 
1820 
1830 
1840 
1850 
i860 
1870 
1880 
1890 
1900 


3,929,214 

5,308,483 

7,239,881 

9,633,822 

12,866,020 

17,069,453 

23,191,876 

31,443,321 

38,558,371 

50,155,783 

62,622,250 

75,568,686 


1789 

1793 
1803 
1813 
1823 
1833 
1843 
1853 
1863 

1873 
1883 

1893 
1903 


30,000 

33.000 
33.ooo 
35,ooo 
40,000 
47,700 
70,680 

93.423 
127,381 

131,425 
i5i,9" 
173,901 
194,182 


65 
105 
141 
181 
213 
240 
223 

234 
241 
292 
325 
356 
386 



the original constitution was 1 to 30,000 of the free population, 
and the number of the members of the first House was 65. 
As the House would, at this ratio, have become unmanage- 
ably large, the ratio, which is first settled by Congress before 



apportionment, has been raised after each census, as will be seen 
from the accompanying table. 

The same term is applied to the acts passed by the state 
legislatures for correcting and redistributing the representation 
of the counties. Such acts are usually passed at decennial 
intervals, more often after the federal census, but the dates may 
vary in different states. The state representatives are usually 
apportioned among the several counties according to population 
and not by geographical position. The electoral districts so 
formed are expected to be equal in proportion to the number of 
inhabitants ; but this method has led to much abuse in the past, 
through the making of unequal districts for partisan purposes. 
(See Gerrymander.) 

If a state has received an increase in the number of its repre- 
sentatives and its legislature does not pass an apportionment 
bill before the next congressional election, the votes of the whole 
state elect the additional members on a general ticket and they 
are called " congressmen-at-large." 

APPRAISER (from Lat. appretiare, to value), one who sets a 
value upon property, real or personal. In England the business 
of an appraiser is usually combined with that of an auctioneer, 
while the word itself has given place, to a great extent, to that of 
"valuer." (See the articles Auctions and Auctioneers, and 
Valuation and Valuers.) 

In the United States appraiser is a term often used to describe 
a person specially appointed by a judicial or quasi-judicial 
authority to put a valuation on property, e.g. on the items of an 
inventory of the estate of a deceased person or on land taken 
for public purposes by the right of eminent domain. Appraisers 
of imported goods and boards of general appraisers have ex- 
tensive functions in administering the customs laws of the 
United States. Merchant appraisers are sometimes appointed 
temporarily under the revenue laws to value where there is no 
resident appraiser without holding the office of appraiser (U.S. 
Rev. Stats. § 2609). 

APPREHENSION (Lat. ad, to; prehendere, to seize), in 
psychology, a term applied to a mode of consciousness in 
which nothing is affirmed or denied of the object in question, but 
the mind is merely aware of (" seizes ") it. " Judgment " (says 
Reid, ed. Hamilton, i. p. 414) " is an act of the mind specifically 
different from simple apprehension or the bare conception 
of a thing "; and again, " Simple apprehension or conception 
can neither be true nor false." This distinction provides for the 
large class of mental acts in which we are simply aware of or 
" take in " a number of familiar objects, about which we in 
general make no judgment unless our attention is suddenly 
called by a new feature. Or again two alternatives may be 
apprehended without any resultant judgment as to their re- 
spective merits. Similarly G. F. Stout points out that while 
we have a very vivid idea of a character or an incident in a work 
of fiction, we can hardly be said in any real sense to have any 
belief or to make any judgment as to its 
existence or truth. With this mental state 
may be compared the purely aesthetic con- 
templation of music, wherein apart from, say, 
a false note, the faculty of judgment is for 
the time inoperative. To these examples may 
be added the fact that one can fully understand 
an argument in all its bearings without in any 
way judging its validity. 

Without going into the question fully, it 
may be pointed out that the distinction 
between judgment and apprehension is relative. 
In every kind of thought there is judgment of 
some sort in a greater or less degree of 
prominence. Judgment and thought are in 
fact psychologically distinguishable merely as 
different, though correlative, activities of con- 
sciousness. Professor Stout further, investigates the phenomena 
of apprehension, and comes to the conclusion that " it is possible 
to distinguish and identify a whole without apprehending any of 
its constituent details." On the other hand, if the attention 



228 



APPRENTICESHIP 



focuses itself for a time on the apprehended object, there is 
an expectation that such details will as it were emerge into 
consciousness. Hence he describes such apprehension as 
" implicit," and in so far as the implicit apprehension determines 
the order - of such emergence he describes it as "schematic." 
A good example of this process is the use of formulae in cal- 
culations; ordinarily the formula is used without question; if 
attention is fixed upon it, the steps by which it is shown to be 
universally applicable emerge and the " schema " is complete 
in detail. 

With this result may be compared Kant's theory of appre- 
hension as a synthetic act (the " synthesis of apprehension ") 
by which the sensory elements of a perception are subjected 
to the formal conditions of time and space. 

See G. F. Stout, Analytic Psychology (London, 1896) ; F. Brentano, 
Psychologie (bk. ii. ch. vii.), and Vom Ursprung sittlicher Erkennt- 
nis; B. Titchener, Outlines of Psychology (New York, 1902), and 
text-books of psychology. Also Psychology. 

APPRENTICESHIP (from Fr. apprendre, to learn), a contract 
whereby one person, called the master, binds himself to teach, 
and another, called the apprentice, undertakes to learn, some 
trade or profession, the apprentice serving his master for a certain 
time. 

Roman law is silent on the subject on this contract, nor does 
it seem to have had any connexion with the division of the Roman 
citizens into tribes or colleges. So far as can be seen it arose in 
the middle ages, and formed an integral part of the system of 
trade gilds and corporations by which skilled labourers of all 
kinds sought protection against the feudal lords, and the main- 
tenance of those exclusive privileges with which in the interests 
of the public they were favoured. In those times it was believed 
that neither arts nor sciences would flourish unless such only 
were allowed to practise them as had given proofs of reasonable 
proficiency and were formed into bodies corporate, with certain 
powers of self-government and the exclusive monopoly of their 
respective arts within certain localities; and the medieval 
universitas (corporation) — whether of smiths and tailors or of 
scholars — included both such as were entitled to practise and 
teach and such as were in course of learning. The former were 
the masters, the latter the apprentices. Hence the term appren- 
tice was applied indifferently to such as were being taught a 
trade or a learned profession, and even to undergraduates or 
scholars who were qualifying themselves for the degree of doctor 
or master in the liberal arts. When barristers were first ap- 
pointed by Edward I. of England they were styled apprenticii 
ad legem — the serjeants-at-law being servientes ad legem; and 
these two terms corresponded respectively to the trade names 
of apprentices and journeymen. During the middle ages the 
term of apprenticeship was seven years, and this period was 
thought no more than sufficient to instruct the learner in his 
profession, craft or mystery under a properly qualified master, 
teacher or doctor— for these names were synonymous — and 
to reimburse the latter by service for the training received. 
After this the apprentice became himself a master and a member 
of the corporation, with full rights to practise the business 
and to. teach others in his turn; so also it would seem that 
undergraduates had to pass through a curriculum of seven years 
before they could attain the degree of doctor or master in the 
liberal arts. On the continent of Europe these rules were ob- 
served with considerable rigour, both in the learned professions 
and in those which we now designate as trades. In England 
they made their way more slowly and did not receive much 
countenance, there being always a jealousy of anything savour- 
ing of interference with the freedom of trade. Nevertheless the 
formation of gilds and companies of tradesmen in England dates 
probably from the 12th century, and the institution of apprentice- 
ships cannot be of much later date. In 1388 and 1405 it is 
noticed in acts of parliament. By various subsequent statutes 
provisions were made for the regulation of the institution, 
and from them it appears that seven years was its ordinary 
and normal term in the absence of special arrangement. By a 
statute of 1562 this was made the law of the land, and it was 



enacted that no person should exercise any " trade or mystery " 
without having served a seven years' apprenticeship. In no 
place did the apprentices become so formidable by their numbers 
and organization as in London. During the Great Rebellion 
they took an active part as a political body, and were conspicuous 
after the Restoration by being frequently engaged in tumults. 
It was probably owing to this circumstance, quite as much as to 
economic considerations of freedom of trade, that the act of 
Elizabeth never found much favour with the courts of law. Soon 
after the Great Rebellion we find the apprentice laws strongly 
reprobated by the judges, who endeavoured, on the theory that 
the act of Elizabeth could apply to no trades which were not in 
existence at its date, to limit its operation as far as possible. 
Such limitation of the act gave rise to many absurd anomalies 
and inconsistencies, e.g. that a coachmaker could not make his 
own wheels but must buy them of a wheelwright, while the 
latter might make both wheels and coaches, because coach- 
making was not a trade in England when the act of Elizabeth 
was passed. For the like reason the great textile and metal 
manufactures which arose at Manchester and Birmingham 
were held exempt from the operation of the statute. Concur- 
rently with the dislike to the apprentice laws which such 
anomalies generated, the doctrines of Adam Smith, that all 
monopolies or restrictions on the freedom of trade were in- 
jurious to the public interest, had gradually been making their 
way, and notwithstanding much opposition an act was passed in 
1814 by which the statute of Elizabeth, in so far as it enacts 
that no person shall engage in any trade without a seven years' 
apprenticeship, was wholly repealed. The effect of this act was 
to give every person the fullest right to exercise any occupation 
or calling of a mechanical or trading kind for which he deemed 
himself qualified. 

Apprenticeship, therefore, which was formerly a compulsory, 
now became a voluntary contract. In the case of the learned 
professions the principles and theories which gave birth to 
corporations with monopolies, and required apprenticeship or its 
equivalents, have — contrary to what has taken place in trade — 
been not only maintained but intensified; that is to say, not 
only have such bodies retained and even extended in some cases 
their exclusive privileges, but in general no one is allowed to 
practise in such professions unless his capabilities have been 
tested and approved by public authority. Thus no man is 
allowed to practise law or medicine in any of their branches who 
has not undergone the appropriate training by attendance at a 
university or by apprenticeship— sometimes by both combined — 
and passed certain examinations. Entrance to the church is 
guarded by similar checks. In such instances the old principle — 
now generally abandoned in trade — of granting a monopoly to 
those possessing a certain standard of qualification is maintained 
in greater vigour than ever. 

In some kinds of manufacture the old conditions have been 
modified by the subdivisions of labour or by the introduction of 
machinery, which have reduced the amount of skill which 
formerly was requisite, and thus they have passed out of the 
category of the higher skilled handicrafts, as only a very slight 
or short training is necessary to make an efficient worker; but 
a large number of the higher skilled trades remain which require a 
long period of training at the bench, and a careful inquiry into 
this subject has shown that in nearly all of such trades there is 
a scarcity of skilled workers, which is due to the falling off in the 
number of apprenticeships. Many persons qualified to form an 
opinion deplore that something in the nature of the old standard 
of qualification is not still applied to those trades, and consider 
that the only method of restoring a high standard of skill is by 
apprenticeship. The decay of apprenticeship in these trades is 
due, not to any inherent defect in the system, nor to its having 
been superseded by any other form of technical education, but to 
difficulties, especially in London and some other large towns, 
which place it beyond the reach of that class of persons who have 
the greatest need of it. Among these difficulties are: — first, 
insufficient organization, and secondly, want of funds to pay 
premiums where Such are required. These difficulties are 



APPROPRIATION— APRAKSIN 



229 



accentuated in London and some other large towns, but in many 
other districts apprenticeship is actively proceeded with. 
Efforts are being made, notably by the National Institution of 
Apprenticeship, to meet these difficulties. The Charity Com- 
missioners in their report for 1905 recognized the value of this 
institution, and stated that they would in future enable the 
trustees of charity endowments for apprenticeship to avail 
themselves of the practical co-operation of the institution. The 
modern trade unions, on the other hand, have done nothing to 
assist in restoring apprenticeship to its proper place; on the 
contrary, they have hampered it by restrictions which they have 
imposed, limiting the number of apprentices who may be taken. 
The result of fewer apprentices has been not only to lower the 
standard of skill in the higher trades, but to reduce the productive 
capacity of the artisans. The altered conditions now attending 
apprenticeship are, mainly, that the apprentice does not live 
with the master, and that the term is generally five years instead 
of a longer period ; but the principle remains precisely the same, 
and the fact that it is applied more and more largely in Austria, 
Germany and other countries is an evidence of its necessity. 

The contract of apprenticeship is generally created by in- 
denture, but any writing properly expressed and attested will do. 
The full consideration must be set out, and the instrument, 
whether a premium is paid or not, must be duly stamped, except 
in the case of parish apprentices and apprentices to the sea 
service (see Seamen, Laws Relating to). Where a charity or 
institution intervenes, it retains control over the indentures 
until the end of the term of apprenticeship, when the indenture 
should be cancelled and given up to the apprentice. Any one who 
is capable of making a contract can take an apprentice, and the 
law does not limit the number which may be taken by any master. 
Any person of legal capacity can bind himself as an apprentice, 
provided he is over seven years of age, though, as he is by the 
common law exempt from all liability ex contractu, it is usual for 
the apprentice's relations or friends to become bound for his 
service and good conduct during the period of his apprenticeship. 
The consent of the apprentice, however, must be expressed by 
his executing the indenture. No child under nine can be bound 
as a parish apprentice. The master must teach the apprentice 
the agreed trade or trades; should the master exercise two 
trades (which he has agreed to teach) and give up one, it would 
be good ground for dissolving the contract by the apprentice. 
An apprentice is not bound to work on Sundays, but he may be 
required to work on bank holidays. He cannot become a volun- 
teer (soldier) without his master's consent. It is usual in the 
indenture to state whether the apprentice is to be paid wages or 
otherwise. If the contract is to pay wages, no deduction can be 
made owing to illness or accident, unless it has been so provided 
for in the indentures. Nor is the apprentice liable for breakages 
or similar faults. The master has been supposed to have a right 
to administer moderate corporal punishment, though he may not 
delegate it. But this right is really obsolete. According to 
old custom a master provided proper food for his apprentices, 
and medical attendance when required; but the modern practice 
is for apprentices to reside with their parents or friends who 
maintain them. A master cannot assign indentures without the 
approval of the apprentice or such parties as are named in the 
contract for this purpose, even if he should transfer his business. 
The contract of apprenticeship may be dissolved by (1) efflux of 
time; (2) by death (if the master dies, some part of the premium 
is usually returnable, but if the apprentice dies no part is return- 
able) ; (3) by consent; (4) in case of grave misconduct; (5) under 
the Bankruptcy Act 1883, providing for discharge of the in- 
dentures of apprenticeship and for payment on account of 
premium. Disputes between master and apprentice, in cases 
where no premium has been paid, or where the premium does not 
exceed £25, are dealt with by courts of summary jurisdiction. 
Apprentices bound according to the " custom of London," who 
are infants above the age of fourteen years and under twenty-one 
and unmarried, are responsible upon covenants contained in 
indentures txecuted by them just as if they were of full age. 
The term of apprenticeship is usually not less than four years. 



Apprentices by the custom of London in agreements made at 
the Guildhall are subject to the jurisdiction of the chamberlain 
of London. 

Parish apprentices are those bound out by guardians of the 
poor in England. By the Poor Relief Act 1601, overseers of the 
poor were empowered, with the consent of two justices, to put out 
poor children as apprentices " where they shall be convenient." 
Owing to the disinclination to receive such apprentices it became 
necessary to make the reception compulsory (1696), but this 
compulsion to receive them was abolished in 1844. Many 
statutes have been passed from time to time regulating the 
apprenticing of parish children, but it is now under the control 
of the Local Government Board, which issues rules specifying 
fully the manner in which such children are to be bound, assigned 
and maintained. 

Authorities. — See 'E. Austin, Law Relating to Apprentices 
(1890); Addison, On Contracts (1905). For the state of apprentice- 
ship in European countries, and, more particularly in France, see 
Apprentissage, enquite et documents (Paris, 1904, Conseil Superieur 
du Travail, Ministere du Commerce, de 1' Industrie, des Postes et des 
Telegraphes, session de 1902). See also the literature issued by the 
National Institution of Apprenticeship, London. (J. S. B.) 

APPROPRIATION (from Lat. appropriare, to set aside), the act 
of setting apart and applying to a particular use to the exclusion 
of all Other. In ecclesiastical law, appropriation is the perpetual 
annexation of an ecclesiastical benefice to the use of some spiritual 
corporation, either aggregate or sole. In the middle ages in 
England the custom grew up of the monasteries reserving to 
their own use the greater part of the tithes of their appropriated 
benefices, leaving only a small portion to their vicars in the 
parishes. On the dissolution of the monasteries these " great 
tithes " were often granted, with the monastic lands, to laymen, 
whose successors, known as " lay impropriators " or " lay rectors," 
still hold them, the system being known as impropriation. Appro- 
priation may be severed and the church become disappropriate, 
by the presentation of a clerk, properly instituted and inducted, 
or by the dissolution of the corporation possessing the benefice. 

In the law of debtor and creditor, appropriation of payments is 
the application of a particular payment for the purpose of paying 
a particular debt. When a creditor has two debts due to him 
from the same debtor on distinct accounts, the general law as to 
the appropriation of payments made by the debtor is that the 
debtor is entitled to apply the payments to such account as he 
thinks fit; solvitur in modum sohentis. In default of appropria- 
tion by the debtor the creditor is entitled to determine the 
application of the sums paid, and may appropriate them even 
to the discharge of debts barred by the Statute of Limitations. 
In default of appropriation by either debtor or creditor, the law 
implies an appropriation of the earlier payments to the earlier 
debts. 

In constitutional law, appropriation is the assignment of money 
for a special purpose. In the United Kingdom an Appropriation 
Bill is a bill passed at the end of each session of parliament, 
enumerating the money grants made during the session, and 
appropriating the various sums, as voted by committee of supply, 
to the various purposes for which it is to be applied. The 
United States constitution (art. I. § 9) says: " No money shall 
be drawn from the treasury, but in consequence of appropriations 
made by law." Bills for appropriating money originate in the 
House of Representatives, but may be amended in the Senate. 

APPURTENANCES (from late Lat. appertinentia, from 
appertinere, to appertain), a legal term for what belongs to and 
goes with something else, the accessories or things usually 
conjoined with the substantive matter in question. 

APRAKSIN, THEDOR MATVYEEVICH (1671-1728), Russian 
soldier, began life as one of the pages of Tsar Theodore III., after 
whose death he served the little tsar Peter in the same capacity. 
The playf ellowship of the two lads resulted in a lifelong friendship. 
In his twenty-first year Apraksin was appointed governor of 
Archangel, then the most important commercially of all the 
Russian provinces, and built ships capable of weathering storms, 
to the great delight of the tsar. He won his colonelcy at the siege 
of Azov (1696). Ini7oohe was appointed chief of the admiralty, 



23° 



APRICOT— APRIL 



in which post (from 1700 to 1706) his unusual technical ability 
was of great service. While Peter was combating Charles XII., 
Apraksin was constructing fleets, building fortresses and havens 
(Taganrog). In 1 707 he was transferred to Moscow. In 1708 he 
was appointed commander-in-chief in Ingria, to defend the new 
capital against the Swedes, whom he utterly routed, besides 
capturing Viborg in Carelia. He held the chief command in the 
Black Sea during the campaign of the Pruth (1711), and in 1713 
materially assisted the conquest of Finland by his queries
from the side of the sea. In 1719-1720 he personally conducted 
the descents upon Sweden, ravaging that country mercilessly, 
and thus extorting the peace of Nystad, whereby she surrendered 
the best part of her Baltic provinces to Russia. For these great 
services he was made a senator and admiral-general of the empire. 
His last expedition was to Reval in 1726, to cover the town from 
an anticipated attack by the English government, with whom the 
relations of Russia at the beginning of the reign of Catharine I. 
were strained almost to breaking-point. Though frequently 
threatened with terrible penalties by Peter the Great for his 
incurable vice of peculation, Apraksin, nevertheless, contrived to 
save his head, though not his pocket, chiefly through the media- 
tion of the good-natured empress, Catharine, who remained his 
friend to the last, and whom he assisted to place on the throne on 
the death of Peter. Apraksin was the most genial and kind- 
hearted of all Peter's pupils. He is said to have never made an 
enemy. He died on the 10th of November 1728. 

See R. Nisbet Bain, The Pupils of Peter the Great (London, 1897). 

(R. N. B.) 

APRICOT (from the Lat. praecox, or praecoquus, ripened 
early, coquere, to cook, or ripen; the English form, formerly 
" apricock " and " abrecox," comes through the Fr. abricot, 
from the Span, albaricoque, which was an adaptation of the 
Arabic al-burquk, itself a rendering of the late Gr. TrpeKOKua or 
irpaiicbKiov , adapted from the Latin; the derivation from in 
aprico coctus is a mere guess), the fruit of Prunus armeniaca, also 
called Armeniaca vulgaris. Under the former name it is regarded 
as a species of the genus to which the plums belong, the latter 
establishes it as a distinct genus of the natural order Rosaceae. 
The apricot is, like the plum, a stone fruit, cultivated generally 
throughout temperate regions, and used chiefly in the form of 
preserves and in tarts. The tree has long been cultivated in 
Armenia (hence the name Armeniaca); it is a native of north 
China and other parts of temperate Asia. It flowers very early in 
the season, and is a hardy tree, but the fruit will scarcely ripen in 
Britain unless the tree is trained against a wall. A great number 
of varieties of the apricot, as of most cultivated fruits, are 
distinguished by cultivators. The kernels of several varieties 
are edible, and in Egypt those of the Musch-Musch variety form 
a considerable article of commerce. The French liqueur Eau de 
noyaux is prepared from bitter apricot kernels. Large quantities 
of fruit are imported from France into the United Kingdom. 

The apricot is propagated by budding on the mussel or common 
plum stock. The tree succeeds in good well-drained loamy soil, 
rather light than heavy. It is usually grown as a wall tree, the 
east and west aspects being preferred to the south, which induces 
mealiness in the fruit, though in Scotland the best aspects are 
necessary. The most usual and best mode of training is the fan 
method. The fruit is produced on shoots of the preceding year, 
and on small close spurs formed on the two-year-old wood. The 
trees should be planted about 20 ft. apart. The summer pruning 
should begin early in June, at which period all the irregular fore- 
right and useless shoots are pinched off; and, shortly afterwards, 
those which remain are fastened to the wall. At the winter 
pruning all branches not duly furnished with spurs and fruit buds 
are removed. The young bearing shoots are moderately pruned 
at the points, care being, however, taken to leave a terminal shoot 
or leader to each branch. The most common error in the pruning 
of apricots is laying in the bearing shoots too thickly; the 
branches naturally diverge in fan training, and when they extend 
so as to be about 1 5 in. apart, a fresh branch should be laid in, 
to be again subdivided as required. The blossoms of the apricot 
open early in spring, but are more hardy than those of the 



peach; the same means of protection when necessary may be 
employed for both. If the fruit sets too numerously, it is thinned 
out in June and in the beginning of July, the later thinnings being 
used for tarts. In the south of England, where the soil is suitable, 
the hardier sorts of apricot, as the Breda and Brussels, bear well 
as standard trees in favourable seasons. In such cases the trees 
may be planted from 20 to 25 ft. apart. 

The ripening of the fruit of the apricot is accelerated by 
culture under glass, the trees being either planted out like 
peaches or grown in pots on the orchard-house system. They 
must be very gently excited, since they naturally bloom when the 
spring temperature is comparatively low. At first a maximum of 
40 only must be permitted; after two or three weeks it may be 
raised to 45°, and later on to 50 and 55 , and thus continued 
till the trees are in flower, air being freely admitted, and the 
minimum or night temperature ranging from 40 to 45 . After 
the fruit is set the temperature should be gradually raised, being 
kept higher in clear weather than in dull. When the fruit has 
stoned, the temperature may be raised to 6o° or 65 by day and 
60° by night; and for ripening off it may be allowed to reach 70 
or 8o° by sun heat. 

The Moorpark is one of the best and most useful sorts in cultiva- 
tion, and should be planted for all general purposes; the Peach 
is a very similar variety, not quite identical; and the Hemskerk 
is also similar, but hardier. The Large Early, which ripens in 
the end of July and beginning of August, and the Kaisha, a 
sweet-kemelled variety, which ripens in the middle of August, 
are also to be recommended. For standard trees in favourable 
localities the Breda and Brussels may be added. 

APRIES ('A?rpi7js), the name by which Herodotus (ii. 161) 
and Diodorus (i. 68) designate Uehabre", OvaQpris (Pharaoh- 
Hophra), the fourth king (counting from Psammetichus I.) of 
the twenty-sixth Egyptian dynasty. He reigned from 589 to 570 
b.c. See Egypt and Amasis. 

APRIL, the second month of the ancient Roman, and the 
fourth of the modern calendar, containing thirty days. The 
derivation of the name is uncertain. The traditional etymology 
from Lat. aperire, " to open," in allusion to its being the season 
when trees and flowers begin to " open," is supported by 
comparison with the modern Greek use of arai^ts (opening) for 
spring. This seems very possible, though, as all the Roman 
months were named, in honour of divinities, and as April was 
sacred to Venus, the Festum Veneris ei Fortunae Virilis being 
held on the first day, it has been suggested that Aprilis was 
originally her month Aphrilis, from her Greek name Aphrodite. 
Jacob Grimm suggests the name of a hypothetical god or hero, 
A per or Aprus. On the fourth and the five following days, 
games (Ludi Megalenses) were celebrated in honour of Cybele; 
on the fifth there was the Festum Fortunae Publicae; on the 
tenth (?) games in the circus, and on the nineteenth equestrian 
combats, in honour of Ceres; on the twenty-first — which was 
regarded as the birthday of Rome — the Vinalia urbana, when 
the wine of the previous autumn was first tasted; on the twenty- 
fifth, the Robigalia, for the averting of mildew; and on the 
twenty-eighth and four following days, the riotous Floralia. 
The Anglo-Saxons called April Osler-monath or Eostur-monalh, 
the period sacred to Eostre or Ostara, the pagan Saxon goddess 
of spring, from whose name is derived the modern Easter. 
St George's day is the twenty- third of the month; and St Mark's 
Eve, with its superstition that the ghosts of those who are 
doomed to die within the year will be seen to pass into the church, 
falls on the twenty-fourth. In China the symbolical ploughing 
of the earth by the emperor and princes of the blood takes place 
in their third month, which frequently corresponds to our 
April; and in Japan the feast of Dolls is celebrated in the same 
month. The " days of April " (journees d'avril) is a name 
appropriated in French history to a series of insurrections at 
Lyons, Paris and elsewhere, against the government of Louis 
Philippe in 1834, which led to violent repressive measures, and 
to a famous trial known as the proces d'avril. 

See Chambers's Book of Days; Grimm's Geschichte der deutschen 
Sprache, Cap. " Monate""; also April-Fools' Day. 



APRIL-FOOLS' DAY— APSE 



231 



APRIL-FOOLS' DAY, or All-Fools' day, the name given 
to the 1 st of April in allusion to the custom of playing practical 
jokes on friends and neighbours on that day, or sending them 
on fools' errands. The origin of this custom has been much 
disputed, and many ludicrous solutions have been suggested, 
e.g. that it is a farcical commemoration of Christ being sent 
from Annas to Caiaphas, from Caiaphas to Pilate, from Pilate 
to Herod, and from Herod back again to Pilate, the crucifixion 
having taken place about the 1st of April. What seems certain 
is that it is in some way or other a relic of those once universal 
festivities held at the vernal equinox, which, beginning on old 
New Year's day, the 25 th of March, ended on the 1st of April. 
This view gains support from the fact that the exact counterpart 
of April-fooling is found to have been an immemorial custom 
in India. The festival of the spring equinox is there termed 
the feast of Huli, the last day of which is the 31st of March, upon 
which the chief amusement is the befooling of people by sending 
them on fruitless errands. It has been plausibly suggested that 
Europe derived its April-fooling from the French. They were 
the first nation to adopt the reformed calendar, Charles IX. 
in 1564 decreeing that the year should begin with the 1st of 
January. Thus the New Year's gifts and visits of felicitation 
which had been the feature of the 1st of April became associated 
with the first day of January, and those who disliked the change 
were fair butts for those wits who amused themselves by sending 
mock presents and paying calls of pretended ceremony on the 
1st of April. Though the 1st of April appears to have been 
anciently observed in Great Britain as a general festival, it was 
apparently not until the beginning of the 18th century that 
the making of April-fools was a common custom. In Scotland 
the custom was known as " hunting the gowk," i.e. the cuckoo, 
and April-fools were " April-gowks," the cuckoo being there, 
as it is in most lands, a term of contempt. In France the person 
befooled is known as poisson d'avril. This has been explained 
from the association of ideas arising from the fact that in April 
the sun quits the zodiacal sign of the fish. A far more natural 
explanation would seem to be that the April fish would be a 
young fish and therefore easily caught. 

A PRIORI (Lat. a, from, prior, prius, that which is before, 
precedes), (1) a phrase used popularly of a judgment based on 
general considerations in the absence of particular evidence; 
(2) a logical term first used, apparently, by Albert of Saxony 
(14th century), though the theory which it denotes is as old as 
Aristotle. In the order of human knowledge the particular 
facts of experience come first and are the basis of generalized 
laws or causes (the Scholastic notiora nobis) ; but in the order 
of nature the latter rank first as the self-existent, fundamental 
truths of existence (notiora naturae). Thus to Aristotle the 
a priori argument is from law or cause to effect, as opposed to 
what we call a posteriori (posterior, subsequent, derived), from 
effect to cause. Since Kant the two phrases have become purely 
adjectival (instead of adverbial) with a technical controversial 
sense, closely allied to the Aristotelian, in relation to knowledge 
and judgments generally. A priori is applied to judgments 
which are regarded as independent of experience, and belonging 
to the essence of thought; a posteriori to those which are derived 
from particular observations. The distinction is analogous to 
that between analysis and synthesis, deduction and induction 
(but there may be a synthesis of a priori judgments, cf. Kant's 
" Synthetic Judgment a priori "). Round this distinction 
a rather barren controversy has raged, and almost all modern 
philosophers have labelled themselves either " Intuitionalist " 
(a priori) or " Empiricist " (a posteriori) according to the view 
they take of knowledge. In fact, however, the rival schools 
are generally arguing at cross purposes; there is a knowledge 
based on particulars, and also a knowledge of laws or causes. 
But the two work in different spheres, and are complementary. 
The observation of isolated particulars gives not necessity, but 
merely strong probability; necessity is purely intellectual or 
" transcendental." If the empiricist denies the intellectual 
element in scientific knowledge, he must not claim absolute 
validity for his conclusions; but he may hold against the 



intuitionalist that absolute laws are impossible to the human 
intellect. On the other hand, pure a priori knowledge can be 
nothing more than form without content (e.g. formal logic, the 
laws of thought). The simple fact at the bottom of the contro- 
versy is that in all empirical knowledge there is an intellectual 
element, without which there is no correlation of empirical data, 
and every judgment, however simple, postulates a correlation 
of some sort if only that between the predicate and its contra- 
dictory. 

APRON (a corruption arising from a wrong division of " a 
napron " into " an apron," from the Fr. naperon, napperon, a 
diminutive of nappe, Lat. mappa, a napkin), an article of costume 
used to protect the front of the clothes. It forms part of the 
ceremonial dress of Freemasons. The " apron " worn by church 
dignitaries is a shortened cassock (q.v.). The word has many 
technical uses, as for the protecting slope in front of the sill of 
dock-gates, or at the foot of weirs. 

APSARAS, in Hindu mythology, a female spirit of the clouds 
and waters. In the Rig-Veda there is one Apsaras, wife of 
Gandharva; in the later scriptures there are many Apsaras 
who act as the handmaidens of Indra and dance before his throne. 
They are able to change their form, and specially rule over the 
fortunes of gaming. One of their duties is to guide to paradise the 
heroes who fall in battle, whose wives they then become. They 
are distinguished as daivika ("divine") or laukika ("worldly"). 

APSE (Gr. axf/is, a fastening, especially the felloe of a wheel; 
Lat. absis), in architecture, a semicircular recess covered with 
a hemispherical vault. The term is applied also to the termina- 
tion to the choir, transept or aisle of any church which is either 
semicircular or polygonal in plan, whether vaulted or covered 
with a timber roof; a church is said to be "apsidal" when it 
terminates in an apse. 

The earliest example of an apse is found in the temple of 
Mars Ultor at Rome (2 B.C.), and it formed afterwards the 
favourite feature terminating the rear of any temple, and one 
which gave importance to the statue of the deity to whom the 
temple was dedicated. Its use by the Romans was not confined 
to the temples, as it is found in the palaces on the Palatine Hill, 
the great Thermae (Baths) and other monuments. In the civil 
basilicas the apse was screened off by columns, and constituted 
the court of justice. In the Ulpian (Trajan's) Basilica the apses 
at each end were of such great dimensions as to come better 
under the definition of hemicycles (q.v.). In these apses the 
floor was raised, and had an altar placed in the centre of its 
chord, where sacrifices were made prior to the sittings. The 
only other two Roman basilicas in which the semicircular apse 
can still be traced are that commenced by Maxentius and 
completed by Constantine at Rome and the basilica at Trier 
(Treves). 

In the earliest Christian basilica, St Peter's at Rome, built 
330 A.D., the apse, 57 ft. in diameter, raised above the confessio 
or crypt, was placed at the west end of the church. This orient- 
ation was originally followed in the churches of St Paul and 
St Lawrence (S. Lorenzo fuori le Mura), both outside the walls 
of Rome, and is found in most of the churches at Rome. On 
the other hand, in the Byzantine church, the apse was built at the 
east end of the church. 

During the reign of Justin the Second (a.d. 565-574), owing 
to a change in the liturgy, two more apses were added, one on 
each side of the central apse. These in the Greek Church were 
provided not to hold altars but for ceremonial purposes. One of 
the earliest examples is found in the church of St Nicholas at 
Myra of the 6th century, and the basilica erected in the great 
court of the temple at Baalbek shows the triple apse. The 
earliest example in Rome is found in the church of Sta Maria 
in Cosmedin (772-795), built probably by Greek craftsmen, who 
had been exiled by the Iconoclasts. Other triapsal choirs are 
found in the cathedral of Parenzo (542 a.d.), in St Mark's, 
Venice, in Sta Fosca and the Duomo at Torcello, and in numerous 
examples throughout Italy and Germany. In central Syria 
there is one example only, at Kalat Seman, where the side apses 
were a later addition. 



232 



APSE— APTERA 



There is one important distinction to be drawn between the 
Byzantine and the Latin apses; they are both semicircular 
internally, but externally the former are nearly always poly- 
gonal. It follows, therefore, that in those churches in Italy 
where the apse is polygonal externally, it is a sign of direct 
Byzantine influence. This is found in St Mark's, Venice; 
Sta Fosca, Torcello; Murano; nearly all the churches at 
Ravenna; and in the Crusaders' churches throughout Syria. 

In the Coptic church in Egypt we find other characteristics; 
in the churches of the Red and White Monasteries, attributed 

to St Helena, an unusual 
depth is given to the apse, 
in the walls of which 
niches are sunk; in the 
church of St John at 
Antinoe there are no fewer 
i than seven. Similar 
niches are found in the 
apses of St Mark's, 
Venice, built in a.d. 828, 
it is said in imitation of 







Apse of the White Monastery. 



St Mark's in Alexandria, 



to receive the relics of St Mark brought over from there. 

In a large number of the apses in the Coptic churches the 
seats round the apse with the bishop's throne in the centre are 
still preserved; of these the' best examples are at Abu Sargah, 
Al "Adra and Abu-s-Sifain. Unfortunately there are no remains 
of the fittings in the tribunes of the ancient Roman basilicas, 
but those in St Peter's at Rome, which were probably copied 
from them, are recorded in drawings, there being two or three 
rows of stone seats with the papal throne in the centre. It is 
possible also that some may still exist in the other early Christian 
basilicas at Rome, but there have been so many changes that 
it is not possible to trace them. In the cathedral of Parenzo 
in Istria (a.d. 532-535), the hemicycle of marble seats for the 
clergy with the episcopal chair in the centre still exists. A 
similar arrangement is found in the apse of the church of the 
6th century attached to the church of St Helena in the island 
of Paros, where there are eight steep grades of semicircular 
stone seats with the bishop's chair in the centre. The aspect 
of the interior of this apse has in consequence very much the 
appearance of a Roman theatre. A third example, better known, 
exists at Torcello, with six concentric seats rising one above the 
other, and in the centre the episcopal chair with a flight of 
thirteen steps down in front of it. 

In the basilica at Bethlehem, the east end of which was 
reconstructed probably in the 5th century, apses of similar 
dimensions to the eastern apse were built at the north and south 
end of the transept. The same disposition is found in the Coptic 
churches of the Red and White Monasteries just referred to, 
in the church of St Elias at Salonica (c. 1012), the cathedral of 
Echmiadzin in Armenia, at Vatopedi, Mt. Athos, and some other 
Byzantine churches. An early example in France exists in the 
church of Germigny-des-Pres on the Loire (806; rebuilt 1868), 
where the three apses are horseshoe on plan, and the same is 
found in the church at Oberzell in the island of Reichenau, 
Lake of Constance, except that the eastern apse there is square. 
Small examples also are found at Querqueville and at St Wan- 
drille near Caudebec, both in Normandy, but the finest develop- 
ment takes place in the church of St Maria im Capitol at Cologne, 
where the aisles are carried round both the northern and southern 
apses. The same feature exists in the cathedral of Tournai in 
Belgium and the churches at Cambrai, Soissons and Valenciennes 
(the last destroyed at the Revolution) in France, and also in 
the cathedrals of Como and of Pisa in Italy. Without aisles, 
there are examples in the churches of the Apostles and of 
St Martin at Cologne; St Quirinus at Neuss; at Roermond; 
St Cross, Breslau; the cathedral of Bonn; and, at a later date, 
in the Marienkirche at Trier; S. Elizabeth at Marburg; the 
church of Sta Maria-del-Fiore at Florence; and the cathedral 
of Parma. 

In consequence of a change made in the orientation of apses 



in the 6th or 7th century, others were subsequently added at 
the west end of existing churches, and this is considered to have 
been the case at Canterbury; but in the German churches 
sometimes apses were built from the first at both ends, such as 
are shown on the manuscript plan of St Gall, of the 9th century. 
Western apses exist at Gernrode; Driibeck; Huyseburg; the 
Obermiinster of Regensburg; St Godehard in Hildesheim; 
the cathedrals of Worms and Trier; the Abbey church of 
Laach; the Minster at Bonn; and in St Pietro-in-Grado near 
Pisa. 

The triapsal churches, to which we have referred, are those 
in which the side apses form the termination of the side aisles; 
but where there are transepts, the aisles are sometimes not 
continued beyond them, and the expansion of the transept 
to north and south gives more ample space for apses; of these 
there are many examples, as in the Abbey church of Laach in 
Germany; at Romsey; Christchurch, Hants; Gloucester, 
Ely, Norwich and Canterbury cathedrals, in England; and at 
St Georges de Bosch erville in France; sometimes there being 
space for two apses on each side. 

In the beginning of the 13th century in France, the apses 
became radiating chapels outside the choir aisle, henceforth 
known as the chevet. These radiating chapels would seem to 
have been suggested in Norwich and Canterbury cathedrals, 
but the feature is essentially a French one and in England 
is found only in Westminster Abbey, into which it was intro- 
duced by Henry III., to whom the chevets of Amiens, Beauvais 
and Reims were probably well known. (R. P.'S.) 

APSE and APSIDES, in mechanics, either of the two points 
of an orbit which are nearest to and farthest from the centre of 
motion. They are called the lower or nearer, and the higher 
or more distant apsides respectively. The " line of apsides " 
is that which joins them, forming the major axis of the orbit. 

APSINES of Gadara, a Greek rhetorician, who flourished 
during the 3rd century a.d. After studying at Smyrna, he 
taught at Athens, and gained such a reputation that he was 
raised to the consulship by the emperor Maximinus (235-238). 
He was the friend of Philostratus, the author of the Lives of the 
Sophists, who speaks of his wonderful memory and accuracy.- 
Two rhetorical treatises by him are extant: Tex"V froTopudi, 
a handbook of rhetoric greatly interpolated, a considerable por- 
tion being taken from the Rhetoric of Longinus; and a smaller 
work, Tlepl &txW-'''U!imvwv ■Kpo^Kijixa.Twv, on Propositions main- 
tained figuratively. 

Editions by Bake, 1849; Spengel-Hammer in Rhetores Graeci, 
ii. (1894) '• see a l so Hammer, De Apsine Rhetore (1876) ; Volkmann, 
Rhetorik der Griechen und R'dmer (1885). 

APT, a town of south-eastern France, in the department of 
Vaucluse, on the left bank of the Coulon, 41 m. E. of Avignon 
by rail. Pop. (1906) 4990. The town was formerly surrounded 
by massive ancient walls, but these have now been for the most 
part replaced by boulevards; many of its streets are narrow 
and irregular. The chief object of interest is the church of 
Sainte-Anne (once the cathedral), the building of which was 
begun about the year 1056 on the site of a much older edifice, 
but not completed until the latter half of the 17th century. 
Many Roman remains have been found in and near the town. 
A fine bridge, the Pont Julien, spanning the Coulon below the 
town, dates from the 2nd or 3rd century. A tribunal of first 
instance and a communal college are the chief public institutions. 
The chief manufactures are silk, confectionery and earthenware; 
and there is besides a considerable trade in fruit, grain and cattle. 
Apt was at one time the chief town of the Vulgientes, a Gallic 
tribe; it was destroyed by the Romans about 125 B.C. arid 
restored by Julius Caesar, who conferred upon it the title Apia 
Julia; it was much injured by the Lombards and the Saracens, 
but its fortifications were rebuilt by the counts of Provence. The 
bishopric, founded in the 3rd century, was suppressed in 1790. 

APTERA (Greek for " wingless "), a term in zoological classi- 
fication applied by Linnaeus to various groups of wingless arthro- 
pods, including some of the insects, the centipedes, the millipedes, 
the Arachnida (scorpions, spiders, &c.) and the Crustacea. In 



APTERA 



233 



modern zoology the term has become restricted to the lowest 
order of the class Hexapoda or true insects. This order includes 
the bristle-tails and the springtails. 

Many wingless insects— such as lice, fleas and certain ear- 
wigs and cockroaches — are placed in various orders together 
with winged insects to which they show evident relationships. 
In such cases the absence of wings must be regarded as secondary 
— due to a parasitic or other special manner of life. But the 
bristle-tails and springtails, which form the modern order 
Aptera, are all without any trace of wings, and, on account of 

several remarkable archaic 
characters which they ex- 
hibit, there is reason for 
believing that they are 
primitively wingless — that 
they represent an early off- 
shoot which sprang from 
the ancestral stock of the 
Hexapoda before organs of 
flight had been acquired 
by the class. 

Characters. — In addition 
to the complete absence of 
wings and of metamor- 
phosis, the Aptera are 
characterized by peculiar 
elongate mandibles (figs. 
1, ~Mn.; 2, 4), with toothed 
apex and sub-apical grind- 
ing surface, like those of 
certain Crustacea; by the 
presence between" the 
mandibles and maxillae of 
a pair of appendages 
(superlinguae or maxil- 
lulae), fig. 1, Mxl., which 
are absent or vestigial in 
all other insects; and, in 
most genera, by the 
presence in the adult of 
abdominalappendagesused 
for locomotion, these latter 
varying in number from one 
to nine pairs. Among 
peculiarities of the internal 
organs the segmental 
arrangement of the ovaries 
in mOst members of the 
order is noteworthy. Many 
Aptera are covered with 
flattened scales like those 
of moths. 

Classification. — The 
Aptera are divided into 
two divergent sub-orders, 
the Tkysanura (q.v.) or 
bristle-tails, and the Col- 
lembola or springtails. 
Thysanura. — The bristle- 
tails have an abdomen of eleven segments, the tenth usually 
carrying a pair of long many-jointed tail-feelers (cerci, fig. 1, x.); 
sometimes a median, jointed tail-appendage is also present. 
To these feelers the popular name is due. There may also be 
abdominal appendages — in the form of simple unjointed stylets 
(fig. 1, ii.-ix.), accompanied by paired eversible sacs, probably 
respiratory in function — on eight (or fewer) other abdominal 
segments. The head of a bristle-tail carries a pair of compound 
eyes and a pair of elongate many-jointed feelers. 

The air-tube system is developed in varying degree in different 
bristle-tails, the number of pairs of spiracles being three (Cam- 
podea), nine (MachiHs), ten (Lepisma), or eleven (Japyx). 

Four families of Thysanura are usually recognized. In the 




From Knowledge. 

Fig. 1. — A typical Thysanuran 

(Machilis maritima). Female, ventral 

view. 

Mx l , Mx?, 1st and 2nd maxillae. 

ii.-x, Appendages on 2nd to 10th ab- 
dominal segments. The ever- 
sible sacs on the abdominal 
segments are shown, some 
protruded and some retracted. 

Ovp, Ovipositor. 

Mn, Mandible, and Mxl. maxillula, 
dissected out of head. 



Machilidae and Lepismidae (these two families are known as 
the Ectotrophi) the maxillae are like those of typical biting 
insects, and there is a median tail-bristle in addition to the 
paired cerci; while in the Campodeidae and Japygidae (which 
form the group Entotrophi) the jaws are apparently sunk in the 
head, through a deep inpushing at the mouth, and there is no 
median tail-bristle. The cerci in Japyx are not, as usual, jointed 
feelers, but strong, curved appendages forming a forceps as in 
earwigs. 

Collembola. — In springtails, or Collembola, the jaws are sunk 
into the head, as in the entotrophous Thysanura; the head 
carries a pair of feelers with not more than six (usually four) 
segments, and there are eight (or fewer) distinct simple eyes on 
each side of the head (fig. 2, 1, 2). These are in some genera 




From Carpenter, Proc. R. Dub. Soc. vol. xi. 

Fig. 2. — Structure of Collembola. 

1. Isotoma hibernica. Side view. 

2. ,, Ocelli and post-antennal organ of right side. 

with 



3. ,, Tip of terminal antennal segment 

antennal organ. 

4. „ Mandible. 

5. ,, Tip of left dens with mucro. Outer view 

6. ,, Hind-foot with claws. X 240. 

7. Entomobrya anomala. Catch. 

like the single elements (ommatidia) of a compound insect eye, in 
others like simple ocelli. The abdomen consists of six segments 
only. The first of these usually carries a ventral tube, furnished 
with paired eversible sacs which assist the insects in walking on 
smooth surfaces, and perhaps serve also as organs for breathing. 
From the researches of V. Willem it appears that the viscid 
fluid which causes the adherence of the ventral tube is secreted 
by a pair of glands in the head whose ducts open into a super- 
ficial groove leading from the second maxillae backward to the 
tube on the first abdominal segment. The third abdominal 
segment usually carries a pair of short appendages whose basal 
segments are fused together; this is the " catch " (fig. 2, 7), 
whose function is to hold in place the " spring," which is formed 
by the fourth pair of abdominal appendages — also with fused 
basal segments. In most Collembola the spring appears to 
belong to the fifth abdominal somite, but Willem, by study of 
the muscles, has shown that it really belongs to the fourth. The 
fused basal segments of the appendages form the " manubrium " 
of the spring, which carries the two " dentes " (usually elongate 



234 



APTERAL— APULEIUS 



and flexible) , each with a " mucro " at its tip (fig. 2,5). The fifth 
abdominal segment is the genital, and the sixth the anal somite. 

The spring serves the Collembola which possess it as an 
efficient leaping-organ (see Springtail). But in some genera it 
is greatly reduced and in many quite vestigial. 

Most springtails are without air-tubes, and breathe through 
the general cuticle of the body. But in one family (Sminthuridae) 
a spiracle, opening on either side between the head and the 
prothorax, leads to a branching system of air-tubes. The 
Sminthuridae are further characterized by the globular abdomen, 
which shows but little external trace of segmentation, and by the 
well-developed spring. 

In the Entomobryidae the body is elongate and clearly seg- 
mented, but the dorsal region (tergum) of the prothorax is much 
reduced and the head downwardly directed; the spring is well 
developed. In the Achorutidae the head is forwardly directed, 
the tergum of the prothorax conspicuous, and the spring small or 
vestigial. 

In many genera of springtails a curious post-antennal organ, 
consisting of sensory structures (often complex in form) sur- 
rounded by a firm ring, is to be noticed on the cuticle of the head 
between the eyes and the feelers. It may be of use as an organ of 
smell. Other sensory organs occur on the third and fourth anten- 
nal segments in the Achorutidae and, Entomobryidae (fig. 2, 3). 

Distribution and Habits. — The Aptera are probably the most 
widely distributed of all insects. Among the bristle-tails we 
find the genus Machilis, represented in Europe (including the 
Faeroe Islands) and in Chile; while Campodea lives high on the 
mountains and in the deepest caves. The springtails have even 
a wider distribution. The genus Isotoma, for example, has some 
of its numerous species in regions so remote as Alaska, Franz 
Josef Land, the Sandwich Islands, the South Orkneys, Graham 
Land, Kerguelen and South Victoria Land. As it is unlikely 
that these delicate insects could be transported across sea- 
channels, their wide and discontinuous range suggests both their 
great antiquity and the former existence of continental tracts 
over which they may have travelled to their present stations. 

Springtails and bristle-tails live in damp concealed places — 
under stones or tree-bark, in moss, and in the decaying vegetable 
or animal matter which serves as food for most of them. Some 
species, however, eat fresh plant-tissues. A species of bristle-tail 
{Machilis maritima) and quite a number of springtails haunt 
the sea-coast at or below high-water mark. In such localities 
many thousands of individuals may sometimes be found associ- 
ated together. The insect fauna of limestone caves both in 
Europe and North America is largely composed of Aptera, 
especially Collembola. 

Geological History. — A supposed Thysanuran from the Silurian 
of New Brunswick has been described by G. F. Matthew, and 
another genus from the French Carboniferous by C. Brongniart. 
Not till the Tertiary do we find remains of Aptera in any quantity, 
species both of living and extinct genera being represented in the 
amber. 

Development. — The embryonic development of several genera 
of Aptera, which has been carefully studied, will be more suitably 
described in comparison with that of other insects than here (see 
Hexapoda). 

Bibliography. — The modern study of the Aptera may be said to 
date from the classical memoirs of T. Tullberg, " Sveriges Podu- 
rider," in Kongl. Svensk Vetensk. Akad. Handl. x., 1872, and Sir J. 
Lubbock (Lord Avebury), " Monograph of the Collembola and 
Thysanura/' Ray_ Society, 1873. ln these, full references to the 
older literature will be found. Subsequently our knowledge of the 
Thysanura has been markedly advanced by J. T. Oudemans, Bijdrage 
tot de Kennis den Thysani-./a en Collembola (Amsterdam, 1888); 
B. Grassi. who published between 1885 and 1889 a series of memoirs 
entitled " I progenitori dei Miriapodi e degli Insetti," in the Atti 
Accad. di Sciens. Nat. Catania, and the Memor. R. Accad. dei Lincei; 
and V. WiMem, whose " Recherches sur les Collemboles et les Thy- 
sanoures," in Mem. Cour. Acad. Roy. Belgique, lviii., 1900, are 
indispensable to the student. In addition to this work of Willem, 
valuable anatomical papers on Collembola have been published by 
H. J. Hansen (Zoo/. Anz. xvi., 1893), J. W. Folsom (Bull. Mus. 
Comp. Anal. Han: xxxv., 1899), C. Bonier (Zool. Anz. win.. 1900), 
and K. Absolon (Zool. Anz. xxiii. and xxiv., 1900, 1901), the two 



latter writers having paid especial attention to the peculiar post 
antennal and antennal sense-organs of springtails. Absolon has 
also written on the Collembola of caves. These writers, with H. 
Schott, C. Schaffer and others, have published many systematic 
papers on Collembola, as has F. Silvestri on Thysanura. British 
species are mentioned in Lubbock's monograph ; for recent additions 
see G. H. Carpenter and W. Evans (Proc. R. Phys. Soc. Edinb. xiv., 
1899, and xv., 1903). (G. H. C.) 

APTERAL (from the Gr. oirrepos, wingless, a-, privative and 
irrepov, a wing), an architectural term applied to amphiprostyle 
temples which have no columns on the sides; in the Ionic temple 
on the Acropolis at Athens known as Nike Apteros, the adjective 
is used, not as applying to the goddess of victory but to the 
absence of any peristyle on the sides. 

APTIAN (Fr. Aplien, from Apt in Vaucluse, France), in 
geology, the term introduced in 1843 by A. d'Orbigny {Pal. 
France Cret. ii.) for the upper stage of the Lower Cretaceous 
rocks. In England it comprises the Lower Greensand and part 
of the Speeton beds; in France it is divided into two sub-stages, 
the I6wer, " Bedoulian," of Bedoule in Provence, with Hoplites 
deshayesei and Ancyloceras Mather oni; and an upper, " Gar- 
gasian," from Gargas near Apt, with Hoplites fur catus (Dufrenoyi) 
and Phylloceras Guettardi. To this stage belong the Toucasia 
limestone and Orbitolina marls of Spain; the Schrattenkalk (part) 
of the Alpine and Carpathian regions; and the Terebrirostra 
limestone of the same area. Parts of the Flysch of the eastern 
Alps, the Biancone of Lombardy, and argile scagliose of Emilia, 
are of Aptian age; so also are the " Trinity Beds " of North 
America. Deposits of bauxite occur in the Aptian hippurite lime- 
stone at Les Baux near Aries, and in the Pyrenees. The Aptian 
rocks are generally clays, marls and green glauconitic sands 
with occasional limestones. (See Greensand and Cretaceous.) 

APULEIUS, LUCIUS, Platonic philosopher and rhetorician, 
was born at Madaura in Numidia about a.d. 125. As the son 
of one of the principal officials, he received an excellent education, 
first at Carthage and subsequently at Athens. After leaving 
Athens he undertook a long course of travel, especially in the 
East, principally with the view of obtaining initiation into 
religious mysteries. Having practised for some time as an 
advocate at Rome, he returned to Africa. On a journey to 
Alexandria he fell sick at Oea (Tripoli), where he made the 
acquaintance of a rich widow, Aemilia Pudentilla, whom he 
subsequently married. The members of her family disapproved 
of the marriage, and indicted Apuleius on a charge of having 
gained her affections by magical arts. He easily established his 
innocence, and his spirited, highly entertaining, but inordinately 
long defence (Apologia or De Magia) before the proconsul 
Claudius Maximus is our principal authority for his biography. 
From allusions in his subsequent writings, and the mention of 
him by St Augustine, we gather that the remainder of his 
prosperous life was devoted to literature and philosophy. At 
Carthage he was elected provincial priest of the imperial cult, in 
which capacity he occupied a prominent position in the provincial 
council, had the duty of collecting and managing the funds for 
the temples of the cult, and the superintendence of the games 
in the amphitheatre. He lectured on philosophy and rhetoric, 
like the Greek sophists, apparently with success, since statues 
were erected in his honour at Carthage and elsewhere. The 
year of his death is not known. 

The work on which the fame of Apuleius principally rests has 
little claim to originality. The Metamorphoses or Golden Ass 
(the latter title seems not to be the author's own, but to have 
been bestowed in compliment, just as the Libri Rerum Quoti- 
dianarum of Gaius were called Aurei) was founded on a narrative 
in the Metamorphoses of Lucius of Patrae, a work extant in the 
time of Photius. From Photius's account (impugned, however, 
by Wi eland and Courier), this book would seem to have consisted 
of a collection of marvellous stories, related in an inartistic 
fashion, and in perfect good faith. The literary capabilities of 
this particular narrative attracted the attention of Apuleius's 
contemporary, Lucian, who proceeded to work it up in his own 
manner, adhering, js Photius seems to indicate, very closely to 
the original, but giving it a comic and satiric turn. Apuleius 



APULIA 



235 



followed this rifacimento, making it, however, the groundwork 
of an elaborate romance, interspersed with numerous episodes, 
of which the beautiful story of Cupid and Psyche is the most 
celebrated, and altering the denouement to suit the religious 
revival of which he was an apostle. 

The adventures of the youthful hero in the form of an ass are 
much the same in both romances, but in Apuleius he is restored 
to human shape by the aid of Isis, into whose mysteries he is 
initiated, and finally becomes her priestess. The book is a 
remarkable illustration of the contemporary reaction against a 
period of scepticism, of the general appetite for miracle and 
magic, and of the influx of oriental and Egyptian ideas into the 
old theology. It is also composed with a well-marked literary 
aim, defined by Kretzschmann as the emulation of the Greek 
sophists, and the transplantation of their tours de force into the 
Latin language. Nothing, indeed, is more characteristic of 
Apuleius than his versatility, unless it be his ostentation and self- 
confidence in the display of it. The dignified, the ludicrous, the 
voluptuous, the horrible, succeed each other with bewildering 
rapidity; fancy and feeling are everywhere apparent, but not 
less so affectation, meretricious ornament, and that effort to say 
everything finely which prevents anything being said well. The 
Latinity has a strong African colouring, and is crammed with 
obsolete words, agreeably to the taste of the time. When these 
defects are mitigated or overlooked, the Golden Ass will be pro- 
nounced a most successful work, invaluable as an illustration of 
ancient manners, and full of entertainment from beginning to 
end. The most famous and poetically beautiful portion is the 
episode of Cupid and Psyche, adapted from a popular legend of 
which traces are found in most fairy mythologies, which explains 
the seeming incongruity of its being placed in the mouth of an old 
hag. The allegorical purport he has infused into it is his own, 
and entirely in the spirit of the Platonic philosophy. Don 
Quixote's adventure with the wine-skins, and Gil Bias's captivity 
among the robbers, are palpably borrowed from Apuleius; and 
several of the humorous episodes, probably current as popular 
stories long before his time, reappear in Boccaccio. 

Of Apuleius's other writings, the Apology has been already 
mentioned. The Florida (probably meaning simply " anthology," 
without any reference to style) consists of a collection of excerpts 
from his declamations, ingenious but highly affected, and in 
general perfect examples of the sophistical art of saying nothing 
with emphasis. They deal with the most varied subjects, and 
are intended to exemplify the author's versatility. The pleasing 
little tract On the God of Socrates expounds the Platonic doctrine 
of beneficent daemons, an intermediate class between gods and 
men. Two books on Plato (De Platone et Ejus Dogmate) treat of 
his life, and his physical and ethical philosophy; a third, treating 
of logic, is generally considered spurious. The De Mundo is an 
adaptation of the Ilepi Ko<ry.ov wrongly attributed to Aristotle. 
Apuleius informs us that he had also composed numerous poems 
in almost all possible styles, and several works on natural history, 
some in Greek. In the preparation of these he seems to have 
attended more closely to actual anatomical research than was 
customary with ancient naturalists. Some other works — dealing 
with theology, the properties of herbs, medical remedies and 
physiognomy, are wrongly attributed to him. 

The character of Apuleius, as delineated by himself, is attrac- 
tive; he appears vehement and passionate, but devoid of 
rancour; enterprising, munificent, genial and an enthusiast 
for the beautiful and good. His vanity and love of display are 
conspicuous, but are extenuated by a genuine thirst for know- 
ledge and a surprising versatility of attainments. He prided 
himself on his proficiency in both Greek and Latin. His place in 
letters is accidentally more important than his genius strictly 
entitles him to hold. He is the only extant example in Latin 
literature of an accomplished sophist in the good sense of the 
term. The loss of other ancient romances has secured him a 
peculiar influence on modern fiction; while his chronological 
position in a transitional period renders him at once the evening 
star of the Platonic, and the morning star of the Neo-Platonic 
philosophy. 



Bibliography. — Complete works: Editio princeps, ed. Andreas 
(1469); Oudendorp (1786-1823); Hildebrand (1842); Helm (1905 et 
seq.) ; P. Thomas (vol. iii. 1908). Metamorphoses, Eyssenhardt (1869) , 
van der Vliet (1897). Psyche et Cupido, Jahn-Michaelis (1883) ; Beck 
(1902). Apologia, I. Casaubon (1594); Kriiger (1864); (with the 
Florida), van der Vliet (1900). Florida, Kriiger (1883). De Deo 
Socratis, Buckley (1844), Lutjohann (1878). De Platone et ejus Dog- 
mate, Goldbacher (1876) (including De Mundo and De Deo Socratis). 
For the relation between. Lucian's "Oms and the Metamorphoses of 
Apuleius, see Rohde, fiber Lucians Schrift Aovmh (1869), and 
Burger, De Lucio Patrensi (1887). On the style of Apuleius consult 
Kretzschmann, De Latinitate L. Apulei (1865), and Koziol, Der Stil 
des A. (1872). There is a complete English translation of the works 
of Apuleius in Bohn's Classical Library. The translations and 
imitations of the Golden Ass in modern languages are numerous: 
in English, by Adlington, 1566 and later eds. (reissued in the Tudor 
translations and Temple Classics), Taylor (1822) (including the 
philosophical works), Head (1851). Of the Cupid and Psyche episode 
there are recent translations by Robert Bridges (1895) (in verse), 
Stuttaford (1903) ; and it is beautifully introduced by Walter Pater 
into his Marius the Epicurean. This episode has afforded the subject 
of a drama to Thomas Heywood, and of narrative poems to Shakerley 
Marmion, Mrs. Tighe, and William Morris (in the Earthly Paradise). 

APULIA (sometimes Appulia in manuscripts but never in 
inscriptions), the district inhabited in ancient times by the 
Apuli. Strictly a Samnite tribe (see Samnites) settled round 
Mount Garganus on the east coast of Italy (Strabo vi. 3. n), 
the Apuli mingled with the Iapygian tribes of that part of the 
coast (Dauni, Peucetii, Poediculi) who, like the Messapii, had 
come from Illyria, so that the name Apulia reached down to the 
border of the ancient Calabria. Almost the only monument of 
Samnite speech from the district is the famous Tabula Bantina 
from Bantia, a small city just inside the Peucetian part of Apulia, 
on the Lucanian border. This inscription is one of the latest 
and in some ways the most important monument of Oscan, 
though showing what appear to be some southern peculiarities 
(see Osca lingua). Its date is almost certainly between 118 
and 90 B.C., and it shows that Latin had not even then spread 
over the district (cf. Lucania). Far older than this are some 
coins from Ausculurri and Teate (later known as Teanum Apulum), 
of which the earliest belong to the 4th century B.C. Roman or 
Latin colonies were few, Luceria (planted 314 B.C.) in the north 
and Brundisium (soon after 268) being the chief. (See R. S. 
Conway, Italic Dialects, xxviii.-xxx. pp. 15 f.; and Mommsen's 
introduction to the opening sections of C.I.L. ix.) (R. S. C.) 

The wars of the 4th and 3rd centuries B.C. brought a great 
part of the pastures of the Apulian plain into the hands of the 
Roman state, and a tax was paid on every head of cattle and 
every sheep, at first to the tax farmer and later to the imperial 
procurator. It was under the Romans that the system of 
migration for the flocks reached its full development, and the 
practice is still continued; the sheep- tracks (tratturi), 350 ft. 
wide, leading from the mountains of the Abruzzi to the plain 
of Apulia date in the main at least from the Roman period, and 
are mentioned in inscriptions. The plain, however, which once 
served as winter grazing ground for a million sheep, now gives 
pasture to about one-half of that number. 1 The shepherds, 
who were slaves, often gave considerable trouble; we hear that 
some 7000 of them, who had made the whole country unsafe, 
were condemned to death in 18.5 B.C. (Livy xxxix. 29). Sheep- 
farming on a large scale was no doubt detrimental to the interests 
of the towns. We hear of repeated risings, for the last time in 
the Social War. Even in the 4th century B.C. the then chief town 
of Apulia, Teate or Teanum Apulum (see above), suffered in this 
way. Luceria subsequently took its place, largely owing to its 
military importance; but under the Empire it was succeeded 
by Canusium. 

The road system of Apulia, which touched all the important 
towns, consisted of three main lines, the Via Appia (see Appia, 
Via), the Via Traiana, and the coast road, running more or less 
parallel in an east-south-east direction. The first (the southern- 
most), coming east from Beneventum, entered Apulia at the 
Pons Aufidi, and ran through Venusia to Tarentum, and thence, 

1 The migration was made compulsory by Alphonso I. in 1442, 
and remained so until 1865. Since that time the tratturi have been 
to some extent absorbed by private proprietors. 



236 



APURE— APURIMAC 



turning north-east, to Brundusium. The second, coming north- 
east from Beneventum, turned east at Aecae, and ran through 
Herdoniae, Canusium, Butuntum, Barium and Gnathia (Gnatia) 
to Brundusium. There was also a short cut from Butuntum to 
Gnathia through Caelia, keeping inland. The third parallel 
line ran to the north of the Via Traiana, in continuation of the 
road along the north-east coast of Picenum and Samnium; 
it entered Apu'ia near Larinum (whence a branch ran south to 
Bovianum Undecimanorum), and thence, keeping in the plain 
to the south of the Mons Garganus, rejoined the coast at Sipon- 
tum, where it received a branch road from the Via Traiana at 
Aecae, passing through Luceria and Arpi. It then passed 
through Barduli (where it was joined by a road from Canusium 
by way of Cannae) to Barium, where it joined the Via Traiana. 
From Barium a road probably ran direct to Caelia, and thence 
south-south-east to join the Via Appia some 25 m. north-west 
of Tarentum. 

Barium was an important harbour, though less so than 
Brundusium and Tarentum, which, however, belonged to 
Calabria in the Roman sense. Apulia, with Calabria, formed 
the second region of Augustus, though we once find Calabria 
treated as a part of the third region, Lucania (C.I.L. ix. 2213). 
The Hannibalic and later wars had, Strabo tells us, destroyed 
the former prosperity of the country; in imperial times we hear 
little or nothing of it. Both were governed by a corrector from 
the time of Constantine onwards, but in 668 the Lombards 
conquered Calabria and Apulia, and it was then that the former 
name was transferred to Bruttium, the meaning of the latter 
being extended to include Calabria also. In the 10th century 
the greater part of this territory was recovered by the Byzantine 
emperors, whose governor was called Karairavos, a name which, 
under the corrupt form Capitanata, belonged to the province 
of Foggia till 1861. It was conquered by the Normans under 
William Bras-de-fer, who took the title of comes Apuliae in 1042 ; 
it was raised to a dukedom with Calabria by Robert Guiscard in 
1059, and united to the Sicilian monarchy in 1 1 27. Many of the 
important towns possess fine Romanesque cathedrals, con- 
structed under the Normans and the Hohenstaufen rulers. It 
shared the subsequent fate of Sicily, becoming a part of the 
kingdom of the Two Sicilies in 1734, and being united with 
Italy in 1861. 

Modern Apulia comprises the three provinces of Foggia, Bari 
and Lecce (the latter corresponding roughly with the ancient 
Calabria, which, however, extended somewhat farther 
Apulia. north inland), and is often known as Le Puglie; it 
stretches from Monte Gargano to the south-east ex- 
tremity of Italy, with an area of 7376 sq. m.; it is bounded on 
the north and east by the Adriatic, on the south-east by the 
Gulf of Taranto, on the south by Basilicata and on the west 
by Campania and the Abruzzi. The three provinces correspond 
to the three natural divisions into which it falls. That of Foggia, 
though it has mountains on the west and south-west boundary, 
and the Monte Gargano at its north-east extremity, is in the main 
a great plain called the Tavoliere (chessboard) di Puglia, with 
considerable lagoons on its north and east coast. That of Bari, 
east-south-east of Foggia and divided from it by the Ofanto 
(Aufidus), the only considerable river of Apulia, 104 m. long, is 
a hilly district with a coast strip along which are the majority 
of the towns- — the lack of villages is especially noticeable; in the 
circondario of Barletta, the north-east portion of the province, 
there are only eleven communes, with a total population of 
335,934- That of Lecce, to the east-south-east again, is a low 
flat limestone terrace. 

The industries of Apulia are mainly pastoral or agricultural. 
Besides sheep, a considerable number of horses, cattle and swine 
are bred; while despite the lack of water, which is the great 
need of modern Apulia (in 1906 arrangements were made for 
a great aqueduct, to supply the three provinces from the head- 
waters of the Sele), cultivation is actively carried on, especially 
in the province of Bari, where grain, wine, olives, almonds, 
lemons, oranges, tobacco, &c, are produced in abundance, and 
the export of olive oil is attaining considerable importance. The 



salt works of Margherita di Savoia produce large quantities 
of salt, and nitre is extracted near Molfetta. 

Railway communications are fairly good, the main line from 
Bologna to Brindisi passing through the whole length of Apulia, 
by way of Foggia and Bari, and having branches from Foggia 
(the main railway centre of Apulia) to Benevento and Caserta, 
to Manfredonia, to Lucera and to Rocchetta S. Antonio (and 
thence to either Avellino, Potenza or Gioia del Colle), from 
Ofantino to Margherita di Savoia, from Barletta to Spinazzola 
(between Rocchetta S. Antonio and Gioia del Colle), from Bari 
to Putignano, and via Gioia del Colle to Taranto, and from 
Brindisi to Taranto, and to Lecce and Otranto; besides which, 
there is a steam tramway from Barletta to Bari via Andria. 

The most important harbours of Apulia are Brindisi, Bari, 
Taranto, Barletta, Molfetta and Gallipoli. The export of olive 
oil to foreign countries from the province of Lecce in 1905 
amounted to 1048 tons, as against 3395 in 1901; but that to 
home ports increased from 7077 to 9025 tons in the same period. 
The production of wine was 358,953 tons in 1905 as against 
203,995 tons in 1901 (an exceptionally bad year) and 284,156 
tons in 1902. Of this 211,872 tons were forwarded by rail and 
sea, in the proportion of five to two respectively, the rest being 
used for home consumption and as a reserve. The cultivation 
of oriental tobacco is extending in the province (see Consular 
Report, No. 3672, July 1906). 

The population of the province of Foggia was 425,450 (1901) 
asagainst322, 758m 1 871, the 'chief towns being Foggia (53,151), 
Cerignola (34,195), S. Severo (30,040), Monte S. Angelo (21,870), 
S. Marco in Lamis (17,309), Lucera (17,515); that of Bari, 
827,698 (1901) as against 604,540 in 1871, the chief towns being 
Bari (77,478), Andria (49,569), Barletta (42,022), Corato (41,573), 
Molfetta (40,135), Trani (31,800), Bisceglie (30,885), Bitonto 
(30,617), Canosa (24,169), Ruvo (23,776), Terlizzi (23,232), 
Altamura (22,729), Monopoli (22,545), Gioia del Colle (21,721); 
that of Lecce, 706,520 (1901) as against 493,594 in 1871, the chief 
towns being Taranto (60,733), Lecce (32,687), Brindisi (25,317), 
Martina Franca (25,007), Ostuni (22,997), Francavilla Fontana 
(20,422), Ceglie Messapica (16,867), Nardo (14,387), Galatina 
(14,071), Gallipoli (13,552), Manduria (13,113). (T. As.) 

APUR& a river of western Venezuela, formed by the confluence 
of the Sarare and Uribante at 6° 45' N. lat. and 71° W. long., 
and flowing eastward across the Venezuelan llanos to a junction 
with the Orinoco at about 7 40' N. lat. and 66° 45' W. long. Its 
drainage area includes the slopes of both the Colombian and 
Venezuelan Andes. It has a sluggish course across the llanos 
for about 300 m., and is navigable throughout its length. Its 
principal tributaries are the Caparro, Portuguesa arid Guarico on 
the north, and the Caucagua on the south. Its lateral channels 
on the south mingle with those of the Arauca for many miles, 
forming an extensive district subject to annual inundations. 

APURIMAC, a river of central Peru, rising in the Laguna de 
Villafra in the western Cordilleras, 7 m. from Caylloma, a village 
in the department of Arequipa, and less than 100 m. from the 
Pacific coast. It flows first north-easterly, then north-westerly 
past Cuzco to the mouth of the Perene tributary, thence east and 
north to its junction with the Ucayali at io° 41' S. lat., and 
73° 34' W. long. It is known as the Apurimae only down to the 
mouth of the Mantaro tributary, n°45' S. lat. and 1325 ft. above 
sea-level. Thence to the mouth of the Perene (984 ft.) it is known 
as the Ene, and from that point to its junction with the Ucayali 
(859 ft.) as the Tambo. 

APURIMAC, an interior department of southern Peru, bounded 
N. by the department of Ayacucho, E. by Cuzco, S. and W. by 
Cuzco and Ayacucho. Area, 8187 sq. m.; pop. (1896) 177,387. 
The department was created in 1873 and comprises five provinces. 
Its physical features and productions are very similar to those of 
Ayacucho (q.v.), with the exception that sugar-cane is cultivated 
with noteworthy success in the low valley of the province of 
Abancay. The capital, Abancay r no m. south-west of Cuzco, 
which is only a village in size but is rich in historical associations 
and Andahuaylas, in the north-west part of the department, are 
its principal towns. 



APYREXIA— AQUARIUM 



237 



APYREXIA (Gr. airvpe%ia, from d-, privative, irvpkacreiv, 
to be in a fever, irvp, fire, fever), in pathology, the normal interval 
or period of intermission in a fever. 

'AQlBA BEN JOSEPH (c. 50-132), Jewish Palestinian rabbi, 
of the circle known as tana (q.v.). It is almost impossible to 
separate the true from the false in the numerous traditions 
respecting his lif e. He became the chief teacher in the rabbinical 
school of Jaffa, where, it is said, he had 24,000 scholars. What- 
ever their number, it seems certain that among them was the 
celebrated Rabbi Meir, and that through him and others 'Aqiba 
exerted a great influence on the development of the doctrines 
embodied in the Mishnah. He sided with Bar Cochebas in the 
last Jewish revolt against Rome, recognized him as the Messiah, 
and acted as his sword-bearer. Being taken prisoner by the 
Romans under Julius Severus, he was flayed alive with circum- 
stances of great cruelty, and met his fate, according to tradition, 
with marvellous steadfastness and composure. He is said by 
some to have been a hundred and twenty years old at the time 
of his death. He is one of the ten Jewish martyrs whose names 
occur in a penitential prayer still used in the synagogue service. 
'Aqiba was among the first to systematize the Jewish tradition, 
and he paved the way for the compilation of the Mishnah. 
From his school emanated the Greek translation of the scriptures 
by Aquila. 

AQUAE (Lat. for " waters "), a name given by the Romans 
to sites where mineral springs issued from the earth. Over a 
hundred can be identified, some declaring by their modern names 
their ancient use: Aix-les-Bains in Savoy (Aquae Sabaudicae), 
Aix-en-Provence (Aquae Sextiae), Aix-la-Chapelle or Aachen 
(Aquae Grani), &c. Only two occur in Britain: Aquae Suits 
— less correctly Aquae Solis — at Bath in Somerset, which was 
famous, and Buxton (called Aquae simply), which seems to 
have been far less important. Aquae Sulis was occupied by 
the Romans almost as soon as they entered the island in 
a.d. 43, and flourished till the end of the Roman period. It was 
frequented by soldiers quartered in Britain, by the Britons, and 
by visitors from north Gaul, and its name was known in Italy, 
though patients probably seldom travelled so far. Like most 
mineral springs known to the ancients, it was under the protec- 
tion of a local deity, the Celtic Sul, whom the Romans equated 
with their Minerva. Stately remains of its baths and temple 
have been found at various times, especially in 1790 and 1878— 
1895, and may still be seen there. 

AQUAE CUTILIAE, a mineral spring in Italy, near the modern 
Cittaducale, 9 m. E. of Rieti. The lake near it was supposed 
by classical writers to be the central point of Italy, and was 
renowned for its floating islands, which, as in other cases, were 
formed from the partial petrification of plants by the mineral 
substances contained in the water. Considerable remains of 
baths may still be seen there - they were apparently resorted to 
by both Vespasian and Titus in their last illnesses, for both died 
there. 

AQUAMARINE (Lat. aqua marina, " water of the sea "), a 
transparent variety of beryl (q.v.), having a delicate blue or 
bluish-green colour, suggestive of the tint of sea-water. It 
occurs at most localities which yield ordinary beryl, some of 
the finest coming from Russia. The gem-gravels of Ceylon 
contain aquamarine. Clear yellow beryl, such as occurs in 
Brazil, is sometimes called aquamarine chrysolite. When 
corundum presents the bluish tint of typical aquamarine, it is 
often termed Oriental aquamarine. 

AQUARELLE (from Ital. acquarella, water-colour), a form of 
painting with thin water-colour or ink. 

AQUARII, a name given to the Christians who substituted 
water for wine in the Eucharist. They were not a sect, for we 
find the practice widely in vogue at an early time, even among 
the orthodox. In Greek they were called Hydroparastatae, or 
those who offer water. Theodosius, in his persecuting edict of 
382, classes them as a special sect with the Manicheans, who also 
eschewed wine. See Eucharist. 

AQUARIUM (plural aquaria), the name given to a receptacle 
for a marine flora and fauna. Until comparatively recently, 



aquaria were little more than domestic toys, or show-places 
of a popular character, but they have now not only assumed 
a profound scientific importance for the convenient study of 
anatomical and physiological problems in marine botany and 
zoology, but have also attained an economic value, as offering 
the best opportunities for that study of the habits and environ- 
ment of marketable food-fish without which no steps for the 
improvement of sea-fisheries can be safely taken. The numerous 
" zoological stations " which have sprung up, chiefly in Europe 
and the United States, but also in the British colonies and Japan, 
often endeavour to unite these two aims, and have in many cases 
become centres of experimental work in problems relating to 
fisheries, as well as in less directly practical subjects. Of these 
stations, the oldest and the most important is that at Naples, 
which, though designed for purely scientific objects, also en- 
courages popular study by means of a public aquarium. The 
following account (1002) of this station by Dr W. Giesbrecht, 
a member of the staff, will serve to show the methods and 
aims, and the complex and expensive equipment, of a modern 
aquarium: — 

" The zoological station at Naples is an institution for the 
advancement of biological science— that is, of comparative 
anatomy, zoology, botany, physiology. It serves this end by 
providing the biologist with the various objects of his study 
and the necessary appliances; it is not a teaching institution. 
The station was founded by Dr Anton Dohrn, and opened in the 
spring of 1874; it is the oldest and largest of all biological 
stations, of which there are now about thirty in existence. Its 
two buildings are situated near the seashore in the western town 
park (Villa Nazionale) of Naples. The older and larger one, 
33 metres long, 24 m. deep, 16 m. high, contains on the ground 
floor the aquarium, which is open to the public. On the first floor 
there is, facing south, the principal library, ornamented with 
fresco paintings, and, facing north, a large hall containing twelve 
working tables, several smaller rooms and the secretarial offices. 
On the second floor is the physiological laboratory, and on the 
third floor the small library, a hall with several working tables, 
and the dark rooms used in developing photographs. The ground 
floor of the smaller building, which was finished in 1887, contains 
the rooms in which the animals are delivered, sorted and pre- 
served, and the fishing tackle kept, together with the workshop 
of the engineer; on the first and second floors are workrooms, 
amongst others the botanical laboratory; on the third floor are 
store-rooms. In the basement of both buildings, which is con- 
tinued underneath the court, there are sea-water cisterns and 
filters, engines and store-rooms. The materials for study which 
the station offers to the biologist are specimens of marine animals 
and plants which abound in the western part of the Mediter- 
ranean, and especially in the Gulf of Naples. To obtain these, 
two screw-steamers and several rowing boats are required, which 
are moored in the harbour of Mergellina, situated close by. The 
larger steamer, 'Johannes Miiller' (15 m. long, 2\ m. wide, 
1 m. draught), which can steam eight to ten English miles per 
hour, is provided with a steam dredge working to a depth of 
eighty fathoms. From the small steamer, ' Frank Balfour,' 
and the rowing boats, the fishing is done by means of tow-nets. 
Besides these there are fishermen and others who daily supply 
living material for study. The plankton (small floating animals) 
is distributed in the morning, other animals as required. The 
animals brought in by the fishermen are at once distributed 
amongst the biologists, whereas the material brought up by the 
dredges is placed in flat revolving wooden vessels, so as to give 
the smaller animals time to come out of their hiding-places. 
The students who work in the station have the first claim on 
specimens of plants and animals; but specimens are also sup- 
plied to museums, laboratories and schools, and to individuals 
engaged in original research elsewhere. Up to the present time 
about 4000 such parcels have been despatched, and not infre- 
quently live specimens of animals are sent to distant places. 
This side of the work has been of very great value to science. 
The principal appliances for study with which the station pro- 
vides the biologist are workrooms furnished with the apparatus 



2 3 8 



AQUARIUM 



and chemicals necessary for anatomical research and physio- 
logical experiments and tanks. Every student receives a tank 
for his own special use. The large tanks of the principal 
aquarium are also at his disposal for purposes of observation 
and experiment if necessary. 

" The water in the tanks is kept fresh by continual circulation, 
and is thus charged with the oxygen necessary to the life of the 
organisms. It is not pumped into the tanks directly from the 
sea, but from three large cisterns (containing 300 cubic metres), 
to which it again returns from the tanks. The water wasted or 
evaporated during this process is replaced by new water pumped 
into the cisterns directly from the sea. The water flows from 
the large cisterns into a smaller cistern, from which it is dis- 
tributed by means of an electric pump through vulcanite or 
lead pipes to the various tanks. The water with which the 
tanks on the upper floors are filled is first pumped into large 
wooden tanks placed beneath the roof, thence it flows, under 
almost constant pressure, into the tanks. The water circulated 
in this manner contains by far the largest number of such 
animals as are capable of living in captivity in good condition. 
Some of them even increase at an undesirable rate, and it some- 
times happens that young Mytilus or Ciona stop up the pipes; 
in laying these, therefore, due regard must be had to the arrange- 
ments for cleaning. For the cultivation of very delicate animals 
it is necessary to keep the water absolutely free from harmful 
bacteria; for this purpose large sand-filters have lately been- 
placed in the system, through which the water passes after leaving 
the cisterns. Each of the smaller cisterns, which are fixed in 
the workrooms, consist of two water-tanks, placed one above 
the other; their frames are of wrought iron and the walls gener- 
ally of glass. Vessels containing minute animals can be placed 
between these two tanks, receiving their water through a siphon 
from the upper tank ; the water afterwards flows away into the 
lower tank. 

" The twenty-six tanks of the public aquarium (the largest of 
which contains 112 cubic metres of water) have stone walls, the 
front portion alone being made of glass. As the tanks hold a 
very large number of animals in proportion to the quantity of 
water, they require to be well aerated. The pipes through which 
the water is conducted are therefore placed above the surface of 
the water, and the fresh supply is driven through them under 
strong pressure. A large quantity of air in the form of fine 
bubbles is thus taken to the bottom of the tank and distributed 
through the entire mass of water. Should the organisms which 
it is desired to keep alive be very minute, there is a danger of 
their being washed away by the circulating water. To obviate 
this, either the water which flows away is passed through a 
strainer, or the water is not changed at all, air being driven 
through it by means of an apparatus put into motion by the 
drinking-water supply. 

" The library contains about 9000 volumes, which students use 
with the help of a slip catalogue, arranged according to authors. 
The station has published at intervals since 1879 two periodicals 
treating of the organisms of the Mediterranean. One is Fauna 
und Flora des Golfes von Neapel, the other MittheUungen aus der 
zoologischen Station zu Neapel. The former consists of mono- 
graphs in which special groups of animals and plants are most 
exhaustively treated and the Mediterranean species portrayed 
according to life in natural colours; up to the present time 
twenty-one zoological and five botanical monographs have ap- 
peared, making altogether 1200 4to sheets with about 400 plates. 
Of the MittheUungen, which contain smaller articles on organisms 
of the Mediterranean, fourteen volumes in 8vo have been pub- 
lished. The station also publishes a Zoologischer Jahresbericht, 
which at first treated of the entire field of zoology, but since 1886 
has been confined principally to comparative anatomy and 
ontogeny; it appears eight to nine months after the end of the 
year reported. The Guide to the Aquarium, with its descriptions 
and numerous pictures, is meant to give the lay visitor an idea 
of the marine animal world. 

"There are about forty officials, amongst them six zoologists, 
one physiologist, one secretary, two draughtsmen, one engineer. 



The station is a private institution, open to biologists of all 
nations under the following conditions: there are agreements 
with the governments of Austria, Baden, Bavaria, Belgium, 
Hamburg, Holland, Hesse, Italy, Prussia, Russia, Saxony, 
Switzerland, Hungary, Wurttemberg, the province of Naples, and 
the universities of Cambridge, Oxford, Strassburg, Columbia 
College (New York), and the British Association for the Advance- 
ment of Science, the Smithsonian Institution, and a society of 
women in the United States of North America (formerly also with 
Bulgaria, Rumania, Spain, the Academy of Sciences in Berlin, 
Williams College, University of Pennsylvania), by virtue of which 
the governments and corporate bodies named have the right, on 
payment of £100 per annum, to send a worker to the station; 
this places at his disposal a ' table ' or workplace, furnished 
with all the necessary appliances and materials as set down in 
the agreement. At present there are agreements for thirty-three 
tables, and since the foundation of the station nearly 1200 
biologists have worked there. The current expenses are paid 
out of the table-rents, the entrance fees to the public aquarium, 
and an annual subvention paid by the German empire." 

In England a station on similar lines, but on a smaller scale, 
is maintained at Plymouth by the Marine Biological Association 
of the United Kingdom, with the help of subsidies from the 
government and the Fishmongers' Company. 

Little difficulty is experienced in maintaining, breeding and 
rearing fresh-water animals in captivity, but for many various 
reasons it is only by unremitting attention and foresight that 
most marine animals can be kept even alive in aquaria, and very 
few indeed can be maintained in a condition healthy enough 
to breed. Much experience, however, has been gained of late 
years at considerable expense, both in England and abroad. In 
starting a marine aquarium of whatever size, it should be obvious 
that the first consideration must be a supply of the purest possible 
water, as free as may be, not only from land-drainage and sewage, 
but also from such suspended matters as chalk, fine sand or mud. 
This is most ideally and economically secured by placing the 
station a few feet above high-water mark, in as sheltered a 
position as possible, on a rocky coast, pumping from the sea to 
a large reservoir above the station, and allowing the water to 
circulate gently thence through the tanks by gravity (Banyuls). 
At an inland aquarium (Berlin, Hamburg), given pure water 
in the first instance, excellent if less complete results may never- 
theless, be obtained. The next consideration is the method by 
which oxygen is to be supplied to the organisms in the aquarium. 
Of the two methods hitherto in use, that of pumping a jet of air 
into tanks otherwise stagnant or nearly so (Brighton), while 
supplying sufficient oxygen, has so many other disadvantages, 
that it has not been employed regularly in any of the more 
modern aquaria. It is, however, still useful in aerating quite 
small bodies of water in which hardy and minute organisms 
can be isolated and kept under control. In the other method, 
now in general use, a fine jet of water under pressure falls on 
to the surface of the tank; this carries down with it a more 
than sufficient air-supply, analysis showing in some cases a 
higher percentage of oxygen in aquarium water than in the 
open sea. 

The water supply is best effected by gravity from reservoirs 
placed above the tanks, but may be also achieved by direct 
pumping from low reservoirs or from the sea to the tanks. 
Provided that an unlimited supply of pure water can be obtained 
cheaply, the overflow from the tanks is best run to waste; but 
in aquaria less fortunately placed, it returns to a storage low- 
level reservoir, from which it is again pumped, thus circulating 
round and round (Naples, Plymouth). The storage reservoirs 
should be in all cases very large in comparison with the bulk of 
water in circulation; if practicable, they should be excavated 
in rock, and lined with the best cement. Thera is no reason 
why they should not be shallow, exposed to light and air, and 
cultivated as rock -pools by the introduction of seaweeds and 
small animals, but they must then be screened from rain, cold 
and dust. The pumps used in circulation will be less likely to 
kill minute animals if of the plunger or ram type, rather than 



AQUARIUS— AQUA VIVA 



239 



rotary, and should be of gun-metal' or one of the new bronze- 
alloys which take a patina in salt water. For the circulating 
pipes many materials have been tried. Vulcanite is not only 
expensive and brittle, but has other disadvantages; common 
iron pipes, coated internally with cement or asphalt or glazed 
internally, with all unions and joints cemented, have been used 
with more or less success. Probably best of all is common lead 
piping, the joints being served with red-lead; water should be 
circulated through such pipes till they become coated with in- 
soluble carbonate, for some time before animals are put into the 
tanks. For small installations glass may be used, the joints 
being made with marine glue or other suitable cement. 

In building the tanks themselves, regard must be had to their 
special purposes. If intended for show-tanks for popular ad- 
miration, or for the study of large animals, they must be large 
with a plate-glass front; for ordinary scientific work small 
tanks with all sides opaque are preferable from every point of 
view. According to their character, size and position, fixed tanks 
may be of brickwork, masonry or rock, coated in each case with 
cement; asphalting the sides offers no particular advantages, 
and often gives rise to great trouble and expense. All materials, 
and especially the cements, must be of the finest quality procur- 
able. For smaller and movable tanks, slate slabs bolted or 
screwed together have some disadvantages, notably those of 
expense, weight and brittleness, but are often used. Better, 
cheaper and lighter, if less permanent, are tanks of wood bolted 
together, pitched internally. Glass bell-jars, useful in particular 
cases, should generally have their sides darkened, except when 
required for observation. Provision should always be made 
for cleaning every part of the tanks, pipes and reservoirs; all 
rock-work in tanks should therefore be removable. As regards 
the lighting of fixed tanks, it should always be directly from 
above. In all tanks with glass sides, whether large or small, 
as much light as possible should be kept from entering through 
the glass; otherwise, with a side-light, many animals become 
restless, and wear themselves out against the glass, affected by 
even so little light as comes through an opposite tank. 

In cases where distance from the sea or other causes make it 
impracticable to allow the overflow from the tanks to run to 
waste, special precautions must be taken to keep the water pure. 
Chemically speaking, the chief character of the water in an 
aquarium circulation, when compared with that of the open sea, 
lies in the excessive quantity of nitrogen present in various forms, 
and the reduced alkalinity; these two being probably connected. 
The excess of nitrogen is referable to dead animals, to waste 
food and to the excreta of the living organisms. The first two 
of these sources of contamination may be reduced by care 
and cleanliness, and by the maintenance of a flow of water 
sufficient to prevent the excessive accumulation of sediment 
in the tanks. The following experiment shows the rapid rise 
of nitrogen if unchecked. A tank with a considerable fauna 
was isolated from the general circulation and aerated by four 
air-jets, except during hours 124-166 t)f the experiment; 
column I. shows per 100,000 the nitrogen estimated as ammonia, 
column II. the total inorganic nitrogen: — 

1. 11. 

Sea-water at source of original 

supply o-ool 0-003 

Aquarium water in tank at com- 
mencement of experiment . . 0-012 0-400 

After 22 i hours 0-020 

75 , 0-025 1-200 

„ 93 0-019 

„ I2Ij ,, 0-OI2 

,, I4I , 0-OI5 2-200 

,,165 0-025 

„ I69 0-025 

,, 189 ,, 0-012 

During this time the alkalinity was reduced to the equivalent of 
30 mg. CaC0 3 per litre, ocean water having an alkalinity equivalent 
to 50-55 mg. per litre. It has been suggested that the organic 
nitrogen becomes oxidized into nitrous, then into nitric acid, 
which lowers the carbonate values. A great deal of reduction 
of this nitrogenous contamination can be effected by filtration, 



a method first introduced successfully at Hamburg, where a 
most thriving aquarium has been maintained by the local 
Zoological Society for many years on the circulation principle, 
new water being added only to compensate for waste and evap- 
oration. The filters consist of open double boxes, the inner 
having a bottom of perforated slate on which rests rough gravel; 
on the latter is fine gravel, then coarse, and finally fine sand. 
Filtration may be either upwards or downwards through the 
inner box to the outer. Such filters, intercalated between tanks 
and reservoir, have been shown by analysis to stop a very large 
proportion of nitrogenous matter. It is doubtful whether 
aquarium water will not always show an excess of nitrogenous 
compounds, but they must be kept down in every way possible. 
In small tanks, well lighted, seaweeds can be got to flourish in 
a way that has not been found practicable in large tanks with 
a circulation; these, with Lamellibranchs and small Crustacea 
as scavengers, will be found useful in this connexion. Slight 
or occasional circulation should be employed here also, to remove 
the film of dust and other matters, which otherwise covers the 
surface of the water and prevents due oxygenation. 

In such small tanks for domestic use the fauna must be 
practically limited to bottom-living animals, but for purposes of 
research it is often desired to keep alive larval and other surface- 
swimming animals (plankton). In this case a further difficulty 
is presented, that of helping to suspend the animals in the water, 
and thus to avoid the exhaustion and death which soon follow 
their unaided efforts to keep off the bottom; this duty is effected 
in nature by specific gravity,, tide and surface current. In 
order to deal with this difficulty a simple but efficient apparatus 
has been devised by Mr E. T. Browne; a " plunger," generally 
a glass plate or filter funnel, moves slowly up and down in a 
bell-jar or other small tank, with a period of rest between each 
stroke; the motive power is obtained through a simple bucket- 
and-siphon arrangement worked by the overflow from other 
tanks. This apparatus (first used at the Plymouth Laboratory 
of the Marine Biological Association in 1897, and since introduced 
into similar institutions), by causing slight eddies in the water, 
keeps the floating fauna in suspension, and has proved very suc- 
cessful in rearing larvae and in similar work. (G. H. Fo.) 

AQUARIUS (the "Water-bearer" or "Cup-bearer"), in 
astronomy, the eleventh sign of the zodiac (g.v.), situated 
between Capricornus and Pisces. Its symbol is ««, representing 
part of a stream of water, probably in allusion to the fact that 
when the sun is in this part of the heavens (January, February) 
the* weather is rainy. It is also a constellation mentioned by 
Eudoxus (4th century B.C.) and Aratus (3rd century B.C.); 
Ptolemy catalogued forty-five stars, Tycho Brahe forty-one, 
Hevelius forty-seven, t Aquarii is a well-defined binary, 
having both components of the fourth magnitude; it is probably 
of long period. 

AQUATINT (Lat. aqua, water, and tincta, dyed), a kind of 
etching (q.v.) which imitates washes with a brush. There are 
many ways of preparing a plate for aquatint, the following being 
recommended by P. G. Hamerton. Have three different solu- 
tions of rosin in rectified alcohol, making them of various degrees 
of strength, but always thin enough to be quite fluid, the weakest 
solution being almost colourless. First pour the strongest 
solution on the plate. When it dries it will produce a granula- 
tion; and you may now bite as in ordinary etching for your 
darker tones, stopping out what the acid is not to operate upon, 
or you may use a brush charged with acid, perchloride of iron 
being a very good mordant for the purpose. After cleaning the 
plate, you proceed with the weaker solutions in the same way, 
the weakest giving the finest granulation for skies, distances, &c. 
The process requires a good deal of stopping-out, and some 
burnishing, scraping, &c, at last. Aquatint may be effectively 
used in combination with line etching, and still more harmoni- 
ously with soft ground etching in which the line imitates that of 
the lead pencil. 

AQUAVIVA, CLAUDIO (1542-1615), fifth general of the 
Jesuits, the youngest son of the duke d'Altri, was born at Naples. 
He joined the Jesuits at Rome in 1 567, and his high administrative 



240 



AQUEDUCT 



gifts marked him out for the highest posts. He was soon 
nominated provincial of Naples and then of Rome; and during 
this office he offered to join the Jesuit mission to England that 
set out under Robert Parsons (q.v.) in the spring of 1580. The 
following year, being then only thirty-seven years old, he was 
elected, by a large majority, general of the society in succession 
to Mercurian, to the great surprise of Gregory XIII.; but the 
extraordinary political ability he displayed, and the vast increase 
that came to the Society during his long generalate, abundantly 
justified the votes of the electors. He, together with Lainez, 
may be regarded as the real founder of the Society as it is known 
to history. A born ruler, he secured all authority in his own 
hands, and insisted that those who prided themselves on their 
obedience should act up to the profession. In his first letter 
" On the happy increase of the Society " (25th of July 1581), he 
treats of the necessary qualifications for superiors, and points 
out that government should be directed not by the maxims of 
human wisdom but by those of supernatural prudence. He 
successfully quelled a revolt among the Spanish Jesuits, which 
was supported by Philip II., and he made use in this matter of 
Parsons. A more difficult task was the management of Sixtus V. , 
who was hostile to the Society. By consummate tact and bold- 
ness Aquaviva succeeded in playing the king against the pope, 
and Sixtus against Philip. For prudential reasons, he silenced 
Mariana, whose doctrine on tyrannicide had produced deep 
indignation in France; and he also appears to have discounten- 
anced the action of the French Jesuits in favour of the League, 
and was thus able to secure solid advantages when Henry IV. 
overcame the confederacy. To him is due the Jesuit system of 
education in the book Ratio atque instilntio studiorum (Rome, 
1586). But the Dominicans denounced it to the Inquisition, 
and it was condemned both in Spain and in Rome, on account of 
some opinions concerning the Thomist doctrines of the divine 
physical premotion in secondary causes and predestination. 
The incriminated chapters were withdrawn in the edition of 1591. 
In the fierce disputes that arose between the Jesuit theologians 
and the Dominicans on the subject of grace, Aquaviva managed, 
under Clement VIII. and Paul V., to save his party from a 
condemnation that at one time seemed probable. He died at 
Rome on the3ist of January 1615, leaving the Society numbering 
13,000 members in 550 houses and 15 provinces. The sub- 
sequent influence exercised by the Jesuits, in their golden age, 
was largely due to the far-seeing policy of Aquaviva, who 
is undoubtedly the greatest general that has governed the 
Society. (E. Tn.*) 

AQUEDUCT (Lat. aqua, water, and ducere, to lead; Gr. 
iiBpayoiyeiov, vhpayioyiov, virovo/jtos), a term properly including 
artificial works of every kind by means of which water is con- 
veyed from one place to another, but generally used in a more 
limited sense. It is, in fact, rarely employed except in cases 
where the work is of considerable magnitude and importance, 
and where the water flows naturally by gravitation. The most 
important purpose for which aqueducts are constructed is that of 
conveying pure water, from sources more or less distant, to large 
masses of population. Aqueducts are either below ground, on 
the surface, or raised on walls either solid or pierced with arches; 
to the last the term is often confined in popular language. The 
choice of method naturally depends on the contour of the country. 
I. Ancient Aqueducts.— -In Egypt, Babylonia and Assyria — flat 
countries traversed by big rivers and subject to floods — water 
was supplied by means of open canals with large basins. 
In Persia devices of all kinds were adopted according 
to the nature of the country. In relation to the 
achievements of Greece and Rome, the Phoenicians are the most 
important among pre-classical engineers. In Cyprus water was 
supplied to temples by rock-cut subterranean conduits carried 
across intervening valleys in siphons. Such conduits have been 
found near Citium, Amathus, &c. (Cesnola, Cyprus, pp. 187, 341). 
In Syria the most striking of Phoenician waterworks is the well 
of Ras-el-Ain near Tyre, which consisted of four strong octagonal 
towers through which rises to a height of 18 to 20 ft. the water 
from four deep artesian wells. The water thus accumulated was 



Phoe- 
nician. 



carried off in conduits to reservoirs near the shore, and thence* 
in vessels or skins to the island. The aqueduct across to the 
island is, of course, of Roman work. 

It is not possible in all cases to find a satisfactory date for 
the numerous conduits which have supplied Jerusalem; some 
probably go back to the times of the kings of Judah. Jerusa i eia . 
The principal reservoir consists of the three Pools of 
Solomon which supplied the old aqueduct; the highest is 
about 20 ft. above the middle one and 40 above the lowest. 
These pools collected the water from Ain Saleh and other springs, 
and sent it to the city by two conduits. The higher of these — ■ 
probably the older — Was partly a rock-cut canal, partly carried 
on masonry; the siphon-pipe system was adopted across the 
lower ground near Rachel's Tomb, where the pipe (15 in. wide) is 
formed of large pierced stones embedded in rubble masonry. 
The lower conduit is still complete; it winds so much as to be 
altogether some 20 m. long. Near the Birket-es-Sultan it passes 
over the valley of Hinnom on nine low arches and reaches the 
city on the hill above the Tyropeon valley. It enters the Haram 
enclosure at the Gate of the Chain (Bab es-Silsila), outside which 
is a basin 84 ft. by 42 by 24 deep. It is interesting to note in the 
case of the underground tunnel which brought water from the 
Virgin's Fountain to the pool of Siloam, that the two boring 
parties had no certain means of keeping the line; there is 
evidence that they had to make shafts to discover their position, 
and that ultimately the parties almost passed one another. 
Though the direct distance is 1100 ft., the length of the con- 
duit is over 1700 ft. Perrot and Chipiez incline to attribute 
the Pools of Solomon to the 'Asmonaeans, followed by Roman 
governors, whereas the earlier tunnels of the Kedron and 
Tyropeon valley may be Punic- Jewish (see also Palest. Explor. 
Fund Mem., " Jerusalem," pp. 346-365). Besides these conduits 
excavation has discovered traces of many other cisterns, tunnels 
and conduits of various kinds. Many of them point to periods 
of great prosperity and engineering enterprise which gave to the 
city a water-supply far superior to that which exists at present. 

See the publications of the Palestine Exploration Fund; A. S. 
Murray's Handbook to Syria and Palestine (1903), pp. 63-67 ; Perrot 
and Chipiez, History of Art in Sardinia, Judaea, &fc. (Eng. trans., 
1890), pp. 321 ff. ; other authorities quoted under Jerusalem. 

The earliest attempts in Europe to solve the problems of 
water-supply were made by the Greeks, who perhaps derived 
their ideas from the Phoenicians. It has generally 
been held, partly on the strength of a passage in Strabo 
(v. 3. 8, p. 235), and partly owing to the comparative unimport- 
ance of the remains discovered, that the Greek works were 
altogether inferior to the Roman. Research in the Greek towns 
of Asia Minor, together with a juster appreciation of the remains 
as a whole, must be held to modify this view. Among the earliest 
examples of Greek work are the tunnels or emissaria which 
drained Lake Copais in Boeotia; these, though net strictly 
aqueducts, were undoubtedly the precursors of such works, 
consisting as they did of subterranean tunnels {virbvop.oi) with 
vertical shafts (<j>pea.Tiat,) , sixteen of which are still recognizable, 
the deepest being about 150 ft. They may be compared with 
that described by Polybius as conveying water from Taurus to 
Hecatompylos, and with numerous other remains in Asia Minor, 
Syria,. Phoenicia and Palmyra. Popular legend ascribed them to 
Cadmus, just as Argos referred the irrigation of its lands to 
Danaiis. They are undoubtedly of great antiquity. 

The insufficiency of water, supplied by natural springs and 
cisterns hewn in the rock, which in an early age had satisfied the 
small communities of Greece, had become a pressing public 
question by the time of the Tyrants, of whom Polycrates of 
Samos and Peisistratus of Athens were distinguished for their 
wisdom and enterprise in this respect. The former obtained the 
services of Eupalinus, an engineer celebrated for the skill with 
which he had carried out the works for the water-supply oi 
Megara (see Athen. Mittheil. xxv., 1900, 23) under the direction 
of the Tyrant Theagenes (c. 625 B.C.). At Samos the difficulty 
lay in a hill which rose between the town and the water source. 
Through this hill Eupalinus cut a tunnel 8 ft. broad, 8 ft. high 



Greek 



AQUEDUCT 



241 



and 4200 ft. long, building within the tunnel a channel 3 ft. 
broad and 11 ells deep. The water, flowing by an accurately 
reckoned declivity, and all along open to the fresh air, was 
received at the lower end by a conduit of masonry, and so led 
into the town, where it supplied fountains, pipes, baths, cloacae, 
&c, and ultimately passed into the harbour (Herod, iii. 60). In 
Athens, under the rule of the Peisistratids (c. 560-510 B.C.), a 
similarly extensive, if less difficult, series of works was completed 
to bring water from the neighbouring hills to supplement the 
inadequate supply from the springs. From Hymettus were two 
conduits passing under the bed of the Ilissus, most of the course 
being cut in the rock. Pentelicus, richer in water, supplied 
another conduit, which can still be traced from the modern 
village of Chalandri by the air shafts built several feet above the 
ground, and at a distance apart of 130-160 ft.; the diameter of 
these shafts is 4-5 ft., and the number of them still preserved is 
about sixty. Tributary channels conveyed into the main stream 
the waters of the district through which it passed. Outside 
Athens, those two conduits met in a large reservoir, from which 
the water was distributed by a ramification of underground 
channels throughout the city. These latter channels vary in 
form, being partly round, partly square, and generally walled 
with stone; the chief one is sufficiently large for two men to 
pass in it. The precise location of the reservoir depends on the 
value of Dr Wilhelm Dorpfeld's theory as to the site of the 
Enneacrunus of Thucydides and Pausanias (see Athens: 
Topography and Antiquity). Dorpfeld places it south-west of 
the Acropolis, where there is a cistern connected with an aqueduct 
which passed under the theatre of Dionysus and on towards the 
Ilissus (see map under Athens). Others have placed it south of 
the Olympieum in the Ilissus bed. Beside these works water was 
brought from Pentelicus in an underground conduit begun by the 
emperor Hadrian and completed by Antoninus Pius. This 
aqueduct is still in use, having been repaired in 1869. 

In Sicily, the works by which Empedocles, it is said, brought 
the water into the town of Selinus, are no longer visible; but 
it is probable that, like those of Syracuse, they consisted chiefly 
of tunnels and pipes laid under the ground. Syracuse was sup- 
plied by two aqueducts, one of which the Athenians destroyed 
(Thuc. vi. 100). One was fed by an affluent (the mod. Buttigliara) 
of the Anapus (mod. Anapo); it carried the water up to the top 
of Epipolae, where the channel was open, and thence down to 
the city and finally into the harbour. The other also ascends to 
the top of Epipolae, skirts the city on the north, and then 
proceeds along the coast. Its course is marked by rect- 
angular shafts (spiragli) at the bottom of which water is still 
visible. 

An example of what appears to have been the earliest form 
of aqueduct in Greece was discovered in the island of Cos beside 
the fountain Burinna (mod. Fountain of Hippocrates) on Mount 
Oromedon. It consists of a bell-shaped chamber, built under- 
ground in the hill-side, to receive the water of the spring and 
keep it cool; a shaft from the top of the chamber supplied fresh 
air. From this reservoir the water was led by a subterranean 
channel, 114 ft. long and 65 ft. high. (J. M. M.) 

In comparing Greek and Roman aqueducts, many writers 
have enlarged on the greatness of the latter as an example of 
Roman contempt for natural obstacles, or even of 
Roman ignorance of the laws of nature. Now, in the 
first place, the Romans were not unacquainted with the law 
that water finds its own level (see Pliny, Hist. Nat. xxxi. 57, 
" subit altitudinem exortus sui "), and took full advantage of 
it in the construction of lofty fountains and the supplying of 
the upper floors of houses. That they built aqueducts across 
valleys in preference to carrying pipes underground was due 
simply to economy. Pipes had to be made of lead which was 
weak, or of bronze which was expensive; and the Romans 
were not sufficiently expert in the casting of large pipes which 
would stand a very great pressure to employ them for the whole 
course of a great aqueduct. Secondly, the water was so ex- 
tremely hard that it was important that the channels should be 
readily accessible for repair as well as for the detection of leak- 



Romaa. 



age. 1 Moreover, as we shall see, the Roman aqueducts did not, 
in fact, preserve a straight line regardless of the configuration 
of the country. A striking example is the aqueduct of Nemausus 
(Nimes), the springs of which are some 10 m. from the town, 
though the actual distance traversed is about 25. Other 
devices, such as changing the level and then modifying the slope, 
and siphon arrangements of various kinds, were adopted (as 
in the aqueduct at Aspendus). 

Sextus Julius Frontinus, appointed curator aquarum in a.d. 97, 
mentions in his treatise de aquaeductibus urbis Romae (on the 
aqueducts of the city of Rome) nine aqueducts as being in use 
in his time (the lengths of the aqueducts as given here follow 
his measurements). These are: (1) Aqua Appia, which took its 
rise between the 6th and 7th milestones of the Via Colla- 
tina, and measured from its source to the Porta Trigemina n 
Roman miles, of which all but about 300 ft. were below ground. 
It appears to have been the first important enterprise of the 
kind at Rome, and was the work of the censor Appius Claudius 
Caecus, from whom it derived its name. The date of its con- 
struction was 312 B.C. (2) Anio Vetus, constructed in 272- 
269 B.C. by the censor Manius Curius Dentatus. From its source 
near Tivoli, on the left side of the Anio, it flowed some 43 m., 2 
of which only 1100 ft. was above ground. At the distance of 
2 m. from Rome (Frontinus, i. 21), it parted into two courses, 
one of which led to the horti Asiniani, and was thence dis- 
tributed; while the other (rectus ductus) led by the temple of 
Spes to the Porta Esquilina. (3) Aqua Marcia, reconstructed 
in 1 860- 1 8 70 under the name of Acqua Pia or Marcia-Pia after 
Pius IX. (though from Tivoli to Rome the modern aqueduct 
takes an entirely different course), rising on the left side of the 
Via Valeria near the 36th milestone. It traversed 6if m., 
of which 54J were underground, and for the remaining distance 
was carried partly on substructions and partly on arches. It 
was the work of the praetor Quintus Marcius Rex (144-140 B.C.), 
not of Ancus Marcius, the fourth king of Rome, as Pliny (N.H. 
xxxi. 3) fancied, and took its name from its constructor. Its 
waters were celebrated for their coolness and excellent quality. 
Its volume was largely increased by Augustus, who added to it 
the Aqua Augusta; and it was repaired and restored by Titus, 
Septimus Severus, Caracalla and Diocletian. (4) Aqua Tepula, 
from its source (now known as Sorgente Preziosa) in the district 
of Tusculum, to Rome, was some 11 m. in length. The first 
portion of its course must have been almost entirely subter- 
ranean and is not now traceable. For the last 6| m. it ran on 
the same series of arches that carried the Aqua Marcia, but at 
a higher level. It was the work of the Censors Cn. Servilius 
Caepio and L. Cassius Longinus, and was completed in the year 
125 B.C. Its water is warm (about 63 Fahr.) and not of the 
best quality. (5) The Aqua Julia, from a source 2 m. from that 
of the Tepula, joined its course at the 10th milestone of the Via 
Latina. The combined stream, after a distance of 4 m., was 
received in a reservoir, and then once more divided into two 
channels. The entire length of the Julia was 155 m. It was 
constructed in the year 33 B.C. by M. Vipsanius Agrippa, who 
also built the (6) Aqua Virgo which, from its origin at a copious 
spring in a marsh on the Via Collatina, measured 14 m. in length; 
it was conveyed in a channel, partly under and partly above 
ground. It was begun in the year 3^ B.C. and was celebrated 
for the excellence of its waters. It was restored to use by 
Pius V. in 1570. (7) Aqua Alsietina or Augusta, the source 
of which is the Lacus Alsietinus (mod. Lago di Martignano) , to 
the north of Rome, was over 22 m. in length, of which 358 paces 
were on arches. It was the work of Augustus, probably with 
the object of furnishing water for his naumachia (a basin for 
sham sea-fights), and not for drinking purposes. Its course is 

'There have been found at Caerwent, in Monmouthshire, clear 
traces of wooden pipes (internal diameter about 2 in.) which must 
have carried drinking-water, and almost certainly a pressure supply 
from the surrounding hills. Some patches of lead also have been 
found obviously nailed on to the pipes at points where they had 
burst (see Archaeologia, 1908). 

2 This distance will not agree with the length given on some of the 
cippi (Lanciani, Bull. Com., 1899, 38). 



242 



AQUEDUCT 



unknown, as no remains of it exist, but an inscription relating 
to it is given in Notizie d. Scavi (1887), p. 182. (8, o) The Aqua 
Claudia and Anio Novus were two aqueducts begun by Caligula 
in a.d. 38 and completed by Claudius in a.d. 52. The springs 
of the former belonged to the same group as those of the Marcia, 
and were situated near the 38th milestone of the Via Sublacensis, 
not far from its divergence from the Via Valeria, while the original 
intake of the latter from the river Anio was 4 m. farther along 
the same road. As the water was thick it was collected in a 
purifying tank, and 4 m. below, a branch stream, the Rivus 
Herculaneus, was added to it. According to Frontinus, over 
10 m. of the course of the Claudia and nearly 05 of that of the 
Anio Novus were above ground. Seven miles out of Rome they 
united and ran from that point into Rome, following a natural 
isthmus formed by a lava stream from the Alban volcano, upon 
a line of arches, which still forms one of the most conspicuous 
features of the Campagna. The original inscription of Claudius 
(a.d. 52) on the Porta Maggiore, by which the Aqua Claudia and 
Anio Novus crossed the Via Praenestina and the Via Labicana, 
gives the length of the Aqua Claudia as 45 m., and that of the 
Anio Novus as 62 m. Frontinus, on the other hand, gives 
46-406 m. {i.e. about 43 English miles) and 58-700 m. (i.e. about 
54 English miles). Albertini (Milanges de I' Ecole Francaise, 1906, 
305) explains the difference as due to the fact that Frontinus 
was calculating the length of the Claudia from the farthest 
spring, the Fons Albudinus, and that of the Anio Novus from 
the new intake constructed by Trajan in one of the three lakes 
constructed by Nero for the adornment of his villa above Subiaco. 
Two other inscriptions on the Porta Maggiore record restorations 
by Vespasian in a.d. 70, and by Titus in a.d. 80. That the 
aqueducts should be spoken of as vetustate dilapsi so soon after 
their construction is not a little surprising, and may be attrir 
buted either to hasty construction in order to complete them 
by a fixed date, or to jobbery by the imperial freedmen who 
under Claudius were especially powerful, or to the fact that a line 
of arches intended originally in all probability for the Aqua 
Claudia alone was made to carry the Anio Novus as well. 

The size of the channels (specus) of the principal aqueducts 
varies considerably at different points of their course. The 
Anio Novus has the largest of them all, measuring 3 to 4 ft. wide 
and 9 ft. high to the top of the roof, which is pointed. They 
are lined with hard cement (opus signinum) containing fragments 
of broken brick. Those aqueducts of which the most con- 
spicuous remains exist in the neighbourhood of Rome are the 
four from the upper valley of the Anio, the two which took 
their supply and their name from the river itself, and the Marcia 
and the Claudia, which originated from the same group of springs, 
in the floor of the Anio valley 6 m. below Subiaco. Those of the 
Anio Vetus, which travelled at a considerably lower level than 
the other three, are the least conspicuous, while the Claudia and 
Anio Novus as a rule kept close together, the latter at the highest 
level of all. The ruins of bridges and substructions in the Anio 
valley down to Tivoli, though comparatively little known, are 
of great importance. In all the aqueducts the original con- 
struction of the bridges was in opus quadratum (masonry), while 
the substructions are in brick-faced concrete; but the bridges 
are as a rule strengthened (and often several times) with rein- 
forcing walls of concrete faced with opus reticulatum or. brick- 
work. Below Tivoli, where the Anio leaves its narrow valley, 
the aqueducts sweep round towards the Alban hills, and pass 
through some very difficult country between Tivoli and Galli- 
cano, alternately crossing ravines, some of which are as much 
as 300 ft. deep, and tunnelling through hills. 1 

The engineering skill displayed is remarkable, and one wonders 
what instruments were employed — probably the so-called 
chorobates, an improvement upon the ordinary water-level 
(Vitruvius viii. 6), though this would be slow and complicated. 
The optical properties of glass lenses were, however, unknown to 

1 The course of the Aqua Claudia was considerably shortened by 
the cutting of a tunnel 3 m. long under the Monte Affliano in the 
time of Domitian (T. Ashby, in Papers of the British School at Rome, 
iii, 133). 



the ancients, and the dioptra, or angle measure, was considered 
by Vitruvius less trustworthy than the chorobates for the planning 
of aqueducts (cf. E. Hultsch, s.v. in Pauly-Wissowa, Real- 
encyclopddie). The aqueducts as a rule were carried on separate 
bridges, though all four united at the Ponte Lupo, a huge 
structure, which after the addition of all the four, and with the 
inclusion of all the later strengthening walls that were found 
necessary in course of time, measures 105 ft. in height, 508 in 
length, and 46 in thickness at the bottom, without including 
the buttresses. From Gallicano onwards the course of these 
four aqueducts follows the lower slopes of the Alban Hills. 
Previous writers on the subject have been unable to determine 
their course, which is largely subterranean; but it can be 
followed step by step with the indications given by the presence 
of the calcareous deposit which was thrown out at the putei or 
shafts (which were, as a rule, placed at intervals of 240 ft., as 
were the cippi) when the specus was cleaned; and remains of 
bridges, though less important, owing to the less difficult char- 
acter of the country, are not entirely absent (cf. the works by 
T. Ashby cited in bibliography). 2 Near the 7th milestone of 
the Via Latina at Le Capanelle, the Aqua Claudia and Anio 
Novus emerge from their underground course, and run into 
Rome upon the long series of arches already mentioned, passing 
over the Porta Maggiore. The Claudia sent off an important 
branch from the Porta Maggiore over the Caelian to the Palatine* 
but the main aqueduct soon reached its termination. A mile 
farther on the Aqua Marcia also, owing to the gradual slope of 
the ground towards Rome, begins to be supported on arches, 
which were also used to carry the Aqua Tepula and the Aqua 
Julia (of the two latter, before their junction with the Marcia, no 
remains exist above ground, but inscribed cippi of the last named 
and its underground channel have been found at Le Capanelle, 
and cippi also close to its springs, which are a little way above 
Grottaf errata at Gli Squarciarelli) . The Anio Vetus followed 
the same line, but kept underground (as was natural at the early 
period at which it was constructed) until the immediate neigh- 
bourhood of Rome, near the locality known as "ad Spem 
veterem " (from a temple of Spes, of which no remains are known) 
close to the Porta Maggiore. At this point, besides the aqueducts 
named, the Aqua Appia, as we are told by Frontinus, entered the 
city, and received an important branch, the Appia Augusta. 
No remains of either have been discovered outside the city. 

The Aqua Alexandrina must also have entered the city here, 
though its channel, which lay at some depth below ground, has 
not been discovered. Considerable remains of its brick aqueducts 
exist in the district between the Via Praenestina and the Via 
Labicana. 

Of the two aqueducts on the right bank of the Tiber, the 
Alsietina, as we have said, has no remains at all, while those 
of the Traiana are not of great importance. The line of the 
aqueducts was marked by cippi, inscribed (in the case of the 
Anio Vetus, Marcia, .Tepula, Julia and Virgo — those of the 
Claudia and Anio Novus are uninscribed, and those of the 
Traiana are differently worded) with the name of the aqueduct, 
the distance from the next cippus (generally 240 ft.) and the 
number, counting from Rome (not from the springs). These 
boundary stones were erected in pairs, to mark off the strip of 
land 30 ft. in width reserved for the aqueduct, and for the road 
or path which generally followed it. The shafts (putei) often 
stood, but not necessarily, at the same points as the cippi. 

To these nine must be added the two following, constructed 
after Frontinus's time: (10) Aqua Traiana, from springs to the 
north-west of the Lacus Sabatinus (Lago di Bracciano), con- 
structed by Trajan in a.d. 109, about 36! English miles in length. 
It was restored by Paul V. in 161 1, who made use of and largely 
transformed the remains of the ancient aqueduct; he allowed 
some of the inferior water of the lake to flow into the channel, and 
it is thus no longer used for drinking, (n) Aqua Alexandrina, 

2 About 3 m. south-east of this point the presence of large quan- 
tities of deposit and a sudden fall in the level of the channels 
seems to indicate the existence of settling tanks, of which no actual 
traces can be seen. 



AQUEDUCT 



Plate I. 




. AQUA CLAUDIA, ROME. 



Pholo, Altnari. 




PONT DU GARD, NIMES (NEMAUSUS). 



Photo, Neurdtin. 



n. «4 a - 



Plate II. % 



AQUEDUCT 



MatfiMMIMIilP»Mltft»- 



-'"""#' i.~ -jsm: 



R0MAI4 AQUEDUCT AT SEGOVIA. 



Photo, Laureal y Cia.. 





AQUEDUCT OF ROQUEFAVOUR, MARSEILLES. 
Early nineteenth century. 




Photo, Brogi. 



PISCINA MIRABILIS AT BAIAE. 



AQUA MARCIA, ROME. 



l'holo, Dr T. Ashby. 



AQUEDUCT 



243 



rising about 14 English miles from Rome, between the Via Prae- 
nestina and the Via Labicana, the work of Alexander Sev.erus 
(a.d. 226). The springs now supply the modern Acqua Felice, 
constructed by Sixtus V. in 1585, but the course of the latter 
is mainly subterranean and not identical with that of the 
former. 

It is agreed that these eleven are all that were constructed. 
Procopius speaks of fourteen (and the Regionary catalogues 
mention others), but this number includes branch conduits. All 
the aqueducts ended in the city in huge castella or reservoirs for 
the purpose of distribution. Vitruvius recommends the division 
of these into three parts — one for the supply of fountains, &c, 
one for the public baths and one for private consumers. In the 
Piazza Vittorio Emmanuele at Rome there are still to be seen 
the remains of a large ornamental fountain built probably for the 
Aqua Julia by Domitian or Alexander Severus (Jordan-Htilsen, 
Topographic, i. 3350). Besides these main castella there were also 
many minor castella in various parts of the city for sub-distribu- 
tion. To allow the water to purify itself before being distributed 
in the city, filtering and settling tanks {piscinae limariae) were 
built outside the walls. These piscinae were covered in with a 
vaulted roof, and were sometimes on a very large scale, as in the 
example still preserved at Fermo, which consists of two stories, 
each having three oblong basins communicating with each other; 
or the Piscina Mirabilis at Baiae, which is covered in by a vaulted 
roof, supported on forty-eight pillars and perforated to permit 
the escape of foul air. Two stairs lead by forty steps to the 
bottom of the reservoir. In the middle of the basin is a sinking 
to collect the deposit of the water. The walls and pillars are 
coated with a stucco so hard as to resist a tool. 

The oversight of aqueducts was placed, in the times of the 
republic, under the aediles, who were not, however, the con- 
structors of them; of the four aqueducts built during this 
period, three are the work of censors, one (the Marcia) of a 
praetor. Under the empire this task devolved on special 
officials styled Curatores Aquarum, instituted by Augustus, 
who, as he himself says, " riyos aquarum omnium refecit " (in- 
scription on the arch by which the Aqua Marcia crossed the Via 
Tiburtina). (T. As.) 

Among the aqueducts outside Italy, constructed in Roman 
times and existing still, the most remarkable are: (1) the aque- 
duct at Nimes (Nemausus), erected probably by Vipsanius 
Agrippa in the time of Augustus, which rose to 160 ft. The Pont 
du Gard, as this aqueduct is now called, consists of three tiers of 
arches across the valley of the river Gardon. In the lowest 
tier are six arches, of which one has a span of 75 ft., the others 
each 60 ft. In the second tier are eleven arches, each with a span 
of 75 ft. In the third tier are thirty-five smaller arches which 
carried the specus. As a bridge, the Pont du Gard has no rival 
for lightness and boldness of design among the existing remains 
of works of this class carried out in Roman times. (2) The 
aqueduct bridges at Segovia (Merckel, Ingenieurtechnik, pp. 
566-568), Tarragona {ibid. 565-566), and Merida in Spain, the 
former being 2400 ft. long, with 109 arches of fine masonry, in 
two tiers, and reaching the height of 102 ft. The bridge at 
Tarragona is 876 ft. long and 83 ft. high. (3) At Mainz are the 
ruins of an aqueduct 7000 yds. long, about half of which is 
carried on from 500 to 600 pillars {Archaeological Journal, 
xlvii., 1890, pp. 211-214). This aqueduct was built by the XlVth 
legion and was for the use of the camp, not for the townspeople. 
For the similar aqueduct at Luynes see Arch. Journ. xlv. (1888), 
pp. 235-237. Similar witnesses of Roman occupation are to be 
seen in Dacia, Africa (see especially under Carthage), Greece 
and Asia Minor. (4) The aqueduct at Jouy-aux-Arches, near 
Metz, which originally extended across the Moselle, here very 
broad, conveyed to the city an abundance of excellent water 
from Gorze. From a large reservoir at the source of the aque- 
duct the water passed along subterranean channels built of hewn 
stone, and sufficiently spacious for a man to walk in them up- 
right. Similar channels received the water after it had crossed 
the Moselle by this bridge, at the distance of about 6 m. from 
Metz, and conveyed it to the city. The bridge consisted of only 



Asia 
Minor. 



one row of arches nearly 60 ft. high. The middle arches have 
given way under the force of the water, but the others are still 
perfectly solid. This aqueduct is probably to be attributed to 
the latter half of the 4th century a.d. It is for the use of the 
town; hence its size. (5) One of the principal bridges of the 
aqueduct of Antioch in Syria is 700 ft. long, and at the deepest 
point 200 ft. high. The lower part consists almost entirely of 
solid wall, and the upper part of a series of arches with very 
massive pillars. The masonry and design are rude. The water 
supply was drawn from several springs at a place called Beit el- 
Ma (anc. Daphne) about 4 or 5 m. from Antioch. From these 
separate springs the water was conducted by channels of hewn 
stone into a main channel, similarly constructed, which traversed 
the rest of the distance, being carried across streams and valleys 
by means of arches or bridges. (6) At the village of Moris, about 
an hour's distance north-west from the town of Mytilene, is the 
bridge of an aqueduct, carried by massive pillars built of large 
hewn blocks of grey marble, and connected by means of three 
rows of arches, of which the uppermost is of brick. The bridge 
extended about 500 ft. in length, and at the deepest point was 
from 70 to 80 ft. high. Judged by the masonry and the graceful 
design, it has been thought to be a work of the age of Augustus. 
Remains of this aqueduct are to be seen at Larisson Lamarousia, 
an hour's distance from Moris, and at St Demetri, two hours 
and a half from Ayasos, on the road to Vasilika. 

The whole subject of the ancient and medieval aqueducts of 
Asia Minor has been considered in great detail by G. Weber 
(" Wasserleitungen in kleinasiatischen Stadten," in 
the Jahrbuch des kaiserl. deutsch. archdolog. Inslit. 
xix., 1904; see also earlier articles in Jahrbuch, 1892, 
1899). The aqueducts examined are those at Pergamum, 
Laodicea and Smyrna (in the earlier articles), and those at 
Metropolis (Ionia) , Tralles (Aidin) , Antioch-on-Maeander, Aphro- 
disias, Trapezopolis, Hierapolis, Apamea Cibotus and Antioch 
in Pisidia. In most of these cases it is difficult or even im- 
possible to decide whether the work is Hellenistic or Roman; 
to the Romans Weber inclines to attribute, e.g. those at Metro- 
polis, Tralles (perhaps), Aphrodisias; to the Greeks, e.g. those 
at Antioch-on-Maearider and Antioch in Pisidia. Since, there- 
fore, a detailed description of these remains does not provide 
material for any satisfactory generalizations as to the dis- 
tinctive features of Hellenistic and Roman work, it will be 
sufficient here to mention a few of the more interesting 
discoveries. 

In the case of Metropolis, the aqueduct in the valley of the 
Astraeus consisted of an arcade about 13 to 16 ft. high. Nearer 
to the town in the hills there are distinct traces of a canal with 
brick walls. It is clear that the water could not have served 
more than the lower parts of the town, the acropolis of which 
is nearly 200 ft. above the level of the conduit. In the case of 
Tralles the water was supplied by a high pressure conduit and 
distributed from the acropolis, where there are the remains of a 
basin (13 ft. by 10) arched over with brick. The ancient aque- 
duct is to be distinguished from a later, probably Byzantine, 
canal conduit, the course of which avoids the deeper depressions, 
crossed by the old aqueduct. Of the Antioch-on-Maf,ander aque- 
duct only a few clay-pipes remain, and the same is true of the 
aqueduct which was built by Carminius in the 2nd century a.d. 
to supply the community when reinforced by the amalgamation 
of Plarasa and Tauropolis; two of its basins are still distinguish- 
able, but the two water-towers which are still standing belong 
to a later Byzantine structure. Trapezopolis was supplied 
from Mt. Salbacus (Baba Dagh): some twenty stone-pipes 
have been found built into a low wall which varies from 3j to 
about 5 ft. wide. Of the pillars which carried the conduit-pipe 
to Antioch in Pisidia, nineteen are still standing. Each arch 
consists of eleven keystones; no cement was used. The con- 
duit, which was high-pressure, ends in a distributing tower and 
reservoir. (J. M. M.) 

II. Medieval. — The aqueduct near Spoleto, w T hich now serves 
also as a bridge, is deserving of notice as an early instance of the 
use of the pointed arch, belonging as it docs to the 7th or 8th 



244 



AQUEDUCT 



Constanti- 
nople. 



century. It has ten arches, remarkable for the elegance of their 
design and the airy lightness of their proportions, each over 
66 ft. in span, and about 300 ft. in height. 

The aqueduct of Pyrgos, near Constantinople, is a remarkable 
example of works of this class carried out in the later times of 
the Roman empire, and consisted of two branches. 
From this circumstance it was called Egri Kemer 
(" the Crooked Aqueduct "), to distinguish it from 
the Long Aqueduct, situated near the source of the waters. 
One of the branches extends 670 ft. in length, and is 106 ft. in 
height at the deepest part. It is composed of three tiers of 
arches, those in each row increasing in width from the bottom 
to the top — an arrangement very properly introduced with the 
view of saving materials without diminishing the strength of the 
work. The two upper rows consisted of arches of semicircles, 
the lower of Gothic arches; and this circumstance leads to the 
belief that the date of the structure is about the 10th century. 
The breadth of the building at the base was 21 ft., and it dimin- 
ished with a regular batter on each side to the top, where it was 
only n ft. The base also was protected by strong buttresses 
or counterforts, erected against each of the pillars. The other 
branch of the aqueduct was 300 ft. long, and consisted of twelve 
semicircular arches. This aqueduct serves to- convey to Con- 
stantinople the waters of the valley of Belgrad, one of the 
principal sources from which the city is supplied. These are 
situated on the heights of Mount Haemus, the extremity of the 
Balkan Mountains, which overhangs the Black Sea. The water 
rises about 15 m. from the city, and between 3 and 4 m. west 
of the village of Belgrad, in three sources, which run in three 
deep and very confined valleys. These unite a little below the 
village, and then are collected into a large reservoir. After 
