
After the confusion caused by the sudden outbreak had sub- 
sided, and preparations had been made, Sir Harry Smith and his 
gallant force turned the tide of war against the Kaffirs. The 
Amatola mountains were stormed; and the paramount chief 
Kreli, who all along covertly assisted the Gaikas, was severely 
punished. In April 1852 Sir Harry Smith was recalled by Earl 
Grey, who accused him — unjustly, in the opinion of the duke of 
Wellington — of a want of energy and judgment in conducting the 
war, and he was succeeded by Lieutenant- General Cathcart. 
Kreli was again attacked and reduced to submission. The 
Amatolas were finally cleared of the Kaffirs, and small forts 
erected among them to prevent their reoccupation. The British 
commanders were hampered throughout by the insufficiency of 
their forces, and it was not till March 1853 that this most 
sanguinary of Kaffir wars was brought to a conclusion, after a 
loss of many hundred British soldiers. Shortly afterwards, 
British Kaffraria was made a crown colony. The Hottentot 
settlement at Kat river remained, but the Hottentot power 
within the colony was now finally crushed. 

The Great Amaxosa Delusion. — From 1853 the Kaffir tribes 
on the east gave little trouble to the colony. This was due, in 
large measure, to an extraordinary delusion which arose among 
the Amaxosa in 1856, and led in 1857 to the death of some 50,000 
persons. This incident is one of the most remarkable instances 
of misplaced faith recorded in history. The Amaxosa had not 
accepted their defeat in 1853 as decisive and were preparing to 
renew the struggle with the white men. At this juncture, May 
1856, a girl named Nongkwase told her father that on going to 
draw water from a stream she had met strangers of commanding 
aspect. The father, Mhlakza, went to see the men, who told him 
that they were spirits of the dead, who had come, if their behests 
were obeyed, to aid the Kaffirs with their invincible power to 
drive the white man from the land. Mhlakza repeated the 
message to his chief, Sarili, one of the most powerful Kaffir rulers. 
Sarili ordered the commands of the spirits to be obeyed. These 
orders were, at first, that the Amaxosa were to destroy their fat 
cattle. The girl Nongkwase, standing in the river where the 
spirits had first appeared, heard unearthly noises, interpreted 
by her father as orders to kill more and more cattle. At length 
the spirits commanded that not an animal of all their herds was 
to be left alive, and every grain of corn was to be destroyed. 
If that were done, on a given date myriads of cattle more beautiful 
than those destroyed would issue from the earth, while great 
fields of corn, ripe and ready for harvest, would instantly appear. 
The dead would rise, trouble and sickness vanish, and youth and 
beauty come to all alike. Unbelievers and the hated white man 
would on that day utterly perish. The people heard and obeyed. 
Sarili is believed by many persons to have been the instigator 
of the prophecies. Certainly some of the principal chiefs regarded 
all that was done simply as the preparation for a last struggle 
with the whites, their plan being to throw the whole Amaxosa 
nation fully armed and in a famishing condition upon the colony. 



There were those who neither believed the predictions nor looked 
for success in war, but destroyed their last particle of food in 
unquestioning obedience to their chief's command. Either in 
faith that reached the sublime, or in obedience equally great, 
vast numbers of the people acted. Great kraals were also 
prepared for the promised cattle, and huge skin sacks to hold 
the milk that was soon to be more plentiful than water. At 
length the day dawned which, according to the prophecies, was 
to usher in the terrestrial paradise. The sun rose and sank, bat 
the expected miracle did not come to pass. The chiefs who had 
planned to hurl the famished warrior host upon the colony had 
committed an incredible blunder in neglecting to call the nation 
together under pretext of witnessing the resurrection. This 
error they realized too late, and endeavoured by fixing the re- 
surrection for another day to gather the clans, but blank despair 
had taken the place of hope and faith, and it was only as starving 
suppliants that the Amaxosa sought the British. The colonists 
did what they could to save life, but thousands perished miserably. 
In their extremity many of the Kaffirs turned cannibals, and one 
instance of parents eating their own child is authenticated. 
Among the survivors was the girl Nongkwase; her father 
perished. A vivid narrative of the whole incident will be found 
in G. M. Theal's History and Geography of South Africa (3rd ed., 
London, 1878), from which this account is condensed. The 
country depopulated as the result of this delusion was afterwards 
peopled by European settlers, among whom were members of the 
German legion which had served with the British army in the 
Crimea, and some 2000 industrious North German emigrants, 
who proved a valuable acquisition to the colony. 

Sir George Grey's Governorship. — In 1854 Sir George Grey 
became governor of the Cape, and the colony owed much to his 
wise administration. The policy, imposed by the home govern- 
ment, of abandoning responsibility beyond the Orange river, was, 
he perceived, a mistaken one, and the scheme he prepared in 
1858 for a confederation of all South Africa (q.v.) was rejected by 
Great Britain. By his energetic action, however, in support of 
the missionaries Moffat and Livingstone, Sir George kept open 
for the British the road through Bechuanalandto the far interior. 
To Sir George was also due the first attempt, missionary effort 
apart, to educate the Kaffirs and to establish British authority 
firmly among them, a result which the self-destruction of the 
Amaxosa rendered easy. Beyond the Kei the natives were left to 
their own devices. Sir George Grey left the Cape in 1861. 
During his governorship the resources of the colony had been 
increased by the opening up of the copper mines in Little Nama- 
qualand, the mohair wool industry had been established and 
Natal made a separate colony. The opening, in November 1863, 
of the railway from Cape Town to Wellington, begun in 1859, and 
the construction in i860 of the great breakwater in Table Bay, 
long needed on that perilous coast, marked the beginning in the 
colony of public works on a large scale. They were the more or 
less direct result of the granting to the colony of a large share in 
its own government. In 1865 the province of British Kaffraria 
was incorporated with the colony, under the title of the Electoral 
Divisions of King William's Town and East London. The 
transfer was marked by the removal of the prohibition of the 
sale of alcoholic liquors to the natives, and the free trade in 
intoxicants which followed had most deplorable results among the 
Kaffir tribes. A severe drought, affecting almost the entire 
colony for several years, caused great depression of trade, and 
many farmers suffered severely. It was at this period (1869) that 
ostrich-farming was successfully established as a separate 
industry. 

Whether by or against the wish of the home government, the 
limits of British authority continued to extend. The Basutos, 
who dwelt in the upper valleys of the Orange river, had subsisted 
under a semi-protectorate of the British government from 1843 
to 1854; but having been left to their own resources on the 
abandonment of the Orange sovereignty, they fell into a long 
exhaustive warfare with the Boers of the Free State. On the 
urgent petition of their chief Moshesh, they were proclaimed 
British subjects in 1868, and their territory became part of the 



HISTORY] 



CAPE COLONY 



241 



colony in 1871 (see Basutoland). In the same year the south- 
eastern part of Bechuanaland was annexed to Great Britain 
under the title of Griqualand West. This annexation was a con- 
sequence of the discovery there of rich diamond mines, an event 
which was destined to have far-reaching results. (F. R. C.) 

Development of Modern Conditions. — The year 1870 marks the 
dawn of a new era in South Africa. From that date the develop- 
ment of modern South Africa may be said to have fairly started, 
and in spite of political complications, arising from time to time, 
the progress of Cape Colony down to the outbreak of the Transvaal 
War of 1 899 was steadily forward. The discovery of diamonds on 
the Orange river in 1867, followed immediately afterwards by the 
discovery of diamonds on the Vaal river, led to the rapid occupa- 
tion and development of a tract of country which had hitherto 
been but sparsely inhabited. In 1870 Dutoitspan and Bult- 
fontein diamond mines were discovered, and in 1871 the still 
richer mines of Kimberley and De Beers. These four great 
deposits of mineral wealth are still richly productive, and con- 
stitute the greatest industrial asset which the colony possesses. 
At the time of the beginning of the diamond industry, not only 
the territory of Cape Colony and the Boer Republics, but all 
South Africa, was in a very depressed condition. Ostrich-farm- 
ing was in its infancy, and agriculture but little developed. The 
Boers, except in the immediate vicinity of Cape Town, were a 
primitive people. Their wants were few, they lacked enterprise, 
and the trade of the colony was restricted. Even the British 
colonists at that time were far from rich. The diamond industry 
therefore offered considerable attractions, especially to colonists 
of British origin. It was also the means at length of demonstrat- 
ing the fact that South Africa, barren and poor on the surface, 
was rich below the surface. It takes ten acres of Karroo to feed a 
sheep, but it was now seen that a few square yards of diamond- 
iferous blue ground would feed a dozen families. By the end of 
187 1 a large population had already gathered at the diamond 
fields, and immigration continued steadily, bringing new-comers 
to the rich fields. Among the first to seek a fortune at the 
diamond fields was Cecil Rhodes. 

In 1858 the scheme of Sir George Grey for the federation of the 
various colonies and states of South Africa had been rejected, as 
has been stated, by the home authorities. In 1 8 74 the 4th earl of 
Carnarvon, secretary of state for the colonies, who had been 
successful in aiding to bring about the federation of Canada, 
turned his attention to a similar scheme for the confederation of 
South Africa. The representative government in Cape Colony 
had been replaced in 1872 by responsible, i.e. self-government, 
and the new parliament at Cape Town resented the manner 
in which Lord Carnarvon propounded his suggestions. A resolu- 
tion was passed (June 11, 1875) stating that any scheme in favour 
of confederation must in its opinion originate within South 
Africa itself. James Anthony Froude, the distinguished historian, 
was sent out by Lord Carnarvon to further his policy in South 
Africa. As a diplomatist and a representative of the British 
government, the general opinion in South Africa was that Froude 
was not a success, and he entirely failed to induce the colonists to 
adopt Lord Carnarvon's views. In 1876, Fingoland, the Idutywa 
reserve, and Noman's-land, tracts of country on the Kaffir 
frontier, were annexed by Great Britain, on the understanding 
that the Cape government should provide for their government. 
Lord Carnarvon, still bent on confederation, now appointed Sir 
Bartle Frere governor of Cape Colony and high commissioner 
of South Africa. 

Frere had no sooner taken office as high commissioner 
than he found himself confronted with serious native troubles in 
Zululand and on the Kaffir frontier of Cape Colony. In 1877 
there occurred an outbreak on the part of the Galekas and the 
Gaikas. A considerable force of imperial and colonial troops was 
employed to put down this rising, and the war was subsequently 
known as the Ninth Kaffir war. It was in this war that the 
famous Kaffir chief, Sandili, lost his life. At its conclusion the 
Transkei, the territory of the Galeka tribe, under. Kreli, was 
annexed by the British. In the meantime Lord Carnarvon had 
resigned his position in the British cabinet, and the scheme for 



confederation which he had been pushing forward was abandoned. 
As a matter of fact, at that time Cape Colony was too fully 
occupied with native troubles to take into consideration very 
seriously so great a question as confederation. A wave of feeling 
spread amongst the different Kaffir tribes on the colonial frontier, 
and after the Gaika-Galeka War there followed in 1879 a rising in 
Basutoland under Moirosi, whose cattle-raiding had for some 
time past caused considerable trouble. His stronghold was taken 
after very severe fighting by a colonial force, but, their defeat 
notwithstanding, the Basutos remained in a restless and aggressive 
condition for several years. In 1880 the colonial authorities 
endeavoured to extend to Basutoland the Peace Preservation Act 
of 1878, under which a general disarmament of the Basutos was 
attempted. Further fighting followed on this proclamation, 
which was by no means successful, and although peace was 
declared in the country in December 1882, the colonial authorities 
were very glad in 1884 to be relieved of the administration of a 
country which had already cost them £3,000,000. The imperial 
government then took over Basutoland as a crown colony, on the 
understanding that Cape Colony should contribute for adminis- 
trative purposes £18,000 annually. In 1880, Sir Bartle Frere, 
who by his energetic and statesmanlike attitude on the relations 
with the native states, as well as on all other questions, had won 
the esteem and regard of loyal South African colonists, was 
recalled by the 1st earl of Kimberley, the liberal secretary of state 
for the colonies, and was succeeded by Sir Hercules Robinson. 
Griqualand West, which included the diamond fields, was now 
incorporated as a portion of Cape Colony. 

Origin of the Afrikander Bond. — The Boer War of 1881, with 
its disastrous termination, naturally reacted throughout South 
Africa; and as one of the most important results, in the year 
1882 the first Afrikander Bond congress was held at Graaff 
Reinet. The organization of the Bond developed into one * 
embracing the Transvaal, the Orange Free State and Cape 
Colony. Each country had a provincial committee with district 
committees, and branches were distributed throughout the whole 
of South Africa. At a later date the Bond in the Cape Colony 
dissociated itself from its Republican branches. The general 
lines of policy which this organization endeavoured to promote 
may best be gathered from De Patriot, a paper published in the 
colony, and an avowed supporter of the organization. The 
following extracts from articles published in 1882 will illustrate, 
better than anything else, the ambition entertained by some of 
the promoters of this remarkable organization. 

" The Afrikander Bond has for its object the establishment of a 
South African nationality by spreading a true love for what is 
really our fatherland. No better time could be found for establishing 
the Bond than the present, when the consciousness of nationality 
has been thoroughly aroused by the Transvaal war." . . ." The 
British government keep on talking about a confederation under the 
British flag, but that will never be brought about. They can be 
quite certain of that. There is just one obstacle in the way of 
confederation, and that is the British flag. Let them remove that, 
and in less than a year the confederation would be established 
under the Free Afrikander flag." " After a time the English will 
realize that the advice given them by Froude was the best — they 
must just have Simon's Bay as a naval and military station on the 
way to India, and give over all the rest of South Africa to the 
Afrikanders." . _. . " Our principal weapon in the social war must 
be the destruction of English trade by our establishing trading 
companies for ourselves." ..." It is the duty of each true 
Afrikander not to spend anything with the English that he can 
avoid." 

De Patriot afterwards became imperialist, but Ons Land, 
another Bond organ, continued in much the same strain. 

In addition to having its press organs, the Bond from time to 
time published official utterances less frank in their tone than 
the statements of its press. Some of the Articles of the Bond's 
original manifesto are entirely praiseworthy, e.g. those referring 
to the administration of justice, the honour of the people, &c; 
such clauses as these, however, were meaningless in view of the 
enlightened government which obtained in Cape Colony, and for 
the true " inwardness " of this document it is necessary to note 
Article 3, which distinctly speaks of the promotion of South 
Africa's independence (Zelfstandigheid). If the Bond aroused 



2.\2 



CAPE COLONY 



[HISTORY 



disloyalty and mistaken aspirations in one section of the Cape 
inhabitants, it is equally certain that it caused a great wave of 
loyal and patriotic enthusiasm to pass through another and more 
enlightened section. A pamphlet written in 1885 for an associa- 
tion called the Empire League by Mr Charles Leonard, who 
afterwards consistently championed the cause of civil equality 
and impartial justice in South Africa, maintained as follows: — ■ 
" (1) That the establishment of the English government here 
was beneficial to all classes; and (2) that the withdrawal of that 
government would be disastrous to every one having vested interests 
in the colony. . . . England never can, never will, give up this 
colony, and we colonists will never give up England. . . . Let us, 
the inhabitants of the Cape Colony, be swift to recognize that we 
are one people, cast together under a glorious flag of liberty, with 
heads clear enough to appreciate the freedom we enjoy, and hearts 
resolute to maintain our true privileges; let us desist from reproach- 
ing and insulting one another, and, rejoicing that we have this 
goodly land as a common heritage, remember that by united action 
only can we realize its grand possibilities. We belong both of us to a 
home-loving stock, and the peace and prosperity of every home in 
the land is at stake. On our action now depends the question whether 
our children shall curse or bless us; whether we shall live in their 
memory as promoters of civil strife, with all its miserable conse- 
quences, or as joint architects of a happy, prosperous and united 
state. Each of us looks back to a noble past. United, we may 
ensure to our descendants a not unworthy future. Disunited, we 
can hope for nothing but stagnation, misery and ruin. Is this a 
light thing ? " 

It is probable that many Englishmen reading Mr Leonard's 
manifesto at the time regarded it as unduly alarming, but sub- 
sequent events proved the soundness of the views it expressed. 
The fact is that, from 1881 onwards, two great rival ideas came 
into being, each strongly opposed to the other. One was that of 
Imperialism — full civil rights for every civilized man, whatever 
his race might be, under the supremacy and protection of Great 
Britain. The other was nominally republican, but in fact 
exclusively oligarchical and Dutch. The policy of the extremists 
of this last party was summed up in the appeal which President 
Kruger made to the Free State in February 1881, when he bade 
them ' ' Come and help us. God is with us. It is his will to unite 
us as a people " — " to make a united South Africa free from 
British authority." The two actual founders of the Bond party 
were Mr Borckenhagcn, a German who was residing in Bloem- 
f ontein, and Mr Reitz, afterwards state secretary of the Transvaal. 
Two interviews have been recorded which show the true aims of 
these two promoters of the Bond at the outset. One occurred 
between Mr Borckenhagen and Cecil Rhodes, the other between 
Mr Reitz and Mr T. Schreiner, whose brother became, at a later 
date, prime minister of Cape Colony. In the first interview 
Mr Borckenhagcn remarked to Rhodes: " We want a united 
Africa," and Rhodes replied: " So do I." Mr Borckenhagen 
then continued: ''There is nothing in the way; we will take 
you as our leader. There is only one small thing: we must, of 
course, be independent of the rest of the world." Rhodes re- 
plied: " You take me cither for a rogue or a fool. I should be 
a rogue to forfeit all my history and my traditions; and I should 
be a fool, because I should be hated by my own countrymen 
and mistrusted by yours." But as Rhodes truly said at Cape 
Town in 1898, " The only chance of a true union is the over- 
shadowing protection of a supreme power, and any German, 
Frenchman, or Russian Would tell you that the best and most 
liberal power is that over which Her Majesty reigns." The other 
interview took place at the beginning of the Bond's existence. 
Being approached by Mr Reitz, Mr T. Schreiner objected that 
the Bond aimed ultimately at the overthrow of British rule and 
the expulsion of the British flag from South Africa. To this 
Mr Reitz replied: " Well, what if it is so?" Mr- Schreiner 
expostulated in the following terms: " You do not suppose 
that that flag is going to disappear without a tremendous struggle 
and hard fighting?" " Well, I suppose not, but even so, what 
of that?" rejoined Mr Reitz. In the face of this testimony with 
reference to two of the most prominent of the Bond's promoters, 
it is impossible to deny that from its beginning the great under- 
lying idea of the Bond was an independent South Africa. 

Mr Hofmeyr's Policy. — In 1882 an act was passed in the 
Cape legislative assembly, empowering members to speak in 



the Dutch language on the floor of the House, if they so desired. 
The intention of this act was a liberal one, but the moment 
of its introduction was inopportune, and its effect was to give 
an additional stimulus to the policy of the Bond. It was prob- 
ably also the means of bringing into the House a number of 
Dutchmen, by no means well educated, who would not have been 
returned had they been obliged to speak English. By this act 
an increase of influence was given to the Dutch leaders. The 
head of the Afrikander Bond at this time in Cape Colony, and 
the leader of Dutch opinion, was Mr J. H. Hofmeyr, a man of 
undoubted ability and astuteness. Although he was recognized 
leader of the Dutch party in Cape Colony, he consistently refused 
to take office, preferring to direct the policy and the action of 
others from an independent position. Mr Hofmeyr sat in the 
house of assembly as member for Stellenbosch, a strong Dutch 
constituency. His influence over the Dutch members was 
supreme, and in addition to directing the policy of the Bond 
within the Cape Colony, he supported and defended the aggressive 
expansion policy of President Kruger and the Transvaal Boers. 
In 1883, during a debate on the Basutoland Dis-annexation 
Bill, Rhodes openly charged Mr Hofmeyr in the House with a 
desire to see a " United States of South Africa under its own 
flag." In 1884 Mr Hofmeyr led the Bond in strongly supporting 
the Transvaal Boers who had invaded Bechuanaland (g.v.), 
proclaiming that if the Bechuanaland freebooters were not per- 
mitted to retain the territories they had seized, in total disregard 
of the terms of the conventions of 1881 and 1884, there would 
be rebellion among the Dutch of Cape Colony. Fortunately, 
however, for the peace of Cape Colony at that time, Sir Charles 
Warren, sent by the imperial government to maintain British 
rights, removed the invading Boers from Stellaland and Goshen 
— two so-called republics set up by the Boer freebooters — in 
March 1885 and no rebellion occurred. Nevertheless the Bond 
party was so strong in the House that they compelled the ministry 
under Sir Thomas Scanlen to resign in 1884. The logical and 
constitutional course for Mr Hofmeyr to have followed in these 
circumstances would have been to accept office and himself form 
a government. This he refused to do. He preferred to put in 
a nominee of his own who should be entirely dependent on him. 
Mr Upington, a clever Irish barrister, was the man he selected, 
and under him was formed in 1884 what will always be known 
in Cape history as the "Warming-pan" ministry. This action 
was denounced by many British colonists, who were sufficiently 
loyal, not only to Great Britain, but also to that constitution 
which had been conferred by Great Britain upon Cape Colony, 
to desire to see the man who really wielded political power also 
acting as the responsible head of the party. It was Mr Hofmeyr's 
refusal to accept this responsibility, as well as the nature of his 
Bond policy, which won for him the political sobriquet of the 
" Mole." Open and responsible exercise of a power conferred 
under the constitution of the country, Englishmen and English 
colonists would have accepted and even welcomed. But that 
subterranean method of Dutch policy which found its strongest 
expression in Pretoria, and which operated from Pretoria to Cape 
Town, could not but be resented by loyal colonists. From 1881 
down to 1898, Mr Hofmeyr practically determined how Dutch 
members should vote, and also what policy the Bond should 
adopt at every juncture in its history. In 1895 he resigned his 
seat in parliament — an action which made his political dictator- 
ship still more remarkable. This influence on Cape politics 
was a demoralizing one. Other well-known politicians at the 
Cape subsequently found it convenient to adapt their views 
a good deal too readily to those held by the Bond. In justice 
to Mr Hofmeyr, however, it is only fair to say that after the 
Warren expedition in 1885, which was at least evidence that. Great 
Britain did not intend to renounce her supremacy in South 
Africa altogether, he adopted a less hostile or anti-British 
attitude. The views and attitude of Mr Hofmeyr between i88r 
and 1884 — when even loyal British colonists, looking to the 
events which followed Majuba, had almost come to believe that 
Great Britain had little desire to maintain her supremacy — can 
scarcely be wondered at. 



HISTORY] 



CAPE COLONY 



243 



Rhodes and Dutch Sentiment.— Recognizing the difficulties of 
the position, Cecil Rhodes from the outset of his political career 
showed his desire to conciliate Dutch sentiment by considerate 
treatment and regard for Dutch prejudices. Rhodes was first 
returned as member of the House of Assembly for Barkly West 
in 1880, and in spite of all vicissitudes this constituency remained 
loyal to him. He supported the bill permitting Dutch to be used 
in the House of Assembly in 1882, and early in 1884 he first took 
office, as treasurer-general, under Sir Thomas Scanlen. Rhodes 
had only held this position for six weeks when Sir Thomas Scanlen 
resigned, and in August of the same year he was sent by Sir 
Hercules Robinson to British Bechuanaland as deputy-com- 
missioner in succession to the Rev. John Mackenzie, the London 
Missionary Society's representative at Kuruman, who in the 
previous May had proclaimed the queen's authority over the 
district. Rhodes's efforts to conciliate the Boers failed — hence 
the necessity for the Warren mission. In 1885 the territories 
of Cape Colony were farther extended, and Tembuland, Bomvana- 
land and Galekaland were formally added to the colony. In 
1886 Sir Gordon Sprigg succeeded Sir Thomas Upington as 
prime minister. 

South African Customs Union. — The period from 1878 to 1885 
in Cape Colony had been one of considerable unrest. In this short 
time, in addition to the chronic troubles with the Basutos — 
which led the Cape to hand them over to the imperial authorities 
— there occurred a series of native disturbances which were 
followed by the Boer War of 1881, and the Bechuanaland dis- 
turbances of 1884. In spite, however, of these drawbacks, the 
development of the country proceeded. The diamond industry 
was flourishing. In 1887 a conference was held in London 
for " promoting a closer union between the various parts of the 
British empire by means of an imperial tariff of customs." 
At this conference it is worthy of note that Mr Hofmeyr pro- 
pounded a sort of " Zollverein " scheme, in which imperial 
customs were to be levied independently of the duties payable 
on all goods entering the empire from abroad. In making the 
proposition he stated that his objects were " to promote the 
union of the empire, and at the same time to obtain revenue for 
the purposes of general defence." The scheme was not at the 
time found practicable. But its authorship, as well as the 
sentiments accompanying it, created a favourable view of Mr 
Hofmeyr's attitude. In the year 1888, in spite of the failure of 
statesmen and high commissioners to bring about political 
confederation, the members of the Cape parliament set about 
the establishment of a South African Customs Union. A 
Customs Union Bill was passed, and this in itself constituted 
a considerable development of the idea of federation. Shortly 
after the passing of the bill the Orange Free State entered the 
union. An endeavour was also made then, and for many years 
afterwards, to get the Transvaal to join. But President Kruger, 
consistently pursuing his own policy, hoped through the Delagoa 
Bay railway to make the South African Republic entirely in- 
dependent of Cape Colony. The endeavour to bring about a 
customs union which would embrace the Transvaal was also 
little to the taste of President Kruger's Hollander advisers, 
interested as they were in the schemes of the Netherlands 
Railway Company, who owned the railways of the Transvaal. 

Diamonds and Railways. — Another event of considerable 
commercial importance to the Cape Colony, and indeed to 
South Africa, was the amalgamation of the diamond-mining 
companies, chiefly brought about by Cecil Rhodes, Alfred Beit 
and " Barney " Barnato, in 1889. One of the principal and 
most beneficent results of the discovery and development of 
the diamond mines was the great impetus which it gave to 
railway extension. Lines were opened up to Worcester and 
Beaufort West, to Graham's Town, Graaff Reinet and Queens- 
town. Kimberley was reached in 1885. In 1890 the line was 
extended northwards on the western frontier of the Transvaal as 
far as Vryburg in Bechuanaland. In 1889 the Free State entered 
into an arrangement with the Cape Colony whereby the main 
trunk railway was extended to Bloemfontein, the Free State 
receiving half the profits. Subsequently the Free State bought 



at cost price the portion of the railway in its own territory. 
In 1891 the Free State railway was still farther extended to 
Viljoen's Drift on the Vaal river, and in 1892 it reached Pretoria 
and Johannesburg. 

Rhodes as Prime Minister: Native Policy. — In 1889 Sir Henry 
Loch was appointed high commissioner and governor of Cape 
Colony in succession to Sir Hercules Robinson. In 1890 Sir 
Gordon Sprigg, the premier of the colony, resigned, and a Rhodes 
government was formed. Prior to the formation of this ministry 
(see table at end of article), and while Sir Gordon Sprigg was 
still in office, Mr Hofmeyr approached Rhodes and offered to put 
him in office as a Bond nominee. This offer was declined. When, 
however, Rhodes was invited to take office after the downfall of 
the Sprigg ministry, he asked the Bond leaders to meet him 
and discuss the situation. His policy of customs and railway 
unions between the various states, added to the personal esteem 
in which he was at this time held by many of the Dutchmen, 
enabled him to undertake and to carry on successfully the 
business of government. 

The colonies of British Bechuanaland and Basutoland were 
now taken into the customs union existing between the Orange 
Free State and Cape Colony. Pondoland, another native terri- 
tory, was added to the colony in 1894, and the year was marked 
by the Glen Grey Act, a departure in native policy for which 
Rhodes was chiefly responsible. It dealt with the natives resid- 
ing in certain native reserves, and in addition to providing for 
their interests and holdings, and in other ways protecting the 
privileges accorded to them, the principle of the duty of some 
degree of labour devolving upon every able-bodied native enjoy- 
ing these privileges was asserted, and a small labour tax was 
levied. 1 This is in many respects the most statesmanlike act 
dealing w"ith natives on the statute-book; and in the session of 
1895 Rhodes was able to report to the Cape parliament that the 
act then applied to 160,000 natives. In 1905 the labour clauses 
of this act, which had fallen into desuetude, were repealed. The 
clauses had, however, achieved success, in that they had caused 
many thousands of natives to fulfil the conditions requisite to 
claim exemption. 

In other respects Rhodes's native policy was marked by com- 
bined consideration and firmness. Ever since the granting of 
self-government the natives had enjoyed the franchise. An act 
passed in 1892, at the instance of Rhodes, imposed an educa- 
tional test on applicants for registration, and made other pro- 
visions, all tending to restrict the acquisition of the franchise 
by " tribal " natives, the possible danger arising from a large 
native vote being already obvious (see section Constitution). 

Rhodes opposed the native "liquor traffic, and at the risk of 
offending some of his supporters among the brandy-farmers of 
the western provinces, he suppressed it entirely on the diamond 
mines, and restricted it as far as he was able in the native reserves 
and territories. Nevertheless the continuance of this traffic on 
colonial farms, as well as to some extent in the native territories 
and reserves, is a black spot in the annals of the Cape Colony. 
The Hottentots have been terribly demoralized, and even 
partially destroyed by it in the western province. 

Another and little-known instance of Rhodes's keen insight 
in dealing with native affairs — an action which had lasting results 
on the history of the colony — may be given. After the native 
territories east of the Kei had been added to Cape Colony, a case 
of claim to inheritance came up for trial, and in accordance with 
the law of the colony, the court held that the eldest son of a 
native was his heir. This decision created the strongest resent- 
ment among the people of the territory, as it was in distinct 

1 The act enjoined that " every male native residing in the district, 
exclusive of natives in possession of lands under ordinary quit-rent 
titles, or in freehold, who, in the judgment of the resident magistrate, 
is fit for and capable of labour, shall pay to the public revenue a tax 
of ten shillings per annum unless he can show to the satisfaction of 
the magistrate that he has been in service beyond the borders of the 
district for at least three months out of the previous twelve, when 
he will be exempt from the tax for that year, or unless he can show 
that he has been employed for a total period of three years, when he 
will be exempt altogether." 



244 



CAPE COLONY 



[HISTORY 



contradiction to native tribal law, which recognized the great 
son, or son of the chief wife, as heir. The government were 
threatened with a native disturbance, when Rhodes tele- 
graphed his assurance that compensation should be granted, 
and that such a decision should never be given again. This assur- 
ance was accepted and tranquillity restored. At the close of the 
next session (that of 1894), after this incident had occurred, 
Rhodes laid on the table a bill drafted by himself, the shortest 
the House had ever seen. It provided that all civil cases were to 
be tried by magistrates, an appeal to lie only to the chief magis- 
trate of the territory with an assessor. Criminal cases were to 
be tried before the judges of supreme court on circuit. The bill 
was passed, and the effect of it was, inasmuch as the magistrates 
administered according to native law, that native marriage 
customs and laws (including polygamy) were legalized in these 
territories. Rhodes had retrieved his promise, and no one who 
has studied and lived amongst the Bantu will question that the 
action taken was both beneficent and wise. 

During 1895 Sir Hercules Robinson was reappointed governor 
and high commissioner of South Africa in succession to Sir Henry 
Loch, and in the same year Mr Chamberlain became secretary 
of state for the colonies. 

Movement for Commercial Federation. — With the development 
of railways, and. the extension of trade between Cape Colony 
and the Transvaal, there had grown up a closer relationship 
on political questions. Whilst premier of Cape Colony, by means 
of the customs union and in every other way, Rhodes en- 
deavoured to bring about a friendly measure of at least com- 
mercial federation among the states and colonies of South Africa. 
He hoped to establish both a commercial and a railway union, 
and a speech which he made in 1894 at Cape Town admirably 
describes this policy : — • 

" With full affection for the flag which I have been born under, 
and the flag I represent, I can understand the sentiment and feeling 
of a republican who has created his independence, and values that 
before all; but I can say fairly that I believe in the future that I 
can assimilate the system, which I have been connected with, 
with the Cape Colony, and it is not an impossible idea that the 
neighbouring republics, retaining their independence, should share 
with us as to certain general principles. If I might put it to you, I 
would say the principles of tariffs, the principle of railway connexion, 
the principle of appeal in law, the principle of coinage, and in fact 
all those principles which exist at the present moment in the United 
States, irrespective of the local assemblieswhich exist in each separate 
state in that country." 

To this policy President Kruger and the Transvaal govern- 
ment offered every possible opposition. Their action in what 
is known as the Vaal River Drift question will best illustrate the 
line of action which the Transvaal government believed it ex- 
pedient to adopt. A difficulty arose at the termination of the 
agreement in 1894 between the Cape government railway and 
the Netherlands railway. The Cape government, for the purposes 
of carrying the railway from the Vaal river to Johannesburg, 
had advanced the sum of £600,000 to the Netherlands railway 
and the Transvaal government conjointly; at the same time it 
was stipulated that the Cape government should have the right 
to fix the traffic rate until the end of 1894, or until such time as 
the Delagoa Bay-Pretoria line was completed. These rates were 
fixed by the Cape government at 2d. per ton per mile, but at the 
beginning of 1895 the rate for the 52 m. of railway from the Vaal 
river to Johannesburg was raised by the Netherlands railway 
to no less a sum than 8d. per ton per mile. It is quite evident 
from the action which President Kruger subsequently took in 
the matter that this charge was put on with his approval, and 
with the object of compelling traffic to be brought to the Trans- 
vaal by the Delagoa route, instead of as heretofore by the colonial 
railway. In order to compete against this very high rate, the 
merchants of Johannesburg began removing their goods 
from the Vaal river by waggon. Thereupon President Kruger 
arbitrarily closed the drifts (fords) on the Vaal river, and thus 
prevented through waggon traffic, causing an enormous block 
of waggons on the banks of the Vaal. A protest was then made 
by the Cape government against the action of the Transvaal, on 
the ground that it was a breach of the London Convention. 



President Kruger took no notice of this remonstrance, and an' 
appeal was made to the imperial government; whereupon the 
latter entered into an agreement with the Cape government, 
to the effect that if the Cape would bear half the cost of any 
expedition which should be necessary, assist with troops, and 
give full use of the Cape railway for military purposes if required, 
a protest should be sent to President Kruger on the subject. 
These terms were accepted by Rhodes and his colleagues, of 
whom Mr W. P. Schreiner was one, and a protest was then sent 
by Mr Chamberlain stating that the government would regard 
the closing of the drifts as a breach of the London Convention, 
and as an unfriendly action calling for the gravest remonstrance. 
President Kruger at once reopened the drifts, and undertook 
that .he would issue no further proclamation on the subject 
except after consultation with the imperial government. 

On the 29th of December 1895 Dr Jameson (q.v.) made his 
famous raid into the Transvaal, and Rhodes's complicity in this 
movement compelled him to resign the premiership of Cape 
Colony in January 1896, the vacant post being taken by Sir 
Gordon Sprigg. As Rhodes's complicity in the raid became 
known, there naturally arose a strong feeling of resentment and 
astonishment among his colleagues in the Cape ministry, who 
had been kept in complete ignorance of his connexion with any 
such scheme. Mr Hofmeyr and the Bond were loud in their 
denunciation of him, nor can it be denied that the circumstances 
of the raid greatly embittered againstEngland the Dutch element 
in Cape Colony, and influenced their subsequent attitude towards 
the Transvaal Boers. 

In 1897 a native rising occurred under Galeshwe, a Bantu 
chief, in Griqualand West. Galeshwe was arrested and the 
rebellion repressed. On cross-examination Galeshwe stated 
that Bosman, a magistrate of the Transvaal, had supplied 
ammunition to him, and urged him to rebel against the govern- 
ment of Cape Colony. There is every reason to suppose that 
this charge was true, and it is consistent with the intrigues which 
the Boers from time to time practised among the natives. 

In 1897 Sir Alfred Milner was appointed high commissioner 
of South Africa and governor of Cape Colony, in succession to 
Sir Hercules Robinson, who had been created a peer under the 
title of Baron Rosmead in August 1896. 

Mr Schreiner' s Policy. — In 1898 commercial federation in 
South Africa advanced another stage, Natal entering the cus- 
toms union. A fresh convention was drafted at this time, and 
under it " a uniform tariff on all imported goods consumed 
within such union, and an equitable distribution of the duties 
collected on such goods amongst the parties to such union, and 
free trade between the colonies and state in respect of all South 
African products," was arranged. In the same year, too, the 
Cape parliamentary election occurred, and the result was the 
return to power of a Bond ministry under Mr W. P. Schreiner. 
From this time, until June 1900, Mr Schreiner remained in office 
as head of the Cape government. During the negotiations 
(see Transvaal) which preceded the war in 1899, feeling at the 
Cape ran very high, and Mr Schreiner's attitude was very freely 
discussed. As head of a party, dependent for its position in 
power on the Bond's support, his position was undoubtedly 
a trying one. At the same time, as prime minister of a British 
colony, it was strongly felt by loyal colonists that he should at 
least have refrained from openly interfering between the Trans- 
vaal and the imperial government during the course of most 
difficult negotiations. His public expressions of opinion were 
hostile in tone to the policy pursued by Mr Chamberlain and 
Sir Alfred Milner. The effect of them, it was believed, might 
conceivably be to encourage President Kruger in persisting in 
his rejection of the British terms. Mr Schreiner, it is true, used 
directly what influence he possessed to induce President Kruger 
to adopt a reasonable course. But however excellent his in- 
tentions, his publicly expressed disapproval of the Chamberlain- 
Milner policy probably did more harm than his private influence 
with Mr Kruger could possibly do good. On the nth of June 
1899, shortly after the Bloemfontein conference, from which 
Sir Alfred Milner had just returned, Mr Schreiner asked the high 



HISTORY] 



CAPE COLONY 



245 



commissioner to inform Mr Chamberlain that he and his col- 
leagues agreed in regarding President Kruger's Bloemfontein 
proposals as " practical, reasonable and a considerable step in 
the right direction." Early in June, however, the Cape Dutch 
politicians began to realize that President Kruger's attitude 
was not so reasonable as they had endeavoured to persuade 
themselves, and Mr Hofmeyr, accompanied by Mr Herholdt, 
the Cape minister of agriculture, visited Pretoria. On arrival, 
they found that the Transvaal Volksraad, in a spirit of defiance 
and even levity, had just passed a resolution offering four new 
seats in the Volksraad to the mining districts, and fifteen to 
exclusively burgher districts. Mr Hofmeyr, on meeting the 
executive, freely expressed indignation at these proceedings. 
Unfortunately, Mr Hofmeyr's influence was more than counter- 
balanced by an emissary from the Free State, Mr Abraham 
Fischer, who, while purporting to be a peacemaker, practically 
encouraged the Boer executive to take extreme measures. 
Mr Hofmeyr's established reputation as an astute diplomatist, 
and as the trusted leader for years of the Cape Dutch party, 
made him as powerful a delegate as it was possible to find. If any 
emissary could accomplish anything in the way of persuading 
Mr Kruger, it was assuredly Mr Hofmeyr. Much was looked 
for from his mission by moderate men of all parties, and by none 
more so, it is fair to believe, than by Mr Schreiner. But Mr 
Hofmeyr's mission, like every other mission to Mr Kruger to 
induce him to take a reasonable and equitable course, proved 
entirely fruitless. He returned to Cape Town disappointed, but 
probably not altogether surprised at the failure of his mission. 
Meanwhile a new proposal was drafted by the Boer executive, 
which, before it was received in its entirety, or at least before 
it was clearly understood, elicited from Mr Schreiner a letter 
on the 7 th of July to the South African News, in which, referring 
to his government, he said: — 

" While anxious and continually active with good hope in the 
cause of securing reasonable modifications of the existing repre- 
sentative system of the South African Republic, this government 
is convinced that no ground whatever exists for active interference 
in the internal affairs of that republic." 

This letter was precipitate and unfortunate. On the nth of 
July, after seeing Mr Hofmeyr on his return, Mr Schreiner made 
a personal appeal to President Kruger to approach the imperial 
government in a friendly spirit. At this time an incident 
occurred which raised the feeling against Mr Schreiner to a very 
high pitch. On the 7th of July 500 rifles and 1,000,000 rounds of 
ammunition were landed at Port Elizabeth, consigned to the 
Free State government, and forwarded to Bloemfontein. Mr 
Schreiner's attention was called to this consignment at the 
time, but he refused to stop it, alleging as his reason that, inas- 
much as Great Britain was at peace with the Free State, he had 
no right to interdict the passage of arms through the Cape Colony. 
The British colonist is as capable of a grim jest as the Transvaal 
Boer, and this action of Mr Schreiner's won for him the nickname 
" Ammunition Bill." At a later date he was accused of delay 
in forwarding artillery and rifles for the defence of Kimberley, 
Mafeking and other towns of the colony. The reason he gave 
for delay was that he did not anticipate war; and that he did 
not wish to excite unwarrantable suspicions in the minds of the 
Free State. His conduct in both instances was perhaps 
technically correct, but it was much resented by loyal colonists. 

On the 28th of July Mr Chamberlain sent a conciliatory 
despatch to President Kruger, suggesting a meeting of delegates 
to consider and report on his last franchise proposals, which were 
complex to a degree. Mr Schreiner, on the 3rd of August, tele- 
graphed to Mr Fischer begging the Transvaal to welcome Mr 
Chamberlain's proposal. At a later date, on receiving an inquiry 
from the Free State as to the movements of British troops, 
Mr Schreiner curtly refused any information, and referred 
the Free State to the high commissioner. On the 28th of August 
Sir Gordon Sprigg in the House of Assembly moved the adjourn- 
ment of the debate, to discuss the removal of arms to the Free 
State. Mr Schreiner, in reply, used expressions which called 
down upon him the severest censure and indignation, both in 



the colony and in Great Britain. He stated that, should the 
storm burst, he would keep the colony aloof with regard both to 
its forces and its people. In the course of the speech he also 
read a telegram from President Steyn, in which the president 
repudiated all contemplated aggressive action on the part 
of the Free State as absurd. The speech created a great sensation 
in the British press. It was probably forgotten at the time 
(though Lord Kimberley afterwards publicly stated it) that one 
of the chief reasons why the Gladstone government had granted 
the retrocession of the Transvaal after Majuba, was the fear that 
the Cape Colonial Dutch would join their kinsmen if the war 
continued. What was a danger in 1881, Mr Schreiner knew to 
be a still greater danger in 1899. At the same time it is quite 
obvious, from a review of Mr Schreiner's conduct through the 
latter half of 1899, that he took an entirely mistaken view of the 
Transvaal situation. He evinced, as premier of the Cape Colony, 
the same inability to understand the Uitlanders' grievances, 
the same futile belief in the eventual fairness of President 
Kruger, as he had shown when giving evidence before the British 
South Africa Select Committee into the causes of the Jameson 
Raid. Actual experience taught him that President Kruger 
was beyond an appeal to reason, and that the protestations of 
President Steyn were insincere. War had no sooner commenced 
with the ultimatum of the Transvaal Republic on the 9th of 
October 1899, than Mr Schreiner found himself called upon to 
deal with the conduct of Cape rebels. The rebels joined the 
invading forces of President Steyn, whose false assurances 
Mr Schreiner had offered to an indignant House of Assembly 
only a few weeks before. The war on the part of the Republics 
was evidently not to be merely one of self-defence. It was one 
of aggression and aggrandisement. Mr Schreiner ultimately 
addressed, as prime minister, a sharp remonstrance to President 
Steyn for allowing his burghers to invade the colony. He also 
co-operated with Sir Alfred Milner, and used his influence to 
restrain the Bond. 

The War of i8gg-igo2} — The first shot actually fired in the 
war was at Kraipan, a small railway station within the colony, 
40 m. south of Mafeking, a train being derailed, and ammuni- 
tion intended for Colonel Baden-Powell seized. The effect 
of this was entirely to cut off Mafeking, the northernmost town 
in Cape Colony, and it remained in a state of siege for over seven 
months. On the 16th of October Kimberley was also isolated. 
Proclamations by the Transvaal and Free State annexing portions 
of Cape Colony were actually issued on the 18th of October, and 
included British Bechuanaland and Griqualand West, with the 
diamond fields. On the 28th of October Mr Schreiner signed 
a proclamation issued by Sir Alfred Milner as high commissioner, 
declaring the Boer annexations of territory within Cape Colony 
to be null and void. 

Then came the British reverses at Magersfontein (on the nth 
of December) and Stormberg (on the 10th of December). The 
effect of these engagements at the very outset of the war, occur- 
ring as they did within Cape Colony, was to offer every inducement 
to a number of the frontier colonial Boers to join their kinsmen 
of the republics. The Boers were prolific, and their families large. 
Many younger sons from the colony, with nothing to lose, left 
their homes with horse and rifle to join the republican forces. 

Meanwhile the loyal Cape colonists were chafing at the tardy 
manner in which they were enrolled by the imperial authorities. 
It was not until after the arrival of Lord Roberts and Lord 
Kitchener at Cape Town on the 10th of January 1900 that these 
invaluable, and many of them experienced, men were freely 
invited to come forward. So strongly did Lord Roberts feel on 
the subject, that he at once made Colonel Brabant, a well-known 
and respected colonial veteran and member of the House of 
Assembly, a brigadier-general, and started recruiting loyal 
colonists in earnest. On the 15th of February Kimberley was 
relieved by General French, and the Boer general, Cronje, 
evacuated Magersfontein, and retreated towards Bloemfontein. 
Cecil Rhodes was shut up in Kimberley during the whole of the 
siege, and his presence there undoubtedly offered an additional 
1 See also Transvaal. 



246 



CAPE COLONY 



[HISTORY 



incentive to the Boers to endeavour to capture the town, but 
his unique position and influence with the De Beers workmen 
enabled him to render yeoman service, and infused enthusiasm 
and courage into the inhabitants. The manufacture of a big 
gun, which was able to compete with the Boer " Long Tom," 
at the De Beers workshops, under Rhodes's orders, and by the 
ingenuity of an American, Mr. Labram, who was killed a few days 
after its completion, forms one of the most striking incidents of 
the period. 

With the relief of Mafeking on the 17th of May, the Cape 
rebellion ended, and the colony was, at least for a time, delivered 
of the presence of hostile forces. 

On the 20th of March Mr (afterwards Sir James) Rose-Innes, 
a prominent member of the House of Assembly, who for several 
years had held aloof from either party, and who also had defended 
Mr Schreiner's action with regard to the passage of arms to the 
Free State, addressed his constituents at Claremont in support 
of the annexation of both republics; and in the course of an 
eloquent speech he stated that in Canada, in spite of rebellions, 
loyalty had been secured from the French Canadians by free 
institutions. In South Africa they might hope that a similar 
policy would attain a similar result with the Boers. In June, 
Mr Schreiner, whose recent support of Sir Alfred Milner had 
incensed many of his Bond followers, resigned in consequence 
of the refusal of some of his colleagues to support the disfranchise- 
ment bill which he was prepared, in accordance with the views 
of the home government, to introduce for the punishment of 
Cape rebels. The bill certainly did not err on the side of severity, 
but disfranchisement for their supporters in large numbers was 
more distasteful to the Bond extremists than any stringency 
towards individuals. Sir Gordon Sprigg, who after a political 
crisis of considerable delicacy, succeeded Mr Schreiner and for 
the fourth time became prime minister, was able to pass the 
Bill with the co-operation of Mr Schreiner and his section. 
Towards the end of the year 1900 the war entered on a new 
phase, and took the form of guerilla skirmishes with scattered 
forces of marauding Boers. In December some of these bands 
entered the Cape Colony and endeavoured to induce colonial 
Boers to join them. In this endeavour they met at first with 
little or no success; but as the year 1901 progressed and the 
Boers still managed to keep the various districts in a ferment, it 
was deemed necessary by the authorities to proclaim martial 
law over the whole colony, and this was done on the 9th of 
October 1901. 

On the 4th of January 1901 Sir Alfred Milner was gazetted 
governor of the Transvaal and Orange River Colony, being 
shortly afterwards created a peer as Lord Milner, and Sir Walter 
Hely-Hutchinson, governor of Natal, was appointed his successor 
as governor of the Cape Colony. The office of high commissioner 
in South Africa was now separated from the governorship of the 
Cape and associated with that of the Transvaal — an indication 
of the changed conditions in South Africa. The division of the 
colonists into those who favoured the Boer states and those 
firmly attached to the British connexion was reflected, to the 
detriment of the public weal, in the parties in the Cape parliament. 
Proposals were made to suspend the constitution, but this 
drastic course was not adopted. The Progressive party, the 
name taken by those who sought a permanent settlement under 
the British flag, lost their leader, and South Africa its foremost 
statesman by the death, in May 1902, of Cecil Rhodes, a few 
weeks before the end of the war. 

After the War. — The acknowledgment of defeat by the Boers 
in the field, and the surrender of some 10,000 rebels, did not 
weaken the endeavours of the Dutch to obtain political supremacy 
in the colony. Moreover, in the autumn of 1902 Sir Gordon 
Sprigg, the prime minister, nominally the leader of the Progres- 
sives, sought to maintain his position by securing the support 
of the Bond party in parliament. In the early part of 1903 
Mr Chamberlain included Cape Town in his visit to South Africa, 
and had conferences with the political leaders of all parties. 
Reconciliation between the Bond and British elements in the 
colony was, however, still impossible, and the two parties con- 



centrated their efforts in a struggle for victory at the coming 
election. Mr Hofmeyr, who had chosen to spend the greater 
part of the war period in Europe, returned to the Cape to re- 
organize the Bond. On the other side Dr Jameson came forward 
as the leader of the Progressives. Parliament was dissolved in 
September 1903. It had passed, since the war, two measures 
of importance — one (1902) restricting alien immigration, the 
other (1903) ratifying the first customs convention between all 
the South African colonies. This convention was notable for its 
grant of preferential treatment (in general, a rebate of 25% on 
the customs already levied) to imports from the United Kingdom. 

The election turned on the issue of British or Bond supremacy. 
It was fought on a register purged of the rebel voters, many of 
whom, besides being disfranchised, were in prison. The issue 
was doubtful, and each side sought to secure the support of the 
native voters, who in several constituencies held the balance of 
power. The Bondsmen were more lavish than their opponents 
in their promises to the natives and even invited a Kaffir journal- 
ist (who declined) to stand for a seat in the Assembly. In view 
of the agitation then proceeding for the introduction of Chinese 
coolies to work the mines on the Rand, the Progressives declared 
their intention, if returned, to exclude them from the colony, 
and this declaration gained them some native votes. The polling 
(in January and February 1 904) resulted in a Progressive majority 
of five in a house of 95 members. The rejected candidates 
included prominent Bond supporters like Mr Merriman and Mr 
Sauer, and also Sir Gordon Sprigg and Mr A. Douglass, another 
member of the cabinet. Mr W. P. Schreiner, the ex-premier, 
who stood as an Independent, was also rejected. 

The Jameson Ministry. — On the 18th of February Sir Gordon 
Sprigg resigned and was succeeded by Dr L. S. Jameson, who 
formed a ministry wholly British in character. The first task 
of the new government was to introduce (on the 4th of March) 
an Additional Representation Bill, to rectify — in part — the 
disparity in electoral power of the rural and urban districts. 
Twelve new seats in the House of Assembly were divided among 
the larger towns, and three members were added to the legislative 
council. The town voter being mainly British, the bill met with 
the bitter opposition of the Bond members, who declared that 
its object was the extinction of their parliamentary power. 
In fact, the bill was called for by the glaring anomalies in the 
distribution of seats by which a minority of voters in the country 
districts returned a majority of members, and it left the towns 
still inadequately represented. The bill was supported by two 
or three Dutch members, who were the object of violent attack 
by the Bondsmen. It became law, and the elections for the 
additional seats were held in July, after the close of the session. 
They resulted in strengthening the Progressive majority both in 
the House of Assembly and in the legislative council — where 
the Progressives previously had a majority of one only. 

At the outset of its career the Jameson ministry had to face 
a serious financial situation. During the war the supplying of the 
army in the field had caused an artificial inflation of trade, and 
the Sprigg ministry had pursued a policy of extravagant expendi- 
ture not warranted by the finances of the colony. The slow 
recovery of the gold-mining and other industries in the Transvaal 
after the war was reflected in a great decline in trade in Cape 
Colony during the last half of 1903, the distress being aggravated 
by severe drought. When Dr Jameson assumed office he found 
an empty treasury, and considerable temporary loans had to 
be raised. Throughout 1904, moreover, revenue continued to 
shrink — compared with 1903 receipts dropped from £11,701,000 
to £9,913,000. The government, besides cutting down official 
salaries and exercising strict economy, contracted (July 1904) 
a loan for £3 ,000,000. It also passed a bill imposing a graduated 
tax (6d. to is. in the £) on all incomes over £1000. A substantial 
excise duty was placed on spirits and beer, measures of relief 
for the brandy-farmers being taken at the same time. The 
result was that while there was a deficit on the budget of 1904- 
1905 of £731,000, the budget of 1 905-1 906 showed a surplus 
of £5161. This small surplus was obtained notwithstanding 
a further shrinkage in revenue. 



HISTORY] 



CAPE COLONY 



247 



Dr Jameson's programme was largely one of material develop- 
ment. In the words of the speech opening the 1905 session of 
parliament, " without a considerable development of our agri- 
cultural and pastoral resources our position as a self-sustaining 
colony cannot be assured." This reliance on its own resources 
was the more necessary for the Cape because of the keen rivalry 
of Natal and Delagoa Bay for the carrying trade of the Trans- 
vaal. The opening up of backward districts by railways was 
vigorously pursued, and in other ways great efforts were made 
to assist agriculture. These efforts to help the. country 
districts met with cordial recognition from the Dutch farmers, 
and the release, in May 1904, of all rebel prisoners was 
another step towards reconciliation. On the exclusion of 
Chinese from the colony the Bond party were also in agreement 
with the ministry. An education act passed in 1905 established 
school boards on a popular franchise and provided for the gradual 
introduction of compulsory education. The cultivation of 
friendly relations with the neighbouring colonies was also one 
of the leading objects of Dr Jameson's policy. The Bond, on its 
side, sought to draw closer to Het Volk, the Boer organization 
in the Transvaal, and similar bodies, and at its 1906 congress, 
held in March that year at Ceres, a resolution with that aim 
was passed, the design being to unify, in accordance with the 
original conception of the Bond, Dutch sentiment and action 
throughout South Africa. 

Native affairs proved a source of considerable anxiety. In 
January 1905 an inter-colonial native affairs commission re- 
ported on the native question as it affected South Africa as a 
whole, proposals being made for an alteration of the laws in 
Cape Colony respecting the franchise exercised by natives. In 
the opinion of the commission the possession of the franchise 
by the Cape natives under existing conditions was sure to create 
in time an intolerable situation, and was an unwise and dangerous 
thing. (The registration of 1905 showed that there were over 
23,000 coloured voters in the colony.) The commission proposed 
separate voting by natives only for a fixed number of members 
of the legislature — the plan adopted in New Zealand with the 
Maori voters. The privileged position of the Cape native was 
seen to be an obstacle to the federation of South Africa. The 
discussion which followed, based partly on the reports that the 
ministry contemplated disfranchising the natives, led, however, 
to no immediate results. 

Another disturbing factor in connexion with native affairs 
was the revolt of the Hottentots and Hereros in German South- 
West Africa (q.v.). In 1904 and the following years large 
numbers of refugees, including some of the most important 
chiefs, fled into British territory, and charges were made in 
Germany that sufficient control over these refugees was not 
exercised by the Cape government. This trouble, however, came 
to an end in September 1907. In that month Morenga, a chief 
who had been interned by the colonial authorities, but had 
escaped and recommenced hostilities against the Germans, was 
once more on the British side of the frontier and, refusing to 
surrender, was pursued by the Cape Mounted Police and killed 
after a smart action. The revolt in the German protectorate 
had been, nearly a year before the death of Morenga, the in- 
direct occasion of a " Boer raid " into Cape Colony. In Novem- 
ber 1906 a small party of Transvaal Boers, who had been em- 
ployed by the Germans against the Hottentots, entered the 
colony under the leadership of a man named Ferreira, and began 
raiding farms and forcibly enrolling recruits. Within a week 
the filibusters were all captured. Ferreira and four companions 
were tried for murder and convicted, February 1907, the death 
sentences being commuted to terms of penal servitude. 

As the result of an inter-colonial conference held in Pieter- 
maritzburg in the early months of 1906, a new customs con- 
vention of a strongly protective character came into force on 
the 1st of June of that year. At the same time the rebate on 
goods from Great Britain and reciprocating colonies was in- 
creased. The session of parliament which sanctioned this 
change was notable for the attention devoted to irrigation and 
railway schemes. But one important measure of a political 



character was passed in 1906, namely an amnesty act. Under 
its provisions over 7000 ex-rebels, who would otherwise have 
had no vote at the ensuing general election, were readmitted to 
the franchise in 1907. 

While the efforts made to develop the agricultural and mineral 
resources of the country proved successful, the towns continued 
to suffer from the inflation — over-buying, over-building and 
over-speculation— which marked the war period. As a conse- 
quence, imports further declined during 1906-1907, and receipts 
being largely dependent on customs the result was a consider- 
ably diminished revenue. The accounts for the year ending 
30th of June 1907 showed a deficit of £640,455. The decline in 
revenue, £4,000,000 in four years, while not a true reflection 
of the economic condition of the country — yearly becoming 
more self-supporting by the increase in home produce — caused 
general disquietude and injuriously affected the position of the 
ministry. In the session of 1907 the Opposition in the legis- 
lative council brought on a crisis by refusing to grant supplies 
voted by the lower chamber. Dr Jameson contested the con- 
stitutional right of the council so to act, and on his advice the 
governor dissolved parliament in September. Before its dissolu- 
tion parliament passed an act imposing a profit tax of 10% on 
diamond- and copper-mining companies earning over £50,000 per 
annum, and another act establishing an agricultural credit bank. 

Mr Merriman, Premier.— The elections for the legislative 
council were held in January 1908 and resulted in a Bond 
victory. Its supporters, who called themselves the South 
African party, the Progressives being renamed Unionists, 
obtained 17 seats out of a total of 26. Dr Jameson thereupon 
resigned (31st of January), and a ministry was formed with 
Mr J. X. Merriman as premier and treasurer, and Mr J. W. Sauer 
as minister of public works. Neither of these politicians was a 
member of the Bond, and both had held office under Cecil Rhodes 
and W. P. Schreiner. They had, however, been the leading 
parliamentary exponents of Bond policy for a considerable time. 
The elections for the legislative assembly followed in April and, 
partly in consequence of the reinfranchisement of the ex-rebels, 
resulted in a decisive majority for the Merriman ministry. 
There were returned 69 members of the South African party, 
Zi Unionists and 5 Independents, among them the ex-premiers 
Sir Gordon Sprigg and Mr Schreiner. The change of ministry 
was not accompanied by any relief in the financial situation. 
While the country districts remained fairly prosperous (agri- 
cultural and pastoral products increasing), the transit trade 
and the urban industries continued to decline. The depression 
was accentuated by the financial crisis in America, which affected 
adversely the wool trade, and in a more marked degree the 
diamond trade, leading to the partial stoppage of the Kimberley 
mines. (The " slump " in the diamond trade is shown by a 
comparison of the value of diamonds exported from the Cape 
in the years 1907 and 1908; in 1907 they were valued at 
£8,973,148, in 1908 at £4,796,655.) This seriously diminished 
the revenue returns, and the public accounts for the year 1907- 
1908 showed a deficit of £996,000, and a prospective deficit for 
the ensuing year of an almost equal amount. To balance the 
budget, Mr Merriman proposed drastic remedies, including the 
suspension of the sinking fund, the reduction of salaries of all 
civil servants, and taxes on incomes of £50 per annum. Partly 
in consequence of the serious economic situation the renewed 
movement for the closer union of the various South African 
colonies, formally initiated by Dr Jameson in 1907, received 
the support of the Cape parliament. During 1907-1908 a national 
convention decided upon unification, and in 1910 the Union of 
South Africa was established (see South Aerica: History). 

Leading Personalities. — The public life of Cape Colony has 
produced many men of singular ability and accomplishments. 
The careers of Cecil Rhodes, of Jan Hendrik Hofmeyr, 
and of Dr L. S. Jameson have been sufficiently indicated (see 
also their separate biographies). Sir Gordon Sprigg, four times 
premier, was associated with the Cape parliament from 1873 to 
T904, and was once more elected to that assembly in 1908. In 
and out of office his zeal was unflagging, and if he lacked those 



248 



CAPEFIGUE— CAPEL 



qualities which inspire enthusiasm and are requisite in a great 
leader, he was at least a model of industry. Among other 
prominent politicians were Sir James Rose-Innes, Mr J. X. 
Merriman and Mr W. P. Schreiner. The two last named both 
held the premiership; their attitude and views have been 
indicated in the historical sketch. Sir James Rose-Innes, a 
lawyer whose intellectual gifts and patriotism have never been 
impugned, was not a " party man," and this made him, on more 
than one occasion, a somewhat difficult political ally. On the 
native question he held a consistently strong attitude, defending 
their rights, and uncompromisingly opposing the native liquor 
traffic. In 1001 he went to the Transvaal as chief justice of that 
colony. Sir Thomas Fuller, a Cape Town representative, though 
he remained outside office, gave staunch support to every en- 
lightened liberal and progressive measure which was brought 
forward. A man of exceptional culture and eloquence, he made 
his influence felt, not only in politics, but in journalism and the 
best social life of the Cape peninsula. From 1902 to 1908 he 
held the office of agent-general of the colony in London. 

In literature, the-colony has produced at least two authors 
whose 'works have taken their place among those of the best 
English writers of their day. The History of South Africa, by 
Mr G. McCall Theal, will remain a classic work^ of reference. 
The careful industry and the lucidity which characterize Mr 
Theal's work stamp him as a historian of whom South Africa 
may well be proud. In fiction, Olive Schreiner (Mrs Cronwright- 
Schreiner) produced, while still in her teens, the Story of an 
African Farm, a work which gave great promise of original 
literary genius. Unfortunately, she, in common with the rest 
of South Africa, was subsequently swept into the seething 
vortex of contemporary politics and controversy. In music 
and painting there have been artists of talent in the Cape Colony, 
but the country is still too young, and the conditions of life too 
disturbed, to allow such a development as has already occurred 
in Australia. 

Governors at the Cape since Introduction of Responsible 
Government 
1870. Sir Henry Barkly. 
1877. Sir Bartle Frere. 
1880. Sir Hercules Robinson. 
1889. Sir Henry Loch. 

1895. Sir Hercules Robinson (Lord Rosmead). 
1897. Sir Alfred Milner. 
1901. Sir Walter Hely-Hutchinson. 

Prime Ministers. 

1872. Mr J. C. Molteno. 1890. Mr C. J. Rhodes. 

1878. Mr J. Gordon Sprigg. 1896. Sir J. Gordon Sprigg. 

1881. Mr T. C. Scanlen. 1898. Mr W. P. Schreiner. 

1884. Mr Upington. 1900. Sir J. Gordon Sprigg. 

1886. Sir J. Gordon Sprigg. 1904. Dr L. S. Jameson. 

1908. Mr J. X. Merriman. 

(A. P. H.; F. R. C.) 
Bibliography — The majority of the books concerning Cape 
Colony deal also with South Africa as a whole (see South Africa: 
Bibliography) . The following list gives books specially relating to the 
Cape. For ethnography see the works mentioned under Bushmen, 
Hottentots, Kaffirs and Bechuana. 

(a) Descriptive accounts, geography, commerce and economics:" 
— The best early accounts of the colony are found in de la Caille's 
Journal historique du voyage fait au Cap de Bonne Esperance (Paris, 
1763), the Nouvelle Description du Cap de Bonne Esperance (Amster- 
dam, 1778); F. le Vaillant's Voyage dans Vinterieur de I'Afrique 
(Paris, 1790), and Second Voyage (Paris, an III. [1794-1795]) ; C. P. 
Thunberg's " Account of the Cape of Good Hope " in vol. xvi. of 
Pinkerton's Travels (London, 1814); A. Sparman's Voyage to the 
Cape of Good Hope . . . 1772-1776 (translated into English from the 
Swedish, London, I785) — an excellent work; and'W. Paterson's 
A Narrative of Four Journeys . . . 1777-1779 (London, 1789). 
P. Kolbe or Kolben's Present State of the Cape of Good Hope (English 
translation from the German, London, 1 731) is less trustworthy. 
Sir J. Barrow's Account of Travels into the Interior of Southern Africa 
in 1797-1798 (2 vols., London, 1 801-1804); H. Lichtenstein's 
Travels in Southern Africa in 1803-1806 (translated from the German, 
2 vols., London, 1812-1815), and W. J. Burchell's Travels in the 
Interior of Southern Africa (2 vols., London, 1 822-1 824) are standard 
works. Burchell's book contains the best map of the Cape published 
up to that time. W. P. Greswell's Geography of Africa south of the 
Zambesi (Oxford, 1892) deals specially with Cape Colony; the 
Illustrated Official Handbook of the Cape and South Africa (Cape Town, 



1893) includes chapters on the zoology, flora, productions and 
resources of the colony. A. R. E. Burton, Cape Colony To-day 
(Cape Town, 1907), a useful guide to the country and its resources. 
A Statistical Register is issued yearly by the Cape government. The 
Census of the Colony, 1904: General Report (Cape Town, 1905) and 
previous census reports contain much valuable matter. 

(b) Special subjects : — For detailed information on special subjects 
consult The Natives of South Africa (London, 1901); R. Wallace, 
Farming Industries of Cape Colony (London, 1896) ; A. R. E. Burton, 
Cape Colony for the Settler (London, 1903) ; The Agricultural Journal 
of the Cape of Good Hope ; Gardner F. Williams, The Diamond Mines 
of South Africa, revised ed. (New York, 1905), an authoritative work 
by a former manager of the De Beers mine; A. W. Rogers, An 
Introduction to the Geology of Cape Colony (London, 1905) and " The 
Campbell Rand and Griquatown Series in Hay," Trans. Geol. Soc. 
S. Africa, vol. ix. (1906) ; Reports, Geological Commission of theCape 
of Good Hope (1896 et seq.) ; Science in South Africa (Cape Town, 
1905); H. A. Bryden, Kloof and Karoo; sport, legend and natural 
history in Cape Colony (London, 1889) ; South African Education 
Yearbook (Cape Colony edition, Cape Town, 1906 et seq.). For 
books dealing with Roman-Dutch law, see South Africa. 

(c) History: — H. C. V. Leibbrandt, Precis of the Archives of the 
Cape of Good Hope (15 vols., vols, v.-vii. contain van Riebeek's 
Journal, Cape Town, 1896-1902); The Rebellion of 1815, generally 
known as Slachter's Nek (Cape Town, 1902) ; G. M. Theal, Chronicles 
of Cape Commanders . . . 1651-1691 . . . (Cape Town, 1882), and 
Records of the Cape Colony from February 1793 to April 1831, from 
MS. in the Record Office, London (36 vols., Cape Town, 1897-1905) ; 
History of South Africa under the Administration of the Dutch East 
India Company, 1652 to 179s (2 vols., London, 1897) ; History of 
South Africa from 1795 to 1834 (London, 1891); E. B. Watermeyer, 
Three Lectures on the Cape . . . under the . . . Dutch East India 
Company (Cape Town, 1857) ; A. Wilmot and J. C. Chase, History of 
the . . . Cape . . . from its Discovery to ... 1868 (Cape Town, 
1869); Lady Anne Barnard, South Africa a Hundred, Years Ago: 
Letters -written from the Cape, 1797-1801 (London, 1901), a vivid 
picture of social life, &c. ; Mrs A. F. Trotter, Old Cape Colony . . . 
Her Men and Houses from 1652 to 1806 (London, 1903); C. T. 
Campbell, British South Africa, 1795-1825 (London, 1897), the story 
of the British settlers of 1820. Consult also J. Martineau's Life of 
Sir Bartle Frere; the Autobiography of Sir Harry Smith; P. A. 
Molteno's Life and Times of Sir John Charles Molteno (first premier of 
Cape Colony) (2 vols., London, 1900); A Wilmot's Life of Sir 
Richard Southey (London,-. 1 904), and G. C. Henderson's Sir George 
Grey (London, 1907). B. Worsfold's Lord Milner's Work in South 
Africa, 1897-1902 (London, 1906), is largely concerned with Cape 
politics. For Blue-books, &c, relating to the colony published 
by the British parliament, see the Colonial Office List (London, 
yearly) (F. R. C.) 

CAPEFIGUE, JEAN-BAPTISTE HONORS RAYMOND (1801- 
1872), French historian and biographer, was born at Marseilles 
in 1 80 1. At the age of twenty he went to Paris to study law; 
but he soon deserted law for journalism. He became editor 
of the Quotidienne, and was afterwards connected, either as 
editor or leading contributor, with the Temps, the Messager des 
Chambres, the Revolution de 1848 and other papers. During 
the ascendancy of the Bourbons he held a post in the foreign 
office, to which is due the royalism of some of his newspaper 
articles. Indeed all Capefigue's works receive their colour from 
his legitimist politics; he preaches divine right and non-re- 
sistance, and finds polite words even for the profligacy of Louis 
XV. and the worthlessness of his mistresses. He wrote bio- 
graphies of Catherine and Marie de' Medici, Anne and Maria 
Theresa of Austria, Catherine II. of Russia, Elizabeth of England, 
Diana of Poitiers and Agnes Sorel — for he delighted in passing 
from " queens of the right hand " to " queens of the left." 
His historical works, besides histories of the Jews from the fall 
of the Maccabees to the author's time, of the first four centuries 
of the Christian church, and of European diplomatists, extend 
over the whole range of French history. He died at Paris in 
December 1872. 

The general catalogue of printed books for the Bibliotheque 
Nationale contains no fewer than seventy-seven works (145 volumes) 
published by Capefigue during forty years. Of these only the 
Histoire de Philippe- Auguste (4 vols., 1829) and the Histoire de la 
reforme, de la ligue et du regne de Henri IV (8 vols., 1834-1835) 
perhaps deserve still to be remembered. For Capefigue's style bears 
evident marks of haste, and although he had access to an exception- 
ally large number of sources of information, includingthe state papers, 
neither his accuracy nor his judgment was to be trusted. 

CAPEL (of Hadham), ARTHUR CAPEL, Baron (fl. 1640- 
1649), English royalist, son of Sir Henry Capel of Rayne Hall, 



CAPEL CURIG— CAPE MAY 



249 



Essex, and of Theodosia, daughter of Sir Edward Montagu of 
Broughton, Northamptonshire, was elected a member of the 
Short and Long Parliaments in 1640 for Hertfordshire. He at 
first supported the opposition to Charles's arbitrary government, 
but soon allied himself with the king's cause, on which side his 
sympathies were engaged, and was raised to the peerage by the 
title of Baron Capel of Hadham on the 6th of August 1641. On 
the outbreak of the war he was appointed lieutenant-general of 
Shropshire, Cheshire and North Wales, where he rendered useful 
military services, and later was made one of the prince of Wales's 
councillors, and a commissioner at the negotiations at Uxbridge 
in 1645. He attended the queen in her flight to France in 1646, 
but disapproved of the prince's journey thither, and retired to 
Jersey, subsequently aiding in the king's escape to the Isle of 
Wight. He was one of the chief leaders in the second Civil War, 
but met with no success, and on the 27th of August, together 
with Lord Norwich, he surrendered to Fairfax at Colchester on 
promise of quarter for life. 1 This assurance, however, was after- 
wards interpreted as not binding the civil authorities, and his 
fate for some time hung in the balance. He succeeded in escaping 
from the Tower, but was again captured, was condemned to 
death by the new " high court of justice " on the 8th of March 
1649, and was beheaded together with the duke of Hamilton 
and Lord Holland the next day. He married Elizabeth, daughter 
and heir of Sir Charles Morrison of Cassiobury, Hertfordshire, 
through whom that estate passed into his family, and by whom 
besides four daughters he had five sons, the eldest Arthur being 
created earl of Essex at the Restoration. Lord Capel, who was 
much beloved, and who was a man of deep religious feeling and 
exemplary life, wrote Daily Observations or Meditations: Divine, 
M or all, published with some of his letters in 1654, and reprinted, 
with a short life of the author, under the title Excellent Con- 
templations, in 1683. 

CAPEL CURIG, a tourist resort in Carnarvonshire, North 
Wales, 141 m. from Bangor. It is a collection of a few houses, too 
scattered to form a village properly so called. At the Roberts hotel 
is shown on a window pane the supposed signature of Wellington. 
The road from Bettws y coed, past the Swallow Falls to Capel 
Curig, and thence to Llanberis and Carnarvon, is very interesting, 
grand and lonely. Excellent fishing is to be had here, chiefly 
for trout. In summer, coaching tours discharge numbers of 
visitors daily; the railway station is Bettws (London & North- 
western railway). Capel Curig means "chapel of Curig," a 
British saint mentioned in Welsh poetry. The place is a centre 
for artists, geologists and botanists, for the ascent of Snowdon, 
Moel Siabod, Glydyr Fawr, Glydyr Fach, Tryfan, &c, and 
for visiting Llyn Ogwen, Llyn Idwal, Twll du (Devil's Kitchenl . 
Nant Ffrancon and the Penrhyn quarries. 

CAPELL, EDWARD (1713-1781), English Shakespearian critic, 
was born at Troston Hall in Suffolk on the nth of June 17 13. 
Through the influence of the duke of Grafton he was appointed 
to the office of deputy-inspector of plays in 1737, with a salary 
of £200 per annum, and in 1745 he was made groom of the privy 
chamber through the same influence. In 1760 appeared his 
Prolusions; or Select Pieces of Ancient Poetry, a collection which 
included Edward III., placed by Capell among the doubtful 
plays of Shakespeare. Shocked at the inaccuracies which had 
crept into Sir Thomas Hanmer's edition of Shakespeare, he 
projected an entirely new edition, to be carefully collated with 
the original copies. After spending three years in collecting, 
and comparing scarce folio and quarto editions, he published 
his own edition in 10 vols. 8vo (1768), with an introduction 
written in a style of extraordinary quaintness, which was after- 
wards appended to Johnson's and Steevens's editions. Capell 
published the first part of his commentary, which included 
notes on nine plays with a glossary, in 1774. This he afterwards 
recalled, and the publication of the complete work, Notes and 
Various Readings of Shakespeare (1779-1783), the third volume 
of which bears the title of The School of Shakespeare, was com- 
pleted, under the superintendence of John Collins, in 1783, two 

1 Gardiner's Hist, of the Civil War, iv. 206 ; cf . article on Fairfax 
by C. H. Frith in the Diet, of Nat. Biog. 



years after the author's death. It contains the results of his 
unremitting labour for thirty years, and throws considerable 
light on the history of the times of Shakespeare, as well as on 
the sources from which he derived his plots. Collins asserted 
that Steevens had stolen Capell's notes for his own edition, 
the story being that the printers had been bribed to show 
Steevens the sheets of Capell's edition while it was passing 
through the press. Besides the works already specified, he 
published an edition of Antony and Cleopatra, adapted for the 
stage with the help of David Garrick in 1758. His edition of 
Shakespeare passed through many editions (1768, 1771, 1793, 
1799, 1803, 1813). Capell died in the Temple on the 24th of 
February 1781. 

CAPELLA, MARTIANUS MINNEUS FELIX, Latin writer, 
according to Cassiodorus a native of Madaura in Africa, flourished 
during the 5th century, certainly before the year 439. He appears 
to have practised as a lawyer at Carthage and to have been in 
easy circumstances. His curious encyclopaedic work, entitled 
Satyricon, or De Nuptiis Philologiae et Mercurii et de septem 
Artibus liberalibus libri noiiem, is an elaborate allegory in nine 
books, written in a mixture of prose and verse, after the manner 
of the Menippean satires of Varro. The style is heavy and 
involved, loaded with metaphor and bizarre expressions, and 
verbose to excess. The first two books contain the allegory 
proper — the marriage of Mercury to a nymph named Philologia. 
The remaining seven books contain expositions of the seven 
liberal arts, which then comprehended all human knowledge. 
Book iii. treats of grammar, iv. of dialectics, v. of rhetoric, vi. of 
geometry, vii. of arithmetic, viii. of astronomy, ix. of music. 
These abstract discussions are linked on to the original allegory by 
the device of personifying each science as a courtier of Mercury 
and Philologia. The work was a complete encyclopaedia of the 
liberal culture of the time, and was in high repute during the 
middle ages. The author's chief sources were Varro, Pliny, 
Solinus, Aquila Romanus, and Aristides Quintilianus. His 
prose resembles that of Apuleius (also a native of Madaura), but 
is even more difficult. The verse portions, which are on the 
whole correct and classically constructed, are in imitation of 
Varro and are less tiresome. 

A passage in book viii. contains a very clear statement of the 
heliocentric system of astronomy. It has been supposed that 
Copernicus, who quotes Capella, may have received from this 
work some hints towards his own new system. 

Editio princeps, by F. Vitalis Bodianus, 1499; the best modern 
edition is that of F. Eyssenhardt (1866) ; for the relationof Martianus 
Capella to Aristides Quintilianus see H. Deiters, Studien zu den 
griechischen Musikern (1881). In the nth century the German 
monk Notker Labeo translated the first two books into Old High 
German. 

CAPE MAY, a city and watering-place of Cape May county, 
New Jersey, U.S.A., on the Atlantic coast, 2 m. E.N.E. of Cape 
May, the S. extremity of the state, and about 80 m. S. by E. of 
Philadelphia. Pop. (1890) 2136; (1900) 2257; (1905) 3006; 
(1910) 2471. Cape May is. served by the Maryland, Delaware 
& Virginia (by ferry to Lewes, Delaware), the West Jersey & 
Seashore (Pennsylvania system), and the Atlantic City (Reading 
system) railways, and, during the summer season, by steamboat 
to Philadelphia. The principal part of the city is on a peninsula 
(formerly Cape Island) between the ocean and Cold Spring 
inlet, which has been dredged and is protected by jetties to make 
a suitable harbour. The further improvement of the inlet and the 
harbour was authorized by Congress in 1907. On the ocean side, 
along a hard sand beach 5 m. long, is the Esplanade. There are 
numerous hotels and handsome cottages for summer visitors, who 
come especially from Philadelphia, from New York, from the 
South and from the West. Cape May offers good bathing, 
yachting and fishing, with driving and hunting in the wooded 
country inland from the coast. At Cape May Point is the Cape 
May lighthouse, 145 ft. high, built in 1800 and rebuilt in 1859. 
In the city are canneries of vegetables and fruit, glass-works and 
a gold-beating establishment. Fish and oysters are exported. 
Cape May was named by Cornelis Jacobsen Mey, director of the 
Prince Hendrick (Delaware) river for the West India Company of 



25° 



CAPENA— CAPERCALLY 



Holland, who took possession of the river in 1623, and planted 
the short-lived colony of Fort Nassau 4 m. below Philadelphia, 
near the present Gloucester City, N.J. Cape May was settled 
about 1699, — a previous attempt to settle here made by Samuel 
Blommaert in 1631 was unsuccessful. It was an important 
whaling port early in the 18th century, and became prominent as 
a watering-place late in that century. It was incorporated as 
the borough of Cape Island in 1848, and chartered as the city of 
Cape Island in 1851 ; in 1869 the name was changed to Cape May. 

CAPENA, an ancient city of southern Etruria, frequently 
mentioned with Veii and Falerii. Its exact site is, however, un- 
certain. According to Cato it was a colony of the former, and in 
the wars between Veii and Romeitappears as dependent upon Veii, 
after the fall of which town, however, it became subject to. Rome. 
Out of its territory the tribus Stellatina was formed in 367 B.C. 
In later republican times the city itself is hardly mentioned, 
but under the empire a municipium Capenatium foederatum is 
frequently mentioned in inscriptions. Of these several were found 
upon the hill known as Civitucola, about 4 m. north-east of the 
post station of ad Vicesimum on the ancient Via Flaminia, a site 
which is well adapted for an ancient city. It lies on the north 
side of a dried-up lake, once no doubt a volcanic crater. Remains 
of buildings of the Roman period also exist there, while, in the 
sides of the hill of S. Martino which lies on the north-east, 1 rock- 
cut tombs belonging to the 7th and 6th centuries B.C. but used in 
Roman times for fresh burials, were excavated in 1859-1864, and 
again in 1904. Inscriptions in early Latin and in local dialect 
were also found (W. Henzen, Bullettino deW Istituto, 1864, 143; 
R. Paribeni, Notizie degli Scavi, 1905, 301). Similar tombs have 
also been found on the hills south of Civitucola. G. B. de Rossi, 
however, supposed that the games of which records (fragments of 
the fasti ludorum) were also discovered at Civitucola, were those 
which were celebrated from time immemorial at the Lucus 
Feroniae, with which he therefore proposed to identify this site, 
placing Capena itself at S. Oreste, on the south-eastern side of 
Mount Soracte. But there are difficulties in the way of this 
assumption, and it is more probable that the Lucus Feroniae is to 
be sought at or near Nazzano, where, in the excavation of a 
circular building which some conjecture to have been the actual 
temple of Feronia, inscriptions relating to a municipality were 
found. Others, however, propose to place Lucus Feroniae at 
the church of S. Abbondio, 1 m. east of Rignano and 4 m. north- 
north-west of Civitucola, which is built out of ancient materials. 
On the Via Flaminia, 26 m. from Rome, near Rignano, is the 
Christian cemetery of Theodora. 

See R. Lanciani, Bullettino dell' Istituto, 1870, 32; G. B. de Rossi, 
Annali dell' Istituto, 1883, 254; Bullettino Crisliano, 1883, 115; 
G. Dennis, Cities and Cemeteries of Etruria (London, 1883), i. 131; 
E. Bormann, Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum (Berlin, 1888), xi. 571 ; 
H Nissen, Italische Landeskunde (Berlin, 1902), ii. 369; R. Paribeni, 
in Monumenti dei Lincei, xvi. (1906), 277 seq. (T. As.) 

CAPER, FLAVIUS, Latin grammarian, flourished during the 
2nd century. He devoted special attention to the early Latin 
writers, and is highly spoken of by Priscian. Caper was the 
author of two works — De Lingua Latina and De Dubiis Generibus. 
These works in their original form are lost; but two short 
treatises entitled De Orthographia and De Verbis Dubiis have 
come down to us under his name, probably excerpts from the 
original works, with later additions by an unknown writer. 

See F. Osann, De Flavio Capro (1849), and review by W. Christ in 
Philologus, xviii. 165-170 (1862), where several editions of other 
important grammarians are noticed; G. Keil, " De Flavio Gram- 
matico," in Dissertationes Halenses, x. (1889); text in H. Keil's 
Grammatici Latini, vii. 

CAPERCALLY, or Caperkally, 2 a bird's name commonly 
derived from the Gaelic capull, a horse (or, more properly, a 

1 Some writers wrongly speak as though the two hills were identical. 

2 This is the spelling of the old law-books, as given by Pennant, 
the zoologist, who, on something more than mere report, first in- 
cluded this bird among the British fauna. The only one of the 
" Scots Acts," however, in which the present writer has been able 
to ascertain that the bird is named is No. 30 of James VI. (1621), 
which was passed to protect " powties, partrikes, moore foulles, 
blakcoks, gray hennis, termigantis, quailzies, capercailzies," &c. 



mare), and coille, a wood, but with greater likelihood, according 
•to the opinion of Dr M'Lauchlan, from cabher, an old man (and, 
by metaphor, an old bird), and coille, the name of Tetrao urogallus, 
the largest of the grouse family ( Tetraonidae), and a species which 
was formerly indigenous to Scotland and Ireland. The word is 
frequently spelt otherwise, as capercalze, capercailzie (the z, 
a letter unknown in Gaelic, being pronounced like y), and caper- 
caillie, and the English name of wood-grouse or cock-of-the-wood 
has been often applied to the same bird. The earliest notice of 
it as an inhabitant of North Britain seems to be by Hector 
Boethius, whose works were published in 1526, and it can then 
be traced through various Scottish writers, to whom, however, 
it was evidently but little known, for about 200 years, or may be 
more, and by one of them only, Bishop Lesley, in ^78, was a 
definite habitat assigned to it: — " In Rossia quoque Louguhabria 
[Lochaber], atque aliis montanis locis " (De Origine Moribus 
et rebus gestis Scotorum. Romae: ed. 1675, p. 24). Pennant, 
during one of his tours in Scotland, found that it was then (1769) 
still to be met with in Glen Moriston and in The Chisholm's 
country, whence he saw a cock-bird. We may infer that it 
became extinct about that time, since Robert Gray (Birds of the 
West of Scotland, p. 229) quotes the Rev. John Grant as writing 
in 1794: " The last seen in Scotland was in the woods of Strath- 
glass about thirty-two years ago." Of its existence in Ireland 
we have scarcely more details. If we may credit the Pavones 
sylvestres of Giraldus Cambrensis with being of this species, 
it was once abundant there, and Willughby (1678) was told 
that it was known in that kingdom as the "cock-of-the-wood." 
A few other writers mention it by the same name, and John Rutty, 
in 1772, says (Nat. Hist. Dublin, i. p. 302) that " one was seen 
in the county of Leitrim about the year 17 10, but they have 
entirely disappeared of late, by reason of the destruction of our 
woods." Pennant also states that about 1760 a few were to 
be found about Thomastown in Tipperary, but no later evidence 
is forthcoming, and thus it would seem that the species was 
exterminated at nearly the same period in both Ireland and 
Scotland. 

When the practice of planting was introduced, the restoration 
of this fine bird to both countries was attempted. In Ireland 
the trial, of which some particulars are given by J. Vaughan 
Thompson (Birds of Ireland, ii. 32), was made at Glengariff, 
but it seems to have utterly failed, whereas in Scotland, where 
it was begun at Taymouth, it finally succeeded, and the species 
is now not only firmly established, but is increasing in numbers 
and range. Mr L. Lloyd, the author of several excellent works on 
the wild sports and natural history of Scandinavia, supplied 
the stock from Sweden, but it must be always borne in mind 
that the original British race was wholly extinct, and no remains 
of it are known to exist in any museum. 

This species is widely, though intermittently, distributed on 
the continent of Europe, from Lapland to the northern parts 
of Spain, Italy and Greece, but is always restricted to pine- 
forests, which alone afford it food in winter. Its bones have been 
found in the kitchen-middens of Denmark, proving that country 
to have once been clothed with woods of that kind. Its remains 
have also been recognized from the caves of Aquitaine. Its 
eastern or southern limits in Asia cannot be precisely given, 
but it certainly inhabits the forests of a great part of Siberia. 
On the Stannovoi Mountains, however, it is replaced by a 
distinct though nearly allied species, the T. urogalloides of 
Dr von Middendorff, 3 which is smaller with a slenderer bill but 
longer tail. 

The cock-of-the-wood is remarkable for his large size and dark 
plumage, with the breast metallic green. He is polygamous, 
and in spring mounts to the topmost bough of a tall tree, whence 
he challenges all comers by extraordinary sounds and gestures; 
while the hens, which are much smaller and mottled in colour, 
timidly abide below the result of the frequent duels, patiently 
submitting themselves to the victor. While this is going on it 
is the practice in many countries, though generally in defiance 

3 Not to be confounded with the bird so named previously by Prof. 
Nilsson, which is a hybrid. 



GAPERN— -CAPET 



2 5i 



of the law, for the so-called sportsman stealthily to draw nigh, 
and with well-aimed gun to murder the principal performer 
in the scene. The hen makes an artless nest on the ground, and 
lays therein from seven to nine or even more eggs. The young are 
able to fly soon after they are hatched, and towards the end of 
summer and beginning of autumn, from feeding on the fruit 
and leaves of the bilberries and other similar plants, which form 
the undercovert of the forests, get into excellent condition and 
become good eating. With the first heavy falls of snow they 
betake themselves to the trees, and then, feeding on the 
pine-leaves, their flesh speedily acquires so strong a flavour of tur- 
pentine as to be distasteful to most palates. The usual method of 
pursuing this species on the continent of Europe is by encouraging 
a trained dog to range the forest and spring the birds, which then 
perch on the trees; while he is baying at the foot their attention 
is so much attracted by him that they permit the near approach 
of his master, who thus obtains a more or less easy shot. A 
considerable number, however, are also snared. Hybrids are 
very frequently produced between the capercally and the black 
grouse (T. tetrix), and the offspring has been described by 
some authors under the name of T. medius, as though a distinct 
species. (A. N.) 

CAPERN, EDWARD (1819-1894), English poet, was born 
at Tiverton, Devonshire, on the 21st of January 1819. From an 
early age he worked in a lace factory, but owing to failing eyesight 
he had to abandon this occupation in 1847 and he was in dire 
distress until he secured an appointment to be " the Rural 
Postman of Bideford," by which name he is usually known. 
He occupied his leisure in writing occasional poetry which struck 
the popular fancy. Collected in a volume and published by 
subscription in 1856, it received the warm praise of the reviews 
and many distinguished people. Poems, by Edward Capern, 
was followed by Ballads and Songs (1858), The Devonshire 
Melodist (a collection of the author's songs, some of them to his 
own music) and Wayside Warbles (1865), and resulted in a civil 
list pension being granted him by Lord Palmerston. He died 
on the 5th of June 1894. 

CAPERNAUM (Kairepvaov/x; probably, "the village of 
Nahum ") , an ancient city of Galilee. More than any other place, 
it was the home of Jesus after he began his mission; there he 
preached, called several of his disciples, and did many works, but 
without meeting with much response from the inhabitants, over 
whom he pronounced the heavy denunciation: — " And thou, 
Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought 
down to hell." The site of the city has been a matter of much 
dispute, — one party, headed by Dr E. Robinson, maintaining an 
identification with Khan Minyeh at the north-west corner of the 
Sea of Galilee, and another, represented especially by Sir C. W. 
Wilson, supporting the claims of Tell Hum, midway between 
Khan Minyeh and the mouth of the Jordan. Khan Minyeh is 
beautifully situated in a " fertile plain formed by the retreat of 
the mountains about the middle of the western shore " of the Sea 
of Galilee. Its ruins are not very extensive, though they may 
have been despoiled for building the great Saracenic Khan from 
which they take their name. In the neighbourhood is a water- 
source, Ain et-Tabighah, an Arabic corruption of Heptapegon 
or Seven Springs (referred to by Josephus as being near 
Capernaum). Tell Hum lies about 3 m. north of Khan Minyeh, 
and its ruins, covering an area of " half a mile long by a quarter 
wide," prove it to have been the site of no small town. It must 
be admitted that if it be not Capernaum it is impossible to say 
what ancient place it represents. But it is doubtful whether 
Tell Hum can be considered as a corruption of Kefr Nahum, the 
Semitic name which the Greek represents: and there is not here, 
as at Khan Minyeh, any spring that can be equated to the 
Heptapegon of Josephus. On the whole the probabilities of the 
two sites seem to balance, and it is practically impossible without 
further discoveries to decide between them. The sites of the 
neighbouring cities of Bethsaida and Chorazin are probably to be 
sought respectively at El-Bateiha, a grassy plain in the north-east 
corner of the lake, and at Kerazeh, 2 m. north of Tell Hum. 
According to the so-called Pseudo-Methodius there was a tradition 



that Antichrist would be born at Chorazin, educated at Bethsaida 
and rule at Capernaum — hence the curse of Jesus upon these 
cities. 

On the site of Capernaum see especially W. Sanday in Journal of 
Theological Studies, vol. v. p. 42. (R. A. S. M.) 

CAPERS, the unexpanded flower-buds of Capparis spinosa, 
prepared with vinegar for use as a pickle. The caper plant is a 
trailing shrub, belonging to the Mediterranean region, resembling 
in habit the common bramble, and having handsome flowers of a 
pinkish white, with four petals, and numerous long tassel-like 
stamens. The leaves are simple and ovate, with spiny stipules. 
The plant is cultivated in Sicily and the south of France ; and in 
commerce capers are valued according to the period at which 
the buds are gathered and preserved. The finest are the young 
tender buds called " nonpareil," after which, gradually increasing 
in size and lessening in value, come " superfine," " fine," 
" capucin " and " capot." Other species of Capparis are 
similarly employed in various localities, and in some cases the 
fruit is pickled. 

CAPET, the name of a family to which, for nearly nine centuries, 
the kings of France, and many of the rulers of the most powerful 
fiefs in that country, belonged, and which mingled with several 
of the other royal races of Europe. The original significance of 
the name remains in dispute, but the first of the family to whom 
it was applied was Hugh, who was elected king of the Franks in 
987. The real founder of the house, however, was Robert the 
Strong (q.v.), who received- from Charles the Bald, king of the 
Franks, the countships of Anjou and Blois, and who is sometimes 
called duke, as he exercised some military authority in the district 
between the Seine and the Loire.- According to Aimoin of Saint- 
Germain-des-Pr6s, and the chronicler, Richer, he was a Saxon, 
but historians question this statement. Robert's two sons, Odo 
or Eudes, and Robert II., succeeded their father successively as 
dukes, and, in 887, some of the Franks chose Odo as their king. 
A similar step was taken, in 922, in the case of Robert II., this 
too marking the increasing irritation felt at the weakness of the 
Carolingian kings. When Robert died in 923, he was succeeded 
by his brother-in-law, Rudolph, duke of Burgundy, and not by 
his son Hugh, who is known in history as Hugh the Great, duke of 
France and Burgundy, and whose domain extended from the 
Loire to the frontiers of Picardy. When Louis V., king of the 
Franks, died in 987, the Franks, setting aside the Carolingians, 
passed over his brother Charles, and elected Hugh Capet, son of 
Hugh the Great, as their king, and crowned him at Reims. 
Avoiding the pretensions which had been made by the Caro- 
lingian kings, the Capetian kings were content, for a time, with a 
more modest position, and the story of the growth of their power 
belongs to the history of France. They had to combat the feudal 
nobility, and later, the younger branches of the royal house 
established in the great duchies, and the main reason for the 
permanence of their power was, perhaps, the fact that there were 
few minorities among them. The direct line ruled in France 
from 987 to 1328, when, at the death of King Charles IV., it was 
succeeded by the younger, or Valois, branch of the family. 
Philip VI., the first of the Valois kings, was a son of Charles I., 
count of Valois and grandson of King Philip III. (see Valois). 
The Capetian- Valois dynasty lasted until 1498, when Louis, duke 
of Orleans, became king as Louis XII., on the death of King 
Charles VIII. (see Orleans). Louis XII. dying childless, the 
house of Valois-Angouleme followed from Francis I. to the death 
of Henry III. in 1589 (see Angouleme), when the last great 
Capetian family, the Bourbons (q.v.) mounted the throne. 

Scarcely second to the royal house is the branch to which 
belonged the dukes of Burgundy. In the 10th century the duchy 
of Burgundy fell into the hands of Hugh the Great, father of 
Hugh Capet, on whose death in 956 it passed to his son Otto, and, 
in 965, to his son Henry. In 1032 Robert, the second son of 
Robert the Pious, king of the Franks, and grandson of Hugh 
Capet, founded the first ducal house, which ruled until 1361. 
For two years the duchy was in the hands of the crown, but in 
1363, the second ducal house, also Capetian, was founded by 
Philip the Bold, son of John II., king of France. This branch 



252 



CAPE TOWN 



of the Capetians is also distinguished by its union with the 
Habsburgs, through the marriage of Mary, daughter of Charles 
the Bold, duke of Burgundy, with Maximilian, afterwards the 
emperor Maximilian I. Of great importance also was the house 
of the counts of Anjou, which was founded in 1246, by Charles, 
son of the French king Louis VIII., and which, in 1360, was 
raised to the dignity of a dukedom (see Anjou). Members of 
this family sat upon the thrones of two kingdoms. The counts 
and dukes of Anjou were kings of Naples from 1265 to 1442. 
In 1308 Charles Robert of Anjou was elected king of Hungary, 
his claim being based on the marriage of his grandfather Charles 
II., king of Naples and count of Anjou, with Maria, daughter of 
Stephen V., king of Hungary. A third branch formed the house 
of the counts of Artois, which was founded in 1238 by Robert, 
son of King Louis VIII. This house merged in that of Valois 
in 1383, by the marriage of Margaret, daughter of Louis, count 
of Artois, with Philip the Bold, duke of Burgundy. The throne 
of Navarre was also filled by the Capetians. In 1284 Jeanne, 
daughter and heiress of Henry I., king of Navarre, married 
Philip IV., king of France, and the two kingdoms were united 
until Philip of Valois became king of France as Philip VI. in 
1328, when Jeanne, daughter of King Louis X., and heiress of 
Navarre, married Philip, count of Evreux (see Navarre). 

In the 13th century the throne of Constantinople was occupied 
by a branch of the Capetians. Peter, grandson of King Louis VI., 
obtained that dignity in 121 7 as brother-in-law of the two 
previous emperors, Baldwin, count of Flanders, and his brother 
Henry. Peter was succeeded successively by his two sons, 
Robert and Baldwin, from whom in 1261 the empire was re- 
covered by the Greeks. 

The counts of Dreux, for two centuries and a half (ii3 2_I 377)> 
and the counts of Evreux, from 1307 to 1425, also belonged to the 
family of the Capets,- — other members of which worthy of mention 
are the Dunois and the Longuevilles, illegitimate branches of the 
house of Valois, which produced many famous warriors and 
courtiers. 

CAPE TOWN, the capital of the Cape Province, South Africa, 
in 33° 56' S., 18° 28' E. It is at the north-west extremity of 
the Cape Peninsula on the south shore of Table Bay, is 6181 m. 
by sea from London and 957 by rail south-west of Johannesburg. 
Few cities are more magnificently situated. Behind the bay 
the massive wall of Table Mountain, 2 m. in length, rises to a 
height of over 3500 ft., while on the east and west projecting 
mountains enclose the plain in which the city lies. The mountain 
to the east, 3300 ft. high, which projects but slightly seawards, 
is the Devil's Peak, that to the west the Lion's Head (over 
2000 ft. high), with a lesser height in front called the Lion's Rump 
or Signal Hill. The city, at first confined to the land at the 
head of the bay, has extended all round the, shores of the bay 
and to the lower spurs of Table Mountain. 

The purely Dutch aspect which Cape Town preserved until 
the middle of the 19th century has disappeared. Nearly all 
the stucco-fronted brick houses, with flat roofs and cornices 
and wide spreading stoeps, of the early Dutch settlers have been 
replaced by shops, warehouses and offices in styles common to 
English towns. 01 the many fine public buildings which adorn the 
city scarcely any date before i860. The mixture of races among 
the inhabitants, especially the presence of numerous Malays, 
who on all festive occasions appear in gorgeous raiment, gives 
additional animation and colour to the street scenes. The 
mosques with their cupolas and minarets, and houses built in 
Eastern fashion contrast curiously with the Renaissance style 
of most of the modern buildings, the medieval aspect of the 
castle and the quaint appearance of the Dutch houses still 
standing. 

Chief Public Buildings. — The castle stands near the shore 
at the head of the bay. Begun in 1666 its usefulness as a fortress 
has long ceased, but it serves to link the city to its past. West 
of the castle is a large oblong space, the Parade Ground. A 
little farther west, at the foot of the central jetty is a statue 
of Van Riebeek, the first governor of the Cape. In a line with 
the jetty is Adderley Street, and its continuation Government 



Avenue. Adderley Street and the avenue make one straight 
road a mile long, and at its end are " the Gardens," as the suburbs 
built on the rising ground leading to Table Mountain are called. 
The avenue itself is fully half a mile long and is lined on either 
side with fine oak trees. In Adderley Street are the customs 
house and railway station, the Standard bank, the general post 
and telegraph offices, with a tower 120 ft. high, and the Dutch 
Reformed church. The church dates from 1699 and is the oldest 
church in South Africa. Of the original building only the clock 
tower (sent from Holland in 1727) remains. Government 
Avenue contains, on the east side, the Houses of Parliament, 
government house, a modernized Dutch building, and the Jewish 
synagogue; on the west side are the Anglican cathedral and 
grammar schools, the public library, botanic gardens, the museum 
and South African college. Many of these buildings are of 
considerable architectural merit, the material chiefly used in 
their construction being granite from the Paarl and red brick. 
The botanic gardens cover 14 acres, contain over 8000 varieties 
of trees and plants, and afford a magnificent view of Table 
Mountain and its companion heights. In the gardens, in front 
of the library is a statue of Sir George Grey, governor of the Cape 
from 1854 to 1861. The most valuable portion of the library is 
the 5000 volumes presented by Sir George Grey. In Queen 
Victoria Street, which runs along the west side of the gardens, 
are the Cape University buildings (begun in 1906), the law courts, 
City club and Huguenot memorial hall. The Anglican cathedral, 
begun in 1901 to replace an unpretentious building on the same 
site, is dedicated to St George. It lies between the library and 
St George's Street, in which are the chief newspaper offices, 
and premises of the wholesale merchants. West of St George's 
Street is Greenmarket Square, the centre of the town during 
the Dutch period. From the balcony of the town house, which 
overlooks the square, proclamations were read to the burghers, 
summoned to the spot by the ringing of the bell in the small- 
domed tower. Still farther west, in Riebeek Square, is the old 
slave market, now used as a church and school for coloured people. 

Facing the north side of the Parade Ground are the handsome 
municipal buildings, completed in 1906. The most conspicuous 
feature is the clock tower and belfry, 200 ft. high. The hall is 
130 ft. by 62, and 55 ft. high. Opposite the main entrance is 
a statue of Edward VII. by William Goscombe John, unveiled 
in 1905. The opera house occupies the north-west corner of 
the Parade Ground. Plein Street, which leads south from the 
Parade Ground, is noted for its cheap shops, largely patronized 
on Saturday nights by the coloured inhabitants. In Sir Lowry 
Road, the chief eastern thoroughfare, is the large vegetable 
and fruit market. Immediately west of the harbour are the con- 
vict station and Somerset hospital. They are built at the town 
end of Greenpoint Common, the open space at the foot of Signal 
Hill. Cape Town is provided with an excellent water supply 
and an efficient drainage system. 

The Suburbs. — The suburbs of Cape Town, for natural beauty 
of position, are among the finest in the world. On the west they 
extend about 3 m., by Green Point to Sea Point, between the sea 
and the foot of the Lion's Rump; on the east they run round the 
foot of the Devil's Peak, by Woodstock, Mowbray, Rondebosch, 
Newlands, Claremont, &c, to Wynberg, a distance of 7 m. Though 
these are managed by various municipalities, there is practically no 
break in the buildings for the whole distance. All the parts are 
connected by the suburban railway service, and by an electric 
tramway system. A tramway also runs from the town over the 
Kloof, or pass between Table Mountain and the Lion's Head, 
to Camp's Bay, on the west coast south of Sea Point, to which 
place it is continued, the tramway thus completely circling the 
Lion's Head and Signal Hill. Of the suburbs mentioned, Green 
Point and Sea Point are seaside resorts, Woodstock being both 
a business and residential quarter. Woodstock covers the ground 
on which the British, in 1806, defeated the Dutch, and contains 
the house in which the articles of capitulation were signed. 
Another seaside suburb is Milnerton on the north-east shores 
of Table Bay at the mouth of the Diep river. Near Maitland, 
and 3 m. from the city, is the Cape Town observatory, built in 



CAPE VERDE ISLANDS 



253 



1820 and maintained by the British government. Rondebosch, 
5 m. from the city, contains some of the finest of the Dutch 
mansions in South Africa. Less than a mile from the station 
is Groote Schuur, a typical specimen of the country houses built 
by the Dutch settlers in the 17th century. The house was the 
property of Cecil Rhodes, and was bequeathed by him for the 
use of the prime minister of Federated South Africa. The 
grounds of the estate extend up the slopes of Table Mountain. 
At Newlands is Bishop's Court, the home of the archbishop of 
Cape Town. More distant suburbs to the south-east are Con- 
stantia, with a famous Dutch farm-house and wine farm, and 
Muizenberg and Kalk Bay, the two last villages on the shore 
of False Bay. At Muizenberg Cecil Rhodes died, 1902. Facing 
the Atlantic is Hout's Bay, 10 m. south-south-west of Wynberg. 

Most of the suburbs and the city itself are exposed to the south- 
east winds which, passing over the flats which join the Cape 
Peninsula to the mainland, reach the city sand-laden. From its 
bracing qualities this wind, which blows in the summer, is known 
as the " Cape Doctor." During its prevalence Table Mountain 
is covered by a dense whitish-grey cloud, overlapping its side 
like a tablecloth. 

The Harbour. — Table Bay, 20 m. wide at its entrance, is fully 
exposed to north and north-west gales. The harbour works, 
begun in i860, afford sheltered accommodation for a large 
number of vessels.- From the west end of the bay a breakwater 
extends north-east for some 4000 ft. East of the breakwater 
and parallel to it for 2700 ft. is the South pier. From breakwater 
and pier arms project laterally. In the area enclosed are the 
Victoria basin, covering 64 acres, the -Alfred basin of 8| acres, 
a graving dock 529 ft. long and a patent slip for vessels up to 
1500 tons. There is good anchorage outside the Victoria basin 
under the lee of the breakwater, and since 1904 the foreshore 
east of the south pier has been reclaimed and additional wharfage 
provided. Altogether there are 2J m. of quay walls, the wharfs 
being provided with electrical cranage. Cargo can be transferred 
direct from the ship into railway trucks. Vessels of the deepest 
draught can enter into the Victoria basin, the depth of water 
at low tide ranging from 24 to 36 ft. 

Trade and Communication. — The port has a practical mono- 
poly of the passenger traffic between the Cape and England. 
Several lines of steamers — chiefly British and German — maintain 
regular communication with Europe, the British mail boats 
taking sixteen days on the journey. By its railway connexions 
Cape Town affords the quickest means of reaching, from western 
Europe, every other town in South Africa. In the import trade 
Cape Town is closely rivalled by Port Elizabeth, but its export 
trade, which includes diamonds and bar gold, is fully 70% of 
that of the entire colony. In 1898, the year before the beginning 
of the Anglo-Boer war, the volume of trade was: — Imports 
£5,128,292, exports £15,881,952. In 1904, two years after the 
conclusion of the war the figures were: — imports £9,070,757; 
exports £17,471,760. In 1907 during a period of severe and 
prolonged trade depression the imports had fallen to £5,263,930, 
but the exports owing entirely to the increased output of gold 
from the Rand mines had increased to £37,994,658; gold and 
diamonds represented over £37,000,000 of this total. The 
tonnage of ships entering the harbour in 1887 was 801,033. I n 
1904 it had risen to 4,846,012 and in 1907 was 4,671,146. The 
trade of the port in tons was 1,276,350 in 1899 and 1,413,471 in 
1904. In 1907 it had fallen to 658,721. 

Defence. — Cape Town, being in the event of the closing of the 
Suez Canal on the main route of ships from Europe to the East, 
is of considerable strategic importance. It is defended by several 
batteries armed with modern heavy guns. It is garrisoned by 
Imperial and local troops, and is connected by railway with the 
naval station at Simon's Town on the east of the Cape Peninsula. 

Population. — The Cape electoral division, which includes 
Cape Town, had in 1865 a population of 50,064, in 1875 57,319, in 
1891 97,238, and in 1904 213,167, of whom 120,475 were whites. 
Cape Town itself had a population in 1875 of 33,000, in 1891 of 
51,251 and in 1904 of 77,668. Inclusive of the nearer suburbs 
the population was 78,866 in 1891 and 170,083 in 1904. Of the 



inhabitants of the city proper 44,203 were white (1904). Of the 
coloured inhabitants 6561 were Malays; the remainder being 
chiefly of mixed blood. The most populous suburbs in 1904 were 
Woodstock with 28,990 inhabitants, and Wynberg with 18,477. 

History and Local Government.— Cape Town was founded in 
1652 by settlers sent from Holland by the Netherlands East 
India Co., under Jan van Riebeek. It came definitely into the 
possession of Great Britain in 1806. Its political history is 
indistinguishable from that of Cape Colony (g.v.). The town was 
granted municipal institutions in 1836. (Among the councillors 
returned at the election of 1904 was Dr Abdurrahman, a Mahom- 
medan and a graduate of Edinburgh, this being, it is believed, 
the first instance of the election of a man of colour to any Euro- 
pean representative body in South Africa.) The municipality 
owns the water and lighting services. The municipal rating 
value was, in 1880 £2,054,204, in 1901 £9,475,260, in 1908 (when 
the rate levied was 3d. in the £) £14,129,439. The total rateable 
value of the suburbs, not included in the above figures, is over 
£8,000,000. Rates are based on capital, not annual, value. The 
control of the port is vested in the Harbour and Railway Board 
of the Union. 

Cape Town is the seat of the legislature of the Union of South 
Africa, of the provincial government, of the provincial division 
of the Supreme Court of South Africa, and of the Cape University; 
also of an archbishop of the Anglican and a bishop of the Roman 
Catholic churches. 

CAPE VERDE ISLANDS (Ilhas do Cabo Verde), an archipelago 
belonging to Portugal; off the West African coast, between 
■17 13' and 14 47' N. and 22° 40' and 25 22' W. Pop. (1905) 
about 138,620; area, 1475 sq. m. The archipelago consists of 
ten islands: — Santo Antao (commonly miswritten St Antonio), 
Sao Vicente, Santa Luzia, Sao Nicolao, Sal, Boa Vista, Maio, Sao 
Thiago (the St Jago of the English), Fogo, and Brava, besides 
four uninhabited islets. It forms a sort of broken crescent, with 
the concavity towards the west. The last four islands constitute 



nSanto Antao 



CAPE VERDE Is. 




the leeward (Sotavento) group and the other six the windward 
(Barlavento). The distance between the coast of Africa and the 
nearest island (Boa Vista) is about 300 m. The islands derive 
their name, frequently but erroneously written " Cape Verd," 
or " Cape de Verd " Islands, from the African promontory off 
which they lie, known as Cape Verde, or the Green Cape. The 
entire archipelago is of volcanic origin, and on the island of Fogo 
there is an active volcano. No serious eruption has taken place 
since 1680, and the craters from which the streams of basalt 
issued have lost their outline. 



254 



CAPE VERDE ISLANDS 



Climate. — The atmosphere of the islands is generally hazy, 
especially in the direction of Africa. With occasional exceptions 
during summer and autumn, the north-east trade is the prevailing 
wind, blowing most strongly from November to May. The rainy 
season is during August, September and October, when there is 
thunder and a light variable wind from south-east or south-west. 
The Harmattan, a very dry east wind from the African continent, 
occasionally makes itself felt. The heat of summer is high, the 
thermometer ranging from 80° to 90° Fahr. near the sea. The 
unhealthy season is the period during and following the rains, 
when vegetation springs up with surprising rapidity, and there is 
much stagnant water, poisoning the air on the lower grounds. 
Remittent fevers are then common. The people of all the 
islands are also subject in May to an endemic of a bilious nature 
called locally levadias, but the cases rarely assume a dangerous 
form, and recovery is usually attained in three or four days 
without medical aid. On some of the islands rain has occasionally 
not fallen for three years. The immediate consequence is a 
failure of the crops, and this is followed by the death of great 
numbers from starvation, or the epidemics which usually break 
out afterwards. 

Flora. — Owing largely to the widespread destruction of 
timber for fuel, and to the frequency of drought, the flora of the 
islands is poor when compared with that of the Canaries, the 
Azores or Madeira. It is markedly tropical in character; and 
although some seventy wild-flowers, grasses, ferns, &c., are 
peculiar to the archipelago, the majority of plants are those found 
on the neighbouring African littoral. Systematic afforestation 
has not been attempted, but the Portuguese have introduced 
a few trees, such as the baohab, eucalyptus and dragon-tree, 
besides many plants of economic value. Coffee-growing, an 
industry dating from 1790, is the chief resource of the people of 
Santo Antao, Fogo and Sao Thiago; maize, millet, sugar-cane, 
manioc, excellent oranges, pumpkins, sweet potatoes, and, to a 
less extent, tobacco and cotton are produced. On most of the 
islands coco-nut and date palms, tamarinds and bananas may 
be seen; orchil is gathered; and indigo and castor-oil are pro- 
duced. Of considerable importance is the physic-nut (Jalropha 
curcas), which is exported. 

Fauna. — Quails are found in all the islands; rabbits in Boa 
Vista, Sao Thiago and Fogo; wild boars in Sao Thiago. Both 
black and grey rats are common. Goats, horses and asses are 
reared, and goatskins are exported. The neighbouring sea 
abounds with fish, and coral fisheries are carried on by a colony of 
Neapolitans in Sao Thiago. Turtles come from the African coast 
to lay their eggs on the sandy shores. The Ilheu Branco, or 
White Islet, between Sao Nicolao and Santa Luzia, is remarkable 
as containing a variety of puffin unknown elsewhere, and a 
species of large lizard (Macroscinctus coctei) which feeds on plants. 

Inhabitants. — The first settlers on the islands imported negro 
slaves from the African coast. Slavery continued in full force 
until 1854, when the Portuguese government freed the public 
slaves, and ameliorated the conditions of private ownership. In 
1857 arrangements were made for the gradual abolition of slavery, 
and by 1876 the last slave had been liberated. The transporta- 
tion of convicts from Portugal, a much-dreaded punishment, was 
continued until the closing years of the 19th century. It was the 
coexistence of these two forms of servitude, even more than the 
climate, which prevented any large influx of Portuguese colonists. 
Hence the blacks and mulattoes far outnumber the white 
inhabitants. They are, as a rule, taller than the Portuguese, and 
are of fine physique, with regular features but woolly hair. 
Slavery and the enervating climate have left their mark on the 
habits of the people, whose indolence and fatalism are perhaps 
their most obvious qualities. Their language is a bastard 
Portuguese, known as the lingua creoula. Their religion is Roman 
Catholicism, combined with a number of pagan beliefs and rites, 
which are fostered by the curandeiros or medicine men. These 
superstitions tend to disappear gradually before the advance of 
education, which has progressed considerably since 1867, when 
the first school, a lyceum, was opened in Ribeira Brava, the 
capital of Sao Nicolao. On all the inhabited islands, except 



Santa Luzia, there are churches and primary schools, conducted 
by the government or the priests. The children of the wealthier 
classes are sent to Lisbon for their education. 

Government.— The archipelago forms one of the foreign 
provinces of Portugal, and is under the command of a governor- 
in-chief appointed by the crown. There are two principal judges, 
one for the windward and another for the leeward group, the 
former with his residence at Sao Nicolao, and the latter at Praia; 
and each island has a military commandant, a few soldiers, and a 
number of salaried officials, such as police, magistrates and 
custom-house directors. There is also an ecclesiastical establish- 
ment, with a bishop, dean and canons. 

Industries. — The principal industries, apart from agriculture, 
are the manufacture of sugar, spirits, salt, cottons and straw hats 
and fish-curing. The average yearly value of the exports is 
about £60,000; that of the imports (including £200,000 for coal), 
about £350,000. The most important of the exports are coffee, 
physic-nuts, millet, sugar, spirits, salt, live animals, skins and 
fish. This trade is principally carried on with Lisbon and the 
Portuguese possessions on the west coast of Africa, and with 
passing vessels. The imports consist principally of coal, textiles, 
food-stuffs, wine, metals, tobacco, machinery, pottery and 
vegetables. Over 3000 vessels, with a total tonnage exceeding 
3,500,000, annually enter the ports of the archipelago; the 
majority call at Mindello, on Sao Vicente, for coal, and do not 
receive or discharge any large quantities of cargo. 

Santo Antao (pop. 25,000), at the extreme north-west of the 
archipelago, has an area of 265 sq. m. Its surface is very rugged 
and mountainous, abounding in volcanic craters, of which the chief 
is the Topoda Coroa (7300 ft.) , also known as the Sugar-loaf. Mineral 
springs exist in many places. The island is the most picturesque, 
the healthiest, and, on its north-western slope, the best watered and 
most fertile of the archipelago. The south-eastern slope, shut out 
by lofty mountains from the fertilizing moisture of the trade- winds, 
has an entirely different appearance, black rocks, white pumice 
and red clay being its most characteristic features. Santo Antao 
produces large quantities of excellent coffee, besides sugar and fruit. 
It has several small ports, of which the chief are the sheltered and 
spacious Tarrafal Bay, on the south-west coast, and the more 
frequented Ponta do Sol, on the north-east, 8 m. from the capital, 
Ribeira Grande, a town of 4500 inhabitants. Cinchona is cultivated 
in the neighbourhood. In 1780 the slaves on Santo Antao were 
declared free, but this decree was not carried out. About the same 
time many white settlers, chiefly from the Canaries, entered the 
island, and introduced the cultivation of wheat. 

Sao Vicente, or St Vincent (8000), lies near Santo Antao, on the 
south-east, and has an area of 75 sq. m. Its highest point is Monte 
Verde (2400 ft.). The whole island is as arid and sterile as the 
south-eastern half of Santo Antao, and for the same reason. It was 
practically uninhabited until 1795; in 1829 its population numbered 
about 100. Its harbour, an extinct crater on the north coast, with 
an entrance eroded by the sea, affords complete shelter from every 
wind. An English speculator founded a coaling station here in 
1851, and the town of Mindello, also known as Porto Grande or St 
Vincent, grew up rapidly, and became the commercial centre of the 
archipelago. Most of the business is in English hands, and nine- 
tenths of the inhabitants understand English. Foodstuffs, wood 
and water are imported from Santo Antao, and the water is stored 
in a large reservoir at Mindello. Sao Vicente has a station for the 
submarine cable from Lisbon to Pernambuco in Brazil. 

Santa Luzia, about 5 m. south-east, has an area of 18 sq. m., 
and forms a single estate, occupied only by the servants or the 
family of the proprietor. Its highest point is 885 ft. above sea-level. 
On the south-west it has a good harbour, visited by whaling and 
fishing boats. Much orchil was formerly gathered, and there is 
good pasturage for the numerous herds of cattle. A little to the 
south are the uninhabited islets of Branco and Razo. 

Sao Nicolao, or Nicolau (12,000), a long, narrow, crescent-shaped 
island with an area of 126 sq. m., lies farther east, near the middle 
of the archipelago. Its climate is not very healthy. Maize, kidney- 
beans, manioc, sugar-cane and vines are cultivated; and in ordinary 
years grain is exported to the other islands. The interior is moun- 
tainous, and culminates in two peaks which can be seen for many 
leagues ; one has the shape of a sugar-loaf, and is near the middle of 
the island ; the other, Monte Gordo, is near the west end, and has a 
height of 4280 ft. All the other islands of the group can be seen 
from Sao Nicolao in clear weather. Vessels frequently enter Pre- 
guica, or Freshwater Bay, near the south-east extremity of the 
island, for water and fresh provisions ; and the custom-house is here. 
The island was one of the first colonized; in 1774 its inhabitants 
numbered 13,500, but famine subsequently caused a great decrease. 
The first capital, Lapa, at the end of a promontory on the south, 



CAPGRAVE 



255 



was abandoned during the period of Spanish ascendancy over 
Portugal (1580-1640) in favour of Ribeira Brava (4000), on the 
north coast, a town which now has a considerable trade. 

Sal (750), in the north-east of the archipelago, has an area of 75 
sq. m. It was originally named Lane, or Lhana (" plain "), from the 
flatness of the greater part of its surface. It derives its modern name 
from a natural salt-spring, but most of the salt produced here is now 
obtained from artificial salt-pans. Towards the close of the 17th 
century it was inhabited only by a few shepherds, and by slaves 
employed in the salt-works. In 1705 it was entirely abandoned, 
owing to drought and consequent famine; and only in 1808 was the 
manufacture of salt resumed. A railway, the first built in Portuguese 
territory, was opened in 1835. The hostile Brazilian tariffs of 1889 
for a time nearly destroyed the salt trade. Whales, turtles and fish 
are abundant, and dairy-farming is a prosperous industry. There 
are many small harbours, which render every part of the island 
easily accessible. 

Boa Vista (2600), the most easterly island of the archipelago, 
has an area of 235 sq. m. It was named Sao Christovao by its 
discoverers in the 15th century. Its modern name, meaning " fair 
view," is singularly inappropriate, for with the exception of a few 
coco-nut trees there is no wood, and in the dry season the island 
seems nothing but an arid waste. The little vegetation that then 
exists is in the bottom of ravines, where corn, beans and cotton are 
cultivated. The springs of good water are few. The coast is indented 
by numerous shallow bays, the largest of which is the harbour of the 
capital, Porto Sal-Rei, on the western side (pop. about 1000). A 
chain of heights, flanked by inferior ranges, traverses the middle of 
Boa Vista, culminating in Monte Gallego (1250 it.), towards the east. 
In the north-western angle of the island there is a low tract of loose 
sand, which is inundated with water during the rainy season; and 
here are some extensive salt-pans, where the sea-water is evaporated 
by the heat of the sun. Salt and orchil are exported. A good deal 
of fish is taken on the coast and supplies the impoverished islanders 
with much of their food. 

Maio (1000) has an area of 70 sq. m., and resembles Sal and Boa 
Vista in climate and configuration, although it belongs to the Sota- 
vento group. Its best harbour is that of Nossa Senhora da Luz, 
on the south-west coast, and is commonly known as Porto Inglez 
or English Road, from the fact that it was occupied until the end of 
the 18th century by the British, who based their claim on the 
marriage-treaty between Charles II. and Catherine of Braganza 
(1662). The island is a barren, treeless waste, surrounded by rocks. 
Its inhabitants, who live chiefly by the manufacture of salt, by 
cattle-farming and by fishing, are compelled to import most of 
their provisions from Sao Thiago, with which, for purposes of local 
administration, Maio is included. 

Sao Thiago (63,000) is the most populous and the largest of the 
Cape Verde Islands, having an area of 350 sq. m. It is also one of 
the most unhealthy, except among the mountains over 2000 ft. high. 
The interior is a mass of volcanic heights, formed of basalt covered 
with chalk and clay, and culminating in the central Pico da Antonia 
(4500 ft.), a sharply pointed cone. There are numerous ravines, fur- 
rowed by perennial streams, and in these ravines are grown large 
quantities of coffee, oranges, sugar-cane and physic-nuts, besides 
a variety of tropical fruits and cereals. Spirits are distilled from 
sugar-cane, and coarse sugar is manufactured. The first capital of 
the islands was Ribeira Grande, to-day called Cidade Velha or the 
Old City, a picturesque town with a cathedral and ruined fort. It 
was built in the 15th century on the south coast, was made an 
episcopal see in 1532, and became capital of the archipelago in 1592. 
In 1712 it was sacked by a French force, but despite its poverty 
and unhealthy situation it continued to be the capital until 1770, 
when its place was taken by Praia on the south-east. Praia (often 
written Praya) has a fine harbour, a population of 21,000 and a 
considerable trade. It contains the palace of the governor-general, 
a small natural history museum, a meteorological observatory and 
an important station for the cables between South America, Europe 
and West Africa. It occupies a basalt plateau, overlooking the bay 
(Porto da Praia) , and has an attractive appearance, with its numerous 
coco j nut trees and the peak of Antonia rising in the background 
above successive steps of tableland. Its unhealthiness has been 
mitigated by the partial drainage of a marsh lying to the east. 

Fogo (17,600) is a mass of volcanic rock, almost circular in shape 
and measuring about 190 sq. m. In the centre a still active volcano, 
the Pico do Cano, rises to a height of about 10,000 ft. Its crater, 
which stands within an older crater, measures 3 m. in circumference 
and is visible at sea for nearly 100 m. It emits smoke and ashes at 
intervals; and in 1680, 1785, 1799, 1816, 1846, 1852 and 1857 it was 
in eruption. After the first and most serious of these outbreaks, the 
island, which had previously been called Sao Felippe, was renamed 
Fogo, i.e. " Fire." The ascent of the mountain was first made in 
1819 by two British naval officers, named Vidal and Mudge. The 
island is divided, like Santo Antao, into a fertile and a sterile zone. 
Its northern half produces fine coffee, beans, maize and sugar-cane ; 
the southern half is little better than a desert, with oases of cultivated 
land 'near its few springs. Sao Felippe or Nossa Senhora da Luz 
(3000), on the west coast, is the capital. The islanders claim to be 
the aristocracy of the archipelago, and trace their descent from the 
priginal Portuguese settlers. The majority, however, are negroes or 



mulattoes. Drought and famine, followed by severe epidemics, have 
been especially frequent here, notably in the years 1 887-1 889. 

Brava (9013), the most southerly of the islands, has an area of 
23 sq. m. Though mountainous, and in some parts sterile, it is very 
closely cultivated, and, unlike the other islands, is divided into a 
multitude of small holdings. The desire to own land is almost uni- 
versal, and as the population numbers upwards of 380 per sq. m., 
and the system of tenure gives rise to many disputes, the peasantry 
are almost incessantly engaged in litigation. The women, who are 
locally celebrated for their beauty, far outnumber the men, who 
emigrate at an early age to America. These emigrants usually return 
richer and better educated than the peasantry of the neighbouring 
islands. To the north of Biava lie a group of reefs among which two 
islets (Ilheus Seccos or Ilheus do Rombo) are conspicuous. These 
are usually known as the Ilheu de Dentro (Inner Islet) and the Ilheu 
de Fora (Outer Islet). The first is used as a shelter for whaling and 
fishing vessels, and as pasturage for cattle ; the second has supplied 
much guano for export. 

History. — The earliest known discovery of the islands was 
made in 1456 by the Venetian captain Alvise Cadamosto (q.v.), 
who had entered the service of Prince Henry the Navigator. 
The archipelago was granted by King Alphonso V. of Portugal 
to his brother, Prince Ferdinand, whose agents completed the 
work of discovery. Ferdinand was an absolute monarch, 
exercising a commercial monopoly. In 1461 he sent an expedition 
to recruit slaves on the coast of Guinea and thus to people the 
islands, which were almost certainly uninhabited at the time. 
On his death in 1470 his privileges reverted to the crown, and 
were bestowed by John II. on Prince Emanuel, by whose acces- 
sion to the throne in 1495 the archipelago finally became part of 
the royal dominions. Its population and importance rapidly 
increased; its first bishop was consecrated in 1532, its first 
governor-general appointed about the end of the century. It 
was enriched by the frequent visits of Portuguese fleets, on their 
return to Europe laden with treasure from the East, and by the 
presence of immigrants from Madeira, who introduced better 
agricultural methods and several new industries, such as dyeing 
and distillation of spirits. The failure to maintain an equal rate 
of progress in the 18th and 19th centuries was due partly to 
drought, famine and disease — in particular, to the famines of 
1730-1733 and 1831-1833 — and partly to gross misgovernment 
by the Portuguese officials. 

The best general account of the islands is given in vols, xxiii. and 
xxvii. of the Boletim of the Lisbon Geographical Society (1905 and 
1908), and in Madeira, Cabo Verde, e Guine, by J. A. Martins (Lisbon, 
1 89 1 ) . Official statistics are published in Lisbon at irregular intervals. 
See also Uber die Capverden (Leipzig, 1884) and Die Vulcane der 
Capverden (Graz, 1882), both by C. Dolter. A useful map, entitled 
Ocean Atlantico Norte, Archipelago do Cabo Verde, was issued in 
1900 by the Commissao de Cartographia, Lisbon. 

CAPGRAVE, JOHN (1393-1464), English chronicler and 
hagiologist, was born at Lynn in Norfolk on the 21st of April 
1393. He became a priest, took the degree of D.D. at Oxford, 
where he lectured on theology, and subsequently joined the order 
of Augustinian hermits. Most of his life he spent in the house of 
the order at Lynn, of which he probably became prior; he was 
certainly provincial of his order in England, which involved 
visits to other friaries, and he made at least one journey to Rome. 
He died on the 1 2 th of August 1464. 

Capgrave was an indefatigable student, and was reputed one 
of the most learned men of his age. The bulk of his works are 
theological: sermons, commentaries and lives of saints. His 
reputation as a hagiologist rests on his Nova legenda Angliae, or 
Catalogus of the English saints, but this was no more than a 
recension of the Sanctilogium which the chronicler John of 
Tinmouth, a monk of St Albans, had completed in 1366, which 
in its turn was largely borrowed from the Sanctilogium of Guido, 
abbot of St Denis. The Nova legenda was printed by Wynkyn 
de Worde in 1516 and again in 1527. Capgrave's historical 
works are The Chronicle of England (from the Creation to 1417), 
written in English and unfinished at his death, and the Liber de 
illustribus Henricis, completed between 1446 and 1453. The 
latter is a collection of lives of German emperors (918-1198), 
English kings (1 100-1446) and other famous Henries in various 
parts of the world (1031-1406). The portion devoted to Henry 
VI. of England is a contemporary record, but consists mainly of 
ejaculations in praise of the pious king. The accounts of the 



25 6 



CAP HAITIEN— CAPILLARY ACTION 



other English Henries are transferred from various well-known 
chroniclers. The Chronicle was edited for the " Rolls " Series 
by Francis Charles Hingeston (London, 1858); the Liber de 
illustrious Henricis was edited (London, 1858) for the same series 
by F. C. Hingeston, who published an English translation the 
same year. The editing of both the works is very uncritical 
and bad. 

See Potthast, Bibliotheka Med. Aev.; and U. Chevalier, Repertoire 
des sources hist. Bio-bibliographie, s.v. 

CAP HAITIEN, Cape Haitten or Haytien, a seaport of Haiti, 
West Indies. Pop. about 15,000. It is situated on the north 
coast, 90 m. N. of Port au Prince, in 19 46' N. and 72° 14' W. 
Its original Indian name was Guarico, and it has been known, at 
various times, as Cabo Santo, Cap Francais and Cape Henri, 
while throughout Haiti it is always called Le Cap. It is the most 
picturesque town in the republic, and the second in importance. 
On three sides it is hemmed in by lofty mountains, while on the 
fourth it overlooks a safe and commodious harbour. Under the 
French rule it was the capital of the colony, and its splendour, 
wealth and luxury earned for it the title of the " Paris of Haiti." 
It was then the see of an archbishop and possessed a large and 
flourishing university. The last remains of its former glory were 
destroyed by the earthquake of 1842 and the British bombard- 
ment of 1865. Although now but a collection of squalid wooden 
huts, with here and there a well-built warehouse, it is the centre 
of a thriving district and does a large export trade. It was 
founded by the Spaniards about the middle of the 1 7th century, 
and in 1687 received a large French colony. In 1695 it was 
taken and burned by the British, and in 1 791 it suffered the same 
fate at the hands of Toussaint L'Ouverture. It then became the 
capital of King Henri Christophe's dominions, but since his fall 
has suffered severely in numerous revolutions. 

CAPILLARY ACTION. 1 A tube, the bore of which is so small 
that it will only admit a hair (Lat. capitta), is called a capillary 
tube. When such a tube of glass, open at both ends, is placed 
vertically with its lower end immersed in water, the water 
is observed to rise in the tube, and to stand within the tube 
at a higher level than the water outside. The action between 
the capillary tube and the water has been called capillary action, 
and the name has been extended to many other phenomena 
which have been found to depend on properties of liquids and 
solids similar to those which cause water to rise in capillary tubes. 

The forces which are concerned in these phenomena are those 
which act between neighbouring parts of the same substance, 
and which are called forces of cohesion, and those which act 
between portions of matter of different kinds, which are called 
forces of adhesion. These forces are quite insensible between 
two portions of matter separated by any distance which we can 
directly measure. It is only when the distance becomes exceed- 
ingly small that these forces become perceptible. G. H. Quincke 
(Pogg. Ann. cxxxvii. p. 402) made experiments to determine the 
greatest distance at which the effect of these forces is sensible, 
and he found for various substances distances about the 
twenty-thousandth part of a millimetre. 

Historical. — According to J. C. Poggendorff (Pogg. Ann. ci. 
p. 551), Leonardo da Vinci must be considered as the discoverer 
of capillary phenomena, but the first accurate observations of 
the capillary action of tubes and glass plates were made by 
Francis Hawksbee (Physico-Mechanical Experiments, London, 
1709, pp. 139-169 ; and Phil. Trans., 1711 and 1712), who 
ascribed the action to an attraction between the glass and the 
liquid. He observed that the effect was the same in thick tubes 
as in thin, and concluded that only those particles of the glass 
which are very near the surface have any influence on the 
phenomenon. Dr James Jurin {Phil. Trans., 17 18, p. 739, and 
1719, p. 1083) showed that the height at which the liquid is 
suspended depends on the section of the tube at the surface of 
the liquid, and is independent of the form of the lower part of 
the tube. He considered that the suspension of the liquid is due 

1 In this revision of James Clerk Maxwell's classical article in 
the ninth edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, additions are 
marked by square brackets. 



to " the attraction of the periphery or section of the surface 
of the tube to which the upper surface of the water is contiguous 
and coheres." From this he showed that the rise of the liquid 
in tubes of the same substance is inversely proportional to their 
radii. Sir Isaac Newton devoted the 31st query in the last 
edition of his Opticks to molecular forces, and instanced several 
examples of the cohesion of liquids, such as the suspension of 
mercury in a barometer tube at more than double the height 
at which it usually stands. This arises from its adhesion to 
the tube, and the upper part of the mercury sustains a consider- 
able tension, or negative pressure, without the separation of its 
parts. He considered the capillary phenomena to be of the same 
kind, but his explanation is not sufficiently explicit with respect 
to the nature and the limits of the action of the attractive force. 
It is to be observed that, while these early speculators ascribe 
the phenomena to attraction, they do not distinctly assert that 
this attraction is sensible only at insensible distances, and that 
for all distances which we can directly measure the force is alto- 
gether insensible. The idea of such forces, however, had been 
distinctly formed by Newton, who gave the first example of 
the calculation of the effect of such forces in his theorem on the 
alteration of the path of a light-corpuscle when it enters or 
leaves a dense body. 

Alexis Claude Clairault ( Theorie de la figure de la terre, Paris, 
1808, pp. 105, 128) appears to have been the first to show the 
necessity of taking account of the attraction between the parts 
of the fluid itself in order to explain the phenomena. He did 
not, however, recognize the fact that the distance at which the 
attraction is sensible is not only small but altogether insensible. 
J. A. von Segner (Comment. Soc. Reg. Gblting. i. (1751) p. 301) 
introduced the very important idea of the surface-tension of 
liquids, which he ascribed to attractive forces, the sphere of 
whose action is so small " ut nullo adhuc sensu percipi potuerit." 
In attempting to calculate the effect of this surface-tension in 
determining the form of a drop of the liquid, Segner took account 
of the curvature of a meridian section of the drop, but neglected 
the effect of the curvature in a plane at right angles to this 
section. 

The idea of surface-tension introduced by Segner had a most 
important effect on the subsequent development of the theory. 
We may regard it as a physical fact established by experiment 
in the same way as the laws of the elasticity of solid bodies. 
We may investigate the forces which act between finite portions 
of a liquid in the same way as we investigate the forces which 
act between finite portions of a solid. The experiments on solids 
lead to certain laws of elasticity expressed in terms of coefficients, 
the values of which can be determined only by experiments 
on each particular substance. Various attempts have also been 
made to deduce these laws from particular hypotheses as to the 
action between the molecules of the elastic substance. We may 
therefore regard the theory of elasticity as consisting of two 
parts. The first part establishes the laws of the elasticity of a 
finite portion of the solid subjected to a homogeneous strain, 
and deduces from these laws the equations of the equilibrium 
and motion of a body subjected to any forces and displace- 
ments. The second part endeavours to deduce the facts of 
the elasticity of a finite portion of the substance from hypo- 
theses as to the motion of its constituent molecules and the forces 
acting between them. In like manner we may by experiment 
ascertain the general fact that the surface of a liquid is in a state 
of tension similar to that of a membrane stretched equally in 
all directions, and prove that this tension depends only on the 
nature and temperature of the liquid and not on its form, and 
from this as a secondary physical principle we may deduce all 
the phenomena of capillary action. This is one step of the 
investigation. The next step is to deduce this surface-tension 
from a hypothesis as to the molecular constitution of the liquid 
and of the bodies that surround it. The scientific importance 
of this step is to be measured by the degree of insight which it 
affords or promises into the molecular constitution of real bodies 
by the suggestion of experiments by which we may discriminate 
between rival molecular theories. 



CAPILLARY ACTION 



257 



In 1756 J. G. Leidenfrost {De aquae communis nonnullis 
qualitatibus tractatus, Duisburg) showed that a soap-bubble 
tends to contract, so that if the tube with which it was blown 
is left open the bubble will dimmish in size and will expel through 
the tube the air which it contains. He attributed this force, 
however, not to any general property of the surfaces of liquids, 
but to the fatty part of the soap which he supposed to separate 
itself from the other constituents of the solution, and to form 
a thin skin on the outer face of the bubble. 

In 1787 Gaspard Monge (Memoires de V Acad, des Sciences, 
1787, p. 506) asserted that " by supposing the adherence of the 
particles of a fluid to have a sensible effect only at the surface 
itself and in the direction of the surface it would be easy to deter- 
mine the curvature of the surfaces of fluids in the neighbourhood 
of the solid boundaries which contain them ; that these surfaces 
would be linteariae of which the tension, constant in all directions, 
would be everywhere equal to the adherence of two particles, 
and the phenomena of capillary tubes would then present nothing 
which could not be determined by analysis." He applied this 
principle of surface-tension to the explanation of the apparent 
attractions and repulsions between bodies floating on a liquid. 

In 1802 John Leslie (Phil. Mag., 1802, vol. xiv. p. 193) gave 
the first correct explanation of the rise of a liquid in a tube by 
considering the effect of the attraction of the solid on the very 
thin stratum of the liquid in contact with it. He did not, like 
the earlier speculators, suppose this attraction to act in an up- 
ward direction so as to support the fluid directly. He showed 
that the attraction is everywhere normal to the surface of the 
solid. The direct effect of the attraction is to increase the 
pressure of the stratum of the fluid in contact with the solid, 
so as to make it greater than the pressure in the interior of the 
fluid. The result of this pressure if unopposed is to cause this 
stratum to spread itself over the surface of the solid as a drop 
of water is observed to do when placed on a clean horizontal 
glass plate, and this even when gravity opposes the action, 
as when the drop is placed on the under surface of the plate. 
Hence a glass tube plunged into water would become wet all 
over were it not that the ascending liquid film carries up a 
quantity of other liquid which coheres to it, so that when it has 
ascended to a certain height the weight of the column balances 
the force by which the film spreads itself over the glass. This 
explanation of the action of the solid is equivalent to that by 
which Gauss afterwards supplied the defect of the theory of 
Laplace, except that, not being expressed in terms of mathe- 
matical symbols, it does not indicate the mathematical relation 
between the attraction of individual particles and the final 
result. Leslie's theory was afterwards treated according to 
Laplace's mathematical methods by James Ivory in the article 
on capillary action, under "Fluids, Elevation of," in the supple- 
ment to the fourth edition of the Encyclopaedia Brilannica, 
published in 1819. 

In 1804 Thomas Young (Essay on the " Cohesion of Fluids, " 
Phil. Trans., 1805, p. 65) founded the theory of capillary pheno- 
mena on the principle of surface-tension. He also observed the 
constancy of the angle of contact of a liquid surface with a solid, 
and showed how from these two principles to deduce the pheno- 
mena of capillary action. His essay contains the solution of a 
great number of cases, including most of those afterwards solved 
by Laplace, but his methods of demonstration, though always 
correct, and often extremely elegant, are sometimes rendered 
obscure by his scrupulous avoidance of mathematical symbols. 
Having applied the secondary principle of surface-tension to 
the various particular cases of capillary action, Young proceeded 
to deduce this surface-tension from ulterior principles. He 
supposed the particles to act on one another with two different 
kinds of forces, one of which, the attractive force of cohesion, 
extends to particles at a greater distance than those to which 
the repulsive force is confined. He further supposed that the 
attractive force is constant throughout the minute distance to 
which it extends, but that the repulsive force increases rapidly 
as the distance diminishes. He thus showed that at a curved 
part of the surface, a superficial particle would be urged towards 



the centre of curvature of the surface, and he gave reasons for 
concluding that this force is proportional to the sum of the 
curvatures of the surface in two normal planes at right angles 
to each other. 

The subject was next taken up by Pierre Simon Laplace 
(Mecanique celeste, supplement to the tenth book, pub. in 1806). 
His results are in many respects identical with those of Young, 
but his methods of arriving at them are very different, being 
conducted entirely by mathematical calculations. The form 
into which he threw his investigation seems to have deterred 
many able physicists from the inquiry into the ulterior cause of 
capillary phenomena, and induced them to rest content with 
deriving them from the fact of surface-tension. But for 
those who wish to study the molecular constitution of bodies 
it is necessary to study the effect of forces which are sensible 
only at insensible distances; and Laplace has furnished us with 
an example of the method of this study which has never been 
surpassed. Laplace investigated the force acting on the fluid 
contained in an infinitely slender canal normal to the surface 
of the fluid arising from the attraction of the parts of the fluid 
outside the canal. He thus found for the pressure at a point 
in the interior of the fluid an expression of the form 

£ = K+iH(i/R+i/R'), 
where K is a constant pressure, probably very large, which, 
however, does not influence capillary phenomena, and therefore 
cannot be determined from observation of such phenomena; 
H is another constant on which all capillary phenomena depend; 
and R and R' are the radii of curvature of any two normal 
sections of the surface at right angles to each other. 

In the first part of our own investigation we shall adhere 
to the symbols used by Laplace, as we shall find that an accurate 
knowledge of the physical interpretation of these symbols is 
necessary for the further investigation of the subject. In the 
Supplement to the Theory of Capillary Action, Laplace deduced 
the equation of the surface of the fluid from the condition that 
the resultant force on a particle at the surface must be normal 
to the surface. His explanation, however, of the rise of a liquid 
in a tube is based on the assumption of the constancy of the angle 
of contact for the same solid and fluid, and of this he has nowhere 
given a satisfactory proof. In this supplement Laplace gave 
many important applications of the theory, and compared the 
results with the experiments of Louis Joseph Gay Lussac. 

The next great step in the treatment of the subject was made 
by C. F. Gauss (Principia generalia Theoriae Figurae Fluidorum 
in statu Aequilibrii, Gottingen, 1830, or Werke, v. 29, Gottingen, 
1867). The principle which he adopted is that of virtual velo- 
cities, a principle which under his hands was gradually trans- 
forming itself into what is now known as the principle of the 
conservation of energy. Instead of calculating the direction 
and magnitude of the resultant force on each particle arising 
from the action of neighbouring particles, he formed a single 
expression which is the aggregate of all the potentials arising 
from the mutual action between pairs of particles. This ex- 
pression has been called the force-function. With its sign 
reversed it is now called the potential energy of the system. It 
consists of three parts, the first depending on the action of 
gravity, the second on the mutual action between the particles 
of the fluid, and the third on the action between the particles 
of the fluid and the particles of a solid or fluid in contact with it. 

The condition of equilibrium is that this expression (which 
we may for the sake of distinctness call the potential energy) 
shall be a minimum. This condition when worked out gives 
not only the equation of the free surface in the form already 
established by Laplace, but the conditions of the angle of 
contact of this surface with the surface of a solid. 

Gauss thus supplied the principal defect in the great work of 
Laplace. He also pointed out more distinctly the nature of the 
assumptions which we must make with respect to the law of 
action of the particles in order to be consistent with observed 
phenomena. He did not, however, enter into the explanation 
of particular phenomena, as this had been done already by 
Laplace, but he pointed out to physicists the advantages of the 



2 5 8 



CAPILLARY ACTION 



method of Segner and Gay Lussac, afterwards carried out by 
Quincke, of measuring the dimensions of large drops of mercury 
on a horizontal or slightly concave surface, and those of large 
bubbles of air in transparent liquids resting against the under side 
of a horizontal plate of a substance wetted by the liquid. 

In 1 83 1 Simeon Denis Poisson published his Nouvette Thiorie 
de faction capillaire. He maintained that there is a rapid 
variation of density near the surface of a liquid, and he gave 
very strong reasons, which have been only strengthened by 
subsequent discoveries, for believing that this is the case. He 
proceeded to an investigation of the equilibrium of a fluid on the 
hypothesis of uniform density, and arrived at the conclusion 
that on this hypothesis none of the observed capillary phenomena 
would take place, and that, therefore, Laplace's theory, in which 
the density is supposed uniform, is not only insufficient but 
erroneous. In particular he maintained that the constant 
pressure K, which occurs in Laplace's theory, and which on that 
theory is very large, must be in point of fact very small, but the 
equation of equilibrium from which he concluded this is itself 
defective. Laplace assumed that the liquid has uniform density, 
and that the attraction of its molecules extends to a finite though 
insensible distance. On these assumptions his results are cer- 
tainly right, and are confirmed by the independent method of 
Gauss, so that the objections raised against them by Poisson fall 
to the ground. But whether the assumption of uniform density 
be physically correct is a very different question, and Poisson 
rendered good service to science in showing how to carry on 
the investigation on the hypothesis that the density very near 
the surface is different from that in the interior of the fluid. 

The result, however, of Poisson's investigation is practically 
equivalent to that already obtained by Laplace. In both 
theories the equation of the liquid surface is the same, involving 
a constant H, which can be determined only by experiment. 
The only difference is in the manner in which this quantity H 
depends on the law of the molecular forces and the law of density 
near the surface of the fluid, and as these laws are unknown to 
us we cannot obtain any test to discriminate between the two 
theories. 

We have now described the principal forms of the theory 
of capillary action during its earlier development. In more 
recent times the method of Gauss has been modified so as to 
take account of the variation of density near the surface, and 
its language has been translated in terms of the modern doctrine 
of the conservation of energy. 1 

J. A. F. Plateau {Statique exptrimentale et theorique des 
liquides), who made elaborate study of the phenomena of surface- 
tension, adopted the following method of getting rid of the effects 
of gravity. He formed a mixture of alcohol and water of the 
same density as olive oil, and then introduced a quantity of oil 
into the mixture. It assumes the form of a sphere under the 
action of surface-tension alone. He then, by means of rings of 
iron-wire, disks and other contrivances, altered the form of 
certain parts of the surface of the oil. The free portions of the 
surface then assume new forms depending on the equilibrium 
of surface-tension. In this way he produced a great many of 
the forms of equilibrium of a liquid under the action of surface- 
tension alone, and compared them with the results of mathe- 
matical investigation. He also greatly facilitated the study of 
liquid films by showing how to form a liquid, the films of which 
will last for twelve or even for twenty-four hours. The debt 
which science owes to Plateau is not diminished by the fact 
that, while investigating these beautiful phenomena, he never 
h"mself saw them, having lost his sight in about 1840. 

G. L. van der Mensbrugghe (M6m. de V Acad. Roy. de Belgique, 
xxrvii., 1873) devised a great number of beautiful illustrations 

1 See Enrico Betti, Teoria della Capillaritd : Nuovo Cimento 
(1867); a memoir by M. Stahl, " Ueber einige Punckte in der 
Theorie der Capillarerscheinungen," Pogg. Ann. cxxxix. p. 239 
(1870); and J. D. Van der Waal's Over de Continuiteit van den 
Gase.n Vloeistoftoestand. A good account of the subject from a 
mathematical point of view will be found in Tameb Challis's 
"'Report on the Theory of Capillary Attraction," Brit. Ass. Report, 
iv. p. 235 (1834). 



of the phenomena of surface-tension, and showed their connexion 
with the experiments of Charles Tomlinson on the figures formed 
by oils dropped on the clean surface of water. 

Athanase Dupre in his 5th, 6th and 7th Memoirs on the 
Mechanical Theory of Heat (Ann. de Chimie et de Physique, 1866- 
i868> applied the principles of thermodynamics to capillary 
phenomena, and the experiments of his son Paul were exceedingly 
ingenious and well devised, tracing the influence of surface- 
tension in a great number of very different circumstances, and 
deducing from independent methods the numerical value of 
the surface-tension. The experimental evidence which Dupre 
obtained bearing on the molecular structure of liquids must be 
very valuable, even if our present opinions on this subject should 
turn out to be erroneous. 

F. H. R. Ludtge {Pogg. Ann. cxxxix. p. 620) experimented on 
liquid films, and showed how a film of a liquid of high surface- 
tension is replaced by a film of lower surface-tension. He also 
experimented on the effects of the thickness of the film, and 
fame to the conclusion that the thinner a film is, the greater is 
its tension. This result, however, was tested by Van der Mens- 
brugghe, who found that the tension is the same for the same 
liquid whatever be the thickness, as long as the film does not 
burst. [The continued coexistence of various thicknesses, as 
evidenced by the colours in the same film, affords an instan- 
taneous proof of this conclusion.] The phenomena of very thin 
liquid films deserve the most careful study, for it is in this way 
that we are most likely to obtain evidence by which we may test 
the theories of the molecular structure of liquids. 

Sir W. Thomson (afterwards Lord Kelvin) investigated the 
effect of the curvature of the surface of a liquid on the thermal 
equilibrium between the liquid and the vapour in contact with 
it. He also calculated the effect of surface-tension on the pro- 
pagation of waves on the surface of a liquid, and determined the 
minimum velocity of a wave, and the velocity of the wind when 
it is just sufficient to disturb the surface of still water. 

Theory of Capillary Action 

When two different fluids are placed in contact, they may 
either diffuse into each other or remain separate. In some cases 
diffusion takes place to a limited extent, after which the result- 
ing mixtures do not mix with each other. The same substance 
may be able to exist in two different states at the same tem- 
perature and pressure, as when water and its saturated vapour are 
contained in the same vessel. The conditions under which the 
thermal and mechanical equilibrium of two fluids, two mixtures, 
or the same substance in two physical states in contact with 
each other, is possible belong to thermodynamics. All that we 
have to observe at present is that, in the cases in which the fluids 
do not mix of themselves, the potential energy of the system 
must be greater when the fluids are mixed than when they are 
separate. 

It is found by experiment that it is only very close to the 
bounding surface of a liquid that the forces arising from the 
mutual action of its parts have any resultant effect on one of 
its particles. The experiments of Quincke and others seem to 
show that the extreme range of the forces which produce capillary 
action lies between a thousandth and a twenty-thousandth part 
of a millimetre. 

We shall use the symbol e to denote this extreme range, 
beyond which the action of these forces may be regarded as 
insensible. If x denotes the potential energy of unit of mass 
of the substance, we may treat x as sensibly constant except 
within a distance e of the bounding surface of the fluid. In 
the interior of the fluid it has the uniform value xo- In like 
manner the density, p, is sensibly equal to the constant quantity 
Po, which is its value in the interior of the liquid, except within 
a distance e of the bounding surface. Hence if V is the volume 
of a mass M of liquid bounded by a surface whose area is S, the 
integral 

M.=jfjpdxdydz (1) 

where the integration is to be extended throughout the volume 



CAPILLARY ACTION 



259 



V, may be divided into two parts by considering separately the 
thin shell or skin extending from the outer surface to a depth e, 
within which the density and other properties of the liquid vary 
with the depth, and the interior portion of the liquid within 
which its properties are constant. 

Since e is a line of insensible magnitude compared with the 
dimensions of the mass of liquid and the principal radii of curva- 
ture of its surface, the volume of the shell whose surface is S 
and thickness e will be Se, and that of the interior space will 
be V-Se. 

If we suppose a normal v less than t to be drawn from the surface 
S into the liquid, we may divide the shell into elementary shells 
whose thickness is dv, in each of which the density and other 
properties of the liquid will be constant. 

The volume of one of these shells will be Sdv. Its mass will be 

Spdv. The mass of the whole shell will therefore be SJ pdv, and 

that of the interior part of the liquid (V — Sc)p . We thus find for 
the whole mass of the liquid 

M=v P0 -sr e (p„-p)^ (2) 

To find the potential energy we have to integrate 

E=jffxpdxdydz (3) 

Substituting xp for p in the process we have just gone through, 
we find 

E=Vxopo— SI (xopo — xp)dv (4) 

J 
Multiplying equation (2) by xo, and subtracting it from (4), 

E-M X o = sf(x-Xo)pd* (5) 

In this expression M and xo are both constant, so that the varia- 
tion of the right-hand side of the equation is the same as that of 
the energy E, and expresses that part of the energy which depends 
on the area of the bounding surface of the liquid. We may call this 
the surface energy. 

The symbol x expresses the energy of unit of mass of the liquid 
at a depth v within the bounding surface. When the liquid is in 
contact with a rare medium, such as its own vapour or any other 
gas, x is greater than xo, and the surface energy is positive. By the 
principle of the conservation of energy, any displacement of the 
liquid by which its energy is diminished will tend to take place of 
itself. Hence if the energy is the greater, the greater the area of 
the exposed surface, the liquid will tend to move in such a way as 
to diminish the area of the exposed surface, or, in other words, the 
exposed surface will tend to diminish if it can do so consistently 
with the other conditions. This tendency of the surface to contract . 
itself is called the surface-tension of liquids. 

Dupre has described an arrangement by which the surface- 
tension of a liquid film may be illustrated. A piece of sheet metal 

is cut out in the form AA (fig. 1). 
A very fine slip of metal is laid 
on it in the position BB, and the 
whole is dipped into a solution 
of soap, or M. Plateau's glycerine 
mixture. When it is taken out the 
rectangle AACC if filled up by a 
liquid film. This film, however, 
tends to contract on itself, and the 
loose strip of metal BB will, if it 
is let go, be drawn up towards AA, provided it is sufficiently light 
and smooth. 

Let T be the surface energy per unit of area ; then the energy of 
a surface of area S will be ST. If, in the rectangle AACC, AA = «, 
and AC = b, its area is S = ab, and its energy Tab. Hence if F is the 
force by which the slip BB is pulled towards AA, 

F = ^Tai=Ta, 




Fig. 1. 



(6) 



or the force arising from the surface-tension acting on a length a 
of the strip is Ta, so that T represents the surface-tension acting 
transversely on every unit of length of the periphery of the liquid 
surface. Hence if we write 



T = f (x — Xo)pdv, 



(7) 



we may define T either as the surface-energy per unit of area, or as 
the surface-tension per unit of contour, for the numerical values of 
these two quantities are equal. 

If the liquid is bounded by a dense substance, whether liquid or 
solid, the value of x may be different from its value when the liquid 
has a free surface. If the liquid is in contact with another liquid, 
let us distinguish quantities belonging to the two liquids by suffixes. 
We shall then have 



Ei — MiXoi=S| Hxi — Xm)pidn, 
J 

E 2 — M2X02 = SJ '(xs — X«)/-2<2"2- 



(8) 
(9) 



Adding these expressions, and dividing the second member by S, 
we obtain for the tension of the surface of contact of the two liquids 

Ti.j = ) Hxi — xm)pidpi+i 2 (X2 — x<a) Pid»i. . . (10) 

If this quantity is positive, the surface of contact will tend to 
contract, and the liquids will remain distinct. If, however, it were 
negative, the displacement of the liquids which tends to enlarge the 
surface of contact would be aided by the molecular forces, so that 
the liquids, if not kept separate by gravity, would at length become 
thoroughly mixed. No instance, however, of a phenomenon of this 
kind has been discovered, for those liquids which mix of themselves 
do so by the process of diffusion, which is a molecular motion, and 
not by the spontaneous puckering and replication of the bounding 
surface as would be the case if T were negative. 

It is probable, however, that there are many cases in which the 
integral belonging to the less dense fluid is negative. If the denser 
body be solid we can often demonstrate this; for the liquid tends 
to spread itself over the surface of the solid, so as to increase the area 
of the surface of contact, even although in so doing it is obliged to 
increase the free surface in opposition to the surface-tension. Thus 
water spreads itself out on a clean surface of glass. This shows 

that) (x — Xo)pdv must be negative for water in contact with glass. 
J 

On the Tension of Liquid Films. — The method already given 
for the investigation of the surface-tension of a liquid, all whose 
dimensions are sensible,. fails in the case of a liquid film such as a 
soap-biibble. In such a film it is possible that no part of the 
liquid may be so far from the surface as to have the potential 
and density corresponding to what we have called the interior 
of a liquid mass, and measurements of the tension of the film 
when drawn out to different degrees of thinness may possibly 
lead to an estimate of the range of the molecular forces, or at 
least of the depth within a liquid mass, at which its properties 
become sensibly uniform. We shall therefore indicate a method 
of investigating the tension of such films. 

Let S be the area of the film, M its mass, and E its energy ; a the 
mass, and e the energy of unit of area ; then 

M=S<r, (11) 

E = Se (12) 

Let us now suppose that by some change in the form of the 
boundary of the film its area is changed from S to S+dS. If its 
tension is T the work required to effect this increase of surface will 
be TdS, and the energy of the film will be increased by this amount. 
Hence 

TdS = <2E = S<fe+edS (13) 

But since M is constant, 

dM=Sd(x+<rdS = o (14) 

Eliminating dS from equations (13) and (14), and dividing by S, 
we find 

T=e_ff £' •••■•• (15) 

In this expression <r denotes the mass of unit of area of the film, 
and e the energy of unit of area. 

If we take the axis of z normal to either surface of the film, the 
radius of curvature of which we suppose to be very great compared 
with its thickness c, and if p is the density, and x the energy of unit 
of mass at depth z, then 

a = \ pdz, (16) 

J 
and 

e=fxpdz (17) 

Both p and x are functions of z, the value of, which remains the 
same when z — c is substituted for z. If the thickness of the film is 
greater than 2e, there will be a stratum of thickness c — 2e in the 
middle of the film, within which the values of p and x will be po and 
Xo- In the two strata on either side of this the law, according to 
which p and x depend on the depth, will be the same as in a liquid 
mass of large dimensions. Hence in this case 

<r = (c-2 e )po+2j^pi J ., . „ . . (18) 

e = (c-2«)xoPu+2f xpiv (19) 

J 
da de . de 

To" 90 ' Tc = xm ' ■■Ta = x< " 

T = 2f xpdv-2xof pdv = 2( (x — xo)pdv. . . (20) 

J -* ■> 

Hence the tension of a thick film is equal to the sum of the tensions 
of its two surfaces as already calculated (equation 7). On the 
hypothesis of uniform density we shall find that this is true for films 
whose thickness exceeds e. 

The symbol x is defined as the energy of unit of mass of the 
substance. A knowledge of the absolute value of this energy is not 
required, since in every expression in which it occurs it is under the 



2bo 



CAPILLARY ACTION 



form x — Xo, that is to say, the differehce between the energy in two 
different states. The only cases, however, in which we have ex- 
perimental values of this quantity are when the substance is either 
liquid and surrounded by similar liquid, or gaseous and surrounded 
by similar gas. It is impossible to make direct measurements of 
the properties of particles of the substance within the insensible 
distance « of the bounding surface. 

When a liquid is in thermal and dynamical equilibrium with its 
vapour, then if p' and x' are the values of p and x fo£ the vapour, 
and po and xo those for the liquid, 

x'-Xo=JL-£(l/p'-l/po) (21) 

where J is the dynamical equivalent of heat, L is the latent heat 
of unit of mass of the vapour, and p is the pressure. At points in 
the liquid very near its surface it is probable that x is greater than 
Xo, and at points in the gas very near the surface of the liquid it 
is probable that x is less than %', but this has not as yet been ascer- 
tained experimentally. We shall therefore endeavour to apply to 
this subject the methods used in Thermodynamics, and where these 
fail us we shall have recourse to the hypotheses of molecular physics. 

We have next to determine the value of x in terms of the action 
between one particle and another. Let us suppose that the force 
between two particles m and m' at the distance / is 

F=wo(/)+cr), (22) 

being reckoned positive when the force is attractive. The actual 
force between the particles arises in part from their mutual gravita- 
tion, which is inversely as the square of the distance. This force is 
expressed by m m' C/~ 2 . It is easy to show that a force subject to 
this law would not account for capillary action. We shall, therefore, 
in what follows, consider only that part of the force which depends 
on <j>{f), where </>(/) is a function of/ which is insensible for all sensible 
values of /, but which becomes sensible and even enormously great 
when / is exceedingly small. 

If we next introduce a new function of/ and write 

//*(/)#- H(/) (23) 

then m m' 11(f) will represent— (1) The work done by the attractive 
force on the particle m, while it is brought from an infinite distance 
from m' to the distance / from m' ; or (2| The attraction of a particle 
to on a narrow straight rod resolved in the direction of the length 
of the rod, one extremity of the rod being at a distance / from m, 
and the other at an infinite distance, the mass of unit of length of 
the rod being m'. The function II(/) is also insensible for sensible 
values of/, but for insensible values of/ it may become sensible and 
even very great. 
If we next write 



f g fll{f)df=K*) (24) 



then 2irmcn/'(s) will represent — (1) The work done by the attractive 
force while a particle m is brought from an infinite distance to a 
distance z from an infinitely thin stratum of 
n' the substance whose mass per unit of area is 
\ a; (2) The attraction of a particle m placed 
'Q* at a distance z from the plane surface of an 
infinite solid whose density is a. 

Let us examine the case in which the particle 
m is placed at a distance z from a curved 
stratum of the substance, whose principal 
radii of curvature are Ri and R2. Let P 
(fig. 2) be the particle and PB a normal to 
the surface. Let the plane of the paper be a 
normal section of the surface of the stratum 
at the point B, making an angle o> with the 
section whose radius of curvature is Ri. 
Then if O is the centre of curvature in the 
plane of the paper, and BO = u, 

sin'w 




Fig. 2. 



-+- 



Ri T R< 

Let POQ = 0, PO = r, PQ=/, BP=z, 

f = u?+r 2 — 2ur cos 

The element of the stratum at Q may be expressed by 
<r« 2 sin dd du, 



(25) 



(26) 



or expressing dd in terms of df by (26), 
aur~ l f df do>. 

Multiplying this by m and by ir(/), we obtain for the work done 
by the attraction of this element when m is brought from an infinite 
distance to Pi, 

mcrur~ s fll(f)dfda>. 

Integrating with respect to / from f = z to f = a, where a is a line 
very great compared with the extreme range of the molecular force, 
but very small compared with either of the radii of curvature, we 
obtain for the work 

(in our 1 (iA (z) — ^ (a) ) doi, 



Jm 



and since ^(a) is an insensible quantity we may omit it. We may 
also write 

ur" 1 = 1 +zw _1 + &c, 



since z is very small compared with u, and expressing u in terms of 
w by (25), we find 

f 27r , 1 \ S , 1 /cos 2 w , sin 2 . 
J oto-^(z) j I +z( 



X 



-+- 



~)\^^ m ^\ l+ Hi+w)\- 



Ri ^Rz 

This then expresses the work done by the attractive forces when 
a particle m is brought from an infinite distance to the point P at a 
distance z from a stratum whose surface-density is <r, and whose 
principal radii of curvature are Ri and R2. 

To find the work done when m is brought to the point P in the 
neighbourhood of a solid body, the density of which is a function 
of the depth v below the surface, we have only to write instead of <r 
pdz, and to integrate 



27rmf 2 pt(z)dz + irm (g-+j^) j z pz^p{z)dz 



This expres- 
a particle m 



where, in general, we must suppose p a function of z. 

sion, when integrated, gives (1) the work done on 

while it is brought from an infinite distance to the point P, or (2) 

the attraction on a long slender column normal to the surface and 

terminating at P, the mass of unit of length of the column being m. 

In the form of the theory given by Laplace, the density of the liquid 

was supposed to be uniform. Hence if we write 

K=2w(<p(z)dz, H = 2irj" z<p(z)dz, 

the pressure of a column of the fluid itself terminating at the surface 
will be 

P 2 jK-|-|H(i/R I -l-i/R 2 )|, 

and the work done by the attractive forces when a particle m is 

brought to the surface of the fluid from an infinite distance will be 

wp(K+|H(i/R 1 + i/R 2 )|; 

If we write „ 

j z +(z)dz = 6(z), 
then 2Trmp8(z) will express the work done by- the attractive forces, 
while a particle m is brought from an infinite distance to a distance 
z from the plane surface of a mass of the substance of density p 
and infinitely thick. The function 0(z) is insensible for all sensible 
values of z. For insensible values it may become sensible, but it 
must remain finite even when z = o, in which case 0(o) = K. 

If x' is the potential energy of unit of mass of the substance in 
vapour, then at a distance z from the plane surface of the liquid 

X = x' — 2tp$(z). 
At the surface 

X = x' — 27rp0(o). 
At a distance z within the surface 

X=x'-4*7>l?(o)-t-2xp0(s). 

If the liquid forms a stratum of thickness c, then 

X = x' -4*-p0(o) +2,rp0(z) +2irp0(r -c). 
The surface-density of this stratum is a = cp. The energy per unit 
of area is 

e = Cxpdz = cp(x'-'\Trpe(o))+2Trp i re(z)dz+2irp i re(c-z)dz. 
J J J 

Since the two sides of the stratum are similar the last two terms 
are equal, and 

e = cp(x'-4'rp0(o))+4>rp 2 J' O 0(z)<Jz. 
Differentiating with respect to c, we find 

-£ = P< Tc = p ( x ' -4tp0(o))+4*-p 2 0(c). 
. Hence the surface-tension 

T = e - <tj! = 4irp 2 ( j~° (z) dz - e0 (c) ) . 
Integrating the first term within brackets by parts, it becomes 



de, 



c6(c) — 00 (o) -J z 2~ z dz ' 



de 



-*«, 



Remembering that 0(o) is a finite quantity, and that -r = ■ 

we find 

T=4TP 2 PW(z)<fe (27) 


When c is greater than e this is equivalent to 2H in the equation of 

Laplace. Hence the tension is the same for all films thicker than «, 
the range of the molecular forces. For thinner films 

■^=47rp 2 ci/'(c). 

Hence if ^(c) is positive, the tension and the thickness will increase 
together. Now 2wmp4'(c) represents theattractionbetweenaparticle 
m and the plane surface of an infinite mass of the liquid, when the 
distance of the particle outside the surface is c. Now, the force 
between the particle and the liquid is certainly, on the whole, 
attractive; but if between any two small values of c it should be 
repulsive, then for films whose thickness lies between these values 
the tension will increase as the thickness diminishes, but for all 
other cases the tension will diminish as the thickness diminishes. 

We have given several examples in which the density is as- 
sumed to be uniform, because Poisson has asserted that capillary 



CAPILLARY ACTION 



261 



phenomena would not take place unless the density varied rapidly 
near the surface. In this assertion we think he was mathematically 
wrong, though in his own hypothesis that the density does actually 
vary, he was probably right. In fact, the quantity 4irp 2 K, which 
we may call with van der Waals the molecular pressure, is so great 
for most liquids (5000 atmospheres for water), that in the parts near 
the surface, where the molecular pressure varies rapidly, we may 
expect considerable variation of density, even when we take into 
account the smallness of the compressibility of liquids. 

The pressure at any point of the liquid arises from two causes, 
the external pressure P to which the liquid is subjected, and the 
pressure arising from the mutual attraction of its molecules. If we 
suppose that the number of molecules within the range of the 
attraction of a given molecule is very large, the part of the pressure 
arising from attraction will be proportional to the square of the 
number of molecules in unit of volume, that is, to the square of the 
density. Hence we may write 

p = P+Ap\ 
where A is a constant [equal to Laplace's intrinsic pressure K. But 
this equation is applicable only at points in the interior, where p 
is not varying.] 

[The intrinsic pressure and the surface-tension of a uniform mass 
are perhaps more easily found by the following process. The former 
can be found at once by calculating the mutual attraction of the 
parts of a large mass which lie on opposite sides of an imaginary 
plane interface. If the density be a, the attraction between the 
whole of one side and a layer upon the other distant z from the plane 
and of thickness dz is 2ir(i i ip(z)dz, reckoned per unit of area. The 
expression for the intrinsic pressure is thus simply 

K = 2*rf" Mz)dz (28) 

In Laplace's investigation a is supposed to be unity. We may call 
the value which (28) then assumes Ko, so that as above 

Ko=2ir/""iKz)eZz (29) 

The expression for the superficial tension is most readily found with 
the aid of the idea of superficial energy, introduced into the subject 
by Gauss. Since the tension is constant, the work that must be 
done to extend the surface by one unit of area measures the tension, 
and the work required for the generation of any surface is the product 
of the tension and the area. From this consideration we may derive 
Laplace's expression, as has been done by Dupre (Theorie mecanique 
de la chaleur, Paris, 1869), and Kelvin (" Capillary Attraction," 
Proc. Roy. Inst., January 1886. Reprinted, Popular Lectures and 
Addresses, 1889). For imagine a small cavity to be formed in the 
interior of the mass and to be gradually expanded in such a shape 
that the walls consist almost entirely of two parallel planes. The 
distance between the planes is supposed to be very small compared 
with their ultimate diameters, but at the same time large enough to 
exceed the range of the attractive forces. The work required to 
produce this crevasse is twice the product of the tension and the area 
of one of the faces. If we now suppose the crevasse produced by 
direct separation of its walls, the work necessary must be the same 
as before, the initial and final configurations being identical; and 
we recognize that the tension may be measured by half the work 
that must be done per unit of area against the mutual attraction 
in order to separate the two portions which lie upon opposite sides 
of an ideal plane to a distance from one another which is outside 
the range of the forces. It only remains to calculate this work. 

If ffi, 01 represent the densities of the two infinite solids, their 
mutual attraction at distance z is per unit of area 

2x<7icr/ 2 °° xj/(z)dz (30) 

or 2ir<na${z) , if we write 

/>(z)rfz = 0(z) (31) 

The work required to produce the separation in question is thus 

2irai<r 2 f" 6(z)dz; (32) 

and for the tension of a liquid of density <r we have 

T = «£"«(*)& (33) 

The form of this expression may be modified by integration by parts. 
For 

f9(z)dz=6(z).z-fz^ ) -dz = 8(z).z+fzt(z)dz. 

Since 9(o) is finite, proportional to K, the integrated term vanishes 
at both limits, and we have simply 

j"0(z)dz=f°zUz)dz (34) 

and 

T = ™ 2 f"zMz)dz (35) 

In Laplace's notation the second member of (34), multiplied by 2w, 
is represented by H. 

As Laplace has shown, the values for K and T may also be ex- 
pressed in terms of the function <t>, with which we started. Integrating 
by parts, we get 

f+(z)dz = zMz)+lz 3 U(z)+ifz 3 <t>{z)dz, 
fz+(z)dz = iz^(z) +|z 4 II (z) + \fz%(z)dz. 



In all cases to which it is necessary to have regard the integrated 
terms vanish at both limits, and we may write 

/; +{ Z )dz - if; 2 ^(z)dz, /; «*(*)* = i/; *«*(*)& ; (36) 

so that 

Ko=y j~"z^(z)dz, To = I J%V(z)dz (37) 

A few examples of these formulae will promote an intelligent 
comprehension of the subject. One of the simplest suppositions 
open to us is that 

*(/)-*-*/. (38) 

From this we obtain 

1I(z) = j8-VP*, ^(z)=/T 3 (/Sz-f l)«-P«, . . (39) 

Ko=47r/r 4 , T„=37r/S- 6 (40) 

The range of the attractive force is mathematically infinite, but 
practically of the order /3 -1 , and we see that T is of higher order in 
this small quantity than K. That K is in all cases of the fourth order 
and T of the fifth order in the range of the forces is obvious from (37) 
without integration. 

An apparently simple example would be to suppose <j>(z) =z". 
We get 

gn+l z n+3 

II W"-^+T'^') = n+ 3 .« + i ' 

^ " n+4.n+ 3 .n + ll •••••• (41) 

The intrinsic pressure will thus- be infinite whatever n may be. If 
«+4 be positive, the attraction of infinitely distant parts contributes 
to the result; while if w+4 be negative, the parts in immediate 
contiguity act with infinite power. For the transition case, discussed 
by William Sutherland (Phil. Mag. xxiv. p. 113, 1887), of «+4=o, 
Ko is also infinite. It seems therefore that nothing satisfactory can 
be arrived at under this head. 

As a third example, we will take the law proposed by Young, viz. 
<t>(z) = 1 from z = o to z = a, ) , ■. 

ij>(z) =0 from z = a to z = oo; J • • ■ • \4 2 > 
and corresponding therewith, 

II(z) =0— z from z = o to z = a, ) ,. 

II(z)=o from z = a to 2 = 00, \ ' ' * *43y 
<Kz)=ia(a*-z i )-§(a s -z 3 ) i 

from z = to z — a, \ ... (44) 
i//(z)=o from z = a to z = oo, ) 
Equations (37) now give 

K ° = yj z3<fe= ir- (45) 

T> * f" 1J TO 5 / ,N 

T =gJ o zyz=— (46) 

The numerical results differ from those of Young, who finds that 
" the contractile force is one-third of the whole cohesive force of a stratum 
of particles, equal in thickness to the interval to which the primitive 
equable cohesion extends," viz. T = |aK; whereas according to the 
above calculation T = ^aK. The discrepancy seems to depend upon 
Young having treated the attractive force as operative in one 
direction only. For further calculations on Laplace's principles, see 
Rayleigh, Phil. Mag., Oct. Dec. 1890, or Scientific Papers, vol. iii. 
P- 397-1 

On Surface-Tension 

Definition. — The tension of a liquid surface across any line 
drawn on the surface is normal to the line, and is the same for all 
directions of the line, and is measured by the force across an element 
of the line divided by the length of that element. 

Experimental Laws of Surf ace-Tension. — 1. For any given 
liquid surface, as the surface which separates water from air, 
or oil from water, the surface-tension is the same at every point 
of the surface and in every direction. It is also practically inde- 
pendent of the curvature of the surface, although it appears 
from the mathematical theory that there is a slight increase of 
tension where the mean curvature of the surface is concave, 
and a slight diminution where it is convex. The amount of this 
increase and diminution is too small to be directly measured, 
though it has a certain theoretical importance in the explanation 
of the equilibrium of the superficial layer of the liquid where it 
is inclined to the horizon. 

2. The surface-tension diminishes as the temperature rises, 
and when the temperature reaches that of the critical point at 
which the distinction between the liquid and its vapour ceases, 
it has been observed by Andrews that the capillary action also 
vanishes. The early writers on capillary action supposed that 
the diminution of capillary action was due simply to the change 
of density corresponding to the rise of temperature, and, there- 
fore, assuming the surface-tension to vary as the square of the 



262 



CAPILLARY ACTION 




density, they deduced its variations from the observed dilatation 
of the liquid by heat. This assumption, however, does not 
appear to be verified by the experiments of Brunner and Wolff 
on the rise of water in tubes at different temperatures. 

3. The tension of the surface separating two liquids which 
do not mix cannot be deduced by any known method from the 
tensions of the surfaces of the liquids when separately in contact 
with air. 

When the surface is curved, the effect of the surface-tension 
is to make the pressure on the concave side exceed the pressure 
on the convex side by T (1/R1 +1/R2), where T is the intensity 
of the surface-tension and Ri, R2 are the radii of curvature 
of any two sections normal to the surface and to each other. 

If three fluids which do not mix are in contact with each other, 
the three surfaces of separation meet in a line, straight or curved. 
Let (fig. 3) be a point in this line, and let the plane of the paper 

be supposed to be normal to the 
line at the point 0. The three 
angles between the tangent planes 
to the three surfaces of separation 
at the point are completely 
determined by the tensions of the 
three surfaces. For if in the 
triangle abc the side ab is taken 
so as to represent on a given 
scale the tension of the surface of 
contact of the fluids a and b, and if 
the other sides be and ca are taken 
so as to represent on the same scale 
the tensions of the surfaces between b and c and between c and 
a respectively, then the condition of equilibrium at O for the 
corresponding tensions R, P and Q is that the angle ROP shall 
be the supplement of abc, POQ of bca, and, therefore, QOR of 
cab. Thus the angles at which the surfaces of separation meet 
are the same at all parts of the line of concourse of the three 
fluids. When three films of the same liquid meet, their tensions 
are equal, and, therefore, they make angles of 120 with each 
other. The froth of soap-suds or beaten-up eggs cqnsists of a 
multitude of small films which meet each other at angles of 120°. 
If four fluids, a, b, c, d, meet in a point O, and if a tetrahedron 
ABCD is formed so that its edge AB represents the tension of 
the surface of contact of the liquids a and b, BC that of 6 and c, 
and so on; then if we place this tetrahedron so that the face 
ABC is normal to the tangent at O to the line of concourse of the 
fluids abc, and turn it so that the edge AB is normal to the tangent 
plane at to the surface of contact of the fluids a and b, then 
the other three faces of the tetrahedron will be normal to the 
tangents at O to the other three lines of concourse of the liquids, 
and the other five edges of the tetrahedron will be normal to 
the tangent planes at to the other five surfaces of contact. 

If six films of the same liquid meet in a point the corresponding 
tetrahedron is a regular tetrahedron, and each film, where it 
meets the others, has an angle whose cosine is— \. Hence if 
we take two nets of wire with hexagonal meshes, and place one 
on the other so that the point of concourse of three hexagons 
of one net coincides with the middle of a hexagon of the other, 
and if we then, after dipping them in Plateau's liquid, place them 
horizontally, and gently raise the upper one, we shall develop 
a system of plane laminae arranged as the walls and floors of 
the cells are arranged in a honeycomb. We must not, however, 
raise the upper net too much, or the system of films will become 
unstable. 

When a drop of one liquid, B, is placed on the surface of 
another, A, the phenomena which take place depend on the re- 
lative magnitude of the three surface-tensions corresponding 
to the surface between A and air, between B and air, and between 
A and B. If no one of these tensions is greater than the sum 
of the other two, the drop will assume the form of a lens, the 
angles which the upper and lower surfaces of the lens make 
with the free surface of A and with each other being equal to 
the external angles of the triangle of forces. Such lenses are 
often seen formed by drops of fat floating on the surface of hot 



water, soup or gravy. But when the surface-tension of A exceeds 
the sum of the tensions of the surfaces of contact of B with air 
and with A, it is impossible to construct the triangle of forces, 
so that equilibrium becomes impossible. The edge of the drop 
is drawn out by the surface-tension of A with a force greater 
than the sum of the tensions of the two surfaces of the drop. 
The drop, therefore, spreads itself out, with great velocity, 
over the surface of A till it covers an enormous area, and is 
reduced to such extreme tenuity that it is not probable that it 
retains the same properties of surface-tension which it has in 
a large mass. Thus a drop of train oil will spread itself over the 
surface of the sea till it shows the colours of thin plates. These 
rapidly descend in Newton's scale and at last disappear, showing 
that the thickness of the film is less than the tenth part of the 
length of a wave of light. But even when thus attenuated, 
the film may be proved to be present, since the surface-tension 
of the liquid is considerably less than that of pure water. This 
may be shown by placing another drop of oil on the surface, 
This drop will not spread out like the first drop, but will take 
the form of a flat lens with a distinct circular edge, showing that 
the surface-tension of what is still apparently pure water is 
now less than the sum of the tensions of the surfaces separating 
oil from air and water. 

The spreading of drops on the surface of a liquid has formed 
the subject of a very extensive series of experiments by Charles 
Tomlinson; van der Mensbrugghe has also written a very 
complete memoir on this subject (Sur la tension superficielle 
des liquides, Bruxelles, 1873). 

When a solid body is in contact with two fluids, the surface 
of the solid cannot alter its form, but the angle at which the 
surface of contact of the two fluids meets the surface of 
the solid depends on the values of the three surface-tensions. 
If a and b are the two fluids and c the solid then the equi- 
librium of the tensions at the point O depends only 
on that of thin components parallel to the surface, 
because the surface-tensions normal to the surface 
are balanced by the resistance of the solid. Hence b oc 

if the angle ROQ (fig. 4) at which the surface of 
contact OP meets the solid is denoted by a, 

Tbc — T ca — Tab COS 0=0, 

Whence 

COS a = (Tb<,~T OT )/Ta6. a 

As an experiment on the angle of contact only gives Fig. 4. 
us the difference of the surface-tensions at the solid 
surface, we cannot determine their actual value. It is theoretic- 
ally probable that they are often negative, and may be called 
surface-pressures. 

The constancy of the angle of contact between the surface 
of a fluid and a solid was first pointed out by Dr Young, who 
states that the angle of contact between mercury and glass is 
about 140°. Quincke makes it 128 52'. 

If the tension of the surface between the solid and one of the 
fluids exceeds the sum of the other two tensions, the point of 
contact will not be in equilibrium, but will be dragged towards 
the side on which the tension is greatest. If the quantity of the 
first fluid is small it will stand in a drop on the surface of the solid 
without wetting it. If the quantity of the second fluid is small 
it will spread itself over the surface and wet the solid. The angle 
of contact of the first fluid is 180° and that of the second is 
zero. 

If a drop of alcohol be made to touch one side of a drop of oil 
on a glass plate, the alcohol will appear to chase the oil over the 
plate, and if a drop of water and a drop of bisulphide of carbon 
be placed in contact in a horizontal capillary tube, the bisulphide 
of carbon will chase the water along the tube. In both cases 
the liquids move in the direction in which the surface-pressure 
at the solid is least. 

[In order to express the dependence of the tension at the inter- 
face of two bodies in terms of the forces exercised by the bodies 
upon themselves and upon one another, we cannot do better 
than follow the method of Dupre. If T12 denote the interfacial 
tension, the energy corresponding to unit of area of the interface 



CAPILLARY ACTION 



263 



is also T12, as we see by considering the introduction (through a 
fine tube) of one body into the interior of the other. A com- 
parison with another method of generating the interface, similar 
to that previously employed when but one body was in question, 
will now allow us to evaluate T12. 

The work required to cleave asunder the parts of the first 
fluid which he on the two sides of an ideal plane passing through 
the interior, is per unit of area 2T1, and the free surface produced 
is two units in area. So for the second fluid the corresponding 
work is 2T2. This having been effected, let us now suppose that 
each of the units of area of free surface of fluid (1) is allowed 
to approach normally a unit area of (2) until contact is estab- 
lished. In this process work is gained which we may denote 
by 4T'i2, 2T'i2 for each pair. On the whole, then, the work 
expended in producing two units of interface is 2Ti-f-2T 2 — 4.T'i 2 , 
and this, as we have seen, may be equated to 2T12. Hence 

T 12 =T 1 +T 2 -2T' 12 (47) 

If the two bodies are similar, 

Ti=T 2 =T' 12 ; 
and Ti2=o, as it should do. 

Laplace does not treat systematically the question of inter- 
facial tension, but he gives incidentally in terms of his quantity 
H a relation analogous to (47). 

If 2T'i2>Ti+T 2 , T12 would be negative, so that the interface 
would of itself tend to increase. In this case the fluids must 
mix. Conversely, if two fluids mix, it would seem that T'12 
must exceed the mean of Ti and T 2 ; otherwise work would 
have to be expended to effect a close alternate stratification of 
the two bodies, such as we may suppose to constitute a first 
step in the process of mixture (Dupre, Thiorie mecanique de la 
chaleur, p. 372; Kelvin, Popular Lectures, p. 53). 

The value of T'i 2 has already been calculated (32). We may 
write 

T'i 2 =7T0-i(r2j" e(z)dz-lircn(r i j'^ z 4 <t>(z)dz; . . (48) 

and in general the functions 8, or <j>, must be regarded as capable 
of assuming different forms. Under these circumstances there 
is no limitation upon the values of the interfacial tensions for 
three fluids, which we may denote by T12, T23, T31. _ If the three 
fluids can remain in contact with one 
* T *3 another, the sum of any two of the 
3 y/^ quantities must exceed the third, and 

by Neumann's rule the directions of 
the interfaces at the common edge 
Tii~ must be parallel to the sides of a 
F IG - 5- triangle, taken proportional to T12, 

T23, T31. If the above-mentioned condition be not satisfied, the 
triangle is imaginary, and the three fluids cannot rest in con- 
tact, the two weaker tensions, even if acting in full concert, 
being incapable of balancing the strongest. For instance, if 
T 3 i>Ti2-|-T23, the second fluid spreads itself indefinitely upon 
the interface of the first and third fluids. 

The experimenters who have dealt with this question, 
C. G. M. Marangoni, van der Mensbrugghe, Quincke, have all 
arrived at results inconsistent with the reality of Neumann's 
triangle. Thus Marangoni says (Pogg. Annalen, cxliii. p. 348, 
1871): — "Die gemeinschaftliche Oberflache zweier Fliissig- 
keiten hat eine geringere Oberflachenspannung als die Differenz 
der Oberflachenspannung der Fliissigkeiten selbst (mit Aus- 
nahme des Quecksilbers)." Three pure bodies (of which one 
may be air) cannot accordingly remain in contact. If a drop 
of oil stands in lenticular form upon a surface of water, it 
is because the water-surface is already contaminated with a 
greasy film. 

On the theoretical side the question is open until we intro- 
duce some limitation upon the generality of the functions. 
By far the simplest supposition open to us is that the functions 
are the same in all cases, the attractions differing merely by 
coefficients analogous to densities in the theory of gravitation. 
This hypothesis was suggested by Laplace, and may conveni- 
ently be named after him. It was also tacitly adopted by 
Young, in connexion with the still more special hypothesis 




which Young probably had in view, namely that the force in 
each case was constant within a limited range, the same in all 
cases, and vanished outside that range. 

As an immediate consequence of this hypothesis we have 
from (28) 

K = K„<r* (49) 

T=-LV (50) 

where Ko, T are the same for all bodies. 

But the most interesting results are those which Young 
(Works, vol. i. p. 463) deduced relative to the interfacial tensions 
of three bodies. By (37), (48), 

T'12 = <ri<r 2 To ; (51) 

so that by (47), (50), 

Ti2 = (<ri-(7 2 ) 2 To (52) 

According to (52), the interfacial tension between any two 
bodies is proportional to the square of the difference of their 
densities. The densities <ri, <t 2 , cr 3 being in descending order of 
magnitude, we njjay write 

T31 = (ai — <r 2 + <T2 — 0"3) 2 To 

= Ti 2 +T 2 3+2(o- 1 — 02) (o- 2 — o- 3 )Tc; 

so that T31 necessarily exceeds the sum of the other two inter- 
facial tensions. We are thus led to the important conclusion 
that according to this hypothesis Neumann's triangle is neces- 
sarily imaginary, that one of three fluids will always spread 
upon the interface of the other two. 

Another point of importance may be easily illustrated by 
this theory, viz. the dependency of capillarity upon abruptness 
of transition. " The reason why the capillary force should 
disappear when the transition between two liquids is sufficiently 
gradual will now be evident. Suppose that the transition from 
o to a is made in two equal steps, the thickness of the inter- 
mediate layer of density \<s being large compared to the range 
of the molecular forces, but small in comparison with the radius 
of curvature. At each step the difference of capillary pressure 
is only one-quarter of that due to the sudden transition from o 
to <r, and thus altogether half the effect is lost by the inter- 
position of the layer. If there were three equal steps, the effect 
would be reduced to one-third, and so on. When the number of 
steps is infinite, the capillary pressure disappears altogether." 
(" Laplace's Theory of Capillarity," Rayleigh, Phil. Mag., 1883, 

P- 3I5-) 

According to Laplace's hypothesis the whole energy of any 
number of contiguous strata of liquids is least when they are 
arranged in order of density, so that this is the disposition 
favoured by the attractive forces. The problem is to make 
the sum of the interfacial tensions a minimum, each tension 
being proportional to the square of the difference of densities 
of the two contiguous liquids in question. If the order of 
stratification differ from that of densities, we can show that 
each step of approximation to this order lowers the sum of 
tensions. To this end consider the effect of the abolition of 
a stratum o-„ + i, contiguous to cr„ and o- n+2 . Before the change 
we have (cr n — (r„ + i) 2 +(cr B+1 — <r„ +2 ) 2 , and afterwards (<r„— <r„ +2 ) 2 . 
The second minus the first, or the increase in the sum of 
tensions, is thus 

2(<r„ — ir„ + i) (<r n+ i — Cn+2) • 

Hence, if <r„ + i be intermediate in magnitude between <r„ and 
cr n +2, the sum of tensions is increased by the abolition of the 
stratum; but, if <r„+i be not intermediate, the sum is decreased. 
We see, then, that the removal of a stratum from between neigh- 
bours where it is out of order and its introduction between 
neighbours where it will be in order is doubly favourable to 
the reduction of the sum of tensions; and since by a succession 
of such steps we may arrive at the order of magnitude through- 
out, we conclude that this is the disposition of minimum tensions 
and energy. 

So far the results of Laplace's hypothesis are in marked 
accordance with experiment; but if we follow it out further, 
discordances begin to manifest themselves. According to (52) 

VT 31 = VT I2 +VT23 (53) 

a relation not verified by experiment. What is more, (52) 
shows that according to the hypothesis T12 is necessarily positive; 



264 



CAPILLARY ACTION 



so that, if the preceding argument be correct, no such thing as 
mixture of two liquids could ever take place. 

There are two apparent exceptions to Marangoni's rule which 
call for a word of explanation. According to the rule, water, 
which has the lower surface-tension, should spread upon the 
surface of mercury; whereas the universal experience of the 
laboratory is that drops of water standing upon mercury retain 
their compact form without the least tendency to spread. To 
Quincke belongs the credit of dissipating the apparent exception. 
He found that mercury specially prepared behaves quite 
differently from ordinary mercury, and that a drop of water 
deposited thereon spreads over the entire surface. The ordinary 
behaviour is evidently the result of a film of grease, which 
adheres with great obstinacy. 

The process described by Quincke is somewhat elaborate; 
but there is little difficulty in repeating the experiment if the 
mistake be avoided of using a free surface already contaminated, 
as almost inevitably happens when the mercury is poured from 
an ordinary bottle. The mercury should be drawn from under- 
neath, for which purpose an arrangement similar to a chemical 
wash bottle is suitable, and it may be poured into watch-glasses, 
previously dipped into strong sulphuric acid, rinsed in distilled 
water, and dried over a Bunsen flame. When the glasses are 
cool, they may be charged with mercury, of which the first part 
is rejected. Operating in this way there is no difficulty in obtain- 
ing surfaces upon which a drop of water spreads, although from 
causes that cannot always be traced, a certain proportion of 
failures is met with. As might be expected, the grease which 
produces these effects is largely volatile. In many cases a very 
moderate preliminary warming of the watch-glasses makes all 
the difference in the behaviour of the drop. 

The behaviour of a drop of carbon bisulphide placed upon 
clean, water is also, at first sight, an exception to Marangoni's 
rule. So far from spreading over the surface, as according to 
its lower surface-tension it ought to do, it remains suspended 
in the form of a lens. Any dust that may be lying upon the 
surface is not driven away to the edge of the drop, as would 
happen in the case of oil. A simple modification of the experi- 
ment suffices, however, to clear up the difficulty. If after the 
deposition of the drop, a little lycopodium be scattered over the 
surface, it is seen that a circular space surrounding the drop, of 
about the size of a shilling, remains bare, and this, however 
often the dusting be repeated, so long as any of the carbon 
bisulphide remains. The interpretation can hardly be doubtful. 
The Carbon bisulphide is really spreading all the while, but on 
account of its volatility is unable to reach any considerable 
distance. Immediately surrounding the drop there is a film 
moving outwards at a high speed, and this carries away almost 
instantaneously any dust that may fall upon it. The pheno- 
menon above described requires that the water-surface be clean. 
If a very little grease be present, there is no outward flow and 
dust remains undisturbed in the immediate neighbourhood of 
the drop.] 

On the Rise of a Liquid in a Tube. — Let a tube (fig. 6) whose 
internal radius is r, made of a solid substance c, be dipped into 

a liquid a. Let us suppose 
that the angle of contact 
for this liquid with the 
solid c is an acute angle. 
This implies that the ten- 
sion of the free surface of 
the solid c is greater than 
that of the surface of 
contact of the solid with 
the liquid a. Now con- 
sider the tension of the 
free surface of the liquid 
a. All round its edge 
there is a tension T acting 
at an angle a with the vertical. The circumference of the 
edge is 2irr, so that the resultant of this tension is a force 
27rrT cos a acting vertically upwards on the liquid. Hence 




the liquid will rise in the tube till the weight of the vertical 
column between the free surface and the level of the liquid 
in the vessel balances the resultant of the surface-tension. The 
upper surface of this column is not level, so that the height 
of the column cannot be directly measured, but let us assume 
that h is the mean height of the column, that is to say, the 
height of a column of equal weight, but with a flat top. Then if 
r is the radius of the tube at the top of the column, the volume 
of the suspended column is irr 2 h, and its weight is wpgr 2 h, when 
p is its density and g the intensity of gravity. Equating this 
force with the resultant of the tension 

irpgr 2 h = 2TrrTc.OS a, 

or 

h — 2T cos alpgr. 
Hence the mean height to which the fluid rises is inversely as 
the radius of the tube. For water in a clean glass tube the angle 
of contact is zero, and 

h=2T/pgr. 

For mercury in a glass tube the angle of contact is 128 52', 
the cosine of which is negative. Hence when a glass tube is 
dipped into a vessel of mercury, the mercury within the tube 
stands at a lower level than outside it. 

Rise of a Liquid between Two Plates. — When two parallel 
plates are placed vertically in a liquid the liquid rises between 
them. If we now suppose fig. 6 to represent a vertical section 
perpendicular to the plates, we may calculate the rise of the 
liquid. Let / be the breadth of the plates measured perpen- 
dicularly to the plane of the paper, then the length of the line 
which bounds the wet and the dry parts of the plates inside is I 
for each surface, and on this the tension T acts at an angle a to the 
vertical. Hence the resultant of the surface-tension is 2/ T cos o. 
If the distance between the inner surfaces of the plates is a, 
and if the mean height of the film of fluid which rises between 
them is h, the weight of fluid raised is pghla. Equating the 
forces — 

pghla = 2IT cos a, 
whence 

h=2T cos a/pga. 
This expression is the same as that for the rise of a liquid in a 
tube, except that instead of r, the radius of the tube, we have 
a the distance of the plates. 

Form of the Capillary Surface. — The form of the surface of a 
liquid acted on by gravity is easily determined if we assume 
that near the part considered the line of contact of the surface 
of the liquid with that of the solid bounding it is straight and 
horizontal, as it is when the solids which constrain the liquid 
are bounded by surfaces formed by horizontal and parallel 
generating lines. This will be the case, for instance, near a flat 
plate dipped into the liquid. If we suppose these generating 
lines to be normal to the plane of the paper, then all sections 
of the solids parallel to this plane will be equal and similar to 
each other, and the section of the surface of the liquid will be 
of the same form for all such sections. 

Let us consider the portion of the liquid between two parallel 
sections distant one unit of length. Let ~P t , P 2 (fig. 7) be two 
points of the surface; 6 lt 2 
the inclination of the surface 
to the horizon at P! and P 2 ; 
y h y 2 the heights of P! and 
P 2 above the level of the 
liquid at a distance from all 
solid bodies. The pressure at 
any point of the liquid which p 

is above this level is negative t,* — "^"(y T 
unless another fluid as, for in- 
stance, the air, presses on the 
upper surface, but it is only 




Fig. 7. 



the difference of pressures with which we have to do, because 
two equal pressures on opposite sides of the surface produce 
no effect. 

We may, therefore, write for the pressure at a height y 
p = -pgy, 



CAPILLARY ACTION 



265 



where p is the density of the liquid, or if there are two fluids 
the excess of the density of the lower fluid over that of the upper 
one. 

The forces acting on the portion of liquid PiP 2 A 2 Ai are — 
first, the horizontal pressures, —§pgyl and %pgy\\ second, the 
surface-tension T acting at Pi and P 2 in directions inclined 0i 
and 2 to the horizon. Resolving horizontally we find — 
TCcosflz-cosflO+kpW-yi 2 ) =0, 

whence 



cos 2 = cos 61 + 



gpyi 2 

2T 



' 2T' 



or if we suppose Pi fixed and P 2 variable, we may write 
cos 8 = constant — igpy 2 /T. 

This equation gives a relation between the inclination of the 
curve to the horizon and the height above the level of the liquid. 
Resolving vertically we find that the weight of the liquid 
raised above the level must be equal to T(sin 2 — sin 0i), and 
this is therefore equal to the area P 1 P 2 A 2 Ai multiplied by gp. 
The form of the capillary surface is identical with that of the 
" elastic curve," or the curve formed by a uniform spring 
originally straight, when its ends are acted on by equal and 

opposite forces applied either 
to the ends themselves or to 
solid pieces attached to them. 
Drawings of the different forms 
of the curve may be found in 
Thomson and Tait's Natural 
Philosophy, vol. i. p. 455. 

We shall next consider the 
rise of a liquid between two 
plates of different materials 
for which the angles of contact are 01 and a 2 , the distance 
between the plates being a, a small quantity. Since the plates 
are very near one another we may use the following equation of 
the surface as an approximation: — 

y = h 1 +Ax+Bx\ h = h 1 +ha+Ba i , 
whence 

cot ai= —A, cot d2 = A+2Ba 
T(cos <*!+ cos a 2 ) = pga(hi + %Aa+lBa 2 ), 

whence we obtain 
T 




h 



-cot o 2 ) 



(cos ai+cosa 2 )+-; (2 cot ai- 
pga 6 

ht = — (cos ai +cos a 2 ) + -r (2 cot 02 — cot ai). 
pga 6 

Let X be the force which must be applied in a horizontal direction 

to either plate to keep it from approaching the other, then the 

forces acting on the first plate are T+X in the negative direction, 

and T sin di+^gpAi 2 in the positive direction. Hence 

X = |gpAi 2 — T(i ^sin ai). 

For the second plate 

X = Jgpfc 2 2 — T(i— sin 02). 

Hence 

X = igp(/*i 2 +W)-Tji-!(sin aj+sin a,)}, 

or, substituting the values of hi and h 2 , 

1 T 2 

X = Acos Oi+COS o 2 ) 2 

2 Pga 1 

— T{l —J (sin ai+sin oj) — tV(cos cn+cos a 2 )(cot ai+cot 02)}, 

the remaining terms being negligible when a is small. The 
force, therefore, with which the two plates are drawn together 
consists first of a positive part, or in other words an attraction, 
varying inversely as the square of the distance, and second, of 
a negative part of repulsion independent of the distance. Hence 
in all cases except that in which the angles ai and a 2 are 
supplementary to each other, the force is attractive when a is 
small enough, but when cos 0.1 and cos ct 2 are of different signs, 
as when the liquid is raised by one plate, and depressed by the 
other, the first term may be so small that the repulsion indi- 
cated by the second term comes into play. The fact that a 
pair of plates which repel one another at a certain distance may 
attract one another at a smaller distance was deduced by 
Laplace from theory, and verified by the observations of the 
abbe Haiiy. 



A Drop between Two Plates.— -If a small quantity of a liquid 
which wets glass be introduced between two glass plates slightly 
inclined to each other, it will run towards that part where the 
glass plates are nearest together. When the liquid is in equi- 
librium it forms a thin film, the outer edge of which is all of the 
same thickness. If d is the distance between the plates at the 
edge of the film and II the atmospheric pressure, the pressure 

of the liquid in the film is II — -g > ar >d if A is the area of the 

film between the plates and B its circumference, the plates will 
be pressed together with a force 

2AT cos a , -r,^ ■ 

= hBT sin a, 

a 

and this, whether the atmosphere exerts any pressure or not. 
The force thus produced by the introduction of a drop of water 
between two plates is enormous, and is often sufficient to press 
certain parts of the plates together so powerfully as to bruise 
them or break them. When two blocks of ice are placed loosely 
together so that the superfluous water which melts from them 
may drain away, the remaining water draws the blocks together 
with a force sufficient to cause the blocks to adhere by the 
process called Regelation. 

[An effect of an opposite character may be observed when the 
fluid is mercury in place of water. When two pieces of flat 
glass are pressed together under mercury with moderate force 
they cohere, the mercury leaving the narrow crevasses, even 
although the alternative is a vacuum. The course of events 
is more easily followed if one of the pieces of glass constitutes 
the bottom, or a side, of the vessel containing the mercury.] 

In many experiments bodies are floated on the surface of 
water in order that they may be free to move under the action 
of slight horizontal forces. Thus Sir Isaac Newton placed a 
magnet in a floating vessel and a piece of iron in another in order 
to observe their mutual action, and A. M. Ampere floated a voltaic 
battery with a coil of wire in its circuit in order to observe the 
effects of the earth's magnetism on the electric circuit. When 
such floating bodies come near the edge of the vessel they are 
drawn up to it, and are apt to stick fast to it. There are two 
ways of avoiding this inconvenience. One is to grease the float 
round its water-line so that the water is depressed round it. 
This, however, often produces a worse disturbing effect, because 
a thin film of grease spreads over the water and increases its 
surface-viscosity. The other method is to fill the vessel with 
water till the level of the water stands a little higher than the 
rim of the vessel. The float will then be repelled from the edge 
of the vessel. Such floats, however, should always be made 
so that the section taken at the level of the water is as small as 
possible. 

[The Size of Drops. — The relation between the diameter of a 
tube and the weight of the drop which it delivers appears to 
have been first investigated by Thomas Tate {Phil. Mag. vol. 
xxvii. p. 176, 1864), whose experiments led him to the conclusion 
that " other things being the same, the weight of a drop of liquid 
is proportional to the diameter of the tube in which it is formed." 
Sufficient time must of course be allowed for the formation of the 
drops; otherwise no simple results can be expected.. In Tate's 
experiments the period was never less than 40 seconds. 

The magnitude of a drop delivered from a tube, even when 
the formation up to the phase of instability is infinitely slow, 
cannot be calculated a priori. The weight is sometimes equated 
to the product of the capillary tension (T) and the circumference 
of the tube (2ira), but with little justification. Even if the 
tension at the circumference of the tube acted vertically, and 
the whole of the liquid below this level passed into the drop, 
the calculation would still be vitiated by the assumption that 
the internal pressure at the level in question is atmospheric. 
It would be necessary to consider the curvatures of the fluid 
surface at the edge of attachment. If the surface could be 
treated as a cylindrical prolongation of the tube (radius a), the 
pressure would be T/a, and the resulting force acting downwards 
upon the drop would amount to one-half (-TraT) of the direct 
upward pull of the tension along the circumference. At this 



266 



CAPILLARY ACTION 



rate the drop would be but one-half of that above reckoned. 
But the truth is that a complete solution of the statical problem 
for all forms up to that at which instability sets in, would not 
suffice for the present purpose. The detachment of the drop 
is a dynamical effect, and it is influenced by collateral circum- 
stances. For example, the bore of the tube is no longer a matter 
of indifference, even though the attachment of the drop occurs 
entirely at the outer edge. It appears that when the external 
diameter exceeds a certain value, the weight of a drop of water 
is sensibly different in the two extreme cases of a very small 
and of a very large bore. 

But although a complete solution of the dynamical problem 
is impracticable, much interesting information may be obtained 
from the principle of dynamical similarity. The argument has 
already been applied by Dupre ( Theorie mecanique de la chaleur, 
Paris, 1869, p. 328), but his presentation of it is rather obscure. 
We will assume that when, as in most cases, viscosity maybe 
neglected, the mass (M) of a drop depends only upon the density 
(cr), the capillary tension (T), the acceleration of gravity (g), and 
the linear dimension of the tube (a). In order to justify this 
assumption, the formation of the drop must be sufficiently slow, 
and certain restrictions must be imposed upon the shape of the 
tube. For example, in the case of water delivered from a glass 
tube, which is cut off square and held vertically, a will be the 
external radius; and it will be necessary to suppose that the 
ratio of the internal radius to a is constant, the cases of a ratio 
infinitely small, or infinitely near unity, being included. But if 
the fluid be mercury, the flat end of the tube remains unwetted, 
and the formation of the drop depends upon the internal diameter 
only. 

The " dimensions " of the quantities on which M depends 
are: — 

<7 = (Mass) 1 (Length)" 3 , 

T = (Force) 1 (Length)" 1 = (Mass) 1 (Time)- 2 , 

g = Acceleration = (Length) 1 (Time) -2 , 
of which M, a mass, is to be expressed as a function. If we 
assume 

M« T x .g». a ! .a u , 

we have, considering in turn length, time and mass, 

y — 3z+w = o, 2x+2y = o, x+z = i; 
so that 

y——x, z = i- x, u = 3~2x. 
Accordingly 

M^WjrV- 1 

i Kg"" 2 ) 
Since * is undetermined, all that we can conclude is that M 
is of the form 

(I) 



M = T« F /T\ 

g V« <ra 7 



where F denotes an arbitrary function. 

Dynamical similarity requires that T/gca 2 be constant; or, 
if g be supposed to be so, that o 2 varies as T/<r. If this condition 
be satisfied, the mass (or weight) of the drop is proportional to T 
and to a. 

If Tate's law be true, that ceteris paribus M varies as a, it 
follows from (1) that F is constant. For all fluids and for all 
similar tubes similarly wetted, the weight of a drop would then 
be proportional not only to the diameter of the tube, but also 
to the superficial tension, and it would be independent of the 
density. 

Careful observations with special precautions to ensure the 
cleanliness of the water have shown that over a considerable 
range, the departure from Tate's law is not great. The results 
give material for the determination of the function Fin (1). 



T/9c7a 2 


gM/Ta 


2-58 


4-13 


1-16 


3-97 


0-708 


3'8o 


0-441 


373 


0-277 


378 


0-220 


3-90 


0-I69 


4-06 



In the preceding table, applicable to thin-walled tubes, the first 
column gives the values of T/gaa 2 , and the second column those 
of gM/Ta, all the quantities concerned being in C.G.S. measure, 
or other consistent system. From this the weight of a drop 
of any liquid of which the density and surface tension are known, 
can be calculated. For many purposes it may suffice to treat 
F as a constant, say 3-8. The formula for the weight of a drop 
is then simply 

Mg = 3 -8Ta, (2) 

in which 3-8 replaces the 2-jr of the faulty theory alluded to 
earlier (see Rayleigh, Phil. Mag., Oct. 1899).] 

Phenomena arising from the Variation of the Surface-tension. — 
Pure water has a higher surface-tension than that of any other 
substance liquid at ordinary temperatures except mercury. 
Hence any other liquid if mixed with water diminishes its 
surface-tension. For example, if a drop of alcohol be placed on 
the surface of water, the surface-tension will be diminished from 
80, the value for pure water, to 25, the value for pure alcohol. 
The surface of the liquid will therefore no longer be in equilibrium, 
and a current will be formed at and near the surface from the 
alcohol to the surrounding water, and this current will go on as 
long as there is more alcohol at one part of the surface than at 
another. If the vessel is deep, these currents will be balanced 
by counter currents below them, but if the depth of the water 
is only two or three millimetres, the surface-current will sweep 
away the whole of the water, leaving a dry spot where the 
alcohol was dropped in. This phenomenon was first described 
and explained by James Thomson, who also explained a pheno- 
menon, the converse of this, called the " tears of strong wine." 

If a wine-glass be half-filled with port wine the liquid rises a 
little up the side of the glass as other liquids do. The wine, 
however, contains alcohol and water, both of which evaporate, 
but the alcohol faster than the water, so that the superficial layer 
becomes more watery. In the middle of the vessel the superficial 
layer recovers its strength by diffusion from below, but the film 
adhering to the side of the glass becomes more watery, and 
therefore has a higher surface-tension than the surface of the 
stronger wine. It therefore creeps up the side of the glass 
dragging the strong wine after it, and this goes on till the quantity 
of fluid dragged up collects into a drop and runs down the side 
of the glass. 

The motion of small pieces of camphor floating on water arises 
from the gradual solution of the camphor. If this takes place 
more rapidly on one side of the piece of camphor than on the 
other side, the surface-tension becomes weaker where there is 
most camphor in solution, and the lump, being pulled unequally 
by the surface-tensions, moves off in the direction of the strongest 
tension, namely, towards the side on which least camphor is 
dissolved. 

If a drop of ether is held near the surface of water the vapour 
of ether condenses on the surface of the water, and surface- 
currents are formed flowing in every direction away from under 
the drop of ether. 

If we place a small floating body in a shallow vessel of water 
and wet one side of it with alcohol or ether, it will move off with 
great velocity and skim about on the surface of _the water, the 
part wet with alcohol being always the stern. 

The surface-tension of mercury is greatly altered by slight 
changes in the state of the surface. The suj face-tension of pure 
mercury is so great that it is very difficult to keep it clean, for 
every kind of oil or grease spreads over it at once. 

But the most remarkable effects of change of surface-tension 
are those produced by what is called the electric polarization 
of the surface. The tension of the surface of contact of mercury 
and dilute sulphuric acid depends on the electromotive force 
acting between the mercury and the acid. If the electromotive 
force is from the acid to the mercury the surface-tension increases; 
if it is from the mercury to the acid, it diminishes. Faraday 
observed that a large drop of mercury, resting on the flat bottom 
of a vessel containing dilute acid, changes its form in a remarkable 
way when connected with one of the electrodes of a battery, 
the other electrode being placed in the acid. When the mercury 



CAPILLARY ACTION 



267 



is made positive it becomes dull and spreads itself out; when it 
is made negative it gathers itself together and becomes bright 
again. G. Lippmann, who has made a careful investigation 
of the subject, finds that exceedingly small variations of the 
electromotive force produce sensible changes in the surface- 
tension. The effect of one of a DanielPs cell is to increase the 
tension from 30-4 to 40-6. He has constructed a capillary 
electrometer by which differences of electric potential less than 
o-oi of that of a DanielPs cell can be detected by the difference 
of the pressure required to force the mercury to a given point 
of a fine capillary tube. He has also constructed an apparatus 
in which this variation in the surface-tension is made to do work 
and drive a machine. He has also found that this action is 
reversible, for when the area of the surface of contact of the acid 
and mercury is made to increase, an electric current passes 
from the mercury to the acid, the amount of electricity which 
passes while the surface increases by one square centimetre 
being sufficient to decompose -000013 gramme of water. 

[The movements of camphor scrapings referred to above afford 
a useful test of the condition of a water surface. If the contamina- 
tion exceed a certain limit, the scrapings remain quite dead. In 
a striking form of the experiment, the water is contained, to 
the depth of perhaps one inch, in a large flat dish, and the 
operative part of the surface is limited by a flexible hoop of thin 
sheet brass lying in the dish and rising above the water-level. 
If the hoop enclose an area of (say) one-third of the maximum, 
and if the water be clean, camphor fragments floating on the 
interior enter with vigorous movements. A touch of the finger 
will then often reduce them to quiet; but if the hoop be ex- 
panded, the included grease is so far attenuated as to lose its 
effect. Another method of removing grease is to immerse and 
remove strips of paper by which the surface available for the 
contamination is in effect increased. 

The thickness of the film of oil adequate to check the camphor 
movements can be determined with fair accuracy by depositing 
a weighed amount of oil (such as -8 mg.) upon the surface of water 
in a large bath. Calculated as if the density were the same 
as in a normal state, the thickness of the film is found to be 
about two millionths of a millimetre. 

Small as is the above amount of oil, the camphor test is a 
comparatively coarse one. Conditions of a contaminated surface 
may easily be distinguished, upon all of which camphor fragments 
spin vigorously. Thus, a shallow tin vessel, such as the lid of a 
biscuit box, may be levelled and filled with tap-water through 
a rubber hose. Upon the surface of the water a little sulphur 
is dusted. An application of the finger for 20 or 30 seconds 
to the under surface of the vessel will then generate enough 
heat to lower appreciably the surface-tenfion, as is evidenced 
by the opening out of the dust and the formation of a bare spot 
perhaps if in. in diameter. When, however, the surface is but 
very slightly greased, a spot can no longer be cleared by the 
warmth of the finger, or even of a spirit lamp, held underneath. 
And yet the greasing may be so slight that camphor fragments 
move with apparently unabated vigour. 

The varying degrees of contamination to which a water surface 
is subject are the cause of many curious phenomena. Among 
thesr is the superficial viscosity of Plateau. In his experiments 
a long compass needle is mounted so as to swing in the surface 
of the liquid under investigation. The cases of ordinary clean 
water and alcohol are strongly contrasted, the motion of the 
needle upon the former being comparatively sluggish. Moreover, 
a different behaviour is observed when the surfaces are slightly 
dusted over. In the case of water the whole of the surface in 
front of the needle moves with it, while on the other hand the 
dust floating on alcohol is scarcely disturbed until the needle actu- 
ally strikes it. Plateau attributed these differences to a special 
quality of the liquids, named by him " superficial viscosity." 
It has been proved, however, that the question is one of con- 
tamination, and that a water surface may be prepared so as to 
behave in the same manner as alcohol. 

Another consequence of the tendency of a moderate con- 
tamination to distribute itself uniformly is the calming effect 



of oil, investigated by B. Franklin. On pure water the propa- 
gation of waves would be attended by temporary extensions 
and contractions of the surface, but these, as was shown by 
O. Reynolds, are resisted when the surface is contaminated. 

Indeed the possibility of the continued existence of films, such 
as constitute foam, depends upon the properties now under 
consideration. If, as is sometimes stated, the tension of a vertical 
film were absolutely the same throughout, the middle parts 
would of necessity fall with the acceleration of gravity. In 
reality, the tension adjusts itself automatically to the weight 
to be supported at the various levels. 

Although throughout a certain range the surface-tension 
varies rapidly with the degree of contamination, it is remarkable 
that, as was first fully indicated by Miss Pockels,the earlier stages 
of contamination have little or no effect upon surface-tension. 
Lord Rayleigh has shown that the fall of surface-tension begins 
when the quantity of oil is about the half of that required to 
stop the camphor movements, and he suggests that this stage 
may correspond with a complete coating of the surface with a 
single layer of molecules.] 

On the Forms of Liquid Films which are Figures of Revolution. — 
A soap bubble is simply a small quantity of soap-suds spread 
out so as to expose a large surface to the air. The 
bubble, in fact, has two surfaces, an outer and an inner g * ''* ca 
surface, both exposed to air. It has, therefore, a bubble. 
certain amount of surface-energy depending on the area 
of these two surfaces. Since in the case of thin films the outer and 
inner surfaces are approximately equal, we shall consider the 
area of the film as representing either of them, and shall use 
the symbol T to denote the energy of unit of area of the film, 
both surfaces being taken together. If T' is the energy of a single 
surface of the liquid, T the energy of the film is 2T'. When by 
means of a tube we blow air into the inside of the bubble we in- 
crease its volume and therefore its surface, and at the same 
time we do work in forcing air into it, and thus increase the 
energy of the bubble. 

That the bubble has energy may be shown by leaving the end 
of the tube open. The bubble will contract, forcing the air 
out, and the current of air blown through the tube may be made 
to deflect the flame of a candle. If the bubble is in the form of 
a sphere of radius r this material surface will have an area 

S=4x»-2 (1) 

If T be the energy corresponding to unit of area of the film the 
surface-energy of the whole bubble will be 

ST=4«- 2 T (2) 

The increment of this energy corresponding to an increase of 
the radius from r to r+dr is therefore 

TdS = 8wrTdr (3) 

Now this increase of energy was obtained by forcing in air at 
a pressure greater than the atmospheric pressure, and thus 
increasing the volume of the bubble. 

Let II be the atmospheric pressure and 11+ p the pressure of 
the air within the bubble. The volume of the sphere is 

V = fxH (4) 

and the increment of volume is 

dM = \-KrHr \ . (5) 

Now if we suppose a quantity of air already at the pressure 
II+i>, the work done in forcing it into the bubble i&pdV. 
Hence the equation of work and energy is 

pdV = Tds (6) 

or 

4irpr 2 dr = 8-n-rdrT (7) 

or 

p = 2T/r (8) 

This, therefore, is the excess of the pressure of the air within 
the bubble over that of the external air, and it is due to the 
action of the inner and outer surfaces of the bubble. We may 
conceive this pressure to arise from the tendency which the 
bubble has to contract, or in other words from the surface-tension 
of the bubble. 

If to increase the area of the surface requires the expenditure 



268 



CAPILLARY ACTION 



of work, the surface must resist extension, and if the bubble in 
contracting can do work, the surface must tend to contract. 
The surface must therefore act like a sheet of india-rubber when 
extended both in length and breadth, that is, it must exert 
surface-tension. The tension of the sheet of india-rubber, 
however, depends on the extent to which it is stretched, 
and may be different in different directions, whereas the tension 
of the surface of a liquid remains the same however much the 
film is extended, and the tension at any point is the same in all 
directions. 

The intensity of this surface-tension is measured by the 
stress which it exerts across a line of unit length. Let us 
measure it in the case of the spherical soap-bubble by consider- 
ing the stress exerted by one hemisphere of the bubble on the 
other, across the circumference of a great circle. This stress is 
balanced by the pressure p acting over the area of the same great 
circle: it is therefore equal to irr^p. To determine the intensity 
of the surface-tension we have to divide this quantity by the 
length of the line across which it acts, which is in this case the 
circumference of a great circle nrr. Dividing irr 2 p by this length 
we obtain \pr as the value of the intensity of the surface-tension, 
and it is plain from equation 8 that this is equal to T. Hence 
the numerical value of the intensity of the surface-tension is 
equal to the numerical value of the surface-energy per unit of 
surface. We must remember that since the film has two surfaces 
the surface-tension of the film is double the 
tension of the surface of the liquid of which it 
is formed. 

To determine the relation between the sur- 
face-tension and the pressure which balances 
it when the form of the surface is not spherical, 
let us consider the following case:— 

Let fig. 9 represent a section through the 
axis Cc of a soap-bubble in the form of a 
Non- figure of revolution bounded by two 

spherical circular disks AB and ab, and having 
soap- the meridian section APa. Let PQ 

bubble. ke animaginarysectionnormaltothe 
axis. Let the radius of this section PR by y, 
and let PT, the tangent at P, make an angle a 
with the axis. 

Let us consider the stresses which are 
exerted across this imaginary section by the 
lower part on the upper part. If the internal 
pressure exceeds the external pressure by p, 
there is in the first place a force iry^p acting upwards arising 
from the pressure p over the area of the section. In -the next 
place, there is the surface-tension acting downwards, but at an 
angle a with the vertical, across the circular section of the bubble 
itself, whose circumference is 2iry, and the downward force is 
therefore 2iryT cos a. 

Now these forces are balanced by the external force which 
acts on the disk ACB, which we may call F. Hence equating 
the forces which act on the portion included between ACB and 
PRQ 

wy 2 p — 2iryT cos a— — F (9). 

If we make CR=s, and suppose 3 to vary, the shape of the 
bubble of course remaining the same, the values of y and of a 
will change, but the other quantities will be constant; In 
studying these variations we may if we please take as our inde- 
pendent variable the length s of the meridian section AP reckoned 
from A. Differentiating equation 9 with respect to 5 we obtain, 
after dividing by 2ir as a common factor, 




,. dv „ dy , „ da 

P y- d --T cos a^ + Ty sin a-^ =0. 



(10). 



Now 

dy ■ , . 

Ts =sma (")- 

The radius of curvature of the meridian section is 



w - ds 
da 



(12)- 



The radius of curvature of a normal section of the surface at 



right angles to the meridian section is equal to the part of the 
normal cut off by the axis, which is 

R 2 = PN=y/cosa (13). 

Hence dividing equation 10 by y sin a, we find 

p=T{i/R 1 + i/R s ) (14). 

This equation, which gives the pressure in terms of the principal 
radii of curvature, though here proved only in the case of a 
surface of revolution, must be true of all surfaces. For the 
curvature of any surface at a given point may be completely 
defined in terms of the positions of its principal normal sections 
and their radii of curvature. 

Before going further we may deduce from equation 9 the 
nature of all the figures of revolution which a liquid film can 
assume. Let us first determine the nature of a curve, such that 
if it is rolled on the axis its origin will trace out the meridian 
section of the bubble. Since at any instant the rolling curve is 
rotating about the point of contact with the axis, the line drawn 
from this point of contact to the tracing point must be normal 
to the direction of motion of the tracing point. Hence if N is 
the point of contact, NP must be normal to the traced curve. 
Also, since the axis is a tangent to the rolling curve, the ordinate 
PR is the perpendicular from the tracing point P on the tangent. 
Hence the relation between the radius vector and the perpen- 
dicular on the tangent of the rolling curve must be identical with 
the relation between the normal PN and the ordinate PR of the 
traced curve. If we write r for PN, then y = r cos a, and equation 
9 becomes 

y V pr V wp- 
This relation between y and r is identical with the relation 
between the perpendicular from the focus of a conic section on 
the tangent at a given point and the focal distance of that point, 
provided the transverse and conjugate axes of the conic are 
2a and 26 respectively, where 

a=-— , and 6 2 = — 7. 
p irp 

Hence the meridian section of the film may be traced by the 
focus of such a conic, if the conic is made to roll on the axis. 

On the different Forms of the Meridian Line. — 1. When the 
conic is an ellipse the meridian line is in the form of a series of 
waves, and the film itself has a series of alternate swellings and 
contractions as represented in figs. 9 and 10. This form of the 
film is called the unduloid. 

1 a. When the ellipse becomes a circle, the meridian line 
becomes a straight line parallel to the axis, and the film passes 
into the form of a cylinder of revolution. 

ib. As the ellipse degenerates into the straight line joining 
its foci, the contracted parts of the unduloid become narrower, 
till at last the figure becomes a series of spheres in contact. 

In all these cases the internal pressure exceeds the external 
by 2T/0 where a is the semi-transverse axis of the conic. The 
resultant of the internal pressure and the surface-tension is 
equivalent to a tension along the axis, and the numerical value 
of this tension is equal to the force due to the action of this 
pressure on a circle whose diameter is equal to the conjugate 
axis of the ellipse. 

2. When the conic is a parabola the meridian line is a cate- 
nary (fig. n); the internal pressure is equal to the external 
pressure, and the tension along the axis is equal to 2ttTot where 
m is the distance of the vertex from the focus. 

3. When the conic is a hyperbola the meridian line is in the 
form of a looped curve (fig. 12). The corresponding figure of the 
film is called the nodoid. The resultant of the internal pressure 
and the surface-tension is equivalent to a pressure along the 
axis equal to that due to a pressure p acting on a circle whose 
diameter is the conjugate axis of the hyperbola. 

When the conjugate axis of the hyperbola is made smaller 
and smaller, the nodoid approximates more and more to the 
series of spheres touching each other along the axis. When the 
conjugate axis of the hyperbola increases without limit, the 
loops of the nodoid are crowded on one another, and each becomes 
more nearly a ring of circular section, without, however, ever 



CAPILLARY ACTION 



269 



reaching this form. The only closed surface belonging to the 
series is the sphere. 

These figures of revolution have been studied mathematically 
by C. W. B. Poisson, 1 Goldschmidt, 2 L. L. Lindelof and F. M. N. 
Moigno, 3 C. E. Delaunay, 4 A. H. E. Lamarle, 5 A. Beer, 6 and 
V. M. A. Mannheim, 7 and have been produced experimentally 
by Plateau 8 in the two different ways already described. 




S1$S>SL 



Fig. 10. — Unduloid. Fig. ii. — Catenoid. Fig. 12. — Nodoid. 

The limiting conditions of the stability of these figures have 
been studied both mathematically and experimentally. We 
shall notice only two of them, the cylinder and the catenoid. 

Stability of the Cylinder. — The cylinder is the limiting form 
of the unduloid when the rolling ellipse becomes a circle. When 
the ellipse differs infinitely little from a circle, the equation of 
the meridian line becomes approximately y = a+c sin (x/a) 
where c is small. This is a simple harmonic wave-line, whose 
mean distance from the axis is a, whose wave-length is 2ira, 
and whose amplitude is c. The internal pressure corresponding 
to this unduloid is as before p = T/a. Now consider a portion 
of a cylindric film of length x terminated by two equal disks 
of radius r and containing a certain volume of air. Let one of 
these disks be made to approach the other by a small quantity 
dx. The film will swell out into the convex part of an unduloid, 
having its largest section midway between the disks, and we 
have to determine whether the internal pressure will be greater 
or less than before. If A and C (fig. 13) are the disks, and if 

x the distance between the 



" 
















A 




A, C, 


C 


c, 


Bj 




B 



















B, 



disks, 



disks is equal to ■kt half 
the wave-length of the 
harmonic curve, the disks 
will be at the points where 
the curve is at its mean 
distance from the axis, 
If Ai, Ci are the 
so that the distance between them is less than vr, the curve 



Fig. 13. 
and the pressure will therefore be T/r as before. 



must be produced beyond the disks before it is at its mean dis- 
tance from the axis. Hence in this case the mean distance is less 
than r, and the pressure will be greater than T/r. If, on the other 
hand, the disks are at A 2 and C 2 , so that the distance between 
them is greater than 7ir, the curve will reach its mean distance 
from the axis before it reaches the disks. The mean distance 
will therefore be greater than r, and the pressure will be less than 
T/r. Hence if one of the disks be made to approach the other, 
the internal pressure will be increased if the distance between 
the disks is less than half the circumference of either, and the 
pressure will be diminished if the distance is greater than this 
quantity. In the same way we may show that if the distance 
between the disks is increased, the pressure will be diminished 
or increased according as the distance is less or more than half 
the circumference of either. 

Now let us consider a cylindric film contained between two 
equal fixed disks. A and B, and let a third disk, C, be placed 
midway between. Let C be slightly displaced towards A. If 
AC and CB are each less than half the circumference of a disk 
the pressure on C will increase on the side of A and diminish on 
the side of B. The resultant force on C will therefore tend to 
oppose the displacement and to bring C back to its original 

1 Nouvelle tkeorie de faction capillaire (1831). 

2 Determinatio superficiei minimae rotatione curvae data duo puncta 
jungentis circa datum axem ortae (Gottingen, 1831). 

3 Lecons de calcul des variations (Paris, 1861). 

4 " Sur la surface de revolution dont la courbure moyenne est 
constante," Liouville's Journal, vi. 

6 " Theorie geometrique des rayons et centres de courbure," Bullet, 
de VAcad. de Belgique, 1857. 

6 Tractatus de Theoria Mathematica Phaenomenorum in Liquidis 
actioni gravitatis detractis observatorum (Bonn, 1857). 

7 Journal de I'Institut, No. 1260. 

8 Statique experimentale et theorique des liquides, 1873. 



position. The equilibrium of C is therefore stable. It is easy 
to show that if C had been placed in any other position than 
the middle, its equilibrium would have been stable. Hence 
the film is stable as regards longitudinal displacements. It is 
also stable as regards displacements transverse to the axis, for 
the film is in a state of tension, and any lateral displacement 
of its middle parts would produce a resultant force tending to 
restore the film to its original position. Hence if the length of 
the cylindric film is less than its circumference, it is in stable 
equilibrium. But if the length of the cylindric film is greater 
than its circumference, and if we suppose the disk C to be placed 
midway between A and B, and to be moved towards A, the 
pressure on the side next A will diminish, and that on the side 
next B will increase, so that the resultant force will tend to 
increase the displacement, and the equilibrium of the disk C is 
therefore unstable. Hence the equilibrium of a cylindric film 
whose length is greater than its circumference is unstable. Such 
a film, if ever so little disturbed, will begin to contract at one 
secton and to expand at another, till its form ceases to resemble 
a cylinder, if it does not break up into two parts which become 
ultimately portions of spheres. 

Instability of a Jet of Liquid. — When a liquid flows out of a 
vessel through a circular opening in the bottom of the vessel, 
the form of the stream is at first nearly cylindrical though its 
diameter gradually diminishes from the orifice downwards on 
account of the increasing velocity of the liquid. But the liquid 
after it leaves the vessel is subject to no forces except gravity, 
the pressure of the air, and its own surface-tension. Of these 
gravity has no effect on the form of the stream except in drawing 
asunder its parts in a vertical direction, because the lower parts 
are moving faster than the upper parts. The resistance of the 
air produces little disturbance until the velocity becomes very 
great. But the surface-tension, acting on a cylindric column 
of liquid whose length exceeds the limit of stability, begins to 
produce enlargements and contractions in the stream as soon 
as the liquid has left the orifice, and these inequalities in the 
figure of the column go on increasing till it is broken up into 
elongated fragments. These fragments as they are falling 
through the air continue to be acted on by surface-tension. 
They therefore shorten themselves, and after a series of oscilla- 
tions in which they become alternately elongated and flattened, 
settle down into the form of spherical drops. 

This process, which we have followed as it takes place on 
an individual portion of the falling liquid, goes through its 
several phases at different distances from the orifice, so that 
if we examine different portions of the stream as it descends, 
we shall find next the orifice the unbroken column, then a series 
of contractions and enlargements, then elongated drops, then 
flattened drops, and so on till the drops become spherical. 

[The circumstances attending the resolution of a cylindrical 
jet into drops were admirably examined and described by 
F. Savart (" Memoire sur la constitution des veines liquides 
lancees par des orifices circulaires en minces parois," Ann. d. 
Chim. t. liii., 1833) and for the most part explained with great 
sagacity by Plateau. Let us conceive an infinitely long circular 
cylinder of liquid, at rest (a motion common to every ,part of the 
fluid is necessarily without influence upon the stability, and 
may therefore be left out of account for convenience of concep- 
tion and expression), and inquire under what circumstances 
it is stable or unstable, for small displacements, symmetrical 
about the axis of figure. 

Whatever the deformation of the originally straight boundary 
of the axial section may be, it can be resolved by Fourier's 
theorem into deformations of the harmonic type. These com- 
ponent deformations are in general infinite in number, of very 
wave-length and of arbitrary phase; but in the first stages of 
the motion, with which alone we are at present concerned, 
each produces its effect independently of every other, and may 
be considered by itself. Suppose, therefore, that the equation 
of the boundary is 

r = a-\-a cos kz, (1) 

where a is a small quantity, the axis of z being that of symmetry 



270 



CAPILLARY ACTION 



The wave-length of the disturbance may be called X, and is 
connected with k by the equation fe=2ir/X. The capillary 
tension endeavours to contract the surface of the fluid; so that 
the stability, or instability, of the cylindrical form of equilibrium 
depends upon whether the surface (enclosing a given volume) 
be greater or less respectively after the displacement than before. 
It has been proved by Plateau (vide supra) that the surface is 
greater than before displacement if ka>i, that is, if X<2ira; 
but less if ka<i, or X>27ra. Accordingly, the equilibrium is 
stable if X be less than the circumference; but unstable if X be 
greater than the circumference of the cylinder. Disturbances 
of the former kind lead to vibrations of harmonic type, whose 
amplitudes always remain small; but disturbances, whose 
wave-length exceeds the circumference, result in a greater and 
greater departure from the cylindrical figure. The analytical 
expression for the motion in the latter case involves exponential 
terms, one of which (except in case of a particular relation be- 
tween the initial displacements and velocities) increases rapidly, 
being equally multiplied in equal times. The coefficient (q) of 
the time in the exponential term (e"') may be considered to 
measure the degree of dynamical instability; its reciprocal 
i/q is the time in which the disturbance is multiplied in the 
ratio 1: e. 

The degree of instability, as measured by q, is not to be deter- 
mined from statical considerations only; otherwise there would 
be no limit to the increasing efficiency of the longer wave- 
lengths. The joint operation of superficial tension and inertia 
in fixing the wave-length of maximum instability was first con- 
sidered by Lord Rayleigh in a paper (Math. Soc. Proc, November 
1878) on the " Instability of Jets." It appears that the value 
of q may be expressed in the form 

!=vg).FN (2) 

where, as before, T is the superficial tension, p the density, and 
F is given by the following table: — 



Va\ 


F(ka). 


VaK 


F(ka). 


•05 


•1536 


•4 


•3382 


•1 


•2108 


•5 


•3432 


•2 


•2794 


•6 


•3344 


•3 


•3182 


•8 


•2701 






•9 


■2015 



The greatest value of F thus corresponds, not to a zero value 
of Wa 2 , but approximately to kV =-4858, or to X = 4- 508X20. 
Hence the maximum instability occurs when the • wave-length 
of disturbance is about half as great again as that at which 
instability first commences. 

Taking for water, in C.G.S. units, T=8i, p= 1, we get for the 
case of maximum instability 



J 



- = -ii5<F 



r| 



(3), 



3 ~8iX-343' 

if d be the diameter of the cylinder. Thus, if d=\, q~ 1 = -115; 
or for a diameter of one centimetre the disturbance is multiplied 
2- 7 times in about one-ninth of a second. If the disturbance 
be multiplied 1000 fold in time, t, ^=3log<. 10=6-9, so that 
t—'-jgd^. For example, if the diameter be one millimetre, the 
disturbance is multiplied 1000 fold in about one-fortieth of a 
second. In view of these estimates the rapid disintegration of 
a fine jet of water will not cause surprise. 

The relative importance of two harmonic disturbances de- 
pends upon their initial magnitudes, and upon the rate at which 
they grow. When the initial values are very small, the latter 
consideration is much the more important; for, if the disturb- 
ances be represented by a.\ei^, aieiJ, in which <fr exceeds ? 2 , 
their ratio is (a 2 /ai)e _ ^' _ 9^ ( ; and this ratio decreases without 
limit with the time, whatever be the initial (finite) ratio <x 2 : ai. 
If the initial disturbances are small enough, that one is ultimately 
preponderant for which the measure of instability is greatest. 
The smaller the causes by which the original equilibrium is 
upset, the more will the cylindrical mass tend to divide itself 
regularly into portions whose length is equal to 4-5 times the 
diameter. But a disturbance of less favourable wave-length 



may gain the preponderance in case its magnitude be sufficiert 
to produce disintegration in a less time than that required by 
the other disturbances present. 

The application of these results to actual jets presents no great 
difficulty. The disturbances by which equilibrium is upset are 
impressed upon the fluid as it leaves the aperture, and the con- 
tinuous portion of the jet represents the distance travelled during 
the time necessary to produce disintegration. Thus the length 
of the continuous portion necessarily depends upon the character 
of the disturbances in respect of amplitude and wave-length. 
It may be increased considerably, as F. Savart showed, by a suit- 
able isolation of the reservoir from tremors, whether due U.. 
external sources or to the impact of the jet itself in the vessel 
placed to receive it. Nevertheless it does not appear to be 
possible to carry the prolongation very far. Whether the 
residuary disturbances are of external origin, or are due to 
friction, or to some peculiarity of the fluid motion within the 
reservoir, has not been satisfactorily determined. On this point 
Plateau's explanations are not very clear, and he sometimes 
expresses himself as if the time of disintegration depended only 
upon the capillary tension, without reference to initial disturb- 
ances at all. 

Two laws were, formulated by Savart with respect to the 
length of the continuous portion of a jet, and have been to a 
certain extent explained by Plateau. For a given fluid and a 
given orifice the length is approximately proportional to the 
square root of the head. This follows at once from theory, if it 
can be assumed that the disturbances remain always of the same 
character, so that the time of disintegration is constant. When 
the head is given, Savart found the length to be proportional 
to the diameter of the orifice. From (3) it appears that the time 
in which a disturbance is multiplied in a given ratio varies, not 
as d, but as d%. Again, when the fluid is changed, the time 
varies as p'T - *. But it may be doubted whether the length 
of the continuous portion obeys any very simple laws, even when 
external disturbances are avoided as far as possible. 

When the circumstances of the experiment are such that the 
reservoir is influenced by the shocks due to the impact of the jet, 
the disintegration usually establishes itself with complete regu- 
larity, and is attended by a musical note (Savart) . The impact 
of the regular series of drops which is at any moment striking 
the sink (or vessel receiving the water), determines the rupture 
into similar drops of the portion of the jet at the same moment 
passing the orifice. The pitch of the note, though not absolutely 
definite, cannot differ much from that which corresponds to the 
division of the jet into wave-lengths of maximum instability; 
and, in fact, Savart found that the frequency was directly as 
the square root of the head, inversely as the diameter of the 
orifice, and independent of the nature of the fluid — laws which 
follow immediately from Plateau's theory. 

From the pitch of the note due tp a jet of given diameter, 
and issuing under a given head, the wave-length of the nascent 
divisions can be at once deduced. Reasoning from some ob- 
servations of Savart, Plateau finds in this way 4-38 as the 
ratio of the length of a division to the diameter of the jet. The 
diameter of the orifice was 3 millims., from which that of the 
jet is deduced by the introduction of the coefficient -8. Now 
that the length of a division has been estimated a priori, it is 
perhaps preferable to reverse Plateau's calculation, and to 
exhibit the frequency of vibration in terms of the other data of 
the problem. Thus 

, V (2M , . 

frequency =^^ (4) 

But the most certain method of obtaining complete regularity 
of resolution is to bring the reservoir under the influence of an 
external vibrator, whose pitch is approximately the same as 
that proper to the jet. H. G. Magnus (Pogg. Ann. cvi., 1859) 
employed a Neef's hammer, attached to the wooden frame 
which supported the reservoir. Perhaps an electrically main- 
tained tuning-fork is still better. Magnus showed that the most 
important part of the effect is due to the forced vibration of that 
side of the vessel which contains the orifice, and that but little, 



CAPILLARY ACTION 



271 



of it is propagated through the air. With respect to the limits 
of pitch, Savart found that the note might be a fifth above, 
and more than an octave below, that proper to the jet. Accord- 
ing to theory, there would be no well-defined lower limit; on 
the other side, the external vibration cannot be efficient if it 
tends to produce divisions whose length is less than the circum- 
ference of the jet. This would give for the interval defining 
the upper limit ir: 4-508, which is very nearly a fifth. In the 
case of Plateau's numbers (ir: 4-38) the discrepancy is a little 
greater. 

The detached masses into which a jet is resolved do not at 
once assume and retain a spherical form, but execute a series 
of vibrations, being alternately compressed and elongated in 
the direction of the axis of symmetry. When the resolution 
is effected in a perfectly periodic manner, each drop is in the 
same phase of its vibration as it passes through a given point 
of space; and thence arises the remarkable appearance of alter- 
nate swellings and contractions described by Savart. The 
interval from one swelling to the next is the space described by 
the drop during one complete vibration,and is therefore (as Plateau 
shows) proportional ceteris paribus to the square root of the head. 

The time of vibration is of course itself a function of the nature 
of the fluid and of the size of the drop. By the method of dimen- 
sions alone it may be seen that the time of infinitely small 
vibrations varies directly as the square root of the mass of the 
sphere and inversely as the square root of the capillary tension; 
and it may be proved that its expression is 



'-'(»#). 



(5) 



V being the volume of the vibrating mass. 

In consequence of the rapidity of the motion some optical 
device is necessary to render apparent the phenomena attending 
the disintegration of a jet. Magnus employed a rotating mirror, 
and also a rotating disk from which a fine slit was cut out. The 
readiest method of obtaining instantaneous illumination is the 
electric spark, but with this Magnus was not successful. The 
electric spark had, however, been used successfully for this 
purpose some years before by H. Buff (Liebigs Ann. lxxviii. 
1851), who observed the shadow of the jet on a white screen. 
Preferable to an opaque screen is a piece of ground glass, 
which allows the shadow to be examined from the farther side 
(Lord Rayleigh). Further, the jet may be very well observed 
directly, if the illumination is properly managed. For this 
purpose it is necessary to place it between the source of light 
and the eye. The best effect is obtained when the light of the 
spark is somewhat diffused by being passed (for example) through 
a piece of ground glass. 

The spark may be obtained from the secondary of an induction 
coil, whose terminals are in connexion with the coatings of a 
Leyden jar. By adjustment of the contact breaker the series 
of sparks may be made to fit more or less perfectly with the forma- 
tion of the drops. A still greater improvement may be effected 
by using an electrically maintained fork, which performs the 
double office of controlling the resolution of the jet and of 
interrupting the primary current of the induction coil. In this 
form the experiment is one of remarkable beauty. The jet, 
illuminated only in one phase of transformation, appears almost 
perfectly steady, and may be examined at leisure. In one 
experiment the jet issued horizontally from an orifice of about 
half a centimetre in diameter, and almost immediately assumed 
a rippled outline. The gradually increasing amplitude of the 
disturbance, the formation of the elongated ligament, and the 
subsequent transformation of the ligament into a spherule, 
could be examined with ease. In consequence of the trans- 
formation being in a more advanced stage at the forward than 
at the hinder end, the ligament remains for a moment connected 
with the mass behind, when it has freed itself from the mass in 
front, and thus the resulting spherule acquires a backwards 
relative velocity, which of necessity leads to a collision. Under 
ordinary circumstances the spherule rebounds, and may be thus 
reflected backwards and forwards several times between the 
adjacent masses. Magnus showed that the stream of spherules 



may be diverted into another path by the attraction of a 
powerfully electrified rod, held a little below the place of 
resolution. 

Very interesting modifications of these phenomena are observed 
when a jet from an orifice in a thin plate (Tyndall has shown 
that a pinhole gas burner may also be used with advantage) 
is directed obliquely upwards. In this case drops which break 
away with different velocities are carried under the action of 
gravity into different paths; and thus under ordinary circum- 
stances a jet is apparently resolved into a " sheaf," or bundle 
of jets all lying in one vertical plane. Under the action of a 
vibrator of suitable periodic time the resolution is regularized, 
and then each drop, breaking away under like conditions, is 
projected with the same velocity, and therefore follows the 
same path. The apparent gathering together of the sheaf into 
a fine and well-defined stream is an effect of singular beauty. 

In certain cases where the tremor to which the jet is subjected 
is compound, the single path is replaced by two, three or even 
more paths, which the drops follow in a regular cycle. The 
explanation has been given with remarkable insight by Plateau. 
If, for example, besides the principal disturbance,which determines 
the size of the drops, there be another of twice the period, it 
is clear that the alternate drops break away under different 
conditions and therefore with different velocities. Complete 
periodicity is only attained after the passage of a pair of drops ; 
and thus the odd series of drops pursues one path, and the even 
series another. 

Electricity, as has long been known, has an extraordinary 
influence upon the appearance of a fine jet of water ascending 
in a nearly perpendicular direction. In its normal state the jet 
resolves itself into drops, which even before passing the summit, 
and still more after passing it, are scattered through a consider- 
able width. When a feebly electrified body (such as a stick of 
sealing-wax gently rubbed upon the coat sleeve) is brought into 
its neighbourhood, the jet undergoes a remarkable transforma- 
tion and appears to become coherent; but under more powerful 
electrical action the scattering becomes even greater than at first. 
The second effect is readily attributed to the mutual repulsion 
of the electrified drops, but the action of feeble electricity in 
producing apparent coherence was long unexplained. 

It was shown by W. von Beetz that the coherence is apparent 
only, and that the place where the jet breaks into drops is not 
perceptibly shifted by the electricity. By screening the various 
parts with metallic plates in connexion with earth, Beetz further 
proved that, contrary to the opinion of earlier observers, the 
seat of sensitiveness is not at the root of the jet where it leaves 
the orifice, but at the place of resolution into drops. An easy 
way of testing this conclusion is to excite the extreme tip of a 
glass rod, which is then held in succession to the root of the jet, 
and to the place of resolution. An effect is observed in the 
latter, and not in the former position. 

The normal scattering of a nearly vertical jet is due to the 
rebound of the drops when they come into collision with one 
another. Such collisions are inevitable in consequence of the 
different velocities acquired by the drops under the action of the 
capillary force, as they break away irregularly from the. con- 
tinuous portion of the jet. Even when the resolution "is regular- 
ized by the action of external vibrations of suitable frequency, 
as in the beautiful experiments of Savart and Plateau, the drops 
must still come into contact before they reach the summit of 
their parabolic path. In the case of a continuous jet, the 
equation of continuity shows that as the jet loses velocity 
in ascending, it must increase in section. When the stream 
consists of drops following one another in single file, no such 
increase of section is possible; and then the constancy of the 
total stream requires a gradual approximation of the drops, 
which in the case of a nearly vertical direction of motion cannot 
stop short of actual contact. Regular vibration has, however, the 
effect of postponing the collisions and consequent scattering of 
the drops, and in the case of a direction of motion less nearly 
vertical, may prevent them altogether. 

Under moderate electrical influence there is no material 



2J2 



CAPILLARY ACTION 



change in the resolution into drops, nor in the subsequent 
motion of the drops up to the moment of collision. The differ- 
ence begins here. Instead of rebounding after collision, as the 
unelectrified drops of clean water generally, or always, do, the 
electrified drops coalesce, and then the jet is no longer scattered 
about. When the electrical influence is more powerful, the repul- 
sion between the drops is sufficient to prevent actual contact, 
and then, of course, there is no opportunity for amalgamation. 

These experiments may be repeated with extreme ease, and 
with hardly any apparatus. The diameter of the jet may be 
about -jV m -> an< i it mav issue from a glass nozzle. The pressure 
may be such as to give a fountain about 2 ft. high. The change 
in the sound due to the falling drops as they strike the bottom 
of the sink should be noticed, as well as that in the appearance of 
the jet. 

The actual behaviour of the colliding drops becomes apparent 
under instantaneous illumination, e.g. by sparks from a Leyden 
jar. The jet should be situated between the sparks and the eye, 
and the observation is facilitated by a piece of ground glass held 
a little beyond the jet, so as to diffuse the light; or the shadow 
of the jet may be received on the ground glass, which is then held 
as close as possible on the side towards the observer. 

In another form of the experiment, which, though perhaps less 
striking to the eye, lends itself better to investigation, the collision 
takes place between two still unresolved jets issuing horizontally 
from glass nozzles in communication with reservoirs containing 
water. One at least of the reservoirs must be insulated. In 
the absence of dust and greasy contamination, the obliquely 
colliding jets may rebound from one another without coalescence 
for a considerable time. In this condition there is complete 
electrical insulation between the jets, as may be proved by the 
inclusion in the circuit of a delicate galvanometer, and a low 
electro-motive force. But if the difference of potential exceed 
a small amount (1 or 2 volts), the jets instantaneously coalesce. 
There is no reason to doubt that in the case of the fountain also, 
coalescence is due to differences of potential between colliding 
drops. 

If the water be soapy, and especially if it contain a small 
proportion of milk, coalescence ensues without the help of elec- 
tricity. In the case of the fountain the experiment may be made 
by leading tap-water through a Woulfe's bottle in which a little 
milk has been placed. As the milk is cleared out, the scattering 
of the drops is gradually re-established. 

In attempting to explain these curious phenomena, it is well 
to consider what occurs during a collision. As the liquid masses 
approach one another, the intervening air has to be squeezed 
out. In the earlier stages of approximation the obstacle thus 
arising may not be important; but when the thickness of the 
layer of air is reduced to the point at which the colours of thin 
plates are visible, the approximation must be sensibly resisted 
by the viscosity of the air which still remains to be got rid of. 
No change in the capillary conditions can arise until the interval 
is reduced to a small fraction of a wave-length of light; but 
such a reduction, unless extremely local, is strongly opposed by 
the remaining air. It is true that this opposition is temporary. 
The question is whether the air can everywhere be squeezed out 
during the short time over which the collision extends. 

It would seem that the forces of electrical attraction act with 
peculiar advantage. If we suppose that upon the whole the 
air cannot be removed, so that the mean distance between 
the opposed surfaces remains constant, the electric attractions 
tend to produce an instability whereby the smaller intervals 
are diminished while the larger are increased. Extremely local 
contacts of the liquids, while opposed by capillary tension which 
tends to keep the surfaces flat, are thus favoured by the elec- 
trical forces, which moreover at the small distances in question 
act with exaggerated power. 

A question arises as to the mode of action of milk or soap 
turbidity. The observation that it is possible for soap to be 
in excess may here have significance. It would seem that the 
surfaces, coming into collision within a fraction of a second of their 
Wrth, would still be subject to further contamination from the 



interior. A particle of soap rising accidentally to the surface 
would spread itself with rapidity. Now such an outward move- 
ment of the liquid is just what is required to hasten the removal 
of intervening air. It is obvious that the effect would fail if 
the contamination of the surface had proceeded too far previously 
to the collision. 

This view is confirmed by experiments in which other gases are 
substituted for air as the environment of colliding jets. Oxygen 
and coal-gas were found to be without effect. On the other hand, 
the more soluble gases, carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide, sulphur 
dioxide, and steam, at once caused union.] 

Stability of the Catenoid. — When the internal pressure is equal 
to the external, the film forms a surface of which the mean 
curvature at every point is zero. The only surface of revolution 
having this property is the catenoid formed by the revolution of a 
catenary about its directrix. This catenoid, however, is in stable 
equilibrium only when the portion considered is such that the 
tangents to the catenary at its extremities intersect before they 
reach the directrix. 

To prove this, let us consider the catenary as the form of 
equilibrium of a chain suspended between two fixed points A and 
B. Suppose the chain hanging between A and B to be of very 
great length, then the tension at A or B will be very great. Let 
the chain be hauled in over a peg at A. At first the tension will 
diminish, but if the process be continued the tension will reach a 
minimum value and will afterwards increase to infinity as the 
chain between A and B approaches to the form of a straight line. 
Hence for every tension greater than the minimum tension there 
are two catenaries passing through A and B. Since the tension is 
measured by the height above the directrix these two catenaries 
have the same directrix. Every catenary lying between them 
has its directrix higher, and every catenary lying beyond them 
has its directrix lower than that of the two catenaries. 

Now let us consider the surfaces of revolution formed by this 
system of catenaries revolving about the directrix of the two 
catenaries of equal tension. We know that the radius of curva- 
ture of a surface of revolution in the plane normal to the meridian 
plane is the portion of the normal intercepted by the axis of 
revolution. 

The radius of curvature of a catenary is equal and opposite to 
the portion of the normal intercepted by the directrix of the 
catenary. Hence a catenoid whose directrix coincides with the 
axis of revolution has at every point its principal radii of curva- 
ture equal and opposite, so that the mean curvature of the 
surface is zero. 

The catenaries which lie between the two whose direction 
coincides with the axis of revolution generate surfaces whose 
radius of curvature convex towards the axis in the meridian 
plane is less than the radius of concave curvature. The mean 
curvature of these surfaces is therefore convex towards the axis. 
The catenaries which lie beyond the two generate surfaces whose 
radius of curvature convex towards the axis in the meridian plane 
is greater than the radius of concave curvature. The mean cur- 
vature of these surfaces is, therefore, concave towards the axis. 

Now if the pressure is equal on both sides of a liquid film, and if 
its mean curvature is zero, it will be in equilibrium. This is the 
case with the two catenoids. If the mean curvature is convex 
towards the axis the film will move from the axis. Hence if a 
film in the form of the catenoid which is nearest the axis is ever 
so slightly displaced from the axis it will move farther from the 
axis till it reaches the other catenoid. 

If the mean curvature is concave towards the axis the film will 
tend to approach the axis. Hence if a film in the form of the 
catenoid which is nearest the axis be displaced towards the axis, 
it will tend to move farther towards the axis and will collapse. 
Hence the film in the form of the catenoid which is nearest the 
axis is in unstable equilibrium under the condition that it is 
exposed to equal pressures within and without. If, however, 
the circular ends of the catenoid are closed with solid disks, so 
that the volume of air contained between these disks and the 
film is determinate, the film will be in stable equilibrium however 
large a portion of the catenary it may consist of. 



CAPILLARY ACTION 



273 




Fig. 14. 



The criterion as to whether any given catenoid is stable or not 
may be obtained as follows: — 

Let PABQ and ApqB (fig. 14) be two catenaries having the 
same directrix and intersecting in A and B. Draw Pp and Qq 
touching both catenaries, Pp and Qq will intersect at T, a point in 
the directrix; for since any catenary with its directrix is a 
similar figure to any other catenary with its directrix, if the 
directrix of the one coincides with that of the other the centre of 

, similitude must lie on the 

■'/ common directrix. Also, 

since the curves at P and 
p are equally inclined to 
the directrix, P and p are 
corresponding points and 
the line P p must pass 
through the centre of 
similitude. Similarly Qq 
must pass through the 
centre of similitude. 
Hence T, the point of 
intersection of Pp and 
Qq, must be the centre 
of similitude and must be on the common directrix. Hence 
the tangents at A and B to the upper catenary must intersect 
above the directrix, and the tangents at A and B to the lower 
catenary must intersect below the directrix. The condition 
of stability of a catenoid is therefore that the tangents at the 
extremities of its generating catenary must intersect before they 
reach the directrix. 

Stability of a Plane Surface. — We shall next consider the limit- 
ing conditions of stability of the horizontal surface which 
separates a heavier fluid above from a lighter fluid below. Thus, 
in an experiment of F. Duprez (" Sur un cas particulier de l'equi- 
libre des liquides," Nouveaux Mem. del' Acad, de Belgique, 1851 et 
1853) , a vessel containing olive oil is placed with its mouth down- 
wards in a vessel containing a mixture of alcohol and water, the 
mixture being denser than the oil. The surface of separation is in 
this case horizontal and stable, so that the equilibrium is estab- 
lished of itself. Alcohol is then added very gradually to the 
mixture till it becomes lighter than the oil. The equilibrium of 
the fluids would now be unstable if it were not for the tension of 
the surface which separates them, and which, when the orifice of 
the vessel is not too large, continues to preserve the stability of 
the equilibrium. 

When the equilibrium at last becomes unstable, the destruc- 
tion of equilibrium takes place by the lighter fluid ascending in 
one part of the orifice and the heavier descending in the other. 
Hence the displacement of the surface to which we must direct 
our attention is one which does not alter the volume of the liquid 
in the vessel, and which therefore is upward in one part of the 
surface and downward in another. The simplest case is that of a 
rectangular orifice in a horizontal plane, the sides being a and b. 
Let the surface of separation be originally in the plane of the 
orifice, and let the co-ordinates x and y be measured from one corner 
parallel to the sides a and b respectively, and let 2 be measured 
upwards. Then if p be the density of the upper liquid, and a that of 
the lower liquid, and P the original pressure at the surface of separa- 
tion, then when the surface receives an upward displacement 2, the 
pressure above it will be P — pgz, and that below it will be P — crgz, 
so that the surface will be acted on by an upward pressure (p — o-) g2. 
Now if the displacement z be everywhere very small, the curvature in 
the planes parallel to xz and yz will be d 2 z/dx 2 and d 2 z/dy 2 respectively, 
and if T is the surface-tension the whole upward force wilt be 

T (3? +3?) +(p -*>**■' 

If this quantity is of the same sign as 2, the displacement will be 
increased, and the equilibrium will be unstable. If it is of the 
opposite sign from 2, the equilibrium will be stable. The limiting 
condition may be found by putting it equal to zero. One form of 
the solution of the equation, and that which is applicable to the 
case of a rectangular orifice, is 

2 = C sin px sin qy. 
Substituting in the equation we find the condition 

I +«• stable. 
(£ 2 +2 2 )T-(p-<r)g= lo neutral. 
( — «« unstable. 



That the surface may coincide with the edge of the orifice, which 
is a rectangle, whose sides are a and b, we must have 

pa = m-K , qb = nir, 
when m and n are integral numbers. Also, if m and n are both 
unity, the displacement will be entirely positive, and the volume of 
the liquid will not be constant. That the volume may be constant, 
either norm must be an even number. We have, tnerefore, to 
consider the conditions under which 



(7ft 2 tl 2 \ 
aT+F 2 ) T -(p-°)g 



cannot be made negative. Under these conditions the equilibrium 
is stable for all small displacements of the surface. The smallest 



admissible value of ■ 



^b 2 1S a 2 ^b 2 ' 



where a is the longer side of 
the rectangle. Hence the condition of stability is that 

»*(&+$ T-(p-<0* 

V ( p 



is a positive quantity. When the breadth b is less than 



ttT 



")g 



the length a may be unlimited. 

When_the orifice is circular of radius a, the limiting value of 

/T 
a is A|— 2, where 2 is the least root of the equation 



5 Ji(z) = i- R + ?7 ; 



3 +&c.,=o. 



6 2-4 2 -6 2 -8 
The least root of this equation is 

2 = 3-83171. 
If h is the height to which the liquid will rise in a capillary tube of 
unit radius, then the diameter of the largest orifice is 

2a=3-8 3 i7VTiI)=5-4l88VW- 
Duprez found from his experiments 

2o = 5-485VW. 

[The above theory may be well illustrated by a lecture ex- 
periment. A thin-walled glass tube of internal diameter equal 
to 145 mm. is ground true at the lower end. The upper end 
is contracted and is fitted with a rubber tube under the control 
of a pinch-cock. Water is sucked up from a vessel of moderate 
size, the rubber is nipped, and by a quick motion the tube 
and vessel are separated, preferably by a downward movement 
of the latter. The inverted tube, with its suspended water, 
being held in a clamp, a beaker containing a few drops of ether 
is brought up from below until the free surface of the water is 
in contact with ether vapour. The lowering of tension, which 
follows the condensation of the vapour, is then strikingly shown 
by the sudden precipitation of the water.] 

Effect of Surface-tension on the Velocity of Waves. — When a 
series of waves is propagated on the surface of a liquid, the sur- 
face-tension has the effect of increasing the pressure at the 
crests of the waves and diminishing it in the troughs, 
wave-length is X, the equation of the surface is 

, . x 
y = 6 sin 27rr- 

The pressure due to the surface tension T is 



If the 



_ T rf 2 ^_4£ 2 
i dx> \ 2 



Ty. 



This pressure must be added to the pressure due to gravity 
gpy. Hence the waves will be propagated as if the intensity 
of gravity had been 

f'i + ^-p 

instead of g. Now it is shown in hydrodynamics that the 
velocity of propagation of waves in deep water is that acquired 
by a heavy body falling through half the radius of the circle 
whose circumference is the wave-length, or 

" 27T 27T + pX (l) 

This velocity is a minimum when _ 

and the minimum value is 

For waves whose length from crest to crest is greater than X, 
the principal force concerned in the motion is that of gravitation. 



274 



CAPILLARY ACTION 



For waves whose length is less than X the principal force 
concerned is that of surface-tension. Lord Kelvin proposed to 
distinguish the latter kind of waves by the name of ripples. 

When a small body is partly immersed in a liquid originally 
at rest, and moves horizontally with constant velocity V, waves 
are propagated through the liquid with ' various velocities 
according to their respective wave-lengths. In front of the 
body the relative velocity of the fluid and the body varies from 
V where the fluid is at rest, to zero at the cutwater on the 
front surface of the body. The waves produced by the body 
will travel forwards faster than the body till they reach a distance 
from it at which the relative velocity of the body and the fluid 
is equal to the velocity of propagation corresponding to the 
wave-length. The waves then travel along with the body at 
a constant distance in front of it. Hence at a certain distance 
in front of the body there is a series of waves which are stationary 
with respect to the body. Of these, the waves of minimum velo- 
city form a stationary wave nearest to the front of the body. 
Between the body and this first wave the surface is comparatively 
smooth. Then comes the stationary wave of minimum velocity, 
which is the most marked of the series. In front of this is a 
double series of stationary waves, the gravitation waves forming 
a series increasing in wave-length with their distance in front 
of the body, and the surface-tension waves or ripples diminishing 
in wave-length with their distance from the body, and both sets 
of waves rapidly diminishing in amplitude with their distance 
from the body. 

If the current-function of the water referred to the body 
considered as origin is \f/, then the equation of the form of the 
crest of a wave of velocity w, the crest of which travels along 
with the body, is 

d<p — w ds 

where ds is an element of the length of the crest. To integrate 
this equation for a solid of given form is probably difficult, 
but it is easy to see that at some distance on either side of the 
body, where the liquid is sensibly at rest, the crest of the wave 
will approximate to an asymptote inclined to the path of the 
body at an angle whose sine is w/V, where w is the velocity of 
the wave and V is that of the body. 

The crests of the different kinds of waves will therefore appear 
to diverge as they get farther from the body, and the waves 
themselves will be less and less perceptible. But those whose 
wave-length is near to that of the wave of minimum velocity 
will diverge less than any of the others, so that the most marked 
feature at a distance from the body will be the two long lines 
of ripples of minimum velocity. If the angle between these 
is 20, the velocity of the body is w sec 6, where w for water is 
about 23 centimetres per second. 

[Lord Kelvin's formula (1) may be applied to find the surface- 
tension of a clean or contaminated liquid from observations 
upon the length of waves of known periodic time, travelling 
over the surface. If v—\/t we have 

T =^icoth^:i^ (2) 

2irr ! X 4.T 2 v ' 

h denoting the depth of the liquid. In observations upon ripples 
the factor involving h may usually be omitted, and thus in the 
case of water (p=i) 



T=- 



(3) 



X s gX2 
2XT 2 4W 2 

simply. The method has the advantage of independence of 
what may occur at places where the liquid is in contact with 
solid bodies. 

The waves may be generated by electrically maintained 
tuning-forks from which dippers touch the surface; but special 
arrangements are needed for rendering them visible. The 
obstacles are (1) the smallness of the waves, and (2) the changes 
which occur at speeds too rapid for the eye to follow. The second 
obstacle is surmounted by the aid of the stroboscopic method 
of observation, the light being intermittent in the period of 
vibration, so that practically only one phase is seen. In order 
to render visible the small waves employed, and which we may 
regard as deviations of a plane surface from its true figure, the 



method by which Foucault tested reflectors is suitable. The 

following results have been obtained 

Clean „ 74 . 

Greasy to the point where camphor motions nearly cease . 53-0 

Saturated with olive oil ^j.q 

Saturated with sodium oleate 25-0 

(Phil. Mag. November 1890) for the tensions of various water- 
surfaces at 18 C, reckoned in C. G. S. measure. 

The tension for clean water thus found is considerably lower 
than that (81) adopted by Quincke, but it seems to be entitled 
to confidence, and at any rate the deficiency is not due to con- 
tamination of the surface. 

A calculation analogous to that of Lord Kelvin may be applied 
to find the frequency of small transverse vibrations of a cylinder 
of liquid under the action of the capillary force. Taking the case 
where the motion is strictly in two dimensions, we may write 
as the polar equation of the surface at time t 

r = a+an cosndcospt, ...... (4) 

where p is given by 

^ = („3_„ } J. (5) 

If n = 1 , the section remains circular, there is no force of restitu- 
tion, and p — o. The principal vibration, in which the section 
becomes elliptical, corresponds to n—2. 

Vibrations of this kind are observed whenever liquid issues 
from an elliptical or other non-circular hole, or even when it is 
poured from the lip of an ordinary jug; and they are super- 
posed upon the general progressive motion. Since the phase 
of vibration depends upon the time elapsed, it is always the same 
at the same point in space, and thus the motion is steady in the 
hydrodynamical sense, and the boundary of the jet is ; a fixed 
surface. In so far as the vibrations may be regarded as iso- 
chronous, the distance between consecutive corresponding 
points of the recurrent figure, or, as it may be called, the -wave- 
length of the figure, is directly proportional to the velocity of 
the jet, i.e. to the square root of the head. But as the head in- 
creases, so do the lateral velocities which go to form the transverse 
vibrations. A departure from the law of isochronism may then 
be expected to develop itself. 

The transverse vibrations of non-circular jets allow us to solve 
a problem which at first sight would appear to be of great 
difficulty. According to Marangoni the diminished surface- 
tension of soapy water is due to the formation of a film. The 
formation cannot be instantaneous, and if we could measure 
the tension of a surface not more than x^tt of a second old, we 
might expect to find it undisturbed, or nearly so, from that 
proper to pure water. In order to carry out the experiment 
the jet is caused to issue from an elliptical orifice in a thin plate, 
about 2 mm. by 1 mm., under a head of 15 cm. A comparison 
under similar circumstances shows that there is hardly any 
difference in the wave-lengths of the patterns obtained with 
pure and with soapy water, from which we conclude that at this 
initial stage, the surface-tensions are the same. As early as 
1869 Dupre had arrived at a similar conclusion from experi- 
ments upon the vertical rise of fine jets. 

A formula, similar to (5), may be given for the frequencies 
of vibration of a spherical mass of liquid under capillary force. 
If, as before, the frequency be PI2YI, and a the radius of the 
sphere, we have 

$•=»(*- 1) (n+2)^ (6) 

n denoting the order of the spherical harmonic by which the 
deviation from a spherical figure is expressed. To find the 
fadius of the sphere of water which vibrates seconds, put 
P—2U., T=8i, p=i, «=2. Thus 12=2.54 cms., or one inch 
very nearly.] 

Tables of Surface-Tension 
In the following tables the units of length, mass and time are 
the centimetre, the gramme and the second, and the unit of 
force is that which if it acted on one gramme for one second 
would communicate to it a velocity of one centimetre per 
second: — 



CAPISTRANO— CAPITAL 



275 







Table of Surface-Tension at 20 


C. (Quincke). 






Liquid. 


Specific 
Gravity. 


Tension of surface 
separating the liquid from 


Angle of contact with 
glass in presence of 


Air. 


Water. 


Mercury. 


Air. 


Water. 


Mercury. 


Water .... 
Mercury .... 
Bisulphide of Carbon 
Chloroform ., 
Alcohol .... 
Olive Oil ... . 
Turpentine 

Hydrochloric Acid . 
Solution of Hyposul- 
phite of Soda . . . 


i 


1 
13-5432 
1-2687 
1-4878 
0-7906 
0-9136 
0-8867 
0-7977 
i-i 

1-1248 


81 
540 
32-1 
30-6 
25-5 
36-9 
29-7 
31-7 
70-1 

77-5 


418 
41-75 
29-5 

20-56 

n-55 
27-8 


418 

372-5 

399 

399 

335 

250-5 

284 

377 
442-5 


25° 32' 
51° 8' 
32° 16' 

25°'l2' 
21° 50' 

37 : 44' 

36° 20' 
23° 20' 


26°8' 

13° 8' 

17°' 
37 44' 
42° 46' 


26° 8' 

47° 2' 
10° 42' 



Olive Oil and Alcohol, 12-2. 
Olive oil and aqueous alcohol (sp. g. 
25-5). 6-8, angle 87° 48'. 



9231, tension of free surface 



Quincke has determined the surface-tension of a great many 
substances near their point of fusion or solidification. His 
method was that of observing the form of a large drop standing 
on a plane surface. If K is the height of the flat surface 
of the drop, and k that of the point where its tangent plane is 
vertical, then 

T = i(K-£)V- 

Quincke finds that for several series of substances the surface- 
tension is nearly proportional to the density, so that if we call 

Surface-Tensions of Liquids at their Point of Solidification. 
From Quincke. 



Substance. 



Platinum .... 

Gold 

Zinc 

Tin 

Mercury .... 

Lead 

Silver 

Bismuth 

Potassium .... 
Sodium .... 
Antimony .... 

Borax 

Carbonate of Soda 
Chloride of Sodium 
Water . . . . . 
Selenium .... 

Sulphur 

Phosphorus . . . 
Wax 



Temperature of 


Surf ace- 


Solidification. 


Tension 


2000 ° C. 


1658 


1200° 


983 


36o° 


860 


230° 


587 


-40° 


577 


330° 


448 


1000° 


419 


265° 


382 


58° 


364 


90° 


253 


432° 


244 


1000° 


212 


1000° 


206 




114 


o° 


86-2 


21 K 


70-4 


111° 


41-3 


43 


41-1 


68° 


33-4 



(K-ky— iTIgp the specific cohesion, we may state the general 
results of his experiments as follows: — 

The bromides and iodides have a specific cohesion about 
half that of mercury. The nitrates, chlorides, sugars and fats, 
as also the metals lead, bismuth and antimony, have a specific 
cohesion nearly equal to that of mercury. Water, the carbonates 
and sulphates, and probably phosphates, and the metals 
platinum, gold, silver, cadmium, tin and copper have a specific 
cohesion double that of mercury. Zinc, iron and palladium, 
three times that of mercury, and sodium, six times that of 
mercury. 

Relation of Surface-tension to Temperature 

It appears from the experiments of B runner and of Wolf on the 
ascent of water in tubes that at the temperature f centigrade 
T =75-20 (1—0-00187/) (Brunner); 
= 76-08 (1 — o-oo2/-(-o-ooooo4i5i 2 ), for a tube -02346cm. diameter 

(Wolf) ; 
= 77 - 34( I — o-ooi8U), for a tube -03098 cm. diameter (Wolf). 
Lord Kelvin has applied the principles of Thermodynamics 
to determine the thermal effects of increasing or diminishing 
the area of the free surface of a liquid, and has shown that in 
order to keep the temperature constant while the area of the 
surface increases by unity, an amount of heat must be supplied 



to the liquid which is dynamically 
equivalent to the product of the 
absolute temperature into the de- 
crement of the surface-tension per 
degree of temperature. We may 
call this the latent heat of surface- 
extension. 

It appears from the experiments 
of C. Brunner and C. J. E. Wolf 
that at ordinary temperatures the 
latent heat of extension of the 
surface of water is dynamically 
equivalent to about half the 
mechanical work done in producing 
the surface-extension. 
References. — Further information on some of the matters dis- 
cussed above will be found in Lord Rayleigh's Collected Scientific 
Papers (1901). In its full extension the subject of capillarity is 
very wide. Reference may be made to A. W. Reinold and Sir A. W. 
Riicker (Phil. Trans. 1886, p. 627); Sir W. Ramsay and J. Shields 
(Zeitschr. physik. Chem. 1893, 12, p. 433) ; and on the theoretical side, 
see papers by Josiah Willard Gibbs; R. Eotvos (Wied. Ann., 1886, 
27, p. 452) ; J. D. Van der Waals, G. Bakker and other writers of the 
Dutch school. (J. C. M.; R.) 

CAPISTRANO, GIOVANNI DI (1386-1456), Italian friar, 
theologian and inquisitor, was born in the little village of Capis- 
trano in the Abruzzi, of a family which had come to Italy with 
the Angevins. He lived at first a wholly secular life, married, 
and became a successful magistrate; he took part in the con- 
tinual struggles of the small Italian states in such a way as to 
compromise himself. During his captivity he was practically 
ruined and lost his young wife. He then in despair entered the 
Franciscan order and at once gave himself up to the most 
rigorous asceticism, violently defending the ideal of strict 
observance. He was charged with various missions by the popes 
Eugenius IV. and Nicholas V., in which he acquitted himself with 
implacable violence. As legate or inquisitor he persecuted the 
last Fraticelli of Ferrara, the Jesuati of Venice, the Jews of Sicily, 
Moldavia and Poland, and, above all, the Hussites of Germany, 
Hungary and Bohemia; his aim in the last case was to make 
conferences impossible between the representatives of Rome and 
the Bohemians, for every attempt at conciliation seemed to him 
to be conniving at heresy. Finally, after the taking of Con- 
stantinople, he succeeded in gathering troops together for a 
crusade against tne Turks (1455), which at least helped to raise 
the siege of Belgrade, which was being blockaded by Mahommed 
II. He died shortly afterwards (October 23, 1456), and was 
canonized in 1690. Capistrano, in spite of this restless life, 
found time to work both in the lifetime of his master St 
Bernardino of Siena and after, at the reform of the order of the 
minor Franciscans, and to uphold both in his writings and his 
speeches the most advanced theories upon the papal supremacy 
as opposed to that of the councils. 

See E. Jacob, Johannes von Capistrano, vol. i. : " Das Leben und 
Wirken Capistrans; " vol. ii..- "Die handschriftlichen Aufzeich- 
nungen von Reden und Tractaten Capistrans," (1st series, Breslau, 
1903-1905). (P. A.) 

CAPITAL (Lat. caput, head), in architecture, the crowning 
member of the column, which projects on each side as it rises, in 
order to support the abacus and unite the square form of the latter 
with the circular shaft. The bulk of the capital may either be 
convex, as in the Doric capital; concave, as in the bell of the 
Corinthian capital; or bracketed out, as in the Ionic capital. 
These are the three principal types on which all capitals are 
based. The capitals of Greek, Doric, Ionic and Corinthian orders 
are given in the article Order. 

From the prominent position it occupies in all monumental 
buildings, it has always been the favourite feature selected for 
ornamentation, and consequently it has become the clearest 
indicator of any style. 

The two earliest capitals of importance are those which are 
based on the lotus (fig. 1) and papyrus (fig. 2) plants respectively, 
and these, with the palm tree capital, were the chief types em- 
ployed by the Egyptians down to the 3rd century B.C., when, 



2j6 



CAPITAL 



under the Ptolemaic dynasties, various river plants were 
employed decoratively and the lotus capital goes through 




Fig. i. — Lo- 
tus Capital 
from Karnak. 



Fig. 2. — Papyrus Capital from Karnak. 

various modifications (fig. 3). Some kind of volute capital is 
shown in the Assyrian bas-reliefs, but no Assyrian capital has 
ever been found; those exhibited as such in the British Museum 
are bases. 

The Persian capital belongs to the third class above mentioned, 
the brackets are carved with the lion (fig. 4) or the griffin pro- 
jecting right and left to support and lessen the bearing of the 
architrave, and on their backs carry other brackets at right 
angles to support the cross timbers. The profuse decoration 
underneath the bracket capital in the palace of Xerxes and 








Fig. 3. — Modified Lotus 
Capital from Philae. 



Fig. 4. — Persian Capital 
from Persepolis. 



elsewhere, serves no structural function, but gives some variety 
to the extenuated shaft. 

The earliest Greek capital is that shown in the Temple-fresco 
at Cnossus in Crete (1600 B.C.) ; it was of the first type — convex, 
and was probably moulded in stucco: the second is represented 
by the richly carved example of the columns (fig. 5) flanking the 
tomb of Agamemnon in Mycenae (c. 1100 B.C.), also convex, 
carved with the chevron device, and with an apophyge on which 
the buds of some flowers are sculptured. The Doric capital of the 
temple of Apollo at Syracuse (c. 700 B.C.) follows, in which the 



echinus moulding has become a more definite form: this in the 
Parthenon reaches its culmination, where the convexity is at the 
top and bottom with a delicate uniting curve. The sloping side of 




Fig. 5. — Early Greek Capital from the Tomb of Agamemnon, 

Mycenae. 

the echinus becomes flatter in the later examples, and in the 
Colosseum at Rome forms a quarter round. 

In the Ionic capital of the Archaic temple of Diana at Ephesus 
(560 B.C.) the width of the abacus is twice that of its depth, 
consequently the earliest Ionic capital known was virtually a 




Fig. 6. — Corinthian Capital from the Tholos of Epidaurus. 
bracket capital. A century later, in the temple on the Ilissus, 
published in Stuart and Revett, the abacus has become square. 
One of the most beautiful Corinthian capitals is that from the 
Tholos of Epidaurus (400 b.c) (fig. 6) ; it illustrates the transition 
between the earlier 
Greek capital of Bassae 
and the Roman version 
of the temple of Mars 
Ultor (fig. 7). 

The foliage of the 
Greek Corinthian capital 
was based on the Acan- 
thus spinosus, that of 
the Roman on the Acan- 
thus mollis; the capital 
of the temple of Vesta 
and other examples at 
Pompeii are carved with 
foliage of a different 
type. 

Byzantine capitals 
are of endless variety; 




Fig. 7.- 



-Roman Capital from the Temple 
of Mars Ultor, Rome. 



the Roman composite capital would 
seem to have been the favourite type they followed at first; 
subsequently, the block of stone was left rough as it came 
from the quarry, and the sculptor, set to carve it, evolved 



CAPITAL 



277 



new types of design to his own fancy, so that one rarely 

mil 




Fig. 8.— Byzantine Capitals from the central portal of St Mark's, 
Venice. 



meets with many repetitions 




of the same design. One of 
the most remarkable is the 
capital in which the leaves 
are carved as if blown by the 
wind; the finest example 
being in Sta Sophia, Thessa- 
lonica; those in St Mark's, 
Venice (fig. 8) specially 
attracted Ruskin's fancy. 
Others are found in St Apolli- 
nare-in-classe, Ravenna. The 
Thistle and Pine capital is 



Fig. 9. — Byzantine Capital 
from the Church of S. Vitale, 
Ravenna. 





Fig. 11. — Cushion 
Capital. 



Fig. 10. — Byzantine Capital from 
the Church of S. Vitale, Ravenna. 



found in St Mark's, Venice; St Luke's, Delphi; the mosques 
of Kairawan and of Ibn Tulun, Cairo, in the two latter cases 




Fig. 12.- 



-Romanesque Capitals from the Cloister of Monreale, 
near Palermo, Sicily. 



being taken from Byzantine churches. The illustration of the 
capital in S. Vitale, Ravenna (figs. 9 and 10) shows above it the 
dosseret required to carry the arch, the springing of which was 
much wider than the abacus of the capital. 

The Romanesque and Gothic capitals throughout Europe 
present the same variety as in the Byzantine and for the same 





'Fig. 14. 



Fig. 13.— Gothic Capitals from Wells Cathedral. 

reason, that the artist evolved his conception of the design trom 
the block he was carving, but in these styles it goes further on 
account of the clustering of columns and piers. 

The earliest type of capital in Lombardy and Germany is that 
which is known as the, cushion-cap, in which the lower portion 
of the cube block has been cut away to meet the circular shaft 
(fig. 11). These early types were generally painted at first with 
various geometrical designs, afterwards carved. 

In Byzantine capitals, the eagle, the lion and the lamb are 
occasionally carved, but 
treated conventionally. 

In the Romanesque and 
Gothic styles, in addition 
to birds and beasts, figures ' 
are frequently introduced 
into capitals, those in the 
Lombard work being 
rudely carved and verging 
on the grotesque; later, 
the sculpture reaches a 
higher standard; in the 
cloisters of Monreale 
(fig. 12) the birds being 1 
wonderfully true to 
nature. In England and 
France (figs. 13 and 14), the figures introduced into the capitals 
are sometimes full of character. These capitals, however, are 
not equal to those 
oftheEarlyEnglish 
school, in which the 
foliage is conven- 
tionally treated as 
if it had been 
copied from metal 
work, and is of 
infinite variety, 
being found in 
small village 
churches as well as 
in cathedrals. 

Reference has 
only been made 
to the leading 
examples of the 
Roman capitals; 
in the Renaissance 
period (fig. 15) the 
feature became of 
the greatest importance 
in the Byzantine and 



-Gothic Capitals from Amiens 
Cathedral. 




Fig. 15. — Italian Renaissance Capital from 
S. Maria dei Miracoli, Venice. 



and its variety almost as great as 
Gothic styles. The pilaster, which 



278 



CAPITAL 



was employed so extensively in the Revival, called for new 
combinations in the designs for its capitals. Most of the 
ornament can be traced to Roman sources, and although less 
vigorous, shows much more delicacy and refinement in its 
carving. (R. P. S.) 

CAPITAL (i.e. capital stock or fund) , in economics, generally, 
the accumulated wealth either of a man or a community, that 
is available for earning interest and producing fresh wealth. In 
social discussion it is sometimes treated as antithetical to labour, 
but it is in reality the accumulated savings of labour and of the 
profits accruing from the savings of labour. It is that portion 
of the annual produce reserved from consumption to supply 
future wants, to extend the sphere of production, to improve 
industrial instruments and processes, to carry out works of public 
utility, and, in short, to secure and enlarge the various means of 
progress necessary to an increasing community. It is the 
increment of wealth or means of subsistence analogous to the 
increment of population and of the wants of civilized man. 
Hence J. S. Mill and other economists, when seeking a graphic 
expression of the service of capital, have called it " abstinence." 
The labourer serves by giving physical and mental' effort in 
order to supply his means of consumption. The capitalist, or 
labourer-capitalist, serves by abstaining from consumption, by 
denying himself the present enjoyment of more or less of his 
means of consumption, in the prospect of a future profit. This 
quality, apparent enough in the beginnings of capital, applies 
equally to all its forms and stages; because whether a capitalist 
stocks his warehouse with goods and produce, improves land, 
lends on mortgage or other security, builds a factory, opens a 
mine, or orders the construction of machines or ships, there is 
the element of self-deprival for the present, with the risk of 
ultimate loss of what is his own, and what, instead of saving and 
embodying income productive form, he might choose to consume. 
On this ground rests the justification of the claims of capital to 
its industrial rewards, whether in the form of rent, interest or 
profits of trade and investment. 

To any advance in the arts of industry or the comforts of life, 
a rate of production exceeding the rate of consumption, with 
consequent accumulation of resources, or in other words, the 
formation of capital, is indispensable. The primitive cultivators 
of the soil, whether those of ancient times or the pioneers who 
formed settlements in the forests of the New World, soon dis- 
covered that their labour would be rendered more effective by 
implements and auxiliary powers of various kinds, and that until 
the produce from existing means of cultivation exceeded what 
was necessary for their subsistence, there could be neither labour 
on their part to produce such implements and auxiliaries, nor 
means to purchase them. Every branch of industry has thus 
had a demand for capital within its own circles from the earliest' 
times. The flint arrow-heads, the stone and bronze utensils of 
fossiliferous origin, and the rude implements of agriculture, war 
and navigation, of which we read in Homer, were the forerunners 
of that rich and wonderful display of tools, machines, engines, 
furnaces and countless ingenious and costly appliances, which 
represent so large a portion of the capital of civilized countries, 
and without the pre-existing capital could not have been 
developed. Nor in the cultivation of land, or the production 
simply of food, is the need of implements, and of other auxiliary 
power, whether animal or mechanical, the only need immediately 
experienced. The demands on the surplus of produce over con- 
sumption are various and incessant. Near the space of reclaimed 
ground, from which the cultivator derives but a bare livelihood, 
are some marshy acres that, if drained and enclosed, would add 
considerably in two or three years to the produce; the forest 
and other natural obstructions might also be driven farther back 
with the result, in a few more years, of profit; fences are necessary 
to allow of pasture and field crops, roads have to be made and 
farm buildings to be erected; as the work proceeds more artificial 
investments follow, and by these successive outlays of past 
savings in improvements, renewed and enhanced from generation 
to generation, the land, of little value in its natural state either 
to the owner and cultivator or the community, is at length 



brought into a highly productive condition. The history of 
capital in the soil is substantially the history of capital in all 
other spheres. No progress can be made in any sphere, small or 
large, without reserved funds possessed by few or more persons, 
in small or large amounts, and the progress in all cases is adven- 
tured under self-deprival in the meanwhile of acquired value, 
and more or less risk as to the final result. 

Capital is necessarily to be distinguished from money, with 
which in ordinary nomenclature it is almost identical. Wealth 
may be in other things than money; oxen, wives, tools, have 
at different stages of civilization represented the recognized 
form of capital ; and modern usage only treats capital as meaning 
the command of money because money is the ordinary form of it 
nowadays. The capital of a country can scarce be said to be 
less than the whole sum of its investments in a productive form, 
and possessing a recognized productive value. 

Adam Smith's distinction of " fixed " and " circulating " 
capital in the Wealth of Nations (book ii. c. i.) cannot fail to be 
always useful in exhibiting the various forms and conditions 
under which capital is employed. Yet the principal pheno- 
mena of capital are found to be the same, whether the form of 
investment be more or less permanent or circulable. The 
machinery in which capital is " fixed," and which yields a profit 
without apparently changing hands, is in reality passing away 
day by day, until it is worn out, and has to be replaced. So 
also of drainage and other land improvements. When the 
natural forests have been consumed and the landowners begin 
to plant trees on the bare places, the plantations while growing 
are a source of health, shelter and embellishment— they are not 
without a material profit throughout their various stages to 
maturity — and when, at the lapse of twenty or more years, they 
are ready to be cut down, and the timber is sold for useful 
purposes, there is a harvest of the original capital expended 
as essentially as in the case of the more rapid yearly crops of 
wheat or oats. The chief distinction would appear to rest in the 
element of time elapsing between the outlay of capital and its 
return. Capital may be employed in short loans or bills of 
exchange at two or three months, in paying wages of labour 
for which there may be return in a day or not in less than a year 
or more, or in queries involving within themselves every form
of capital expenditure, and requiring a few years or ninety-nine 
years for the promised fructification on which they proceed. 
But the common characteristic of capital is that of a fund yield- 
ing a return and reproducing itself whether the time to this end 
be long or short. The division of expenditure or labour (all 
expenditure having a destination to labour of one kind or 
another) into " productive " and " unproductive " by the same 
authority (book ii. c. 3) is also apposite both for purposes of 
political economy and practical guidance, though economists 
have found it difficult to define where " productive expenditure " 
ends and " unproductive expenditure " begins. Adam Smith 
includes in his enumeration of the " fixed capital " of a country 
" the acquired and useful abilities of all the inhabitants "; 
and in this sense expenditure on education, arts and sciences 
might be deemed expenditure of the most productive .value, 
and yet be wanting in strict commercial account of the profit 
and loss. It must be admitted that there is a personal expendi- 
ture among all ranks of society, which, though not in any sense 
a capital expenditure, may become capital and receive a pro- 
ductive application, always to be preferred to the grossly un- 
productive form, in the interest both of the possessors and of 
the community. 

The subject in its details is full of controversies, and a discussion 
of it at any length would embrace the whole field of economics. The 
subject will be found fully dealt with in every important economic 
work, but the following may be specially consulted: — J. S. Mill, 
Principles of Political Economy; J. E. Cairns, Some Leading 
Principles of Political Economy; F. A. Walker, Political Economy; 
A. Marshall, Principles of Economics ; E. Bohm v. Bawerk, Capital 
and Interest; K. Marx, Capital; J. B. Clark, Capital and its Earn- 
ings; see also the economic works of W. H. Mallock (Critical Ex- 
amination of Socialism, 1908, &c.) for an insistence on the importance 
of " ability," or brain-work, as against much of modern socialist 
theorizing against " capitalism." 



CAPITAL PUNISHMENT 



2 79 



CAPITAL PUNISHMENT. By this term is now meant the 
infliction of the penalty of death for crime under the sentence of 
some properly constituted authority, as distinguished from 
killing the offender as a matter of self-defence or private ven- 
geance, or under the order of some self-constituted or irregular 
tribunal unknown to the law, such as that of the Vigilantes of 
California, or of lynch law (q.v.) . In the early stages of society 
a man-slayer was killed by the " avenger of blood " on behalf 
of the family of the man killed, and not as representing 
the authority of the state (Pollock and Maitland, Hist. Eng. 
Law, ii. 447.) This mode of dealing with homicide survives in the 
vendetta of Corsica and of the Mainotes in Greece, and in certain 
of the southern states of North America. The obligation or 
inclination to take vengeance depends on the fact of homicide, 
and not on the circumstances in which it was committed, i.e. 
it is a part of the lex talionis. The mischief of this system was 
alleviated under the Levitical law by the creation of cities of 
refuge, and in Greece and Italy, both in Pagan and Christian 
times, by the recognition of the right of sanctuary in temples 
and churches. A second mode of dealing with homicide was that 
known to early Teutonic and early Celtic law, where the relatives 
of the deceased, instead of the life of the slayer, received the 
wer of the deceased, i.e. a payment in proportion to the rank 
of the slain, and the king received the blood-wite for the loss 
of his man. But even under this system certain crimes were 
in Anglo-Saxon law bot-less, i.e. no compensation could 
be paid, and the offender must suffer the penalty of death. 
In the laws of Khammurabi, king of Babylon (2285-2242 
B.C.), the death penalty is imposed for many offences. The 
modes for executing it specially named are burning, drowning 
and impalement {Oldest Code of Laws, by C. H. W. Johns, 1903). 
Under the Roman law, " capital " punishment also included 
punishments which deprived the offender of the status of 
Roman citizen {capitis deminutio, capitis amissio), e.g. condemna- 
tion to servitude in the mines or to deportation to an island 
{Dig. 48. 19). 

United Kingdom. — The modes of capital punishment in 
England under the Saxon and Danish kings were various: 
British and hanging, beheading, burning, drowning, stoning, and 
foreign precipitation from rocks. The principle on which this 
laws and variety depended was that where an offence was 
met ° s ' such as to entitle the king to outlaw the offender, 
he forfeited all, life and limb, lands and goods, and that the 
king might take his life and choose the mode of death. William 
the Conqueror would not allow judgment of death to be exe- 
cuted by hanging and substituted mutilation; but his successors 
varied somewhat in their policy as to capital punishment, and 
by the 13th century the penalty of death became by usage (with- 
out legislation) the usual punishment for high and petty treason 
and for all felonies (except mayhem and petty larceny, i.e. theft 
of property worth less than is.); see Stephen, Hist. Cr. Law, 
vol. i. 458; Pollock and Maitland, Hist. Eng. Law, vol. ii. 459. 
It therefore included all the more serious forms of crime against 
person or property, such as murder, manslaughter, arson, high- 
way robbery, burglary (or hamesucken) and larceny; and when 
statutory felonies were created they were also punishable by 
death unless the statute otherwise provided. The death penalty 
was also extended to heretics under the writ de heretico com- 
burendo, which was lawfully issuable under statute from 1382 
(5 Ric. II. stat. s) until 1677 (29 Chas. II. c. 9). For this purpose 
the legislature had adopted the civil law of the Roman Empire, 
which was not a part of the English common law (Stephen, 
Hist. Cr. Law, vol. ii. 438-469). 

The methods of execution by crucifixion (as under the Roman 
law), or breaking on the wheel (as under the Roman Dutch law 
and the Holy Roman Empire), were never recognized by the 
common law, and would fall within the term " cruel and unusual 
punishments " in the English Bill of Rights, and in the United 
States would seem to be unconstitutional (see Wilkinson v. Utah, 
1889, 136 U.S. 436, 446). 

The severity of barbarian and feudal laws was mitigated, so 
far as common-law offences were concerned, by the influence of 



the Church as the inheritor of Christian traditions and Roman 
jurisprudence. The Roman law under the empire did not allow 
the execution of citizens except under the Lex Porcia. But the 
right of the emperors to legislate per rescriptum principis enabled 
them to disregard the ordinary law when so disposed. The 83rd 
novel of Justinian provided that criminal causes against clerics 
should be tried by the judges, and that the convicted cleric 
should be degraded by his bishop before his condemnation by 
the secular power, and other novels gave the bishops considerable 
influence, if not authority, over the lay judiciary. In western 
Europe the right given by imperial legislation in the Eastern 
Empire was utilized by the Papacy to claim privilege of clergy, 
i.e. that clerks must be remitted to the bishop for canonical 
punishment, and not subjected to civil condemnation at all. 
The history of benefit of clergy is given in Pollock and Maitland, 
Hist. English Law, vol. i. pp. 424-440, and Stephen, Hist. Cr. 
Law, vol. iii. 459, 463. By degrees the privilege was extended 
not only to persons who could prove ordination or show a genuine 
tonsure, but all persons who had sufficient learning to be able 
to read the neck- verse (Ps. Ii. v. 1). Before the Reformation 
the ecclesiastical courts had ceased to take any effective action 
with respect to clerks accused of offences against the king's laws; 
and by the time of Henry VII. burning on the hand under the 
order of the king's judges was substituted for the old process 
of compurgation in use in the spiritual courts. 

The effect of the claim of benefit of clergy is said to have been 
to increase the number of convictions, though it mitigated the 
punishment; and it became, in fact, a means of showing mercy 
to certain classes of individuals convicted of crime as a kind 
of privilege to the educated, i.e. to all clerks whether seculai 
or religious (25 Edw. III. stat. 3); and it was allowed only 
in case of a first conviction, except in the case of clerks who could 
produce their letters of orders or ,a certificate of ordination. 
To prevent a second claim it was the practice to brand murderers 
with the letter M, and other felons with the Tyburn T, and Ben 
Jonson was in 1598 so marked for manslaughter. 

The reign of Henry VIII. was marked by extreme severity 
in the execution of criminals — as during this time 72,000 persons 
are said to have been hanged. After the formation of English 
settlements in America the severity of the law was mitigated 
by the practice of reprieving persons sentenced to death on 
condition of their consenting to be transported to the American 
colonies, and to enter into bond service there. The practice 
seems to have been borrowed from Spain, and to have been begun 
in 1597 (39 Eliz. c. 4). It was applied by Cromwell after his 
campaign in Ireland, and was in full force immediately after 
the Restoration, and is recognized in the Habeas Corpus Act 
1677, and was used for the Cameronians during Claverhouse's 
campaign in south-west Scotland. In the 1 8th century the courts 
were empowered to sentence felons to transportation (see 
Deportation) instead of to execution, and this state of the law 
continued until 1857 (6 Law Quarterly Review, p. 388). This 
power to sentence to transportation at first applied only to 
felonies with benefit of clergy; but in 1705, on the abolition 
of the necessity of proving capacity to read, all criminals alike 
became entitled to the benefit previously reserved to clerks. 
Benefit of clergy was finally abolished in 1827 as to all 
persons not having privilege of peerage, and in 1841 as 
to peers and peeresses. Its beneficial effect had now been 
exhausted, since no clergyable offences remained capital crimes. 

At the end of the 18th century the criminal law of all Europe 
was ferocious and indiscriminate in its administration of capital 
punishment for almost all forms of grave crime; and yet owing 
to poverty, social conditions, and the inefficiency of the police, 
such forms of crime were far more numerous than they now are. 
The policy and righteousness of the English law were questioned 
as early as 1766 by Goldsmith through the mouth of the vicar 
of Wakefield: " Nor can I avoid even questioning the validity 
of that right which social combinations have assumed of capitally 
punishing offences of a slight nature. In cases of murder their 
right is obvious, as it is the duty of us all from the law of self- 
defence to cut off that mar. who has shown a disregard for the 



28o 



CAPITAL PUNISHMENT 



life of another. Against such all nature rises in arms; but it 
is not so against him who steals my property." He adds later: 
" When by indiscriminate penal laws the nation beholds the same 
punishment affixed to dissimilar degrees of guilt, the people 
are led to lose all sense of distinction in the crime, and this 
distinction is the bulwark of all morality." 

The opinion expressed by Goldsmith was strongly supported 
by Bentham, Romilly, Basil Montaguand Mackintoshin England, 
and resulted in considerable mitigation of the severity of the law. 
In 1800 over 200 and in 1819 about 180 crimes were capital. 
As the result of the labour of these eminent men and their 
disciples, and of Sir Robert Peel, there are now only four crimes 
(other than offences against military law or naval discipline) 
capitally punishable in England — high treason, murder, piracy 
with violence, and destruction of public arsenals and dockyards 
(The Dockyards, &c, Protection Act 1772). An attempt to 
abolish the death penalty for this last offence was made in 1837, 
but failed, and has not since been renewed. In the case 
of the last two offences sentence of death need not be pro- 
nounced, but may be recorded (4 Geo. IV. c. 48). Since 1838 
it has in practice been executed only for murder; the method 
being by hanging. 

The change in the severity of the law is best illustrated by the 
following statistics: — 



Years. 


Death Sentences. 


Sentences Executed. 


For all 

Crimes. 


For 
Murder. 


For all 
Crimes. 


For 
Murder. 


1831 

1833 l 
1838 1 
1862 ! 


1601 

931 

116 

29 


H 
9 

25 
28 


52 

33 

6 

15 


12 
6 

5 
15 



During the twelve years from 1893 to 1904, 788 persons were 
committed for trial for murder, being an average of 65. The 
highest number was in 1893 (82) and the lowest in 1900 (51). Of 
those tried in 1904, 28 (26 males and 2 females) were convicted 
of murder, 16 (all males) were executed; 9 males and 2 females 
had their sentences commuted to penal servitude for life. 

In Scotland capital punishment can be imposed only for 
treason, murder and offences against 10 Geo. IV. c. 38, i.e. 
wilful shooting, stabbing, strangling or throwing corrosives with 
intent to murder, maim, disfigure, disable, or do grievous bodily 
harm, in all cases where if death had ensued the offence would 
have been murder. Prior to 1 88 7 rape, robbery, wilful fire-raising 
and incest, and many other crimes-, 
were also capital offences; but in 
practice the pains of law were re- 
stricted at the instance of the prose- 
cution. The method is by hanging. 

In Ireland capital punishment 
may be inflicted for the same 
offences as in England, except 
offences under the Dockyards Pro- 
tection Act 1772, and it is carried 
out in the same manner. 

Offences under Military Law. — Thus far only crimes against 
the ordinary law of the land have been dealt with. But both 
the Naval Discipline Act of 1866 and the Army Act empower 
courts-martial to pass sentence for a number of offences against 
military and naval laws. Such sentences are rarely if ever 
passed where an ordinary court is within reach, or except in time 
of war. The offences extend from traitorous communication 
with the enemy and cowardice on the field to falling asleep while 
acting as a sentinel on active service. It is for the authority 
confirming a sentence of death by court-martial to direct the 
mode of execution, which both in the British and United States 
armies is usually by shooting or hanging. During the Indian 
Mutiny some mutineers were executed by being blown from the 
mouth of cannon. As to the history of military punishments 
see Clode, Military and Martial Law. 

1 Each of these years followed upon legislation mitigating severity 
of punishment 



British Colonies and Possessions.— -Under the Indian Penal 
Code sentence of death may be passed for waging war against 
the king (s. 121) and for murder (s. 302). If the murder is com- 
mitted by a man under sentence of transportation for life the 
death penalty must be imposed (s. 303). In other cases it is 
alternative. This code has been in substance adopted in Ceylon, 
in Straits Settlements and Hong-Kong, and in the Sudan. 
In most of the British colonies and possessions the death penalty 
may be imposed only in the case of high treason, wilful murder 
and piracy with violence. But in New South Wales and Victoria 
sentence of death may be passed for rape and criminal abuse of 
girls under ten. In Queensland the law was the same until the 
passing of the Criminal Code of 1899. 

Under the Carfadian Criminal Code of 1892 the death sentence 
may be imposed for treason (s. 657), murder (s. 231), rape (s. 267), 
piracy with violence (s. 127), and upon subjects of a friendly 
power who levy war on the king in Canada (s. 68) . But the judge 
is bound by statute to report on all death sentences, and the date 
of execution is fixed so as to give time for considering the report. 
The sentence is executed by hanging. In South Africa the 
criminal law is based on the Roman-Dutch law, under which 
capital punishment is liable for treason {crimen perduellionis or 
laesae majestatis), murder and rape (van Leeuwen, c. 36). In the 
Cape Colony rape is still capital (R. v. Nonosi, 1885 ; 1 Buchanan, 
1898). In Natal rape may be punished by hanging (act no. 22, 
1898). Though the Roman-Dutch modes of executing the 
sentence by decapitation or breaking on the wheel have not been 
formally abolished, in practice the sentence in the Cape Colony is 
executed by hanging. In the Transvaal hanging is now the sole 
mode of executing capital punishment (Criminal Procedure 
Code, 1903, s. 244). The Roman-Dutch law as to crime and 
punishments has been superseded in Ceylon and British Guiana 
by ordinance. 

Austria-Hungary. — In Austria capital punishment was in 1787 
for a time abolished, but was reintroduced in 1795 for high 
treason, and in 1803 for certain other crimes. Under the 
penal code' still in force in 1906 it might be inflicted for 
the offences in the table given below, but not on offenders 
who were under twenty when they committed the offence. 
The annexed table indicates that the full sentence was 
sparingly executed. Under a Penal Code drafted in 1906, 
however, only two offences were made capital, viz. high treason 
against the person of the emperor and the graver cases of 
murder. The sentence is executed by hanging. 



Crimes Punishable by 
Death. 


1853 to 1873. 


1875 to 1900. 


1901 to 1903. 


Con- 
demned. 


Executed. 


Con- 
demned. 


Executed. 


Con- 
demned. 


Executed. 


High treason 

Murder, s. 136 .... 
Killing by robbers, s. 141 . 
Public violence, ss. 85, 87 . 
Incendiarism, s. 167 
Criminal use of explosives 
(explosives law, s. 4). 


4 

880 

12 

5 




102 

3 




1 

2085 

35 
1 




81 
1 






180 

3 






9 






Belgium. — Under the Belgian Penal Code of 1867 the death 
penalty is retained for certain forms of high treason, and for 
assassination and parricide by poisoning. It may not be 
pronounced on a person under eighteen. The sentence is 
executed publicly by the guillotine. No execution seems to 
have taken place since 1863. 

Denmark. — Sentence of death may be imposed for most forms 
of high treason, aggravated cases of murder, rape and piracy. 
It is executed publicly by the axe. Offenders under eighteen are 
not liable. 

Finland. — In Finland the death penalty is alleged not to have 
been inflicted since 1824. It may be imposed for the assassina- 
tion of the grand duke or grand duchess of the head of a friendly 
state, and wilful murder of other persons. 

France. — Under the ancien regime in France, 115 crimes had 
become capital in 1789. The mode of execution varied, but in 
some cases it was effected by breaking on the wheel or burning, 



CAPITAL PUNISHMENT 



281 



and was coupled with mutilation. Under the Penal Code of 
1810, as amended in or after 1832, even so late as 1871, thirty 
offences were capital, one being perjury against a prisoner 
resulting in his condemnation to death (art. 361). At present it 
may be imposed for wounding a public official with intent to 
murder (art. 233), assassination, parricide, poisoning, killing to 
commit a crime or escape from justice (arts. 302, 304). But 
juries freely exercise the power of acquitting in capital cases, or 
of defeating the capital sentence by finding extenuating circum- 
stances in more than seven-eighths of the cases, which compels 
the court to reduce the punishment by one or more degrees, i.e. 
below the penalty of death. And in recent times the prerogative 
of mercy has been continually exercised by the president, even in 
gross cases where public opinion demanded the extreme penalty. 
The sentence is executed in public by the guillotine. 

Germany. — In many of the states of Germany capital punish- 
ment had been abolished (Brunswick, Coburg, Nassau, Olden- 
burg in 1849; Saxe-Meiningen, Saxe-Weimar, 1862; Baden, 
1863; Saxony, 1868). But it has been restored by the Imperial 
Criminal Code of 1872, in the case of attempts on the life of the 
emperor, or of the sovereign of any federal state in which the 
offender happens to be (s. 80), and for deliberate homicide (s. 211) 
— as opposed to intentional homicide without deliberation — and 
for certain treasonable acts committed when a state of siege has 
been proclaimed. The sentence is executed by beheading (s. 13). 

Holland. — In Holland there have been no executions since 
i860. Capital punishment (by hanging) was abolished in 1870, 
and was not reintroduced in the Penal Code of 1886. 

Italy. — Capital punishment was abolished in Tuscany as far 
back as 1786, and from Italy has come the chief opposition to 
the death penalty, originated by Beccaria, and supported by 
many eminent jurists. Under the Penal Code of 1888 the death 
penalty was abrogated for all crimes, even for regicide. The 
cases of homicide in Italy are very numerous compared with 
those in England, amounting in 1905 to 105 per million as com- 
pared with 27 per million in the United Kingdom. 

Japan. — The penalty of death is executed by hanging within a 
prison. It may be imposed for executing or contriving acts 
of violence against the mikado or certain of his family, and for 
seditious violence with the object of seizing the territory or 
subverting the government or laws of Japan, or conspiring 
with foreign powers to commence hostilities against Japan. It 
is inflicted for certain forms of homicide, substantially wilful 
murder in the first degree. 

Norway. — Under Norwegian law, up to 1905, sentence of death 
might be passed for murder with premeditation, but the court 
might as an alternative decree penal servitude for life. Sentence 
of death had also to be passed in cases where a person under 
sentence of penal servitude for life committed murder or culpable 
homicide, or caused bodily injuries in circumstances warranting 
a sentence of penal servitude for life, or committed robbery or 
the graver forms of wilful fire-raising. The sentence was 
carried out by decapitation (see Beheading); but there had 
been no execution since 1876. The new Norwegian Code, 
which came into force on the 6th of January 1905, abolished 
capital punishment. 

Portugal. — There has been considerable objection in Portugal 
to capital punishment, and it was abolished in 1867. 

Rumania. — Capital punishment was abolished in 1864. 

Russia. — In 1750, under the empress Elizabeth, capital punish- 
ment was abolished; but it was restored later and was freely 
inflicted, the sentence being executed by shooting, beheading 
or hanging. According to a Home Office Return in England 
in 1907 the death penalty is abolished, except in cases where the 
lives of the emperor, empress or heir to the throne are concerned. 

Spain. — Under the Spanish Penal Code of 1870 the following 
crimes are capital: — inducing a foreign power to declare war 
against Spain, killing the sovereign, parricide and assassination. 
The method employed is execution in public by the garrote. 
But the death sentence is rarely imposed, the customary penalty 
for murder being penal servitude in chains for life, while a parri- 
cide is imprisoned in chains " in perpetuity until death." 



Sweden. — The severity of the law in Sweden was greatly miti- 
gated so far back as 1777. Under the Penal Code of 1864 the 
penalty of death may be imposed for certain forms of treason, in- 
cluding attempts on the life of the sovereign or on the independence 
of Sweden, and for premeditated homicide (assassinat) , and in 
certain cases for offences committed by persons under sentence 
of imprisonment for life. In 1901 a bill to abolish capital 
punishment was rejected by both houses of the Swedish 
parliament. 

Switzerland. — Capital punishment was abolished in Switzer- 
land in 1874 by Federal legislation; but in 1879, in consequence 
of a plebiscite, each canton was empowered to restore the 
death penalty for offences in its territory. The Federal govern- 
ment was unwilling to take this course, but was impelled to it 
by the fact that, between 1874 and 1879, cases of premeditated 
murder had considerably increased. Seven of the cantons out 
of twenty-two have exercised the power given to restore capital 
punishment. But there do not seem to have been any cases 
in which the death penalty has been inflicted; and on the 
assassination of the empress of Austria at Geneva in 1898 it 
was found that the laws of the canton did not permit the execu- 
tion of the assassin. The canton of Zug imposes the lowest 
minimum penalty known, i.e. three years' imprisonment for 
wilful homicide, the maximum being imprisonment for life. 

United Stales of America. — Under the Federal laws sentence 
of death may be passed for treason against the United States 
and for piracy and for murder within the Federal jurisdiction. 
But for the most part the punishment of crime is regulated by 
the laws of the constituent states of the Union. 

The death penalty was abolished in Michigan in 1846 except 
for treason, and wholly in Wisconsin in 1853. In Maine it was 
abolished in 1876, re-enacted in 1883, and again abolished 
in 1887. In Rhode Island it was abolished in 1852, but restored 
in 1882, only in case of murder committed by a person under 
sentence of imprisonment for life (Laws, 1896, c. 277, s. 2). 
In all the other states the death penalty may still be inflicted: 
in Alabama, Delaware, Georgia, Maryland, and West Virginia, 
for treason, murder, arson and rape; in Alaska, Arizona, 
Kansas, New Jersey, Mississippi, Montana, New York, North 
Dakota, Oregon, and South Dakota, for treason and murder; 
in Colorado, Idaho, Illinois, Iowa, Massachusetts, Minnesota, 
Nebraska, New Hampshire, New Mexico, Nevada, Ohio, Okla- 
homa, Pennsylvania, Utah and Wyoming, for murder only; 
in Kentucky and Virginia, for treason, murder and rape ; 
in Vermont, for treason, murder and arson; in Indiana, for 
treason, murder, and for arson if death result; in California, 
for treason, murder and train-wrecking; in North Carolina, 
for murder, rape, arson and burglary; in Florida, Missouri, 
South Carolina, Tennessee and Texas, for murder and rape; 
in Arkansas and Louisiana, for treason, murder, rape, and 
administering poison or use of dangerous weapons with intent 
to murder. Louisiana is cited by Girardin (le droit de punir) 
as a state in which the death penalty was abolished in 1830. 
Under the influence of the eminent jurist, E. Livingston, who 
framed the state codes, the legislature certainly passed a resolu- 
tion against capital punishment. But since as early as 1846 
it has been there lawful, subject to a power given to the jury, 
to bring in a verdict of guilty, " but no capital punishment," 
which had the effect of imposing a sentence of hard labour for 
life. In certain states the jury has, under local legislation, the 
right to award the sentence. The constitutionality of such 
legislation has been doubted, but has been recognized by the 
courts of Illinois and Iowa. Sentence of death is executed 
by hanging, except in seven of the states, where it is carried 
out by "electrocution" (q.v.). 

With the mitigation of the law as to punishment, agitation 
against the theory of capital punishment has lost much of its 
force. But many European and American writers, and 
some English writers and associations, advocate the ^oao?"" 
total abolition of the death punishment. The ultimate abolition. 
argument of the opponents of capital punishment is that 
society has no right to take the life of any one of its members on 



282 



CAPITO— CAPITULARY 



any ground. But they also object to capital punishment: (i) on 
religious grounds, because it may deprive the sinner of his full time 
for repentance; (2) on medical grounds, because homicide is 
usually if not always evidence of mental disease or irresponsi- 
bility; (3) on utilitarian grounds, because capital punishment is 
not really deterrent, and is actually inflicted in so few instances 
that criminals discount the risks of undergoing it; (4) on legal 
grounds, i.e. that the sentence being irrevocable and the evidence 
often circumstantial only, there is great risk of gross injustice 
in executing a person convicted of murder; (5) on moral grounds, 
that the punishment does not fit the case nor effect the refor- 
mation of the offender. It is to be noted that the English 
Children Act 1908 expressly forbids the pronouncing or recording 
the sentence of death against any person under the age of 
sixteen (s. 103). 

The punishment is probably retained, partly from ingrained 
habit, partly from a sense of its appropriateness for certain 
crimes, but also that the ultima ratio may be available in cases 
of sufficient gravity to the commonweal. The apparent dis- 
crepancy between the number of trials and convictions for 
murder is not in England any evidence of hostility on the part 
of juries to capital punishment, which has on the whole lessened 
rather than increased since the middle of the 19th century. It 
is rarely if ever necessary in England, though common in America, 
to question the jurors as to their views on capital punishment. 
The reasons for the comparatively small number of convictions 
for murder seem to be: (1) that court and jury in a capital case 
lean in favorem vitae, and if the offence falls short of the full 
gravity of murder, conviction for manslaughter only results; 
(2) that in the absence of a statutory classification of the degrees 
of murder, the prerogative of mercy is exercised in cases falling 
short of the highest degree of gravity recognized by lawyers and 
by public opinion; (3) that where the conviction rests on cir- 
cumstantial evidence the sentence is not executed unless the 
circumstantial evidence is conclusive; (4) that charges of in- 
fanticide against the mothers of illegitimate children are treated 
mercifully by judge and jury, and usually terminate in acquittal, 
or in a conviction of concealment of birth; (5) that many persons 
tried as murderers are obviously insane; (6) that coroners' 
juries are somewhat recklessly free in returning inquisitions 
of murder without any evidence which would warrant the 
conviction of the person accused. 

The medical doctrine, and that of Lombroso with respect 
to criminal atavism and irresponsibility, have probably tended 
to incline the public mind in favour of capital punishment, and 
Sir James Stephen and other eminent jurists have even been 
thereby tempted to advocate the execution of habitual criminals. 
It certainly seems strange that the community should feel bound 
carefully to preserve and tend a class of dangerous lunatics, and 
to give them, as Charles Kingfley says, " the finest air in England 
and the right to kill two gaolers a week." 

The whole question of capital punishment in the United 
Kingdom was considered by a royal commission appointed in 
1864, which reported in 1866 (Pari. Pap., 1866, 10,438). The 
commission took the opinions of all the judges of the supreme 
courts in the United Kingdom and of many other eminent 
persons, and collected the laws of other countries so far as this 
was ascertainable. The commissioners differed on the question 
of the expediency of abolishing or retaining capital punishment, 
and did not report thereon. But they recommended: (1) that 
it should be restricted throughout the United Kingdom to high 
treason and murder; (2) alteration of the law of homicide so 
as to classify homicides according to their gravity, and to confine 
capital punishment to murder in the first degree; (3) modifica- 
tion of the law as to child murder so as to punish certain cases 
of infanticide as misdemeanours; (4) authorizing judges to 
direct sentence of death to be recorded; (5) the abolition — 
since carried out— of public executions. 

Authorities. — Beccaria, Dei Delitte e delle Pene (1 790) ; Bentham, 
Rationale of Punishment; Lammasch, Grundris des Strafrechts 
(Leipzig, 1902); Olivecrona, De la peine de mort; Mittermaier, 
Capital Punishment; Report of the Royal Commission on Capital 
Punishment (Pari. Pap., 1866, No. 10,438); Oldfield, The Penalty of 



Death (1901) ; Pollock and Maitland, History of English Law, Pike, 
History of Crime; Sir J. F. Stephen, History of Crime in England; 
S. Walpole, History of England, vol. i. p. 191 ; vol. iv. p. 74; 
Andrews' Old Time Punishments; A Century of Law Reform 
(London, 1901) ; Lecture ii. by Sir H. B. Poland; Howard Association 
Publications. (W. F. C.) 

CAPITO (or Kopfel), WOLFGANG [Fabricius] (1478-1541), 
German reformer, was born of humble parentage at Hagenau in 
Alsace. He was educated for the medical profession, but also 
studied law, and applied himself so earnestly to theology that 
he received the doctorate in that faculty also, and, having 
joined the Benedictines, taught for some time at Freiburg. He 
acted for three years as pastor in Bruchsal, and was then called 
to the cathedral church of Basel (1515). Here he made the 
acquaintance of Zwingli and began to correspond with Luther. 
In 1519 he removed to Mainz at the request of Albrecht, arch- 
bishop of that city, who soon made him his chancellor. In 1523 
he settled at Strassburg, where he remained till his death in 
November 1541. He had found it increasingly difficult to 
reconcile the new religion with the old, and from 1524 was one 
of the leaders of the reformed faith in Strassburg. He took a 
prominent part in the earlier ecclesiastical transactions of the 
1 6th century, was present at the second conference of Zurich 
and at the conference of Marburg, and along with Martin Bucer 
drew up the Confessio Tetrapolitana. Capito was always more 
concerned for the " unity of the spirit " than for dogmatic 
formularies, and from his endeavours to conciliate the Lutheran 
and Zwinglian parties in regard to the sacraments, he seems to 
have incurred the suspicions of his own friends; while from his 
intimacy with Martin Cellarius and other divines of the Socinian 
school he drew on himself the charge of Arianism. His principal 
works were: — Institutionum Hebraicarum libri duo; Enarrationes 
in Habacuc et Hoseam Prophetas; a life of Oecolampadius and 
an account of the synod of Berne (1532). 

CAPITULARY (Med. Lat. capitularium) , a series of legislative 
or administrative acts emanating from the Merovingian and 
Carolingian kings, so called as being divided into sections or 
chapters (capitula). With regard to these capitularies two 
questions arise: (1) as to the means by which they have been 
handed down to us; (2) as to their true character and scope. 

(1) As soon as the capitulary was composed, it was sent to the 
various functionaries of the Frankish empire, archbishops, 
bishops, missi and counts, a copy being kept by the chancellor 
in the archives of the palace. At the present day we do not 
possess a single capitulary in its original form; but very 
frequently copies of these isolated capitularies were included in 
various scattered manuscripts, among pieces of a very different 
nature, ecclesiastical or secular. We find, therefore, a fair number 
of them in books which go back as far as the 9th or 10th centuries. 
In recent editions in the case of each capitulary it is carefully 
indicated from what manuscripts it has been collated. 

These capitularies make provisions of a most varied nature; 
it was therefore found necessary at quite an early date to classify 
them into chapters according to the subject. In 827 Ansegisus, 
abbot of St Wandrille at Fontenelle, made such a collection. 
He embodied them in four books: one of the ecclesiastical 
capitularies of Charlemagne, one of the ecclesiastical capitularies 
of Louis the Pious, one of the secular capitularies of Charlemagne, 
and one of the secular capitularies of Louis, bringing together 
similar provisions and suppressing duplicates. This collection 
soon gained an official authority, and after 829 Louis the Pious 
refers to it, citing book and section. 

After 827 new capitularies were naturally promulgated, and 
before 858 there appeared a second collection in three books, 
by an author calling himself Benedictus Levita. His aim was, 
he said, to complete the work of Ansegisus, and bring it up to 
date by continuing it from 827 to his own day; but the author 
has not only borrowed prescriptions from the capitularies; he 
has introduced other documents into his collection, fragments of 
Roman laws, canons of the councils and especially spurious 
provisions very similar in character to those of the same date 
found in the False Decretals. His contemporaries did not notice 
these spurious documents, but accepted the whole collection as 



CAPITULATION— CAPITULATIONS 



283 



authentic, and incorporated the four books of Ansegisus and 
the three of Benedictus Levita into a single collection in seven 
books. The serious historian of to-day, however, is careful not 
to use books v., vi. and vii. for purposes of reference. 

Early editors chose to republish this collection of Ansegisus 
and Benedictus as they found it. It was a distinguished French 
scholar, Etienne Baluze, who led the way to a fresh classification. 
In 1677 he brought out the Capitularia regum francorum, in two 
folio volumes, in which he published first the capitularies of the 
Merovingian kings, then those of Pippin, of Charles and of 
Louis the Pious, which he had found complete in various manu- 
scripts. After the date of 840, he published as supplements the 
unreliable collection of Ansegisus and Benedictus Levita, with 
the warning that the latter was quite untrustworthy. He then 
gave the capitularies of Charles the Bald, and of other Carolingian 
kings, either contemporaries or successors of Charles, which he 
had discovered in various places. A second edition of Baluze 
was published in 1780 in 2 volumes folio by Pierre de Chiniac. 

The edition of the Capitularies made in 1835 by George Pertz, 
in the Monumenla Germaniae (folio edition, vol. i., of the Leges) 
was not much advance on that of Baluze. A fresh revision was 
required, and the editors of the Monumenta decided to reissue 
it in their quarto series, entrusting the work to Dr Alfred Boretius. 
In 1883 Boretius published his first volume, containing all the 
detached capitularies up to 827, together with various appendices 
bearing on them, and the collection of Ansegisus. Boretius, 
whose health had been ruined by overwork, was unable to finish 
his work; it was continued by Victor Krause, who collected 
in vol. ii. the scattered capitularies of a date posterior to 828. 
Karl Zeumer and Albrecht Werminghoff drew up a detailed 
index of both volumes, in which all the essential words are noted. 
A third volume, prepared by Emil Seckel, was to include the 
collection of Benedictus Levita. 

(2) Among the capitularies are to be found documents of a very 
varied kind. Boretius has divided them into several classes: — 

(a) The Capitula legibus addenda. — These are additions made 
by the king of the Franks to the barbarian laws promulgated 
under the Merovingians, the Salic law, the Ripuarian or the 
Bavarian. These capitularies have the same weight as the law 
which they complete; they are particular in their application, 
applying, that is to say, only to the men subject to that law. 
Like the laws, they consist chiefly of scales of compensation, 
rules of procedure and points of civil law. They were solemnly 
promulgated in the local assemblies where the consent of the 
people was asked. Charlemagne and Louis the Pious seem to 
have made efforts to bring the other laws into harmony with the 
Salic law. It is also to be noted that by certain of the capitularies 
of this class, the king adds provisions affecting, not only a single 
law, but all the laws in use throughout the kingdom. 

(b) The Capitula ecclesiastica. — These capitularies were 
elaborated in the councils of the bishops; the kings of the 
Franks sanctioned the canon of the councils, and made them 
obligatory on all the Christians in the kingdom. 

(c) The Capitula per se scribenda. — These embodied political 
decrees which all subjects of the kingdom were bound to observe. 
They often bore the name of edictum or of constitutio, and the 
provisions made in them were permanent. These capitularies 
were generally elaborated by the king of the Franks in the 
autumn assemblies or in the committees of the spring assemblies. 
Frequently we have only the proposition made by the king to 
the committee, capitula tractanda cum comitibus, episcopis, et 
abbatibus, and not the final form which was adopted. 

(d) The Capitula missorum, which are the instructions given 
by Charlemagne and his successors to the missi sent into the 
various parts of the empire. They are sometimes drawn up in 
common for all the missi of a certain year — capitula missorum 
generalia; sometimes for the missi sent only on a given circuit — 
capitula missorum specialia. These instructions sometimes hold 
good only for the circuit of the missus; they have no general 
application and are merely temporary. 

(e) With the capitularies have been incorporated various 
documents; for instance, tne rules to be observed in administer- 



ing the king's private domain (the celebrated capitulary de villis^ 
which is doubtless a collection of the instructions sent at various 
times to the agents of these domains); the partitions of the 
kingdom among the king's sons, as, the Divisio regnorum of 806, 
or the Ordinatio imperii of 817; the oaths of peace and brother- 
hood which were taken on various occasions by the sons of Louis 
the Pious, &c. 

The merit of clearly establishing these distinctions belongs to 
Boretius. He has doubtless exaggerated the difference between 
the Capitula missorum and the Capitula per se scribenda; among 
the first are to be found provisions of a general and permanent 
nature, and among the second temporary measures are often 
included. But the idea of Boretius is none the less fruitful. In 
the capitularies there are usually permanent provisions and 
temporary provisions intermingled; and the observation of 
this fact has made it possible more clearly to understand certain 
institutions of Charlemagne, e.g. military service. 

After the reign of Louis the Pious the capitularies became 
long and diffuse. Soon, from the 10th century onwards, no 
provision of general application emanates from the kings. Hence- 
forth the kings only regulated private interests by charters; it 
was not until the reign of Philip Augustus that general provisions 
again appeared; but when they did so, they bore the name of 
ordinances (ordonnances) . 

There were also capitularies of the Lombards. These capitu- 
laries formed a continuation of the Lombard laws, and are 
printed as an appendix to these laws by Boretius in the folio 
edition of the Monumenta Germaniae, Leges, vol. iv. 

Authorities.- — Boretius, Die Capitularien im Longobardenreich 
(Halle, 1864); and Beitrage zur Capitularienkritih (Leipzig, 1874); 
G. Seeliger, Die Kapitularien der Karolinger (Munich, 1893). See 
also the histories of institutions or of law by Waitz, Brunner, 
Fustel de Coulanges, Viollet, Esmein. (C. Pf.) 

CAPITULATION (Lat. capitulum, a little head or division; 
capitulare, to treat upon terms) , an agreement in time of war for 
the surrender to a hostile armed force of a particular body of 
troops, a town or a territory. It is an ordinary incident of war, 
and therefore no previous instructions from the captor's govern- 
ment are required before finally settling the conditions of capitu- 
lation. The most usual of such conditions are freedom of religion 
and security of private property on the one hand, and a promise 
not to bear arms within a certain period on the other. Such 
agreements may be rashly concluded with an inferior officer, on 
whose authority the enemy are not in the actual position of the 
war entitled to place reliance. When an agreement is made by 
an officer who has not the proper authority or who has exceeded 
the limits of his authority, it is termed a sponsion, and, to be 
binding, must be confirmed by express or tacit ratification. 
Article 35 of the Hague Convention (1899) on the laws and the 
customs of war lays down that " capitulations agreed on between 
the contracting parties must be in accordance with the rules of 
military honour. When once settled they must be observed by 
both the parties." 

In another sense, capitulation is the name given to an arrange- 
ment by which foreigners are withdrawn, for most civil and 
criminal purposes, from the jurisdiction of the state making the 
capitulation. Thus in Turkey arrangements termed capitula- 
tions (q.v.), and treaties confirmatory of them, have been made 
between the Porte and other states by which foreigners resident 
in Turkey are subject to the laws of their respective countries. 
The term is also applied by French writers to the oath which on 
his election the Holy Roman emperor used to make to the 
college of electors; this related chiefly to such matters as regalian 
rights, appeals from local jurisdictions, the rights of the pope, &c. 

CAPITULATIONS (from Lat. caput, or its Low-Latin diminutive 
capitulum, as indicating the form in which these acts were set 
down in " chapters "; the Gr. equivalent cephaleosis, (ce$aXaiw<ns, 
is occasionally used in works of the 17th century), treaties 
granted by a state and conferring the privilege of extra-territorial 
jurisdiction within its boundaries on the subjects of another 
state. Thus, in the 9th century, the caliph Harun-al-Rashid 
engaged to grant guarantees and commercial facilities to such 



284 



CAPIZ 



Franks, subjects of the emperor Charlemagne, as should visit 
the East with the authorization of their emperor. After the 
break-up of the Frank empire, similar concessions were made to 
some of the practically independent Italian city states that grew 
up on its ruins. Thus, in 1098, the prince of Antioch granted a 
charter of this nature to the city of Genoa; the king of Jerusalem 
extended the same privilege to Venice in 1 1 23 and to Marseilles 
in 1136. Salah-ud-din (Saladin), sultan of Babylon (Cairo), 
granted a charter to the town of Pisa in 1173. The Byzantine 
emperors followed this example, and Genoa, Pisa and Venice 
all obtained capitulations. The explanation of the practice is 
to be found in the fact that the sovereignty of the state was held 
in those ages to apply only to its subjects; foreigners were 
excluded from its rights and obligations. The privilege of 
citizenship was considered too precious to be extended to the 
alien, who was long practically an outlaw. But when the 
numbers, wealth and power of foreigners residing within the 
state became too great, it was found to be politic to subject them 
to some law, and it was held that this law should be their own. 
When the Turkish rule was substituted for that of the Byzantine 
emperors, the system already in existence was continued; the 
various non-Moslem peoples were allowed their semi-autonomy 
in matters affecting their personal status, and the Genoese of 
Galata were confirmed in their privileges. But the first capitula- 
tion concluded with a foreign state was that of 1535 granted to 
the French. Lest it should be imagined that this was a concession 
wrested by the victorious Christian monarch from the decadent 
Turk, it should be borne in mind that Turkey was then at the 
height of her power, and that Francis I. had shortly before 
sustained a disastrous defeat at Pavia. His only hope of assist- 
ance lay in Suleiman I., whose attack on Vienna had been checked 
by the victorious Charles V. The appeal to Suleiman on the 
ground of the common interest of France and Turkey in over- 
coming Charles V.'s overweening power was successful; the 
secret mission of Frangipani, an unofficial envoy who could be 
disowned in case of failure, paved the way for De la Forest's 
embassy in 1534, and in 1536 the capitulations were signed. 1 
They amounted to a treaty of commerce and a treaty allowing 
the establishment of Frenchmen in Turkey and fixing the 
jurisdiction to be exercised over them: individual and religious 
liberty is guaranteed to them, the king of France is empowered 
to appoint consuls in Turkey, the consuls are recognized as 
competent to judge the civil and criminal affairs of French 
subjects in Turkey according to French law, and the consuls may 
appeal to the officers of the sultan for their aid in the execution 
of their sentences. This, the first of the capitulations, is practi- 
cally the prototype of its successors. Five years later, similar 
capitulations were concluded with Venice. The capitulations 
were at first held to be in force only during the lifetime of the 
sultan by whom they were granted; thus in 1569 Sultan Selim II. 
renewed the French capitulations granted by his predecessor. 
In 1583 England obtained her first capitulation, until which time 
France had been the official protector of all Europeans estab- 
lished in Turkey. Later on, England claimed to protect the 
subjects of other nations, a claim which is rejected in the French 
capitulations of 1597, 1604 and 1607, the last-named of which 
explicitly lays down that the subjects of all nations not repre- 
sented at Constantinople by an ambassador shall be under 
French protection. In 1613 Holland obtained her first capitula- 
tion, with the assistance of the French ambassador, anxious 
to help a commercial rival of England. In 1673 the French, 
represented by the marquis de Nointel, succeeded in obtaining 
the renewal of the capitulations which, for various reasons, had 
remained unconfirmed since 1607. Louis XIV. had been anxious 
to secure the protectorate of all Catholics in Turkey, but was 
obliged to content himself with the recognition of his right to 
protect all Latins of non-Turkish nationality; his claims for the 
restoration to the Catholics of the Holy Places usurped by the 
Greeks was also rejected, the sultan only undertaking to promise 
to restore their churches to the Jesuit Capuchins. An important 

1 LaForest, a knight of St John of Jerusalem, was the first resident 
ambassador of France at Constantinople. He died in 1537. 



commercial gain was the reduction of the import duties from 
5 t0 3%; and all suits the value of which exceeded 4000 aspres 
in which French subjects sued, or were sued by, an Ottoman 
subject, were to be heard not by the ordinary tribunals but at the 
Porte itself. Later, France's friendship secured for Turkey a 
successful negotiation of the peace of Belgrade in 1 739, and the 
result was the capitulation of 1740; this is no longer limited in 
duration to the sultan's lifetime but is made perpetual, and, 
moreover, declares that it cannot be modified without the assent 
of the French. It conferred on the French ambassador pre- 
cedence over his colleagues. Austria had obtained capitulations 
in 1 7 18, modified in 1784; Russia secured similar privileges- in 
1784. In the course of the 18th century nearly every European 
power had obtained these, and such newly-established countries 
as the United States of America, Belgium and Greece followed 
in the 19th century. 

The chief privileges granted under the capitulations to 
foreigners resident in Turkey are the following: liberty of 
residence, inviolability of domicile, liberty to travel by land 
and sea, freedom of commerce, freedom of religion, immunity 
from local jurisdiction save under certain safeguards, ex- 
clusive extra-territorial jurisdiction over foreigners of the same 
nationality, and competence of the forum of the defendant in 
cases in which two foreigners are concerned (though the Sublime 
Porte has long claimed to exercise jurisdiction in criminal cases 
in which two foreigners of different nationality are concerned — 
the capitulations are silent on the point and the claim is resisted 
by the powers) . 

The same system has been followed by such countries as Persia, 
China, Japan and Siam. 

The practical result of the capitulations in Turkey is to form 
each separate foreign colony into a sort of imperium in imperio, 
and to hamper the local jurisdiction very considerably. As the 
state granting the capitulations progresses in civilization it 
chafes under these restraints in its sovereignty. Turkey's 
former vassals, Rumania and Servia, though theoretically bound 
to respect the capitulations so long as they formed part of 
Turkey, had practically abrogated them long before securing 
their independence through the treaty of Berlin in 1878. The 
same may be said of Bulgaria. Japan was liberated from the 
burden of the capitulations some years ago. 

The extra-territorial jurisdiction exercised by the foreign 
powers over their subjects in Turkey and other countries where 
capitulations exist is regulated by special legislative enactments; 
in the case of the United Kingdom by orders in council. 

In Turkey the capitulations are practically the only treaties 
in force with the powers, since the expiration about 1889 of the 
commercial treaties, concluded in 1861-1862. As they all con- 
tain the " most-favoured nation " clause, the privileges in any 
one apply to all the powers, though not always claimed. Thus 
America and Belgium claim under their treaties with Turkey 
the right to try all their subjects, even if accused of offences 
against Ottoman subjects — a claim recently made by Belgium 
in the case of the Belgian subject Joris, accused of participation 
in the bomb outrage of 1905 at Yildiz. One peculiar privilege 
granted in the capitulations of 1675 (Art. 74) authorizes the 
king of England to buy in Turkey with his own money two 
cargoes of figs and raisins, in fertile and abundant years and not 
in times of dearth or scarcity, and provides that after a duty 
of 3%, has been paid thereon no obstacle or hindrance shall be 
given thereto. 

CAPIZ, a town and the capital of the province of Capiz, Panay, 
Philippine Islands, on the Capiz or Panay river, about 4 m. from 
its mouth on the N. coast. Pop. (1903) 18,525. Capiz has 
a large and beautiful Roman Catholic church (of stone), a 
Protestant church (with a hospital) and good government 
buildings, and is the seat of the provincial high school. Alcohol 
of a superior quality is manufactured in large quantities from 
the fermented juice of the nipa palm, which grows plentifully 
in the neighbouring swamps. Fishing and the weaving of fabrics 
of cotton, hemp and pineapple fibre are important industries. 
Rice and sugar are raised in abundance. Tobacco, Indian corn 



CAPMANY— CAPO D'ISTRIA 



'285 



and cacao are produced to a limited extent; and rice, alcohol, 
sugar and copra are exported. Coasting vessels ascend the 
river to the town. The language is Visayan. 

CAPMANY Y MONTPALAU, ANTONIO DE (1742-1813), 
Spanish polygraph, was born at Barcelona on the 24th of Novem- 
ber 1742. He retired from the army in 1770, and was subse- 
quently elected secretary of the Royal Academy of History at 
Madrid. His principal works are — Memorias histdricas sobre la 
marina, commercio, y artesde la antigua ciudad de Barcelona 
(4 vols. 1779-1792); Teatro historico-critico de la elocuencia 
Espanola (1786); Filiosofia de la elocuencia (1776), and 
Cuestiones criticas sobre varios puntos de historia economica, 
polltica, y militar (1807). Capmany died at Barcelona on the 
14th of November 1813. His monograph on the history of his 
birthplace still preserves much of its original value. 

CAPO D'ISTRIA, GIOVANNI ANTONIO [Joannes], 1 Count 
(1776-1831), Russian statesman and president of the Greek 
republic, was born at Corfu on the nth of February 1776. He 
belonged to an ancient Corfiot family which had immigrated 
from Istria in 1373, the title of count being granted to it by 
Charles Emmanuel, duke of Savoy, in 1689. The father of 
Giovanni, Antonio Maria Capo d'Istria, was a man of consider- 
able importance in the island, a stiff aristocrat of the old school, 
who in 1798, after the treaty of Campo Formio had placed the 
Ionian Islands under French rule, was imprisoned for his oppo- 
sition to the new regime, his release next year being the earliest 
triumph of his son's diplomacy. On the establishment in 1800, 
under Turkish suzerainty, of the septinsular republic — a settle- 
ment negotiated at Constantinople by the elder Capo d'Istria — 
Giovanni, who had meanwhile studied medicine at Padua, entered 
the government service as secretary to the legislative council, 
and in one capacity or another exercised for the next seven years 
a determining voice in the affairs of the republic. At the begin- 
ning of 1807 he was appointed "extraordinary military 
governor " to organize the defence of Santa Maura against Ali 
Pasha of Iannina, an enterprise which brought him into contact 
with Theodoros Kolokotrones and other future chiefs of the war 
of Greek independence, and awoke in him that wider Hellenic 
patriotism which was so largely to influence his career. 

Throughout the period of his official connexion with the 
Ionian government, Capo d'Istria had been a consistent upholder 
of Russian influence in the islands; and when the treaty of 
Tilsit (1807) dashed his hopes by handing over the Ionian republic 
to Napoleon, he did not relinquish his belief in Russia as the most 
reliable ally of the Greek cause. He accordingly refused the 
offers made to him by the French government, and accepted the 
invitation of the Russian chancellor Romanzov to enter the tsar's 
service. He went to St Petersburg in 1809, and was appointed 
to the honorary post of attache to the foreign office, but it was 
not till two years after, in 181 1, that he was actually employed 
in diplomatic work as attache to Baron Stackelberg, the Russian 
ambassador at Vienna. His knowledge of the near East was here 
of great service, and in the following year he was attached, as chief 
of his diplomatic bureau, to Admiral Chichagov, on his mission 
to the Danubian principalities to stir up trouble in the Balkan 
peninsula as a diversion on the flank of Austria,' and to attempt 
to supplement the treaty of Bucharest by an offensive and 
defensive alliance with the Ottoman empire. The Moscow 
campaign of 181 2 intervened; Chichagov was disgraced in con- 
sequence of his failure to destroy Napoleon at the passage of the 
Beresina; but Capo d'Istria was not involved, was made a 
councillor of state and continued in his diplomatic functions. 
During the campaign of 1813 he was attached to the staff of 
Barclay de Tolly and was present at the battles of Liitzen, 
Bautzen, Dresden and Leipzig. With the advance of the allies 
he was sent to Switzerland to secure the withdrawal of the 
republic from the French alliance. Here, in spite of his instruc- 
tions to guarantee the neutrality of Switzerland, he signed on his 

1 After his election to the Greek presidency in 1827, Capo d'Istria, 
whose baptismal names were Giovanni Antonio, signed himself 
Joannes Capodistrias, the form by which he is very commonly 
known. 



own responsibility the proclamation issued by Prince Schwarzen- 
berg, stating the intention of the allied troops to march through 
the country. His motive was to prevent any appearance of dis- 
agreement among the allies. The emperor Alexander, to whom he 
hastened to make an explanation in person, endorsed his action. 

Capo d'Istria was present with the allies in Paris, and after the 
signing of the first peace of Paris he was rewarded by the tsar 
with the order of St Vladimir and his full confidence. At the 
congress of Vienna his influence was conspicuous; he represented 
the tsar on the Swiss committee, was associated with Rasumovsky 
in negotiating the tangled Polish and SaxOn questions, and was 
the Russian plenipotentiary in the discussions with the Baron 
vom Stein on the affairs of Germany. His Memoire sur V empire 
germanique, of the 9th of February 18 15, presented to the tsar, 
was based on the policy of keeping Germany weak in order to 
secure Russian preponderance in its councils. It was perhaps 
from a similar motive that, after the Waterloo campaign, he 
strenuously opposed the proposals for the dismemberment of 
France. It was on his advice that the due de Richelieu persuaded 
Louis XVIII. to write the autograph letter in which he declared 
his intention of resigning rather "than submit to any diminution 
of the territories handed down to him by his ancestors. 2 The 
treaty of the 20th of November 181 5, which formed for years the 
basis of the effective concert of Europe, was also largely his work. 

On the- 26th of September 181 5, after the proclamation of the 
Holy Alliance at the great review on the plain of Vertus, Capo 
d'Istria was named a secretary of state. On his return to St 
Petersburg, he shared the ministry of foreign affairs with Count 
Nesselrode, though the latter as senior signed all documents. 
Capo d'Istria, however, had sole charge of the newly acquired 
province of Bessarabia, which he governed conspicuously well. 
In 1818 he attended the emperor Alexander at the congress of 
Aix-la-Chapelle, and in the following year obtained leave to visit 
his home. He travelled by way of Venice, Rome and Naples, 
his progress -exciting the liveliest apprehensions of the powers, 
notably of Austria. The " Jacobin " pose of the tsar was 
notorious, his all-embracing ambition hardly less so; and Russian 
travellers in Italy, notably the emperor's former tutor, Cesar de 
Laharpe, were little careful in the expression of their sympathy 
for the ideals of the Carbonari. In Metternich's eyes Capo 
d'Istria, " the coryphaeus of liberalism," was responsible for the 
tsar's vagaries, the fount of all the ills of which the times were 
sick; and, for all the count's diplomatic reticence, the Austrian 
spies who dogged his footsteps earned their salaries by reporting 
sayings that set the reactionary courts in a flutter. For 
Metternich the overthrow of Capo d'lstria's influence became a 
necessity of political salvation. At Corfu Capo d'Istria became 
the repository of all the grievances of his countrymen against 
the robust administration of Sir Thomas Maitland. At the 
congress of Vienna the count had supported the British pro- 
tectorate over the Ionian Islands, the advantages of which from 
the point of view of trade and security were obvious; but 
the drastic methods of " King Tom's " government, symbolized 
by a gallows for pirates and other evil-doers in every popular 
gathering place, offended his local patriotism. He submitted a 
memorandum on the subject to the tsar, and before returning to 
Russia travelled via Paris to England to lay the grievances of the 
Ionians before the British government. His reception was a cold 
one, mainly due to his own disingenuousness, for he refused to 
show British ministers the memorandum which he had already 
submitted to the Russian emperor, on the ground that it was 
intended only for his own private use. The whole thing seemed, 
rightly or wrongly, an excuse for the intervention of Russia in 
affairs which were by treaty wholly British. 

On his return to St Petersburg in the autumn of 1819, Capo 
d'Istria resumed his influence in the intimate counsels of the tsar. 
The murder of the Russian agent, Kotzebue, in March, had 
shaken but not destroyed Alexander's liberalism, and it was 
Capo d'Istria who drew up the emperor's protest against the 
Carlsbad decrees and the declaration of his adherence to con- 
stitutional views (see Alexander I.). In October 1820 Capo 

2 The letter was written by Michael Stourdza and copied by Loui? 



286 



CAPODISTRIA— CAPPADOCIA 



d'Istria accompanied the tsar to the congress at Troppau. The 
events of the year — the murder of the due de Berry in March, 
the Revolutions in Spain and in Naples — had produced their 
effect. Alexander was, in Metternich's exultant language, "a 
changed man," and Capo d'Istria apparently shared his conver- 
sion to reactionary principles. The Austrian chancellor now 
put forth all his powers to bring Alexander under his own 
influence, and to overthrow Capo d'Istria, whom he despised, 
distrusted and feared. In 1821 Alexander Ypsilanti's misguided 
raid into the Danubian principalities gave him his opportunity. 
The news reached the tsar at the congress of Laibach, and to 
Capo d'Istria was entrusted the task of writing the letter to 
Ypsilanti in which the tsar repudiated his claim, publicly pro- 
claimed that he had the sympathy and support of Russia. For 
a while the position of Capo d'Istria was saved; but it was 
known that he had been approached by the agent of the Greek 
Hetairia before Ypsilanti, and that he had encouraged Ypsilanti 
to take up the ill-fated adventure which he himself had refused ; 
he was hated at the Russian court as an upstart Greek, and 
Metternich was never weary of impressing on all and sundry that 
he was " using Russian policy for Greek ends." At last nothing 
but long habit and native loyalty to those who had served him 
well, prevented Alexander from parting with a minister who had 
ceased to possess his confidence. Capo d'Istria, anticipating his 
dismissal, resigned on the eve of the tsar's departure for the 
congress of Verona (1822), and retired into private life at Geneva. 

On the nth of April 1827, the Greek national assembly at 
Troezene elected Capo d'Istria president of the republic. The 
vote was a triumph for the Russian faction, for the count, even 
after his fall, had not lost the personal regard of the emperor 
Alexander, nor ceased to consider himself a Russian official. 
He accepted the offer, but was in no hurry to take up the thank- 
less task. In July he visited the emperor Nicholas I. at Tsarskoye 
Selo, receiving permission to proceed and instructions as 
to the policy he should adopt, and he next made a tour of the 
courts of Europe in search of moral and material support. The 
news of the battle of Navarino (20th of October 1827) hastened 
his arrival; the British frigate " Warspite " was placed at his 
disposal to carry him to Greece, and on the 19th of January 1828 
he landed at Nauplia. 

Capo d'Istria 's rule in Greece had to contend against immense 
difficulties — the utter poverty of the treasury, the barbarism 
of the people but recently emancipated, the continued presence 
of Ibrahim Pasha, with an unbroken army, in the south of the 
Morea. His strength lay in his experience of affairs and in the 
support of Russia; but he was by inheritance an aristocrat and 
by training an official, lacking in broad human sympathy, and 
therefore little fitted to deal with the wild and democratic 
elements of the society it was his task to control. The Greeks 
could understand the international status given to them by his 
presidency, and for a while the enthusiasm evoked by his arrival 
made him master of the situation. He thoroughly represented 
Greek sentiment, too, in his refusal to accept the narrow limits 
which the powers, in successive protocols, sought to impose on 
the new state (see Greece). But the Russian administrative 
system by which he sought to restrain the native turbulence 
was bound in the end to be fatal to him. The wild chiefs of the 
revolution won over at first by their inclusion in his government, 
were offended by his European airs and Russian uniform, and 
alienated by his preference for the educated Greeks of the 
Phanar and of Corfu, his promotion of his brothers Viaro and 
Agostino to high commands causing special offence. Dissatisfac- 
tion ended in open rebellion; the islands revolted; Capo d'Istria 
called in the aid of the Russian admiral; and Miaoulis, the hero 
of the Greek war at sea, blew up the warships under his command 
to prevent their falling into the hands of the government. On 
land, so far as the president was concerned, the climax was 
reached with the attempt to coerce the Mavromichales of the 
Maina, the bravest and most turbulent of the mountain clans, 
whose chief .Petros Mavromichales, commonly known as Petrobey, 
had played a leading part in the War of Independence. The 
result was an insurrection in the Maina (Easter, 1830), and the I 



imprisonment of those of the Mavromichales, including Petrobey, 
who happened to be in the power of the government. At the 
news of their chieftain's imprisonment the Mainots, who had for 
a while been pacified, once more flew to arms and threatened to 
march on Nauplia; but negotiations were opened, and on the 
advice of the Russian minister Petrobey consented to make his 
submission to the president. Unhappily, when he was brought 
under guard to the appointed interview, Capo d'Istria, in a 
moment of irritation and weariness, refused to see him. Maddened 
with rage at this insult from a man who had not struck a blow 
for Greece, the proud old chief, on his way back to prison, called 
out to two of his kinsmen, his son George and his brother 
Constantine, " You see how I fare," and passed on. Accord- 
ing to the code of the Maina this was a command to take 
revenge. Next day, the gth of October 1831, the two placed 
themselves at the door of the church where Capo d'Istria 
was accustomed to worship. As he passed in Constantine 
shot him down, and as he fell George thrust a dagger into his 
heart. 

Authorities. — Carl W. P. Mendelssohn-Bartholdy's Graf Jo'hann 
Kapodistrias (Berlin, 1864) is based on all the sources, printed and 
unprinted, available at the time of publication, and contains an 
excellent guide to these. This may be supplemented by the historical 
sections of F. de Marten's Recueil des trailes conclus par la Russie, &c. 
(1874, &c). A sketch of Capo d'lstria's activity as president will 
be found in W. Alison Phillips's The War of Greek Independence 
(London, 1897). Many of Capo d'lstria's despatches, &c, are 
published in the collections of diplomatic correspondence mentioned 
in the bibliography of the article Europe: History. Under the 
Russian title " Zapiska grapha Joanna Capodistrias " is published in 
the series of the Imperial Russian Historical Society,vol.iii. p. 163 (St 
Petersburg, 1868) theApercude ma carribre publique, written by Capo 
d'Istria for presentation to the emperor Alexander, and dated at 
Geneva Jf December 1826. Of unpublished materials may be 
mentioned the letters of Capo d'Istria to Sir Richard Church.vol. xvi. 
of the Church Papers in the British Museum (Add. MSS. 36453- 
36571). See further bibliography to chapter vi. of vol. x. of the 
Cambridge Modern History (1907). (W. A. P.) 

CAPODISTRIA, a town and seaport of Austria, in Istria, 
15 m. S.W. of Trieste by rail. Pop. (1900) 10,711, mostly Italians. 
It is situated on a small island, which occupies the end of a large 
bay in the Gulf of Trieste, and which is connected with the 
mainland by a causeway half a mile in length. Capodistria is an 
old town with small streets, and has preserved remarkably well 
its Italian, almost its Venetian character. The most noteworthy 
buildings are the cathedral, the town-hall and the Loggia or the 
old law-court, all situated in the principal square. In addition 
to the extraction of salt from the sea in the extensive salt works 
near the town, fishing and shipbuilding are the other principal 
occupations of the population. Trade is chiefly in sea-salt, wine 
and oil. Capodistria is usually identified with the town of 
Aegida, mentioned by Pliny, which appears by an inscription 
to have afterwards received (in the 6 th century) the name of 
Justinopolis from Justin II. When at the beginning of the 13th 
century Istria fell into the hands of the patriarchs of Aquileia, 
they made this town the capital of the whole province. Thence 
it acquired its actual name, which means the capital of Istria. 
It was captured by the Venetians in 1279, and passed into 
Austrian possession in 1797. 

CAPONIER (from the Fr. caponniere, properly a capon-cote 
or house), in fortification, a work constructed in the ditch of a ' 
fort. Its fire (musketry, machine-guns, case shot, &c.) sweeps 
the bottom of the ditch and prevents an enemy from establishing 
himself in it. The term is used in a military sense as early as in 
the late 17th century. In various bastioned systems of fortifica- 
tion a caponier served merely as a covered means of access to 
outworks, the bastion trace providing for the defence of the 
ditch by fire from the main parapet. 

CAPPADOCIA, in ancient geography, an extensive inland 
district of Asia Minor. In the time of Herodotus the Cappa* 
docians occupied the whole region from Mount Taurus to the 
Euxine. That author tells us that the name of the Cappadocians 
(Katpatouka) was applied to them by the Persians, while they 
were termed by the Greeks " Syrians," or " White Syrians " 
(Leucosyri). Under the later kings of the Persian empire the 



CAPPADOCIA 



287 



were divided into two satrapies or governments, the one com- 
prising the central and inland portion, to which the name of 
Cappadocia continued to be applied by Greek geographers, while 
the other was called Cappadocia Kara Uovrov, or simply Pontus 
(q.v.). This division had already come about before the time 
of Xenophon. As after the fall of the Persian government the 
two provinces continued to be separate, the distinction was per- 
petuated, and the name Cappadocia came to be restricted to 
the inland province (sometimes called Great Cappadocia), which 
alone will be considered in the present article. 

Cappadocia, in this sense, was bounded S. by the chain of 
Mount Taurus, E. by the Euphrates, N. by Pontus, and W. 
vaguely by the great central salt " Desert " (Axylon). But it is 
impossible to define its limits with accuracy. Strabo, the only 
ancient author who gives any circumstantial account of the 
country, greatly exaggerated its dimensions; it was in reality 
about 250 m. in length by less than 150 in breadth. With the 
exception of a narrow strip of the district called Melitene, on the 
east, which forms part of the valley of the Euphrates, the whole 
of this region is a high upland tract, attaining to more than 
3000 ft., and constituting the most elevated portion of the great 
tableland of Asia Minor (q.v.) . The western parts of the province, 
where it adjoins Lycaonia, extending thence to the foot of 
Mount Taurus, are open treeless plains, affording pasture in 
modern as in ancient times to numerous flocks of sheep, but 
almost wholly desolate. But out of the midst of this great 
upland level rise detached groups or masses of mountains, mostly 
of volcanic origin, of which the loftiest are Mount Argaeus (still 
called by the Turks Erjish Dagh), (13,100 ft.), and Hassan Dagh 
to the south-west (8000 ft.). 

The eastern portion of the province is of a more varied and 
broken character, being traversed by the mountain system 
called by the Greeks Anti-Taurus. Between these mountains 
and the southern chain of Taurus, properly so called, lies the 
region called in ancient times Cataonia, occupying an upland 
plain surrounded by mountains. This district in the time of 
Strabo formed a portion of Cappadocia and was completely 
assimilated; but earlier writers and the Persian military system 
regarded the Cataonians as a distinct people. 

Cappadocia contained the sources of the Sarus and Pyramus 
rivers with their higher affluents, and also the middle course of 
the Halys (see Asia Minor) , and the whole course of the tributary 
of Euphrates now called Tokhma Su. But as no one of these 
rivers was navigable or served to fertilize the lands along its 
torrential course, none has much importance in the history of 
the province. 

The kingdom of Cappadocia, which was still in existence in 
the time of Strabo, as a nominally independent state, was 
divided, according to that geographer, into ten districts. Of 
these Cataonia has been described; the adjoining district of 
Melitene, which did not originally form part of Cappadocia at all, 
but was annexed to it by Ariarathes I., was a fertile tract adjoining 
the Euphrates; its chief town retains the name of Malatia. 
Cilicia was the name given to the district in which Caesarea, the 
capital of the whole country was situated, and in which rose the 
conspicuous Mount Argaeus. Tyanitis, the region of which Tyana 
was the capital, was a level tract in the extreme south, extend- 
ing to the foot of Mount Taurus. Garsauritis appears to have 
comprised the western or south-western districts adjoining 
Lycaonia; its chief town was Archelais. Laviansene or Laviniane 
was the country south and south-east of Sivas, through which 
ran the road from Sebastea to Caesarea: Sargarausene lay south 
of the above, and included Uzun Yaila and the upper basin of 
the Tokhma Su; Saravene lay west of Laviansene and included 
the modern district of Ak Dagh; Chamanene lay west again 
of the above along the middle course of the Halys: Morimene 
was the north-western district extending along the edge of the 
central desert as far south as Melegob. 

The only two cities of Cappadocia considered by Strabo to 
deserve that appellation were Mazaca, the capital of the kingdom 
under its native monarchs (see Caesarea-Mazaca) ; and Tyana, 
not far from the foot of the Taurus, the site of which is marked by 



a great mound at a place called Kiz (or Ekuz) Hissar, about 
12 m. south-west of Nigdeh. Archelais, founded by Archelaus, 
the last king of the country, subsequently became a Roman 
colony, and a place of some importance. It is now Akserai. 

Several localities in the Cappadocian country were the sites of 
famous temples. Among these the most celebrated were those of 
Comana (q.v.) and Venasa in Morimene, where a male god was 
served by over 3000 hieroduli. The local sanctity of Venasa has 
been perpetuated by the Moslem veneration for Haji Bektash, 
the founder of the order of dervishes to which the Janissaries 
used in great part to belong. Cappadocia was remarkable for the 
number of its slaves, which constituted the principal wealth of 
its monarchs. Large numbers were sent to Rome but did not 
enjoy a good reputation. The Cappadocian peasants are still 
in the habit of taking service in the West of the peninsula and 
only returning to their homes after long absences; their labour 
is now much valued by employers, as they are a strong sober 
folk. The province was celebrated for its horses, as well as for 
its vast flocks of sheep; but from its elevation above the sea, and 
the coldness of its climate, it could never have been rich and 
fertile. 

History. — Nothing is known of the history of Cappadocia 
before it became subject to the Persian empire, except that the 
country was the home of a great " Hittite " power centred at 
Boghaz-Keui (see Pteria), which has left monuments at many 
places, e.g. Nevsheher, Fraktin, Gorun, Malatia, various points 
about Albistan and Derendeh, Bulgur Maden, Andaval and 
Tyana. Possibly the princes of the last named city were inde- 
pendent. With the decline of the Syro-Cappadocians after their 
defeat by Croesus, Cappadocia was left in the power of a sort of 
feudal aristocracy, dwelling in strong castles and keeping the 
peasants in a servile condition, which later made them apt for 
foreign slavery. It was included in the third Persian satrapy in 
the division established by Darius, but long continued to be 
governed by rulers of its own, none apparently supreme over the 
whole country and all more or less tributary to the Great King. 
Thoroughly subdued at last by the satrap Datames, Cappadocia 
recovered independence under a single ruler, Ariarathes (hence 
called Ariarathes I.), who was a contemporary of Alexander the 
Great, and maintained himself on the throne of Cappadocia 
after the fall of the Persian monarchy. 

The province was not visited by Alexander, who contented 
himself with the tributary acknowledgment of his sovereignty 
made by Ariarathes before the conqueror's departure from Asia 
Minor; and the continuity of the native dynasty was only in- 
terrupted for a short time after Alexander's death, when the 
kingdom fell, in the general partition of the empire, to Eumenes. 
His claims were made good in 322 by the regent Perdiccas, who 
crucified Ariarathes; but in the dissensions following Eumenes's 
death, the son of Ariarathes recovered his inheritance and left it 
to a line of successors, who mostly bore the name of the founder 
of the dynasty/ Under the fourth of the name Cappadocia 
came into relations with Rome, first as a foe espousing the cause 
of Antiochus the Great, then as an ally against Perseus of 
Macedon. The kings henceforward threw in their lot with the 
Republic as against the Seleucids, to whom they had been from 
time to time tributary. Ariarathes V. marched with the Roman 
proconsul Crassus against Aristonicus, a claimant to the throne of 
Pergammum, and their forces were annihilated (130 B.C.). The 
imbroglio which followed his death ultimately led to interference 
by the rising power of Pontus and the intrigues and wars which 
ended in the failure of the dynasty. The Cappadocians, sup- 
ported by Rome against Mithradates, elected a native lord, 
Ariobarzanes, to succeed (93 B.C.); but it was not till Rome had 
disposed at once of the Pontic and Armenian kings that his 
rule was established (63 B.C.). In the civil wars Cappadocia was 
now for Pompey, now for Caesar, now for Antony, now against 
him. The Ariobarzanes dynasty came to an end and a certain 
Archelaus reigned in its stead, by favour first of Antony, then of 
Octavian, and maintained tributary independence till a.d. 17, 
when the emperor Tiberius, on Archelaus's death in disgrace, 
reduced Cappadocia at last to a province. Vespasian in a.d. 70 



288 



CAPPEL— CAPPELLO 



joined Armenia Minor to it and made the combined province 
a frontier bulwark. It remained, under various provincial 
redistributions, part of the Eastern Empire till late in the 
nth century, though often ravaged both by Persians and 
Arabs. But before it passed into Seljuk hands (1074), and from 
them ultimately to the Osmanlis, it had, already become largely 
Armenian in religion and speech; and thus we find the southern 
part referred to as " Hermeniorum terra " by crusading chroni- 
clers. At this day the north-east and east parts of the province 
are largely inhabited by Armenians. The native kings had done 
much to Hellenize Cappadocia, which had previously received 
a strong Iranian colour; but it was left to Christianity to com- 
plete their work. Though pre-Hellenic usages long survived in 
the local cults and habits, a part of the people has remained more 
or less Hellenic to this day, in spite of its envelopment by Moslem 
conquerors and converts. The tradition of its early church, 
illuminated by the names of the two Gregories and Basil of 
Caesarea, has been perpetuated by the survival of a native 
Orthodox element throughout the west and north-west of the 
province; and in the remoter valleys Greek speech has never 
wholly died out. Its use has once more become general under 
Greek propagandist influence, and the Cappadocian " Greeks " 
are now a flourishing community. 

Bibliography. — W. Wright, Empire of the Hittites (1884); 
G. Perrot and C. Chipiez, Hist, de fart dans V antiquite, vol. iv. 
(1886); A. H. Sayce, Hittites (1892) (see also Pteria) ; J. G. 
Droysen, Gesch. des Hellenismus (3rd ed., 1878); A. Holm, Gesch. 
Griech. (Eng. trans., 1886) ; Th. Reinach, Mithridate Eupator (1890) ; 
E. R. Bevan, House of Seleucus (1902) ; Th. Mommsen, Provinces of 
the Roman Empire (Eng. trans., 1886) ; J. Marquardt, Rom. Staatsver- 
waltung, i. (1874) ; W. M. Ramsey, Hist. Geog. of Asia Minor (1890) ; 
C. Ritter, Erdkunde, xviii. xix. (1858-1859); D. G. Hogarth and 
J. A. R. Munro, Mod. and Anc. Roads in E. Asia Minor (R. G. S. 
Supp. Papers, iii. 1893); G. Perrot, Souvenirs d'un voyage dans VA. 
Mineure (1864); H. J. v. Lennep, Travels in Asia Minor (1870); 
E. Chantre, Mission en Cappadocie (1898) ; H. F. Tozer, Turkish 
Armenia (1881); H. C. Barkley, Ride Through A. M. and Armenia 
(1891); Lord Warkworth, Notes of a Diary in As. Turkey (1898); 
M. Sykes, Bar id-Islam (1904). (E. H. B. ; D. G. H.) 

CAPPEL, a French family which produced some distinguished 
jurists and theologians in the 15th and 16th centuries. In 1491, 
Guillaume Cappel, as rector of the university of Paris, protested 
against a tithe which Innocent VIII. claimed from that body. 
His nephew, Jacques Cappel (d. 1541), the real founder of the 
family, was himself advocate-general at the parlement of Paris, 
and in a celebrated address delivered before the court in 1537, 
against the emperor Charles V., claimed for Francis I. the 
counties of Artois, Flanders and Charolais. He left nine chil- 
dren, of whom three became Protestants. The eldest, Jacques 
(1529-1586), sieur du Tilloy, wrote several treatises on juris- 
prudence. Louis (1534-1586), sieur de Moriambert, the fifth 
son, was a most ardent Protestant. In 1570 he presented a 
confession of faith to Charles IX. in the name of his co-re- 
ligionists. He disputed at Sedan before the due de Bouillon 
with the Jesuit, Jean Maldonat (1534-1583), and wrote in de- 
fence of Protestantism. The seventh son, Ange (1537-1623), 
seigneur du Luat, was secretary to Henry IV., and enjoyed the 
esteem of Sully. Among those who remained Catholic should be 
mentioned Guillaume, the translator of Machiavelli. The eldest 
son Jacques also left two sons, famous in the history of Pro- 
testantism: — Jacques (1570-1624), pastor of the church founded 
by himself on his fief of le Tilloy and afterwards at Sedan, where 
he became professor of Hebrew, distinguished as historian, 
philologist and exegetical scholar; and Louis (see below). 

On the protest of Guillaume Cappel, see Du Bellay, Historia 
Universitatis Parisicnsis, vol. y. On the family, see the sketch by 
another Jacques Cappel, " De Capellorum gente," in the Com- 
mentarii et notae criticae in Vetus Testamentum of Louis Cappel, his 
father (Amsterdam, 1689). Consult Eugene and Emile Haag, La 
France protestante, vol. iii. (new edition, 1881). 

CAPPEL, LOUIS (1585-1658), French Protestant divine and 
scholar, a Huguenot whose descent is traced above, was 
born at St Elier, near Sedan, in 1585. He studied theology 
at Sedan and Saumur; and Arabic at Oxford, where he spent 
two years. At the age of twenty-eight he accepted the chair of 



Hebrew at Saumur, and twenty years afterwards was appointed 
professor of theology. Amongst his fellow lecturers were Moses 
Amyraut and Josue de la Place. As a Hebrew scholar he made 
a special study of the history of the Hebrew text, which led 
him to the conclusion that the vowel points and accents are 
not an original part of the Hebrew language, but were inserted 
by the Massorete Jews of Tiberias, not earlier than the 5th 
century A.D., and that the primitive Hebrew characters are those 
now known as the Samaritan, while the square characters are 
Aramaic and were substituted for the more ancient at the time 
of the captivity. These conclusions were hotly contested by 
Johannes Buxtorf, being in conflict with the views of his father, 
Johannes Buxtorf senior, notwithstanding the fact that Elias 
Levita had already disputed the antiquity of the vowel points 
and that neither Jerome nor the Talmud shows any acquaintance 
with them. His second important work, Critica Sacra, was 
distasteful from a theological point of view. He had completed 
it in 1634; but owing to the fierce opposition with which he had 
to contend, he was only able to print it at Paris in 1650, by aid 
of a son, who had turned Catholic. The various readings in the 
Old Testament text and the differences between the ancient 
versions and the Massoretic text convinced him that the idea 
of the integrity of the Hebrew text, as commonly held by Pro- 
testants, was untenable. This amounted to an attack on the 
verbal inspiration of Scripture. Bitter, however, as was the 
opposition to his views, it was not long before his results were 
accepted by scholars. 

Cappel was also the author of Annotationes et Commentarii in 
Vetus Testamentum, Chronologia Sacra, and other biblical works, 
as well as of several other treatises on Hebrew, among which are the 
Arcanum Punctuationis revelatum (1624) and the Diatriba de veris et 
antiquis Ebraeorum Uteris (1645). His Commentarius de Capellorum 
gente, giving an account of the family to which he belonged, was 
published by his nephew James Cappel (1 639-1 722), who, at the age 
of eighteen, became professor of Hebrew at Saumur, but, on the 
revocation of the edict of Nantes, fled to England, where he died in 
1722. See Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklopddie. 

CAPPELLO, BIANCA (1548-1587), grand duchess of Tuscany, 
was the daughter of Bartolommeo Cappello, a member of one 
of the richest and noblest Venetian families, and was famed for 
her great beauty. At the age of fifteen she fell in love with 
Pietro Bonaventuri, a young Florentine clerk in the firm of 
Salviati, and on the 28th of November 1563 escaped with him 
to Florence, where they were married and she had a daughter 
named Pellegrina. The Venetian government made every effort 
to have Bianca arrested and brought back, but the grand duke 
Cosimo de' Medici intervened in her favour and she was left 
unmolested. However she did not get on well with her husband's 
family, who were very poor and made her do menial work, until 
at last her beauty attracted Francesco, the grand duke's son, 
a vicious and unprincipled rake. Although already married to 
the virtuous and charming Archduchess Giovanna of Austria, 
he seduced the fair Venetian and loaded her with jewels, money 
and other presents. Bianca's accommodating husband was given 
court employment, and consoled himself with other ladies; 
in 1572 he was murdered in the streets of Florence in consequence 
of some amorous intrigue, though possibly Bianca and Francesco 
were privy to the deed. On the death of Cosimo in 1 574 Francesco 
succeeded to the grand duchy; he now installed Bianca in a 
fine palace close to his own and outraged his wife by flaunting 
his mistress before her. As Giovanna had borne Francesco 
no sons, Bianca was very anxious to present him with an heir, 
for otherwise her position would remain very insecure. But 
although she resorted to all sorts of expedients, even to that of 
trying to pass off a changeling as the grand duke's child, she was 
not successful. In 1578 Giovanna died; a few days later 
Francesco secretly married Bianca, and on the 10th of June, 
1579, the marriage was publicly announced. The Venetian 
government now put aside its resentment and was officially 
represented at the magnificent w r edding festivities, for it saw 
in Bianca Cappello an instrument for cementing good relations 
with Tuscany. But the long expected heir failed to come, 
and Bianca realized that if her husband were to die before her 
she was lost, for his family, especially his brother Cardinal 



CAPPERONNIER— CAPPONI 



289 



Ferdinand, hated her bitterly, as an adventuress and interloper. 
In October 1587 both the grand duke and his wife died of colic 
within a couple of days of each other. At the time poison was 
suspected, but documentary evidence has proved the suspicion 
to be unfounded. 

See S. Romanin, Lezioni di storia Veneta, vol. ii. (Florence, 1875) ; 
G. E. Saltini, Tragedie Medicee domestiche (Florence, 1898). 

(L.V.*) 

CAPPERONNIER, CLAUDE (1671-1744), French classical 
scholar, the son of a tanner, was born at Montdidier on the 1st of 
May 1671. He studied at Amiens and Paris, and took orders in the 
Church of Rome, but devoted himself almost entirely to classical 
studies. He declined a professorship in the university of Bale, 
and was afterwards appointed (1722) to the Greek chair in the 
College de France. He published an edition of Quintilian (1725) 
and left behind him at his death an edition of the ancient Latin 
Rhetoricians, which was published in 1756. He furnished much 
material for Robert Estienne's Thesaurus Linguae Latinae. 
His nephew, Jean Capperonnier (1716-1775), his successor 
in the chair of Greek at the College de France, was also a distin- 
guished scholar, and published valuable editions of classical 
authors — Caesar, Anacreon, Plautus, Sophocles. 

CAPPONI, GINO, Marquis (1792-1876), Italian statesman 
and historian, was born on the 13th of September 1702. The 
Capponi family is one of the most illustrious Florentine houses, 
and is mentioned as early as 1250; it acquired great wealth 
as a mercantile and banking firm, and many of its members 
distinguished themselves in the service of the republic and the 
Medicis (see Capponi, Piero), and later in that of the house of 
Lorraine. Gino was the son of the Marquis Pier Roberto 
Capponi, a nobleman greatly attached to the reigning grand 
duke of Tuscany, Ferdinand III. When that prince was deposed 
by the French in 1799 the Capponi family followed him into 
exile at Vienna, where they remained until he exchanged his 
rights to the grand duchy for a German principality (1803). 
The Capponi then returned to Florence, and in 181 1 Gino married 
the marchesina Giulia Riccardi. Although the family were 
very anti-French Gino was chosen with other notables to pay 
homage to Napoleon in Paris in 1 813. On the fall of Napoleon 
Ferdinand returned to Tuscany (September 1814), but the restora- 
tion proved less reactionary there than in any other part of 
Italy. Young Capponi was well received at court, but not being 
satisfied with the life of a mere man of fashion, he devoted himself 
to serious study and foreign travel. After sundry journeys in 
Italy he again visited Paris in 1818, and then went to England. 
He became deeply interested in English institutions, and care- 
fully studied the constitution, the electoral system, university 
life, industrial organization, &c. At Edinburgh he met Francis 
Jeffrey, the editor of the Edinburgh Review, and conceived a 
desire to found a similar review in Italy. Besides knowing 
Jeffrey he made the acquaintance of many prominent statesmen 
and men of letters, including Lord John. Russell, the duke of 
Bedford, Dugald Stewart, Ugo Foscolo, &c. This visit had a 
great effect in forming his character, and while it made him 
an ardent Anglophil, he realized more and more the distressing 
conditions of his own country. He returned to Italy in 1820, 
and on reaching Florence he set to work to found a review on 
the lines of the Edinburgh, which should attract the best literary 
talent. This he achieved with the help of the Swiss G. P. 
Vieusseux, and the result was the Antologia. He contributed 
largely to its columns, as well as to those of the Archivio Storico, 
another of Vieusseux's ventures. Capponi began to take a 
more active interest in politics, and entered into communication 
with the Liberals of all parts of Italy. He had discussed the 
possibility of liberating Italy with Prince Charles Albert of 
Savoy-Carignano, to whom he had ijtfroduced the Milanese 
revolutionist Count Confalonieri (?.».). But the collapse of the 
rising of 1821 and the imprisonment of Confalonieri made 
Capponi despair of achieving anything by revolution, and he 
devoted himself to the economic development of Tuscany and 
to study. At his beautiful villa of Varramista he collected 
materials for a history of the Church; his work was interrupted 



by family troubles and by increasing blindness, but although 
by 1844 he had completely lost his sight he continued to work by 
means of amanuenses. In 1847 he again plunged into politics 
and discussed plans for an Italian alliance against Austria. 
When the grand duke Leopold II. decided in 1848 to grant his 
people a constitution, Capponi was made a member of the 
commission to draw it up, and he eventually became prime 
minister. During his short tenure of office he conducted foreign 
affairs with great skill, and made every effort to save the Italian 
situation after the defeat of Charles Albert on the Mincio. In 
October 1848 he resigned; soon afterwards the grand duke 
fled, anarchy followed, and then in 1849 he returned, but with 
an escort of Austrian soldiery. The blind statesman thanked 
God that he could not see the hated white uniforms in Florence. 
He returned to his studies and commenced his great Storia 
della Repubblica di Firenze; but he followed political affairs 
with great interest, and helped to convince Lord John Russell, 
who stayed with him in 1859, of the hopelessness of the grand 
duke's position. On Leopold's second flight (27th of April 
1859) a Tuscan assembly was summoned, and Capponi elected 
member of it. He voted for the grand duke's deposition and 
for the union of Tuscany with Piedmont. King Victor Emmanuel 
made him senator in i860. His last years were devoted almost 
exclusively to his Florentine history, which was published in 
1875 and achieved an immediate success. This was Capponi's 
swan song, for on the 3rd of February 1876 he died at the age of 
eighty-four. 

Capponi was one of the best specimens of the Tuscan landlord 
class. " He represents," wrote his biographer Tabarrini, 
" one of the most striking personalities of a generation, now 
wholly passed away, which did not resign itself to the beatitudes 
of 181 5, but wished to raise Italy from the humble state to which 
the European peace of that year had condemned her; and he 
succeeded by first raising the character of the Italians in the 
opinion of foreigners, so as to deserve their esteem and respect." 
He knew nearly all the most interesting people in Italy, besides 
many distinguished foreigners: Giuseppe Giusti, the poet, 
A. Manzoni, the novelist, Niccolo Tommaseo, Richard Cobden, 
A. von Reumont, the historian, were among those whom he 
entertained at his palace or his villas, and many were the strug- 
gling students and revolutionists to whom he gave assistance. 
As a historian his reputation rests on his Storia della Repubblica 
di Firenze (Florence, 1875); it was the first comprehensive 
Italian book on the subject based on documents and written 
in a modern critical spirit, and if the chapters on the early 
history of the city are now obsolete in view of recent discoveries, 
yet, as a whole, it remains a standard work. Besides his history 
a large number of essays and pamphlets have been published 
in his Scritti Inediti. 

See M. Tabarrini, Gino Capponi (Florence, 1879) ; and A. voa 
Reumont, Gino Capponi (Gotha, 1880). (L. V.*) 

CAPPONI, PIERO (144 7-1496), Florentine statesman and 
warrior. He was at first intended for a business career, but 
Lorenzo de' Medici, appreciating his ability, sent him as am- 
bassador to various courts, where he acquitted himself with 
distinction. On the death of Lorenzo (1492), who was succeeded 
by his son, the weak and incapable Piero, Capponi became one of 
the leaders of the anti-Medicean faction which two years later 
expelled him from Florence. Capponi was then made chief of 
the republic and conducted public affairs with great skill, notably 
in the difficult negotiations with Charles VIII. of France, who 
had invaded Italy in 1494 and in whose camp the exiled Medici 
had taken refuge. In November Charles, on his way to Naples, 
entered Florence with his army, and immediately began to 
behave as though he were the conqueror of the city, because he 
had entered it lance in rest. The signory was anxious to be on 
good terms with him, but when he spoke in favour of the Medici 
their temper changed at once, and the citizens were ordered 
to arm and be prepared for all emergencies. Tumults broke 
out between French soldiers and Florentine citizens, barricades 
were erected and stones began to fly from the windows. This 
alarmed Charles, who lowered his tone and said nothing more 



290 



CAPRAIA— CAPRIFOLIACEAE 



about conquered cities or the Medici. The Florentines were 
willing to pay him a large sum of money, but in settling the 
amount further disagreements arose. Charles, who was full of 
the Medici's promises, made exorbitant demands, and finally 
presented an ultimatum to the signory, who rejected it. 
" Then we shall sound our trumpets," said the king, to which 
Capponi replied " And we shall toll our bells," and tore up the 
ultimatum in the king's face. Charles, who did not relish the 
idea of house-to-house fighting, was forced to moderate his claims, 
and concluded a more equitable treaty with the republic. On 
the 28th of November he departed, and Capponi was appointed 
to reform the government of Florence. But being more at home 
in the camp than in the council chamber, he was glad of the 
opportunity of leading the armies of the republic against the 
Pisan rebels. He proved a most capable general, but while 
besieging the castle of Soiana, he was killed on the 25th of 
September 1496. His death was greatly regretted, for the 
Florentines recognized in him their ablest statesman and 
warrior. 

See under Savonarola, Florence, Medici, Charles VIII. The 
" Vita di Piero di Gino Capponi," by V. Acciaiuoli (published in the 
Archivio Storico Italiano, series 1, vol. iv. part 2", 1853), is the chief 
contemporary authority; see also P. Villari, Savonarola, vol. i. 
(Florence, 1 887) , and Gino Capponi, Storia della Repubblica di Firenze, 
vol. ii. (Florence, 1875). (L. V.*) 

CAPRAIA (anc. Capraria, from Lat. capra, wild-goat), an 
island of Italy, off the N.W. coast (the highest point 1466 ft. 
above sea-level), belonging to the province of Genoa, 42 m. S.S.E. 
of Leghorn by sea. Pop. (1901) 547. It is of volcanic origin, 
and is partly occupied by a penal agricultural colony. It pro- 
duces wine, and is a centre of the anchovy fishery. It became 
Genoese in 1527 and was strongly fortified. In 1796 it was 
occupied for a short time by Nelson. About 20 m. to the north 
is the island of Gorgona (highest point 836 ft.), also famous for 
its anchovies. 

CAPRERA, an island off the N.E. coast of Sardinia, about 
1 m. in length. It is connected by a bridge with La Madda- 
lena. Its chief interest lies in its connexion with Garibaldi, 
who first established himself there in 1854, and died there on 
the 2nd of June 1882. His tomb is visited on this anniversary by 
Italians from all parts. Roman remains, including a bust of 
Maximian, have been found upon the island. 

CAPRI (anc. Capreae), an island on the S. side of the Bay of 
Naples, of which it commands a fine view; it forms part of the 
province of Naples, and is distant about 20 m. S. of the town of 
Naples. Pop. (1901) of the commune of Capri, 3890, of Anacapri, 
2316. It divides the exits from the bay into two, the Bocca 
Grande, about 16 m. wide, between Capri and Ischia, and the 
Bocca Piccola, 3 m. wide between Capri and the extreme south- 
west point of the peninsula of Sorrento. It is 4 m. in length and 
the greatest width is 15 m., the total area being 55 sq. m. The 
highest point is the Monte Solaro (1920 ft.) on the west, while at 
the east end the cliffs rise to a height of 900 ft. sheer from the 
sea. The only safe landing-place is on the north side. There are 
two small towns, Capri (45*.ft.) and Anacapri (980 ft.), which 
until the construction of a carriage road in 1874 were connected 
only by a flight of 784 steps (the substructures of which at least 
are ancient). The island lacks water, .and is dusty during 
drought, but is fertile, producing fruit, wine and olive oil; the 
indigenous flora comprises 800 species. The fishing industry 
also is important. But the prosperity of the island depends 
mainly upon foreign visitors (some 30,000 annually), who are 
attracted by the remarkable beauty of the scenery (that of the 
coast being especially fine), the views of the sea and of the Bay of 
Naples, and the purity of the air. The famous Blue Grotto, the 
most celebrated of the many caves in the rocky shores of the 
island, was known in Roman times, but lost until 1826, when it 
was rediscovered. Another beautiful grotto has green instead of 
blue refractions; the effect in both cases is due to the light 
t entering by a small entrance. 

The high land in the west of the island and the somewhat less 
elevated region in the east are formed of Upper Tithonian and 
Lower Cretaceous limestones, the latter containing Rudistes. 



The intervening depression, which seems to be bounded on the 
west by a fault, is filled to a large extent by sandstones and marls 
of Eocene age. A superficial layer of recent volcanic tuffs 
occurs in several parts of the island. The Blue Grotto is in the 
Tithonian limestones; it shows indications of recent changes of 
level. ,., 

The earliest mythical inhabitants (though some have localized 
the Sirens here) are the Teleboi from Acarnania under their king 
Telon. Neolithic remains were found in 1882 in the Grotta delle 
Felci, a cave on the south coast. In historical times we find the 
island occupied by Greeks. It subsequently fell into the hands of 
Neapolis, and remained so until the time of Augustus, who took 
it in exchange for Aenaria (Ischia) and often resided there. 
Tiberius, who spent the last ten years of his life at Capri, built no 
fewer than twelve villas there; to these the great majority of the 
numerous and considerable ancient remains on the island belong. 
All these villas can be identified with more or less certainty, the 
best preserved being those on the east extremity, consisting of 
a large number of vaulted substructures and the foundations 
perhaps of a pharos (lighthouse). One was known as Villa Jo vis, 
and the other eleven were probably named after other deities. 
The existence of numerous ancient cisterns shows that in Roman 
as in modern times rain-water was largely used for lack of springs. 
After Tiberius's death the island seems to have been little 
visited by the emperors, and we hear of it only as a place of 
banishment for the wife and sister of Commodus. The island, 
having been at first the property of Neapolis, and later of the 
emperors, never had upon it any community with civic rights. 
Even in imperial times Greek was largely spoken there, for about 
as many Greek as Latin inscriptions have been found. The 
medieval town was on the north side at the chief landing-place 
(Marina Grande), and to it belonged the church of S. Costanzo, an 
early Christian building. It was abandoned in the 15th century 
on account of the inroads of pirates, and the inhabitants took 
refuge higher up at the two towns of Capri and Anacapri. 

In 1806 the island was taken by the English fleet under Sir 
Sidney Smith, and strongly fortified, but in 1808 it was retaken 
by the French under Lamarque. In 1813 it was restored to 
Ferdinand I. of the Two Sicilies. 

See J. Beloch, Campanien (Breslau, 1890), 278 seq.; G. Feola, 
Rapporto sullo stato dei ruderi Augusto-Tiberiani — MS. inedito, 
publicato dal Dott. Ignazio Cerio (Naples, 1894); F. Furchheim, 
Bibliografia dell' Isola di Capri e della provincia Sorrentina (Naples, 
1899); C. Weichhardt, Das Schloss des Tiberius und andere Romer- 
bauten auf Capri (Leipzig, '1900). (T. As.) 

CAPRICCIO, or Caprice (Ital. for a sudden motion or fancy), 
a musical term for a lively composition of an original and fan- 
tastic nature, not following a set musical form, although 
the first known, written for the harpsichord, partook of the 
nature of a fugue. The word is also used for pieces of a 
fanciful type, in the nature of transcriptions and variations. 

CAPRICORNUS ('.'The Goat"), in astronomy, the tenth 
sign of the zodiac (q.v.), represented by the symbol!? intended 
to denote the crooked horns of this animal. The word is derived 
from Lat. caper, a goat, and cornu, a horn. It is also a constella- 
tion of the southern hemisphere, mentioned by Eudoxus (4th 
century B.C.) and Aratus (3rd century B.C.); Ptolemy and Tycho 
Brahe catalogued 28 stars, Hevelius gave 29. It was represented 
by the ancients as a creature having the forepart a goat, and the 
hindpart a fish, or sometimes simply as a goat. An interesting 
member of this constellation is a-Capricorni, a pair of stars of 3rd 
and 4th magnitudes, each of which has a companion of the 9th 
magnitude. 

CAPRIFOLIACEAE, a natural order of plants belonging to 
the sympetalous or higher division of Dicotyledons, that namely 
which is characterized by having the petals of the flower united. 
The plants are mainly shrubs and trees; British representatives 
are Sambticus (elder) , Viburnum (guelder-rose and wayfaring tree), 
Lonicera (honeysuckle) (see fig.); Adoxa (moschatel), a small 
herb with a creeping stem and small yellowish-green flowers, is 
occasionally found on damp hedge-banks; Linnaea, a slender 
creeping evergreen with a thread-like stem and pink bell-shaped 



CAPRIVI DE CAPRERA DE MONTECUCCOLI 



291 



flower, a northern plant, occurs in fir-forests and plantations in 
the north of England and Scotland. The leaves are opposite, 
simple as in honeysuckle, or compound as in elder; they have 
usually no stipules. The flowers are regular as in Viburnum 




Flowering shoot of Lonicera Caprifolium, slightly reduced. 1 , Fruit 
slightly reduced; 2, horizontal plan of arrangement of flower. 

and Sambucus, more rarely two-lipped as in Lonicera; the sepals 
and petals are usually five in number and placed above the ovary, 
the five stamens are attached to the corolla-tube, there are three 
to five carpels, and the fruit is a berry as in honeysuckle or 
snowberry (Symphoricarpus), or a stone fruit, with several, 
usually three, stones, as in Sambucus. 

In Sambucus and Viburnum the small white flowers are 
massed in heads; honey is secreted at the base of the styles 
and, the tube of the flower being very short, is exposed to the 
visits of flies and insects with short probosces. The flowers of 
Lonicera, which have a long tube, open in the evening, when they 
are sweet-scented and are visited by hawk-moths. The order 
contains about 250 species, chiefly natives of the north temperate 
zone and the mountains of the tropics. Several genera afford 
ornamental plants; such are Lonicera, erect shrubs or twiners 
with long-tubed white, yellow or red flowers; Symphoricarpus, 
a North American shrub, with small whitish pendulous flowers 
and white berries; Diervilla (also known as Weigelia), and 
Viburnum, including V. Opulus, guelder rose, in the cultivated 
forms of which the corolla has become enlarged at the expense 
of the essential organs and the flowers are neuter. 

CAPRIVI DE CAPRERA DE MONTECUCCOLI, GEORG LEO 
VON, Count (1 831-1899), German soldier and statesman, was 
born on the 24th of February 183 1 at Charlottenburg. The 
family springs from Carniola, and the name was originally 
written Kopriva; in the 18th century one branch settled in 
Wernigerode, and several members entered the Prussian service; 
the father of the chancellor held a high judicial post, and was 
made a life member of the Prussian House of Lords. Caprivi 
was educated in Berlin, and entered the army in 1849; he took 
part in the campaign of 1866, being attached to the staff of the 
1st army. In 1870 he served as chief of the staff to the 10th army 
corps, which formed part of the 2nd army, and took part in the 
battles before Metz as well as in those round Orleans, in which 
he highly distinguished himself. One of the most delicate 
strategical problems of the whole war was the question of 
whether to change the direction of the 10th corps on the morning of 
the 1 6th of August before Vionville, and in this, as well as in the 



actual manoeuvres of the corps on that day, Caprivi, as repre- 
sentative of, and counsellor to, his chief, General v. Voigts- 
Rhetz, took a leading part. At the battle of Beaune-la-Rolande, 
the turning-point of the Orleans campaign, the- 10th corps bore 
the brunt of the fighting. After the peace he held several 
important military offices, and in 1883 was made chief of the 
admiralty, in which post he had to command the fleet and to 
organize and represent the department in the Reichstag. He 
resigned in 1888, when the command was separated from the 
representation in parliament, and was appointed commander of 
the 10th army corps. Bismarck had already referred to him as 
a possible successor to himself, for Caprivi had shown great 
administrative ability, and was unconnected with any political 
party; and in March 1890 he was appointed chancellor, Prussian 
minister president and foreign minister. He was quite unknown 
to the public, and the choice caused some surprise, but it was 
fully justified. The chief events of his administration, which 
lasted for four years, are narrated elsewhere, in the article on 
Germany. He showed great ability in quickly mastering the 
business, with which he was hitherto quite unacquainted, as he 
himself acknowledged; his speeches in the Reichstag were 
admirably clear, dignified and to the point. His first achieve- 
ment was the conclusion in July 1890 of a general agreement with 
Great Britain regarding the spheres of influence of the two 
countries in , Africa. Bismarck had supported the colonial 
parties in Germany in pretensions to which it was impossible 
for Great Britain to give her consent, and the relations between 
the two powers were in consequence somewhat strained. Caprivi 
adopted a conciliatory attitude, and succeeded in negotiating 
terms with Lord Salisbury which gave to Germany all she could 
reasonably expect. But the abandonment of an aggressive 
policy in East Africa and in Nigeria, and in the withdrawal of 
German claims to Zanzibar (in exchange for Heligoland) aroused 
the hostility of the colonial parties, who bitterly attacked the 
new chancellor. Caprivi had, however, by making the frontiers 
of the Congo Free State and German East Africa meet, " cut " 
the Cape to Cairo connexion of the British, an achievement 
which caused much dismay in British colonial circles, regular 
treaties having been obtained from native chiefs over large 
areas which the chancellor secured for Germany. In Nigeria 
also Caprivi by the 1890 agreement, and by another concluded 
in 1893, made an excellent bargain for his country, while in 
South-West Africa he obtained a long but narrow extension 
eastward to the Zambezi of the German protectorate (this strip 
of territory being known as " Caprivi's Finger ") . In his African 
policy the chancellor proved far-sighted, and gained for the new 
protectorates a period for internal development and consolida- 
tion. The Anglo-German agreement of 1890 was followed by 
commercial treaties with Austria, Rumania, &c. ; by concluding 
them he earned the express commendation of the emperor and 
the title of count, but he was from this time relentlessly attacked 
by the Agrarians, who made it a ground for their distrust that 
he was not himself a landed proprietor; and from this time he 
had to depend much on the support of the Liberals and other 
parties who had been formerly in opposition. The reorganization 
of the army caused a parliamentary crisis, but he carried it 
through successfully, only, however, to earn the enmity of the 
more old-fashioned soldiers, who would not forgive him for 
shortening the period of service. His position was seriously 
compromised by the failure in 1892 to carry an education bill 
which he had defended by saying that the question at issue was 
Christianity or Atheism, and he resigned the presidency of the 
Prussian ministry, which was then given to Count Eulenburg. 
In 1894, a difference arose between Eulenburg and Caprivi 
concerning the bill for an amendment of the criminal code (the 
Umsturs Vorlage), and in October the emperor dismissed both. 
Caprivi's fall was probably the work of the Agrarians, but it was 
also due to the fact that, while he showed very high ability in 
conducting the business of the country, he made no attempt to 
secure his personal position by forming a party either in parlia- 
ment or at court. He interpreted his position rather as a soldier; 
he did his duty, but did not think of defending himself. He 



292 



CAPRONNIER— CAPSTAN 



suffered much from the attacks made on him by the followers of 
Bismarck, and he was closely associated with the social ostracism 
of that statesman; we do not know, however, in regard either to 
this or to the other events of his administration, to what extent 
Caprivi was really the author of the policy he carried out, and to 
what extent he was obeying the orders of the emperor. With a 
loyalty which cannot be too highly praised, he always refused, 
even after his abrupt dismissal, to justify himself, and he could 
not be persuaded even to write memoirs for later publication. 
The last years of his life were spent in absolute retirement, for 
he could not return even to the military duties which he had 
left with great reluctance at the orders of the emperor. He died 
unmarried on the 6th of February 1899, at the age of sixty-eight. 
See R. Arndt, Die Reden des Grafen v. Caprivi (Berlin, 1894), with 
a biography. (J. W. He.) 

CAPRONNIER, JEAN BAPTISTE (1814-1891), Belgian 
stained-glass painter, was born in Brussels in 18 14, and died 
there in 1891. He had much to do with the modern revival of 
glass-painting, and first made his reputation by his study of 
the old methods of workmanship, and his clever restorations of 
old examples, and copies made for the Brussels archaeological 
museum. He carried out windows for various churches in 
Brussels, Bruges, Amsterdam and elsewhere, and his work was 
commissioned also for France, Italy and England. At the 
Paris Exhibition of 1855 he won the only medal given for glass- 
painting. 

CAPSICUM, a genus of plants, the fruits of which are used 
as peppers (see Cayenne Pepper for botany, &c). As 
used in medicine, the ripe fruit of the capsicum mimum (or 
fruiescans), containing the active principle capsaicin (cap- 
sacutin), first isolated by Thresh in 1876, has remarkable 
physiological properties. Applied locally to the skin or mucous 
membrane, it causes redness and later vesication. Internally in 
small doses it stimulates gastric secretions and causes dilatation 
of the vessels; but if used internally in excess for a long period it 
will cause subacute gastritis. In single doses in excess it causes 
renal irritation and inflammation and strangury. The adminis- 
tration of capsicum is valuable in atony of the stomach due to 
chronic alcoholism, its hot stimulating effect not only increasing 
the appetite but to a certain degree satisfying the craving for 
alcohol. It is also useful in the flatulency of the aged, where it 
prevents the development of gas, and has a marked effect on 
anorexia. It has been used in functional torpidity of the kidney. 
Externally capsicum plaster placed over the affected muscles is 
useful in rheumatism and lumbago. Capsicum wool, known as 
calorific wool, made by dissolving the oleoresin of capsicum in 
ether and pouring it on to absorbent cotton-wool, is useful in 
rheumatic affections. 

CAPSTAN (also spelt in other forms, or as " capstock " and 
" cable stock," connected with the O. Fr. capestan or cabestan, 
from Lat. capistrum, a halter, capere, to take hold of; the 
conjecture that it came from the Span, cabra, goat, and estanto, 
standing, is untenable), an appliance used on board ship and on 
dock walls, for heaving-in or veering cables and hawsers, whether 
of iron, steel or hemp. It differs from a windlass, which is used 
for the same purposes, in having the axis on which the rope is 
wound vertical instead of horizontal. The word seems to have 
come into English (14th century) from French or Spanish ship- 
men at the time of the Crusades. The earlier forms were of a 
comparatively simple character, made of wood with an iron 
spindle and worked by manual labour with wooden capstan bars. 
As heavier cables were supplied to ships, difficulty was found, 
when riding at anchor, in holding, checking and - veering cable. 
A cable-holder (W. H. Harfield's) was tested in H.M.S. " New- 
castle " (wooden frigate) in 1870 and proved effective; its first 
development in 1876 was the application in the form of a 
windlass secured to the deck, driven by a messenger chain from 
the capstan, fitted in H.M.S. " Inflexible " (fig. 1). 

The capstans and engine are shown at A, A, A, and the windlass 
B is driven by messenger chains C, C. The four cables (dotted 
line D, D) lead to their respective cable-holders, fitted with a 
brake, and by these means each cable-holder can be connected 




Fig. 1. 



to the main driving shaft, and any cable hove-in or veered 
independently of the other; by using steam power instead of 
manual, the previous slow motion 
was obviated. In H.M.S. " Col- 
ling wood " steam power was 
used to work the windlass" 
directly by means of worm 
gearing; the windlass was 
divided into two parts, so that ; 
the one on the port side could 
be worked independently of that 
on the starboard, and vice 
versa. An independent capstan 
in both ships, arranged to take 
either of the cables, could be 
worked by hand or steam. In 

the " Collingwood's " windlass the cables remained on their 
holders, and could be hove-in or veered without being touched. 
Napier's patent windlass for merchant ships (1906) resembles 
an appliance fitted in the earlier second-class cruisers of the 
British navy (1890 to 1900). Two cable wheels or cable-holders 
are mounted loose on a horizontal axle, one on each side of a 
worm wheel which is tightly keyed on the middle part of the axle. 
A vertical steam engine with two cylinders, placed one on each 
side of the framing, drives a second horizontal axle which is 
connected by a set of bevel gears to an upright worm shaft, 
which works the worm wheel. This worm wheel can be con- 
nected by means of sliding bolts to one or both of the cable 
wheels, enabling one or both cables to be hove-in or veered 
as necessary. A brake, of Napier's self-holding differential 
type, is fitted to each cable wheel, and is controlled by hand 
wheels on the aft side of the windlass. For warping pur- 
poses, warping drums are fitted (made portable if required). 
A third central capstan, fitted forward of the windlass, is con- 
nected to the upright worm shaft by a horizontal shaft and 
bevel wheels. It can also be worked by manual labour with 
capstan bars. Fig. 2 represents the arrangement of the capstans 
on the forecastle of a battleship, fitted by Napier Brothers. Deep- 




FlG. 2. — Elevation looking aft. 

bodied capstans have been superseded by low drum-headed ones, 
over which the guns may be fired. The three capstans or cable- 
holders of cast steel, capable of taking 2\\ in. cables, are fitted 
on vertical spindles, which pass down through the main and 
armoured decks to the platform one, where the steam engine and 
gearing are placed. The gearing consists of worm and wheel 
gears, so arranged that the three capstans can be worked singly or 
in conjunction, when heaving-in or veering, and the brakes (of 
the type previously mentioned) are controlled by a portable 
hand wheel fitted on the aft side of each. The cable-holders 
can be used for riding at anchor (see Cable). The middle line 
capstan E is keyed to vertical spindles and can be coupled up to 
the capstan engine, by clutch and drop bolts in the capstan 
engine room; it is fitted with a cable-holder, to take either the. 
port or starboard cables, and in addition is provided with 
portable whelps, enabling it to be used for warping. It can also 
be worked by manual labour with capstan bars, a drum-head E', 
fitted on the spindle on the main deck, enabling additional 
capstan bars to be used if required. 

To avoid carrying steam pipes aft, the after capstan is worked 



CAPSULE— CAPTIVE 



2 93 




Fig. 3. 



-Napier Brothers' 
capstan. 



by an electric motor which is kept below the water-line. Napier 
Brothers' capstan (fig. 3) is for warping purposes, for working the 
stern anchor with wire hawser and for coaling. It is placed on the 
upper deck, and is fitted with a drum-head for capstan bars, with 
pawls and pawl rim on the deck plate, the pawls A being lifted and 
placed on their rests B when working with the motor. The upper 
portion of the capstan, together with its drum-head, is portable, 
being fixed to the centre boss with keys and gun-metal screws. 
The centre boss is keyed to the spindle, which passes through the 
deck and carries at its lower end a coupling for connecting to 
the worm wheel gear. For working by motor, the additional 
security of two drop bolts is provided. The gearing consists 
of a single worm and worm wheel, working in an oil-bath, the 
worm shaft being coupled direct to the motor spindle. The 
motor is of the semi-enclosed type, the working and live parts 
being protected by a perforated metallic covering; it is worked 
off a 100-volt circuit, at a speed under full load conditions of 300 
revolutions per minute. The motor is of a 4-pole type and 

compound wound, the shunt 
winding limiting the speed on 
light load to not more than 
1000 revolutions per minute. 
A frictional break is provided, 
pulled off by means of a shunt- 
excited magnet. The controller 
is of the reversing drum type, 
with not less than four steps 
in either direction, and is fitted 
with a magnetic blow-out. The 
control is effected by a remov- 
able hand wheel on a portable 
pedestal, fitted on top with a 
circular dial plate and indi- 
cating pointer; the hand wheel 
reverses the current as well as 
graduates the speed in either direction. All capstans of the 
British navy, after being fitted on board ship, are tested for 
lifting power and speed; with foremost (steam) capstans, the 
steam being at 1 50 lb pressure, the anchor is usually let go in 
16 to 25 fathoms water, and the speed ascertained by observing 
the time taken to heave-in not less than a length of cable, 75 ft.; 
the length must be hove-in in three minutes, or at the rate of 
25 ft. per minute. With the after capstan (motor) of first-class 
battleships and cruisers, a weight is used instead of an anchor, 
the test being to lift 9 tons at the rate of 25 ft. per minute. 
Capstans on dock walls in British government dockyards are 
usually driven by hydraulic or air pressure, conveyed through 
pipes to small engines underneath the capstans. (J. W. D.) 

CAPSULE (from the Lat. capsula, a small box), a term in 
botany for a dry seed vessel, as in the poppy, iris, foxglove, &c, 
containing one or more cells. When ripe the capsule opens and 
scatters the seed (see Botany). The word is used also for a 
small gelatinous case enclosing a dose of medicine, and for a 
metal cap or cover on bottles and jars. In anatomy the term 
is used to denote a cover or envelope partly or wholly surrounding 
a structure. Every diarthrodial joint possesses a fibrous or 
ligamentous capsule, lined with synovial membrane, attached 
to the adjacent ends of the articulating bones. The term is 
particularly applied to the sac which encloses the crystalline 
lens of the eye ; to Glisson's capsule, a thin areolar coat of fibrous 
tissue lying inside the tunica serosa of the liver; to the glomerular 
capsules in the kidney substance; to the suprarenal capsules, 
two small flattened organs in the epigastric region; and to the 
internal and external capsules of the brain (see Brain, fig. 14 
and explanation). 

CAPTAIN (derived from Lat. caput, head, through the Low 
Lat. capitanus), a chief or leader, in various connexions, but 
particularly a grade officer in the army or navy. 

At sea the name of captain is given to all who command ships 
whether they belong to the military navy of their country or 
not, or whether they hold the substantive rank or not. Thus a 
lieutenant when in command of a vessel is addressed as captain. 



In France a naval lieutenant is addressed as mon capitaine, 
because he has that comparative rank in the army. The master 
of a merchant ship is known as her captain. But the name is 
also used in the strict sense of foreman, or head man, to describe 
many of the minor or " petty " officers of a British or American 
man-of-war — the captain of a top, of the forecastle, or of a gun. 
The title " post captain " in the British navy means simply 
full captain, and is the equivalent of the French capitaine de 
vaisse.au. It had its origin in the fact that captains appointed 
to a ship of twenty guns and upwards were included in, or 
" posted " on, the permanent list of captains from among whom 
the admirals were chosen. The captain of the fleet is an officer 
who acts as chief of the staff to an admiral commanding a large 
force. The position is equivalent to flag rank, but is held by 
a captain. Staff captain is the highest grade of the officers 
entrusted with the nayigation of a ship or fleet. 

The military rank of captain (Fr. capitaine, Ger. Hauptmann, 
or in the cavalry, Rittmeister) , which was formerly the title of an 
officer of high rank corresponding to the modern general officer 
or colonel, has with the gradual subdivision and articulation 
of armies, come to be applied to the commanders of companies 
or squadrons, and in general to officers of the grade equivalent 
to this command (see Officers). 

The title of " captain-general " was formerly used in the 
general sense of a military commander-in-chief, and is still 
similarly used in Spain. In the Spanish army there are eight 
captains-general, each of whom has command of a " region " 
corresponding to an army corps district. The same title was 
formerly given to the Spanish governors of the colonial provinces 
in the New World. The official title of the governor of Jamaica 
is " captain-general and governor-in-chief." 

CAPTAL (Lat. capitalis, " first," " chief "), a medieval feudal 
title in Gascony. According to Du Cange the designation captal 
{capital, captau, capitau) was applied loosely to the more illus- 
trious nobles of Aquitaine, counts, viscounts, &c, probably 
as capitales domini, " principal lords," though he quotes more 
fanciful explanations. As an actual title the word was used 
only by the lords of Trene, Puychagut, Epernon and Buch. 
It is best known in connexion with the famous soldier, Jean de 
Grailly, captal of Bush (d. 1376), the " captal de Buch" par 
excellence, immortalized by Froissart as the confidant of the 
Black Prince and the champion of the English cause against 
France. His active part in the war began in 1364, when he 
ravaged the country between Paris and Rouen, but was beaten 
by Bertrand du Guesclin at Cocherel and taken prisoner. Re- 
leased next year, he received the seigniory of Nemours and took 
the oath of fealty to the French king, Charles V., but soon resigned 
his new fief and returned to his allegiance to the English king. 
In 1367 he took part in the battle of Navarette, in which Du 
Guesclin was taken prisoner, the captal being entrusted with his 
safe-keeping. In 1371 Jean de Grailly was appointed constable 
of Aquitaine, but was taken prisoner next year and interned in 
the Temple at Paris where, resisting all the tempting offers of 
the French king, he remained till his death five years later. 

CAPTION (Lat. captio, a taking or catching), a term still 
used in law, especially Scots, for arrest or apprehension. From 
the obsolete sense of a catching at any possible plea or objection 
comes the adjective " captious," i.e. sophistical or fault-finding. 
The term also has an old legal use, to signify the part of an 
indictment, &c, which shows where, when and by what authority 
it is taken, found or executed; so its opening or heading. From 
this is derived the modern sense of the heading of an article in 
a book or newspaper. 

CAPTIVE (from Lat. capere, to take), one who is captured in 
warfare. As a term of International Law, it has been displaced by 
that of " prisoner of war." The position and treatment of cap- 
tives or prisoners of war is now dealt with fully in chapter ii. of 
the regulations annexed to the Hague Convention respecting the 
Laws and Customs of War on Land, of the 18th of October 1907. 

See Peace Conference and War ; also Sir T.Barclay, supplement 
to Problems of International Practice and Diplomacy, for comparison 
of texts of 1899 and 1907. 



294 



CAPTURE—CAPUA 



CAPTURE (from Lat. capere, to take; Fr. prise maritime; 
Ger. Wegnahme), in international law, the taking possession 
by a belligerent vessel of an enemy or neutral merchant or non- 
fighting ship. If an enemy ship is captured she becomes forth- 
with lawful prize (q.v.); when a neutral ship, the belligerent 
commander, in case her papers are not conclusive, has a right 
to search her. If he finds contraband on board or the 
papers or cargo or circumstances excite any serious suspicion 
in his mind, which the master of the ship has been unable to 
dispel, he places an officer and a few of his crew on board and 
sends her to the nearest port where there is a prize court for 
trial. The word is also used for the vessel thus captured (see 
Blockade, Contraband). (T. Ba.) 

CAPUA (anc. Casilinum) , a town and archiepiscopal see of 
Campania, Italy, in the province of Caserta, 7 m. W. by rail from 
the town 01 Caserta. Pop. (1001) 14,285. It was erected in 
856 by Bishop Landulf on the site of Casilinum (q.v.) after the 
destruction of the ancient Capua by the Saracens in 840, but 
it only occupies the site of the original pre-Roman town on the 
left (south) bank of the river. 

The cathedral of S. Stefano, erected in 856, has a handsome 
atrium and a lofty Lombard campanile, and a (modernized) 
interior with three aisles; both it and the atrium have ancient 
granite columns. The Romanesque crypt, with ancient columns, 
has also been restored. It has a fine paschal candlestick, and 
the fragments of a pulpit with marble mosaic of the 13th century. 
There are also preserved in the cathedral a fine Exultet roll and 
an evangelarium of the end of the 12th century, bound in bronze 
decorated with gold filigree and enamels. The mosaics of the 
beginning of the 12th century in the apses of the cathedral and 
of S. Benedetto, were destroyed about 1720 and 1620 respectively. 
The small church of S. Marcello was also built in 856. In 1232- 
1240 Frederick II. erected a castle to guard the Roman bridge 
over the Volturno, composed of a triumphal arch with two 
towers. This was demolished in 1557. The statues with which 
it was decorated were contemporary imitations of classical 
sculptures. Some of them are still preserved in the Museo 
Campano (E. Bertaux, L' 'Art dans I'ltalie miridionale, Paris, 
1904, i. 707). The Museo Campano also contains a considerable 
collection of antiquities from the ancient Capua. 

Capua changed hands frequently during the middle ages. 
One of the most memorable facts in its history is the terrible 
attack made on it in 1501 by Caesar Borgia, who had entered 
the town by treachery, in which 5000 lives were sacrificed. It 
remained a part of the kingdom of Naples until the 2nd of 
November i860, when, a month after the battle of the Volturno, 
it surrendered to the Italian troops. (T. As.) 

CAPUA (mod. 5. Maria di Capua Vetere), the chief ancient 
city of Campania, and one of the most important towns of 
ancient Italy, situated 16 m. N. of Neapolis, on the N.E. edge 
of the Campanian plain. Its site in a position not naturally 
defensible, together with the regularity of its plan, indicates that 
it is not a very ancient town, though it very likely occupies the 
site of an early Oscan settlement. Its foundation is attributed 
by Cato to the Etruscans, and the date given as about 260 years 
before it was " taken " by Rome (Veil. i. 7). If this be referred, 
not to its capture in the second Punic War (211 B.C.) but to its 
submission to Rome in 338 B.C., we get about 600 B.C. as the date 
of its foundation, a period at which the Etruscan power was at 
its highest, and which may perhaps, therefore, be accepted. 1 
The origin of the name is probably Campus, a plain, 2 as the 
adjective Campanus shows, Capuanus being a later form stig- 
matized as incorrect by Varro (De L. L. x. 16). The derivation 
from Kairvs (a vulture, Latinized into Volturnum by some 
authorities who tell us that this was the original name), and that 
from caput (as though the name had been given it as the " head " 
of the twelve Etruscan cities of Campania), must be rejected. 

1 G. Patroni, in Atti del Congresso Inlernazionale di Scienze Sloriche 
(Rome, 1904), v. 217, is inclined to place it considerably earlier. 

2 Livy iv. 37, " Vulturnum Etruscorum urbem quae nunc Capua 
est, ab Samnitibus captam (425 B.C.) Capuamque ab duce eorum 
Capye, vel, quod propius vero est, a campestri agro appellatam." 



The Etruscan supremacy in Campania came to an end with the 
Samnite invasion in the latter half of the 5th century B.C. (see 
Campania); these conquerors, however, entered into alliance 
with Rome for protection against the Samnite mountain tribes, 
and with Capua came the dependent communities Casilinum, 
Calatia, Atella, so that the greater part of Campania now fell 
under Roman supremacy. The citizens received the civitas sine 
suffragio. In the second Samnite War they provetfun trustworthy, 
so that the Ager Falenrus on the right bank of the Volturnus 
was taken from them and distributed among citizens of Rome, 
the tribus Falerna being thus formed; and in 318 the powers of the 
native officials (meddices) were limited by the appointment of 
officials with the title praefecti Capuam Cumas (taking their 
name from the most important towns of Campania); these were 
at first mere deputies of the praetor urbanus, but after 123 B.C. 
were elected Roman magistrates, four in number; they governed 
the whole of Campania until the time of Augustus, when they 
were abolished. In 312 B.C. Capua was connected with Rome 
by the construction of the Via Appia, the most important of the 
military highways of Italy. The gate by which it left the 
Servian walls of Rome bore the name Poita Capena — perhaps 
the only case in which a gate in this enceinte bears the name of 
the place to which it led. At what time the Via Latina was 
prolonged to Casilinum is doubtful (it is quite possible that it was 
done when Capua fell under Roman supremacy, i.e. before the 
construction of the Via Appia); it afforded a route only 6 m. 
longer, and the difficulties in connexion with its construction 
were much less; it also avoided the troublesome journey through 
the Pomptine Marshes (see T. Ashby in Papers of the British 
School at Rome, i. 217, London, 1902). The importance of Capua 
increased steadily during the 3rd century, and at the beginning 
of the second Punic War it was considered to be only slightly 
behind Rome and Carthage themselves, and was able to furnish 
30,000 infantry and 4000 cavalry. Until after the defeat of 
Cannae it remained faithful to Rome, but, after a vain demand 
that one of the consuls should always be selected from it, it 
transferred its allegiance to Hannibal, who made it his winter- 
quarters, with bad results to the morale of his troops (see Punic 
Wars) . After a long siege it was taken by the Romans in 2 1 1 b .c. 
and severely punished; its magistrates and communal organiza- 
tion were abolished, the inhabitants losing their civic rights, and 
its territory became Roman state domain. Parts of it were sold 
in 205 and 199 B.C., another part was divided among the citizens 
of the new colonies of Volturnum and Liternum established 
near the coast in 194 B.C., but the greater portion of it was 
reserved to be let by the state. Considerable difficulties occurred 
in preventing illegal encroachments by private persons, and it 
became necessary to buy a number of them out in 162 B.C. It 
was, after that period, let, not to large but to small proprietors. 
Frequent attempts were made by the democratic leaders to 
divide the land among new settlers. Brutus in 83 B.C. actually 
succeeded in establishing a colony, but it was soon dissolved; and 
Cicero's speeches De Lege Agraria were directed against a 
similar attempt by Servilius Rullus in 63 B.C. In the meantime 
the necessary organization of the inhabitants of this thickly- 
populated district was in a measure supplied by grouping them 
round important shrines, especially that of Diana Tifatina, in 
connexion with which a pagus Dianae existed, as we learn from 
many inscriptions; a pagus Herculaneus is also known. The 
town of Capua belonged to none of these organizations, and was 
entirely dependent on the praefecti. It enjoyed great prosperity, 
however, owing to its spelt, which was worked into groats, wine, 
roses, spices, unguents, &c, and also owing to its manufactures, 
especially of bronze objects, of which both the elder Cato and 
the elder Pliny speak in the highest terms {De agr. 13s; Hist. 
Nat. xxiv. 95). Its luxury remained proverbial; and Campania 
is especially spoken of as the home of gladiatorial combats. 
From the gladiatorial schools of Campania came Spartacus and 
his followers in 73 B.C. Julius Caesar as consul in 59 B.C. succeeded 
in carrying out the establishment of a colony in connexion with 
his agrarian law, and 20,000 Roman citizens were settled in this 
territory. The number of colonists was increased by Mark 



CAPUCHIN MONKEY 



295 



Antony, Augustus (who constructed an aqueduct from the Mons 
Tifata, and gave the town of Capua estates in the district of 
Cnossus in Crete to the value of 12 million sesterces — £120,000), 
and Nero. In the war of a.d. 69 it took the side of Vitellius. 
Under the later empire it is not often mentioned; but in the 
4th century it was the seat of the consularis Campaniae and its 
chief town, though Ausonitjs puts it behind Mediolanum (Milan) 
and Aquileia in his ordo nobilium urbium. Under Constantine 
we hear of the foundation of a Christian church in Capua. In 
a.d. 456 it was taken and destroyed by Genseric, but must have 
been soon rebuilt: it was, however, finally destroyed by the 
Saracens in 840 and the church of S. Maria Maggiore, founded 
about 497, alone remained. It contains 52 ancient marble 
columns, but was modernized in 1766. The site was only 
occupied in the late middle ages by a village which has, however, 
outgrown the medieval Capua in modern days. 

Remains. — No pre-Roman remains have been found within 
the town of Capua itself, but important cemeteries have been 
discovered on all sides of it, the earliest of which go back to the 
7th or 6th century B.C. The tombs are of various forms, partly 
chambers with frescoes on the walls, partly cubical blocks of 
peperino, hollowed out, with grooved lids. The objects found 
within them consist mainly of vases of bronze (many of them 
without feet, and with incised designs of Etruscan style) and of 
clay, some of Greek, some of local manufacture, and of paintings. 
On the east of the town, in the Patturelli property, a temple has 
been discovered with Oscan votive inscriptions, some of them 
inscribed upon terra-cotta tablets, others on cippi, while of a 
group of 1 50 tufa statuettes (representing a matron holding one 
or more children in her lap) three bore Latin inscriptions of the 
early imperial period. The site of the town being in a perfectly 
flat plain, without natural defences, it was possible to lay it out 
regularly. Its length from east to west is accurately determined 
by the fact that the Via Appia, which runs from north-west to 
south-east from Casilinum to Calatia, turns due east very soon 
after passing tie so-called Arco Campano (a triumphal arch of 
good brickwork, once faced with marble, with three openings, 
erected in honour of some emperor unknown), and continues to 
run in this direction for 5413! English feet (= 6000 ancient 
Oscan feet). The west gate was the Porta Romana; remains 
of the east gate (the name of which we do not know) have been 
found. This fact shows that the main street of the town was 
perfectly orientated, and that before the Via Appia was con- 
structed, i.e. in all probability in pre-Roman times. The width 
of the town from north to south cannot be so accurately deter- 
mined as the line of the north and south walls is not known, 
though it can be approximately fixed by the absence of tombs 
(Beloch fixes it at 4000 Oscan feet = 3609 English feet), nor is it 
absolutely certain (though it is in the highest degree probable, 
for Cicero praises its regular arrangement and fine streets) that 
the plan of the town was rectangular. Within the town are 
remains of thermae on the north of the Via Appia and of a theatre 
opposite, on the south. The former consisted of a large crypto- 
porticus round three sides of a court, the south side being open 
to the road; it now lies under the prisons. Beloch (see below) 
attributes this to the Oscan period; but the construction as 
shown in Labruzzi's drawing (v. 17) 1 is partly of brick- work and 
opus reticulatum, which may, of course, belong to a restoration. 
The stage of the theatre had its back to the road; Labruzzi 
(v. 18) gives an interesting view of the cavea. It appears from 
inscriptions that it was erected after the time of Augustus. 
Other inscriptions, however, prove the existence of a theatre as 
early as 94 B.C., so that the existence of another elsewhere must 
be assumed. We know that the Roman colony was divided into 
regions and possessed a capitolium, with a temple of Jupiter, 
within the town, and that the market-place, for unguents 
especially, was called Seplasia; we also hear of an aedes alba, 
probably the original senate house, which stood in an open space 
known as albana. But the sites of all these are quite uncertain. 
Outside the town on the north is the amphitheatre, built in the 

1 For these drawings see T. Ashby, " Dessins inedits de Carlo 
Labruzzi," in Melanges de V&cole frangaise, 1903, 414. 



time of Augustus, restored by Hadrian and dedicated by 
Antoninus Pius, as the inscription over the main entrance 
recorded. The exterior was formed by 80 Doric arcades of four 
storeys each, but only two arches now remain. The keystones 
were adorned with heads of divinities. The interior is better 
preserved; beneath the arena are subterranean passages like 
those in the amphitheatre at Puteoli. It is one of the largest in 
existence; the longer diameter is 185 yds., the shorter 152, and 
the arena measures 83 by 49 yds., the corresponding dimensions 
in the colosseum at Rome being 205, 170, 93 and 58 yds. To 
the east are considerable remains of baths — a large octagonal 
building, an apse against which the church of S. Maria delle 
Grazie is built, and several heaps of debris. On the Via Appia, 
to the south-east of the east gate of the town, are two large and 
well-preserved tombs of the Roman period, known as le Carceri 
vecchie and la Conocchia. To the east of the amphitheatre an 
ancient road, the Via Dianae, leads north to the Pagus Dianae, 
on the west slopes of the Mons Tifata, a community which sprang 
up round the famous and ancient temple of Diana, and probably 
received an independent organization after the abolition of that 
of Capua in 2 1 1 B.C. The place often served as a base for attacks 
on the latter, and Sulla, after his defeat of C. Norbanus, gave the 
whole of the mountain to the temple. Within the territory of 
the pagus were several other temples with their magistri. After 
the restoration of the community of Capua, we find magistri of 
the temple of Diana still existing, but they were probably 
officials of Capua itself. The site is occupied by the Benedictine 
church of S. Angelo in Formis 2 which dates from 944, and 
was reconstructed by the abbot Desiderius (afterwards Pope 
Victor III.) of Monte Cassino in 1073, with interesting paintings, 
dating from the end of the nth century to the middle of the 1 2th, 
in which five different styles may be distinguished. They form a 
complete representation of all the chief episodes of the New 
Testament (see F. X. Kraus, Jahrbuch d. k. preuss. Kunst- 
sammlungen, xiv.). Deposits of votive objects (favissae), 
removed from the ancient temple from time to time as new ones 
came in and occupied all the available space, have been found, 
and considerable remains of buildings belonging to the Vicus 
Dianae (among them a triumphal arch and some baths, also a 
hall with frescoes, representing the goddess herself ready for the 
chase) still exist. 

The ancient road from Capua went on beyond the Vicus 
Dianae to the Volturnus (remains of the bridge still exist) and 
then turned east along the river valley to Caiatia and Telesia. 
Other roads ran to Puteoli and Cumae (the so-called Via 
Campana) and to Neapolis, and as we have seen the Via Appia 
passed through Capua, which was thus the most important road 
centre of Campania (q.v.). 

See Th. Mommsen in Corpus Inscrip. Lat. x. (Berlin, 1883), p. 365 
seq. ; J. Beloch, Campanien (Breslau, 1890), 295 seq.; Ch. Hiilsen in 
Pauly-Wissowa, Realencyclopadie (Stuttgart, 1899), "'• : 555- (T. As.) 

CAPUCHIN MONKEY, the English name of a tropical 
American monkey scientifically known as Cebus capucinus; the 
plural, capuchins, is extended to embrace all the numerous 
species of the same genus, whose range extends from Nicaragua 
to Paraguay. These monkeys, whose native name is sapajou, 
are the typical representatives of the family Cebidae, and belong 
to a s-ub-family in which the tail is generally prehensile. From 
the other genera of that group (Cebinae) with prehensile tails 
capuchins are distinguished by the comparative shortness of 
that appendage, and the absence of a naked area on the under 
surface of its extremity. The hair is not woolly, the general 
build is rather stout, and the limbs are of moderate length and 
slenderness. The name capuchin is derived from the somewhat 
cowl-like form assumed by the thick hair on the crown of the 
head of the sapajous. In their native haunts these monkeys 
go about in troops of considerable size, frequenting the summits 
of the tall forest-trees, from which they seldom, if ever, descend. 
In addition to fruits of various kinds, they consume tender 
shoots and buds, insects, eggs and young birds. Many of the 

2 The name comes from the aqueduct (forma) erected by Augustus 
for the supply of Capua, remains of which still exist. 



296 



CAPUCHINS— CAPYBARA 



species are difficult to distinguish, and very little is known of their 
habits in a wild state, although several members of the group 
are common in captivity (see Primates). (R. L.*) 

CAPUCHINS, an order of friars in the Roman Catholic Church, 
the chief and only permanent offshoot from the Franciscans. 
It arose about the year 1520, when Matteo di Bassi, an " Obser- 
vant " Franciscan, became possessed of the idea that the habit 
worn by the Franciscans was not the one that St Francis had 
worn; accordingly he made himself a pointed or pyramidal 
hood and also allowed his beard to grow and went about bare- 
footed. His superiors tried to suppress these innovations, but 
in 1528 he obtained the sanction of Clement VII. and also the 
permission to live as a hermit and to go about everywhere 
preaching to the poor; and these permissions were not only for 
himself, but for all such as might join him in the attempt to 
restore the most literal observance possible of St Francis's rule. 
Matteo was soon joined by others. The Observants opposed 
the movement, but the Conventuals supported it, and so Matteo 
and his companions were formed into a congregation, called 
the Hermit Friars Minor, as a branch of the Conventual Fran- 
ciscans, but with a vicar of their own, subject to the jurisdiction 
of the general of the Conventuals. From their hood (capuche) 
they received the popular name of Capuchins. In 1529 they 
had four houses and held their first general chapter, at which 
their special rules were drawn up. . The eremitical idea was 
abandoned, but the life was to be one of extreme austerity, 
simplicity and poverty — in all things as near an approach to 
St Francis's idea as was practicable. Neither the monasteries 
nor the congregation should possess anything, nor were any 
devices to be resorted to for evading this law; no large provision 
against temporal wants should be made, and the supplies in the 
house should never exceed what was necessary for a few days. 
Everything was to be obtained by begging, and the friars were 
not allowed even to touch money. The communities were to be 
small, eight being fixed as the normal number and twelve as the 
limit. In furniture and clothing extreme simplicity was enjoined 
and the friars were to go bare-footed without even sandals. 
Besides the choral canonical office, a portion of which was recited 
at midnight, there were two hours of private prayer daily. The 
fasts and disciplines were rigorous and frequent. The great ex- 
ternal work was preaching and spiritual ministrations among 
the poor. In theology the Capuchins abandoned the later 
Franciscan school of Scotus, and returned to the earlier school 
of Bonaventura (q.v.). The new congregation at the outset 
of its history underwent a series of severe blows. The two 
founders left it, Matteo di Bassi to return to the Observants, 
while his first companion, on being superseded in the office of 
vicar, became so insubordinate that he had to be expelled. 
The case of the third vicar, Bernardino Ochino (q.v.), who became 
a Calvinist, 1543, and married, was even more disastrous. 
This mishap brought the whole congregation under the suspicion 
of heretical tendencies and the pope resolved to suppress it; 
he was with difficulty induced to allow it to continue, but the 
Capuchins were forbidden to preach. In a couple of years the 
authorities were satisfied as to the soundness of the general body 
of Capuchin friars, and the permission to preach was restored. 
The congregation at once began to multiply with extraordinary 
rapidity, and by the end of the 16th century the Capuchins had 
spread all over the Catholic parts of Europe, so that in 16 10 
they were freed from their dependence on the Conventual 
Franciscans and became an independent order, with a general 
of their own. They are said to have had at that time 1 500 houses 
divided into fifty provinces. They were one of the chief factors 
in the Catholic Counter-reformation, working assiduously 
among the poor, preaching, catechizing, confessing in all parts, 
and impressing the minds of the common people by the great 
poverty and austerity of their life. By these means they were 
also extraordinarily successful in making converts from Pro- 
testantism to Catholicism. Nor were the activities of the 
Capuchins confined to Europe. From an early date they under- 
took missions to the heathen in America, Asia and Africa, and 
at the middle of the 17th century a Capuchin missionary college 



was founded in Rome for the purpose of preparing their subjects 
for foreign missions. A large number of Capuchins have suffered 
martyrdom for the Gospel. This activity in Europe and else- 
where continued until the close of the 18th century, when the 
number of Capuchin friars was estimated at 31,000. 

Like all other orders, the Capuchins suffered severely from 
the secularizations and revolutions of the end of the 18th century 
and the first half of the 19th; but they survived the strain, 
and during the latter part of the 19th century rapidly recovered 
ground. At the beginning of the present century there were 
fifty provinces with some 500 monasteries and 300 hospices or 
lesser houses; and the number of Capuchin friars, including 
lay-brothers, was reckoned at 9500. In England there are ten 
or twelve Capuchin monasteries, and in Ireland three. The 
Capuchins now/possess the church of the Portiuncula at Assisi. . 
The Capuchins still keep up their missionary work and have some 
200 missionary stations in all parts of the world — notably India, 
Abyssinia and the Turkish empire. Though " the poorest of all 
orders," it has attracted into its ranks an extraordinary number 
of the highest nobility and even of royalty. The celebrated 
Father Mathew, the apostle of Temperance in Ireland, was a 
Capuchin friar. Like the Franciscans the Capuchins wear a 
brown habit. 

The Capuchines are Capuchin nuns. They were founded 
in 1538 in Naples. They lived according to the rules and regu- 
lations of the Capuchin friars, and so austere was the life that 
they were called " Sisters of Suffering." The order spread to 
France and Spain, and a few convents still exist. 

In order fully to grasp the meaning of the Capuchin reform, it is 
necessary to know the outlines of Franciscan history (see Francis- 
cans). There does not appear to be any modern general history of 
the Capuchin order as a whole, though there are histories of various 
provinces and of the foreign missions. The references to all this 
literature will be found in the article " Kapuzinerorden " in Wetzer 
und Welte, Kirchenlexicon (2nd ed.), which is the best general sketch 
on the subject. Shorter sketches, with the needful references, are 
given in Max Heimbucher, Orden und Kongregationen (1896), i. § 44, 
and in Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklopadie (3rd ed.), art. " Kapuziner. 
Helyot's Hist, des ordres religieux (1792), vii. c. 24 and c. 27, 
gives an account of the Capuchins up to the end of the 17th 
century. (E. C. B.) 

CAPUS, ALFRED (1858- ), French author, was born at 
Aix, in Provence, on the 25th of November 1858. In 1878 he 
published, in collaboration with L. Vonoven, a volume of short 
stories, and in the next year the two produced a one-act piece, 
Le Mari malgrS lui, at the Theatre Cluny . He had been educated 
as an engineer, but became a journalist, and joined the staff 
of the Figaro in 1894. His novels, Qui perd gagne (1890), Faux 
Depart (1891), Annies d'avenlures (1895), which belong to this 
period, describe the struggles of three young men at the beginning 
of their career. From the first of these he took his first comedy, 
Brignol et sa fille (Vaudeville, 23rd November 1894). Among 
his later plays are Innocent (1896), written with Alphonse Allais; 
P elites j dies (1897); Rosine (1897); Mariage bourgeois (1898); 
Les Maris de Leontine (1900); La Bourse ou la vie (1900); La 
Veine (1901); La Petite Fonctionnaire (1901); Les Deux JEcoles 
(1902) ; La Chdtelaine(igo2) ; L' Adversaire (1903), with Emmanuel 
Arene, which was produced in London by Mr George Alexander 
as The Man of the Moment, and Notre Jeunesse (1904), the first 
of his plays to be represented at the Theatre Francais; Monsieur 
PiUgois (1905); and, in collaboration with Lucien Descaves, 
L' Attentat (1906). 

See fidouard Quet, Alfred Capus (1904), with appreciations by 
various authors, in the series of Celebrites d'aujourdhui. 

CAPYBARA, or Carpincho (Hydrochaerus capybara), the 
largest living rodent mammal, characterized by its moderately 
long limbs, partially-webbed toes, of which there are four in 
front and three behind, hoof-like nails, sparse hair, short ears, 
cleft upper lip and the absence of a tail. The dentition is 
peculiar on account of the great size and complexity of the last 
upper molar, which is composed of about twelve plates, and 
exceeds in length the three teeth in front. The front surface 
of the incisors has a broad, shallow groove. Capybaras are 
aquatic rodents, frequenting the banks of lakes and rivers, and 



CAR— CARACAL 



297 



being sometimes found where the water is brackish. They 
generally associate in herds, and spend most of the day in covert 
on the banks, feeding in the evening and morning. When dis- 
turbed they make for the water, in which they swim and dive 
with expertness, often remaining below the surface for several 
minutes. Their usual food consists of water-plants and bark, 
but in cultivated districts they do much harm to crops. Their 
cry is a low, abrupt grunt. From five to eight is the usual 
number in a litter, of which there appears to be only one in the 
year; and the young are carried on their parent's back when 
in the water. Extinct species of capybara occur in the tertiary 
deposits of Argentina, some of which were considerably larger 
than the living form. Capybaras belong to the family Caviidae, 
the leading characteristics of which are given in Rodentia. 
When full-grown the entire length of the animal is about 4 ft., 
and the girth 3 ft. Their geographical range extends from 
Guiana to the river Plate. Capybaras can be easily tamed; 
numbers are killed on land by jaguars and in the water by 
caimans — the alligators of South America. 

CAR (Late Lat. carra), a term originally applied to a small 
two- wheeled vehicle for transport (see Carriage), but also to 
almost anything in the nature of a carriage, chariot, &c, and 
to the carrying-part of a balloon. With some specific qualifica- 
tion (tram-car, street-car, railway-car, sleeping-car, motor-car, 
&c.) it is combined to serve as a general word instead of carriage 
or vehicle. From Ireland comes the " jaunting-car," which is 
in general use, both in the towns, where it is the commonest 
public carriage for hire, and in the country districts, where it is 
employed to carry the mails and for the use of tourists. The 
gentry and more well-to-do farmers also use it as a private 
carriage in all parts of Ireland. The genuine Irish jaunting-car 
is a two-wheeled vehicle constructed to carry four persons 
besides the driver. In the centre, at right angles to the axle, 
is a " well " about 18 in. deep, used for carrying parcels or small 
luggage, and covered with a lid which is usually furnished with 
a cushion. The " well " provides a low back to each of the two 
seats, which are in the form of wings placed over each wheel, 
with foot boards hanging outside the wheel on hinges, so that 
when not in use they can be turned up over the seats, thus 
reducing the width of the car (sometimes very necessary in the 
narrow country roads) and protecting the seats from the 
weather. The passengers on each side sit with their backs to 
each other, with the " well " between them. The driver sits 
on a movable box-seat, or " dicky," a few inches high, placed 
across the head of the " well," with a footboard to which there 
is usually no splash-board attached. A more modern form of 
jaunting-car, known as a " long car," chiefly used for tourists, 
is a four-wheeled vehicle constructed on the same plan, which 
accommodates as many as eight or ten passengers on each side, 
and two in addition on a high box-seat beside the driver. In the 
city of Cork a carriage known as an " inside car " is in common 
use. It is a two-wheeled covered carriage in which the pas- 
sengers sit face to face as in a wagonette. In remote country 
districts the poorer peasants still sometimes use a primitive 
form of vehicle, called a " low-backed car," a simple square 
shallow box or shelf of wood fastened to an axle without springs. 
The two wheels are solid wooden disks of the rudest construction, 
generally without the protection of metal tires, and so small in 
diameter that the body of the car is raised only a few inches from 
the ground. 

CARABINIERS, originally mounted troops of the French 
army, armed with the carabine (carbine). In 1690 one company 
of carabiniers was maintained in each regiment of cavalry. 
Their duties were analogous to those of grenadiers in infantry 
regiments — scouting, detached work, and', in general, all duties 
requiring special activity and address. They fought mounted 
and dismounted alike, and even took part in siege warfare in 
the trenches. At the battle of Neerwinden in 1693 all the cara- 
binier companies present were united in one body, and after 
the action Louis XIV. consolidated them into a permanent 
regiment with the name Royal Carabiniers. This was one of 
the old regiments which survived the French Revolution, at 



which time the title was changed to " horse grenadiers "; it is 
represented in the French army of to-day by the nth Cuirassiers. 
The carabiniers (6th Dragoon Guards) of the British army date 
from 1685, and received the title from being armed with the 
carabine in 1692. Regimen tally therefore they were one year 
senior to the French regiment of Royal Carabiniers, and as a 
matter of fact they took part as a regiment in the battle of 
Neerwinden. Up to 1745 their title was " The King's Cara- 
biniers "; from 1745 to 1788 they were called the 3rd Irish Horse, 
and from 1788 they have borne their present title. In the 
German army, one carabinier regiment alone (2nd Saxon Reiter 
regiment) remains of the cavalry corps which formerly in various 
states bore the title. In Italy the gendarmerie are called cara- 
binieri. 

CARABOBO, the smallest of the thirteen states of Venezuela, 
bounded N. by the Caribbean Sea, E. by the state of Aragua, S. 
by Zamora and W. by Lara. Its area is 2985 sq. m., and its 
population, according to an official estimate of 1905, is 221,891. 
The greater part of its surface is mountainous with moderately 
elevated valleys of great fertility and productiveness, but south 
of the Cordillera there are extensive grassy plains conterminous 
with those of Guarico and Zamora, on which large herds of cattle 
are pastured. The principal products of the state are cattle, 
hides and cheese from the southern plains, coffee and cereals from 
the higher valleys, sugar and agua r diente from the lower valleys 
about Lake Valencia, and cacao, coco-nuts and coco-nut fibre 
from the coast. Various minerals are also found in its south-west 
districts, about Nirgua. The capital is Valencia, and its princi- 
pal towns are Puerto Cabello, Montalban (estimated pop. in 1904 
7500), 30 m. W.S.W. of Valencia; Nirgua (pop. in 1891 8394), 
an important commercial and mining town 365 m. S.W. of 
Valencia, 2500 ft. above sea level; and Ocumare (pop. in 1891 
7493), near the coast i8| m. E. of Puerto Cabello, celebrated 
for the fine quality of its cacao. Carabobo is best known for the 
battle fought on the 24th of June 1821 on a plain at the southern 
exit from the passes through the Cordillera in this state, between 
the revolutionists under Bolivar and the Spanish forces under 
La Torre. It was one of the four decisive battles of the war, 
though the forces engaged were only a part of the two armies 
and numbered 2400 revolutionists (composed of 1500 mounted 
ttaneros known as the " Apure legion," and 900 British), and 
3000 Spaniards. The day was won by the British, who drove 
the Spaniards from the field at the point of the bayonet, although 
at a terrible loss of life. The British legion was afterwards 
acclaimed by Bolivar as " Salvadores de mi Patria." The 
Spanish forces continued the war until near the end of 1823, but 
their queries were restricted to the districts on the coast.

CARACAL, the capital of the department of Romanatzi, 
Rumania; situated in the plains between the lower reaches of 
the Jiu and Olt rivers, and on the railway from Corabia, beside 
the Danube, to Hermannstadt in Transylvania. Pop. (1900) 
12,055. Caracal has little trade, except in grain. Its chief 
buildings are the prefecture, school of arts and crafts and several 
churches. There are some ruins of a tower, built in a.d. 217 by 
the Roman emperor Caracalla, after whom the place is named. 
In 1596 Michael the Brave of Walachia defeated the Turks near 
Caracal. 

CARACAL (Lynx caracal), sometimes called Persian lynx, an 
animal widely distributed throughout south-western Asia, and 
over a large portion of Africa. It is somewhat larger than a fox, 
of a uniform reddish brown colour above, and whitish beneath, 
with two white spots above each of the eyes, and a tuft of long 
black hair at the tip of the ears; to these it owes its name, which 
is derived from Turkish words signifying " black-ear." There 
is little information as to the habits of this animal in a wild 
state. Dr W. T. Blanford considers that it dwells among grass 
and bushes rather than in forests. Its prey is said to consist 
largely of gazelles, small deer, hares and peafowl and other birds. 
The caracal is easily tamed, and in some parts of India is trained 
to capture the smaller antelopes and deer and such birds as the 
crane and pelican. According to Blyth, it is a favourite amuse- 
ment among the natives to let loose a couple of tame caracals 



2gS 



CARACALLA— CARACCI 



among a flock of pigeons feeding on the ground, when each will 
strike down a number of birds before the flock can escape. 
Frequent reference is made in Greek and Roman literature to 
the lynx, and from such descriptions as are given of it there is 
little doubt that the caracal, and not the European lynx, was 
referred to. In South Africa, where the caracal abounds, its 
hide is made by the Zulus into skin-cloaks, known- as karosses. 
According to W. L. Sclater, these when used as blankets are said 
to be beneficial in cases of rheumatism; an ointment prepared 
from the fat of the animal being employed for the same purpose. 
The North African caracal has been separated as Lynx, or 
Caracal, berberorum, but it is best regarded as a local race. 

CARACALLA (or Caracallus), MARCUS AURELIUS 
ANTONINUS (186-217), Roman emperor, eldest son of the 
emperor Septimius Severus, was born at Lugdunum (Lyons) on 
the 4th of April 186. His original name was Bassianus; his 
nickname Caracalla was derived from the long Gallic tunic which 
he wore and introduced into the army. He further received the 
imperial title of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus at the time when 
his father declared himself the adopted son of M. Aurelius. After 
the death of Severus (211) at Eboracum (York) in Britain, 
Caracalla and his brother Geta, who had accompanied their 
father, returned to Rome as colleagues in the supreme power. 
In order to secure the sole authority, Caracalla barbarously 
murdered his brother in his mother's arms, and at the same time 
put to death some 20,000 persons, who were suspected of favour- 
ing him, amongst them the jurist Papinianus. An important 
act of his reign (212) was the bestowal of the rights of Roman 
citizenship upon all free inhabitants of the empire, although the 
main object of Caracalla was doubtless to increase the amount 
of revenue derived from the tax on inheritances or legacies to 
which only Roman citizens were liable. His own extravagances 
and the demands of the soldiery were a perpetual drain upon his 
resources, to meet which he resorted to taxes and extortion of 
every description. He spent the remainder of his reign wandering 
from place to place, a mode of life to which he was said to have 
been driven by the pangs of remorse. Handing over the reins 
of government to his mother, he set out in 213 for Raetia, where 
he carried on war against the Alamanni; in 214 he attacked the 
Goths in Dacia, whence he proceeded by way of Thrace to Asia 
Minor, and in 2 1 5 crossed to Alexandria. Here he took vengeance 
for the bitter sarcasms of the inhabitants against himself and his 
mother by ordering a general massacre of the youths capable of 
bearing arms. In 216 he ravaged Mesopotamia because Arta- 
banus, the Parthian king, refused to give him his daughter in 
marriage. He spent the winter at Edessa, and in 217, when he 
recommenced his campaign, he was murdered between Edessa 
and Carrhae on the 8th of April at the instigation of Opellius 
(Opilius) Macrinus, praefect of the praetorian guard, who 
succeeded him. Amongst the numerous buildings with which 
Caracalla adorned the city, the most famous are the thermae, 
and the triumphal arch of Septimius Severus in the forum. 

Authorities. — Dio Cassius lxxvii., lxxviii. ; Herodian iii. 10, 
iv. 14; lives of Caracalla, Severus and Geta, in Scriptores Historiae 
Augustae; Eutropius viii. 19-22; Aurelius Victor, De Caesanbus, 
20-23; E P iL 2 °- 2 3; Zosimus i. 9-10 ; H. Schiller, Geschchte der 
romischenKaiserzeil (1883), 738 ff.;Pauly-'Wissow3L,Realencyclopadte, 
ii. 2434 S. (von Rohden). 

CARACAS, the principal city and the capital of the United 
States of Venezuela, situated at the western extremity of an 
elevated valley of the Venezuelan Coast Range known as the 
plain of Chacao, (s\ m. S.S.E. of La Guaira, its port on the 
Caribbean coast, in lat'. io° 30' N., long. 67 4' W. The plain 
is about 11 m. long by 3 m. wide, and is separated from the 
coast by a part of the mountain chain which extends along 
almost the entire water front of the republic. It is covered with 
well-cultivated plantations. The Guaira river, a branch of the 
Tuy, traverses the plain from west to east, and flows past the 
city on the south. Among its many small tributaries are the 
Catuche, Caroata and Anauco, which flow down through the city 
from the north and give it a natural surface drainage. The city 
is built at the narrow end of the valley and at the foot of the 



Cerro de Avila, and stands from 2887 to 3442 ft. above sea level, 
the elevation of the Plaza de Bolivar, its topographical centre, 
being 3025 ft. Two miles north-east is the famous Silla de 
Caracas, whose twin summits, like a gigantic old-fashioned 
saddle (silla), rise to an elevation of 8622 ft.; and the Naiguete, 
still farther eastward, overlooks the valley from a height of 
9186 ft. The climate of Caracas is often described as that of 
perpetual spring. It is subject, however, to extreme and rapid 
variations in temperature, to alternations of dry and humid 
winds (the latter, called catias, being irritating and oppressive), 
to chilling night mists brought up from the coast by the westerly 
winds, and to other influences productive of malaria, catarrh, 
fevers, bilious disorders and rheumatism. The maximum and 
minimum temperatures range from 84° to 48 F., the annual 
mean being about 66°, and the daily variation is often as much 
as 1 5 . The city is built with its streets running between the 
cardinal points of the compass and crossing each other at right 
angles. Two intersecting central streets also divide the city 
into four sections, in each of which the streets are methodically 
named and numbered, as North 3rd, 5th, 7th, &c, or West 2nd, 
4th, 6th, &c, according to direction and location. This method 
of numeration dates from the time of Guzman Blanco, but the 
common people adhere to the names bestowed upon the city 
squares in earlier times. The streets are narrow, but are clean 
and well-paved, and are lighted by electricity and gas. There 
are several handsome squares and public gardens, adorned with 
statues, trees and shrubbery. The principal square is the Plaza 
de Bolivar, the conventional centre of the city, in which stands 
a bronze equestrian statue of Bolivar, and on which face the 
cathedral, archbishop's residence, Casa Amarilla, national 
library, general post office and other public offices. The Inde- 
pendencia Park, formerly called Calvario Park, which occupies 
a hill on the west side of the city, is the largest and most attractive 
of the public gardens. Among the public edifices are the capitol, 
which occupies a whole square, the university, of nearly equal 
size, the cathedral, pantheon, masonic temple (built by the 
state in the spendthrift days of Guzman Blanco), national 
library, opera-house, and a number of large churches. The city 
is generously provided with all the modern public services, 
including two street car lines, local and long distance telephone 
lines, electric power and light, and waterworks. The principal 
water supply is derived from the Macarao river, 15 m. distant. 
Railway connexion with the port of La Guaira was opened in 1883 
by means of a line 23 m. long. Another line (the Gran Ferro- 
carril de Venezuela) passes through the mountains to Valencia, 
mm. distant, and two short lines run to neighbouring villages, 
one to Petare and Santa Lucia, and the other to El Valle. The 
archbishop of Venezuela resides in Caracas and has ecclesiastical 
jurisdiction over the dioceses of Ciudad Bolivar, Calabozo, 
Barquisimeto, Merida and Maracaibo. There are no manu- 
factures of note. 

Caracas was founded in 1567 by Diego de Losada under 
the pious title of Santiago de Leon de Caracas, and has been 
successively capital of the province of Caracas, of the captaincy- 
general of Caracas and Venezuela, and of the republic ' of 
Venezuela. It is also one of the two chief cities, or capitals, of the 
Federal district. It was the birthplace of Simon Bolivar, and 
claims the distinction of being the first colony in South America 
to overthrow Spanish colonial authority. The city was almost 
totally destroyed by the great earthquake of 1812. In the war 
of independence it was repeatedly subjected to pillage and 
slaughter by both parties in the strife, and did not recover its 
losses for many years. In 18 10 its population was estimated at 
50,000; seventy-one years later the census of 1881 gave it only 
55,638. In 1891 its urban population was computed to be 
72,429, which in 1904 was estimated to have increased to about 
90,000. 

CARACCI, LODOVICO, AGOSTINO, and ANNIBALE, three 

celebrated Italian painters, were born at Bologna in 1555, 1557, 

and 1560 respectively. Lodovico, the eldest, son of a butcher, 

was uncle to the two younger, Agostino and Annibale, sons of a 

I tailor, and had nearly finished his professional studies before the 



CARACCIOLO 



299 



others had begun their education. From being a reputed dunce, 
while studying under Tintoretto in Venice, he gradually rose, by 
an attentive observation of nature and a careful examination of 
the works of the great masters. preserved at Bologna, Venice, 
Florence and Parma, to measure himself with the teachers of his 
day, and ultimately projected the opening of a rival school in his 
native place. Finding himself unable to accomplish his design 
without assistance, he sent for his two nephews, and induced 
them to abandon their handicrafts (Agostino being a goldsmith, 
and Annibale a tailor) for the profession of painting. Agostino 
he first placed under the care of Fontana, retaining Annibale in 
his own studio ; but he afterwards sent both to Venice and Parma 
to copy the works of Titian, Tintoretto and Correggio, on which 
his own taste had been formed. On their return, the three 
relatives, assisted by an eminent anatomist, Anthony de la Tour, 
opened, in 1589, an academy of painting under the name of the 
Incamminati (or, as we might paraphrase it, the Right Road), 
provided with numerous casts, books and bassi-rilievi, which 
Lodovico had collected in his travels. From the affability and 
kindness of the Caracci, and their zeal for the scientific education 
of the students, their academy rose rapidly in popular estimation, 
and soon every other school of art in Bologna was deserted and 
closed. They continued together till, at the invitation of Cardinal 
Farnese, Annibale and Agostino went to Rome in 1600 to paint 
the gallery of the cardinal's palace. The superior praises awarded 
to Agostino inflamed the jealousy of Annibale, already kindled 
by the brilliant reception given by the pupils of the Incamminati 
to Agostino's still highly celebrated picture of the " Communion 
of St Jerome," and the latter was dismissed to Parma to paint 
the great saloon of the Casino. Here he died in 1602, when on 
the eve of finishing his renowned painting of "Celestial, Terrestrial 
and Venal Love." Annibale continued to work alone at the 
Farnese gallery till the designs were completed; but, dis- 
appointed at the miserable remuneration offered by the cardinal, 
he retired to Naples, where an unsuccessful contest for a great 
work in the church of the Jesuits threw him into a fever, of 
which he died in 1609. Lodovico always remained at his academy 
in Bologna (excepting for a short visit to his cousin at Rome), 
though invited to execute paintings in all parts of the country. 
He died in 1619, and was interred in the church of Santa Maria 
Maddalena. The works of Lodovico are numerous in the chapels 
of Bologna. The most famous are — The " Madonna standing on 
the moon, with St Francis and St Jerome beside her, attended by 
a retinue of angels"; "John the Baptist," "St Jerome," "St 
Benedict " and " St Cecilia "; and the "Limbo of the Fathers." 
He was by far the most amiable of the three painters, rising 
superior to all feelings of jealousy towards his rivals, and though 
he received large sums for his productions, yet, from his almost 
unparalleled liberality to the students of the academy, he died 
poor. With skill in painting Agostino combined the greatest 
proficiency in engraving (which he had studied under Cornelius 
de Cort) and high accomplishments as a scholar. He died not 
untroubled by remorse for the indecencies which, in accordance 
with the corruption of the time, he had introduced into some 
of his engravings. The works of Annibale are more diversified 
in style than those of the others, and comprise specimens of 
painting after the manner of Correggio, Titian, Paolo Veronese, 
Raphael and Michelangelo. The most distinguished are the 
■' Dead Christ in the lap of the Madonna "; the " Infant and 
St John"; "St Catherine"; "St Roch distributing alms" 
(now in the Dresden gallery) ; and the " Saviour wailed over by 
the Maries," at present in possession of the earl of Carlisle. He 
frequently gave great importance to the landscape in his com- 
positions. The reputation of Annibale is tarnished by his 
jealousy and vindictiveness towards his brother, and the licen- 
tiousness of his disposition, which contributed to bring him to a 
comparatively early grave. 

The three Caracci were the founders of the so-called Eclectic 
school of painting, — the principle of which was to study in the 
works of the great masters the several excellences for which they 
had been respectively pre-eminent, and to combine these in the 
productions of the school itself; for instance, there was to be the 



design of Raphael, the power oi Michelangelo, the colour of 
Titian, and so on. 

See A. Venturi, i" Caracci e la loro scuola, 1895. (W. M. R.) 

CARACCIOLO, FRANCESCO, Prince (1732-1799), Neapolitan 
admiral and revolutionist, was born on the 18th of January 
1732, of a noble Neapolitan family. He entered the navy and 
learned his seamanship under Rodney. He fought with 
distinction in the British service in the American War of Inde- 
pendence, against the Barbary pirates, and against the French 
at Toulon under Lord Hotham. The Bourbons placed the 
greatest, confidence in his skill. When on the approach of the 
French to Naples King Ferdinand IV. and Queen Mary Caroline 
fled to Sicily on board Nelson's ship the " Vanguard " (December 
1798), Caracciolo escorted them on the frigate " Sannita." He 
was the only prominent Neapolitan trusted by the king, but 
even the admiral's loyalty was shaken by Ferdinand's cowardly 
flight. On reaching Palermo Caracciolo asked permission to 
return to Naples to look after his own private affairs (January 
1799). This was granted, but when he arrived at Naples he 
found all the aristocracy and educated middle classes infatuated 
with the French revolutionary ideas, and he himself was received 
with great enthusiasm. He seems at first to have intended to 
live a retired life; but, finding that he must either join the 
Republican party or escape to Procida, then in the hands of the 
English, in which case even his intimates would regard him as 
a traitor and his property would have been confiscated, he was 
induced to adhere to the new order of things and took command 
of the republic's naval forces. Once at sea, he fought actively 
against the British and Neapolitan squadrons and prevented 
the landing of some Royalist bands. A few days later all the 
French troops in Naples, except 500 men, were recalled to the 
north of Italy. 

Caracciolo then attacked Admiral Thurn, who from the 
" Minerva " commanded the Royalist fleet, and did some damage 
to that vessel. But the British fleet on the one hand and Cardinal 
Fabrizio Ruffo's army on the other made resistance impossible. 
The Republicans and the 500 French had retired to the castles, 
and Caracciolo landed and tried to escape in disguise. But 
he was betrayed and arrested by a Royalist officer, who on the 
29th of June brought him in chains on board Nelson's flagship 
the " Foudroyant." It is doubtful whether Caracciolo should 
have been included in the capitulation concluded with the 
Republicans in the castles, as that document promised life and 
liberty to those who surrendered before the blockade of the forts, 
whereas he was arrested afterwards, but as the whole capitulation 
was violated the point is immaterial. Moreover, the admiral's 
fate was decided even before his capture, because on the 27 th 
of June the British minister, Sir W. Hamilton, had communicated 
to Nelson Queeji Mary Caroline's wish that Caracciolo should 
be hanged. As soon as he was brought on board, Nelson ordered 
Thurn to summon a court martial composed of Caracciolo's 
former officers, Thurn himself being a personal enemy of the 
accused. The court was held on board the " Foudroyant," 
which was British territory — a most indefensible proceeding. 
Caracciolo was charged with high treason; he had asked to be 
judged by British officers, which was refused, nor was he allowed 
to summon witnesses in his defence. He was condemned to 
death by three votes to two, and as soon as the sentence was 
communicated to Nelson the latter ordered that he should be 
hanged at the yard-arm of the " Minerva " the next morning, 
and his body thrown into the sea at sundown: Even the cus- 
tomary twenty-four hours' respite for confession was denied 
him, and his request to be shot instead of hanged refused. The 
sentence was duly carried out on the 30th of June 1799. 

Caracciolo was technically a traitor to the king whose uniform 
he had worn, but apart from the wave of revolutionary 
enthusiasm which had spread all over the educated classes of 
Italy, and the fact that treason to a government like that of the 
Neapolitan Bourbons could hardly be regarded as a crime, 
there was no necessity for Nelson to make himself the executor 
of the revenge of Ferdinand and Mary Caroline. His greatest 
offence, as Captain Mahan remarks {Life of Nelson, i. 440), was 



3oo 



CARACOLE— CARALES 



committed against his own country by sacrificing his inalienable 
character as the representative of the king of Great Britain 
to his secondary and artificial character as delegate of the king 
of Naples. The only explanation of Nelson's conduct is to be 
found in his infatuation for Lady Hamilton, whose low ambition 
made her use her influence over him in the interest of Queen 
Mary Caroline's malignant spite. 

Authorities. — Besides the general works on Nelson and Naples, 
such as P. Colletta's Storia del Reame di Napoli (Florence, 1848), 
there is a large amount of special literature on the subject. Nelson 
and the Neapolitan Jacobins (Navy Records Society, l903),contains 
all the documents on the episode, including those incorrectly tran- 
scribed by A. Dumas in his Borbcni di Napoli (Naples, 1862-1863), 
with an introduction defending Nelson by H. C. Gutteridge; the 
work contains a bibliography. The case against Nelson is set forth 
by Professor P. Villari in his article " Nelson, Caracciolo, e la Repub- 
blica Napolitana " (Nuova Antologia, 16th February 1899); Captain 
A. T. Mahan has replied in " The Neapolitan Republic and Nelson's 
Accusers" (English Historical Review, July 1899), "Nelson at 
Naples " (ibid., October 1900), and "Nelson at Naples" (Athenaeum, 
8th July 1899) ; see also F. Lemmi, Nelson e Caracciolo (Florence, 
1898); C. Giglioli, Naples in 1799 (London, 1903); Freiherr von 
Helfert, Fabrizio Ruffo (Vienna, 1882); H. Huffer, Die neapoli- 
tanische Republik des Jahres 1799 (Leipzig, 1884). (L. V.*) 

CARACOLE (a Fr. word, the origin of which is doubtful, mean- 
ing the wheeling about of a horse; in Spanish and Portuguese 
caracol means a snail with a spiral shell), a turn or wheeling 
in horsemanship to the left or right, or to both alternately, so 
that the movements of the horse describe a zig-zag course. 
The term has been used loosely and erroneously to describe any 
display of fancy riding. It is also used for a spiral staircase in 
a tower. 

CARACTACUS, strictly Caratacus, the Latin form of a Celtic 
name, which survives in Caradoc and other proper names. The 
most famous bearer of the name was the British chieftain who 
led the native resistance to the Roman invaders in a.d. 48-51, 
and was finally captured and sent to Rome (Tac. Ann. xii. 33, 
Dio. lx.). Two old camps on the Welsh border are now called 
Caer Caradoc, but the names seem to be the invention of anti- 
quaries and not genuinely ancient memorials of the Celtic hero. 

CARADOC SERIES, in geology, the name introduced by 
R. I. Murchison in 1839 for the sandstone series of Caer Caradoc 
in Shropshire, England. The limits of Murchison's Caradoc 
series have since been somewhat modified, and through the 
labours of C. Lapworth the several members of the series have 
been precisely defined by means of graptolitic zones. These 
zones are identical with those found in the rocks of the same 
age in North Wales, the Bala series (q.v.), and the terms Bala 
or Caradoc series are used indifferently by geologists when 
referring to the uppermost substage of the Ordovician System. 
The Ordovician rocks of the Caradoc district have been sub- 
divided into the following beds, in descending order: the 
Trinudeus shales, Acton Scott beds, Longville flags, Chatwell 
and Soudley sandstones, Harnage shales and Hoar Edge grits 
and limestone. In the Corndon district in the same county the 
Caradoc series is represented by the Marrington group of ashes 
and shales and the Spy Wood group beneath them; these two 
groups of strata are sometimes spoken of as the Chirbury series. 
In the Breidden district are the barren Criggeon shales with 
ashes and flows of andesite. 

In the Lake district the Coniston limestone series represents the 
Upper Caradocian, the lower portion being taken up by part of the 
great Borrowdale volcanic series of rocks. The Coniston limestone 
series contains the following subdivisions : — 

Ashgill group (Ashgill shales and Staurocephalus limestone). 

Kiesley limestone. 

Sleddale group (Applethwaite beds = Upper Coniston limestone 
conglomerate; Yarlside rhyolite; stye end beds = Lower 
Coniston limestone. 

Roman Fell group (Corona beds). 

The Dufton shales and Drygill shales are equivalents of the 
Sleddale group. 

Rocks of Caradoc age are well developed in southern Scotland ; in 
the Girvan district they have been described as the Ardmillan series 
with the Drummock group and Barren Flagstone group in the upper 
Oortion, and the Whitehouse, Ardwell and Balclatchie groups in the 
lower part. Similarly, two divisions, known as the Upper and Lower 



Hartfell series, are recognized in the southern and central area, in 
Peeblesshire, Ayrshire and Dumfriesshire. 

In Ireland the Caradoc or Bala series is represented by the lime- 
stones of Portraine near Dublin and of the Chair of Kildare; by the 
Ballymoney series of Wexford and Carnalea shales of Co. Down. 
In the Lough Mask district beds of this age are found, as in Wales, 
interstratified with volcanic lavas and tuffs. Other localities are 
known in counties Tyrone, Meath and Louth, also in Lambay Island. 

See Ordovician System; also C. Lapworth, Ann. and Mag. 
Nat. Hist., 5th series, vol. vi., 1880; Geol. Mag., 1889; C. Lapworth 
and W. W. Watts, Proc. Geol. Assoc, xiii., 1894; J. E. Marr, Geol. 
Mag., 1892; J. E. Marr and T. Roberts, Q. J. G. S., 1885; B. N. 
Peach and J. Home, " Silurian Rocks of Great Britain," vol. I., 1899 
(Mem. Geol. Survey). (J. A. H.) 

CARALES (Gr. KdpaXts, mod. Cagliari, q.v.), the most 
important ancient city of Sardinia, situated on the south coast 
of the island. Its foundation is generally attributed to the 
Carthaginians, and Punic tombs exist in considerable numbers 
near the present cemetery on the east and still more on the rocky 
plateau to the north-west of the town. It first appears in Roman 
history in the Second Punic War, and probably obtained full 
Roman civic rights from Julius Caesar. In imperial times it was 
the most important town in the island, mainly owing to its fine 
sheltered harbour, where a detachment of the classis Misenas 
was stationed. In the 4th and 5th centuries it was probably the 
seat of the praeses Sardiniae. It is mentioned as an important 
harbour in the Gothic and Gildonic wars. It was also the chief 
point of the road system of Sardinia. Roads ran hence to Olbia 
by the east coast, and through the centre of the island, to Othoca 
(Oristano) direct, and thence to Olbia (probably the most 
frequented route), through the mining district to Sulci and 
along the south and west coasts to Othoca. The hill occupied 
by the Pisan fortifications and the medieval town within them 
must have been the acropolis of the Carthaginian settlement; 
it is impossible to suppose that a citadel presenting such natural 
advantages was not occupied. The Romans, too, probably 
made use of it, though the lower quarters were mainly occupied 
in imperial times. A. Taramelli (Notizie degli Scavi, 1905, 
41 seq.) rightly points out that the nucleus of the Roman muni- 
cipium is probably represented by the present quarter of the 
Marina, in which the streets intersect at right angles and Roman 
remains are frequently found in the subsoil. An inscription 
found some way to the north towards the amphitheatre speaks 
of paving in the squares and streets, and of drains constructed 
under Domitian in a. d. 83 (F. Vivanet in Notizie degli Scavi, 
1897, 279). The amphitheatre occupies a natural depression in 
the rock just below the acropolis, and open towards the sea with 
a fine view. Its axes are 95! and 79 yds., and it is in the main cut 
in the rock, though some parts of it are built with concrete. 
Below it, to the south, are considerable remains of ancient 
reservoirs for rain-water, upon which the city entirely depended. 
This nucleus extended both to the east and to the west; in the 
former direction it ran some way inland, on the east of the castle 
hill. Here were the ambulationes or public promenades con- 
structed by the pro-consul Q. Caecilius Metellus before a.d. 6 
(Corp. Inscrip. Lat. x., Berlin, 1883, No. 7581). Here also, not far 
from the shore, the. remains of Roman baths, with a fine coloured 
mosaic pavement, representing deities riding on marine monsters, 
were found in 1907. To the east was the necropolis of Bonaria, 
where both Punic and Roman tombs exist, and where, on the 
site of the present cemetery, Christian catacombs have been 
discovered (F. Vivanet in Notizie degli Scavi, 1892, 183 seq.; 
G. Pinza in Nuovo Bullettino di Archeologia Cristiana, 1901, 
61 seq.). But the western quarter seems to have been far more 
important; it extended along the lagoon of S. Gilla (which lies 
to the north-west of the town, and which until the middle ages 
was an open bay) and on the lower slopes of the hill which rises 
above it. The chief discoveries which have been made are noted 
by Taramelli (loc. cit.) and include some important buildings, of 
which a large Roman house (or group of houses) is the only one 
now visible (G. Spano in Notizie degli Scavi, 1876, 148, 173; 
1877, 285; 1880, 105, 405). Beyond this quarter begins an 
extensive Roman necropolis extending along the edge of the hill 
north-east of the high road leading to the north-west; the most 



CARAN D'ACHE— CARAVAGGIO, M. A. DA 



301 



important tomb is the so-called Grotta delle Vipere, the rock- 
hewn tomb of Cassius Philippus and Atilia Pomptilla, the sides 
of which are covered with inscriptions {Corpus Inscr. Lat. x., 
Berlin, 1883 , Nos. .7 563-7 578) . Other tombs are also to be found 
on the high ground near the Punic tombs already mentioned. 
The latter are hewn perpendicularly in the rock, while the Roman 
tombs are chambers excavated horizontally.. In the lagoon 
itself were found a large number of terra cottas, made of local 
clay, some being masks of both divinities and men (among them 
grotesques) others representing hands and feet, others various 
animals, and of amphorae of various sizes and other vases. 
Some of the amphorae contained animals' bones, possibly the 
remains of sacrifices.. These objects are of the Punic period; 
' they were all found in groups, and had apparently been arranged 
on a platform of piles in what was then a bay, in readiness for 
shipment (F. Vivanet in Notizie degli Scavi, 1893, 255). It is 
probable that the acropolis of Carales was occupied even in 
prehistoric times; but more abundant traces of prehistoric 
settlements (pottery and fragments of obsidian, also kitchen 
middens, containing bones of animals and shells of molluscs 
used for human food) have been found on the Capo S. Elia 
to the south-east of the modern town (see A. Taramelli in 
Notizie degli Scavi, 1904, 19 seq.). An inscription records the 
existence of a temple of Venus Erycina on this promontory in 
Roman times. The museum contains an interesting collection 
of objects from many of the sites mentioned, and also from other 
parts of the island; it is in fact the most important in Sardinia, 
and is especially strong in prehistoric bronzes (see Sardinia). 
For the Roman inscriptions see C. I. L. cit., Nos. 7552-7807. (T.As.) 
CARAN D'ACHE, the pseudonym (meaning " lead-pencil ") of 
Emmanuel Poire (1858-1909), French artist and illustrator, who 
was born and educated at Moscow, being the grandson of one of 
Napoleon's officers who had settled in Russia. He determined 
to be a military painter, and when he arrived in Paris from 
Russia he found an artistic adviser in Detaille He served five 
years in the army, where the principal work allotted to him was 
the drawing of uniforms for the ministry of war. He embellished 
a short-lived journal, La Vie militaire, with a series of illustra- 
tions, among them being some good-tempered caricatures of the 
German army, which showed how accurately ht was acquainted 
with military detail. His special gift lay in pictorial anecdote, 
the story being represented at its different stages with irresistible 
effect, in the artist's own mannered simplicity. Much of his 
work was contributed to La Vie parisienne, Le Figaro illustrS, 
La Caricature, Le Chat noir, and he also issued various albums of 
sketches, the Carnet de cheques, illustrating the Panama scandals, 
Album de croquis militaires et d'histoire sans legendes, Histoire 
de Marlborough, &c, besides illustrating a good many books, 
notably the Prince Kozakokoff of Bemadaky. He died on the 
26th of February 1909. 

A collection of his work was exhibited at the Fine Art Society's 
rooms in London in 1898. The catalogue contained a prefatory note 
by M. H. Spielmann. 

CARAPACE (a Fr. word, from the Span, carapacho, a shield 
or armour), the upper shell of a crustacean, tortoise or turtle. 
The covering of the armadillo is called a carapace, as is also the 
hard case in which certain of the Infusoria are enclosed. 

CARAPEGUA, an interior town of Paraguay, 37 m. S.E. 
of Asuncion on the old route between that city and the missions. 
Pop. (est.) 13,000 (probably the population of the large rural 
district about the town is included in this estimate). The town 
(founded in 1725) is situated in a fertile country producing 
cotton, tobacco, Indian corn, sugar-cane and mandioca. It has 
two schools, a church and modern public buildings. 

CARAT (Arab. Qirdt, weight of four grains; Gr. Kepariov, 
little horn, the fruit of the carob or locust tree), a small weight 
(originally in the form of a seed) used for diamonds and precious 
stones, and a measure for determining the fineness of gold. 
The exact weight of the carat, in practice, now varies slightly in 
different places. In 1877 a syndicate of London, Paris and 
Amsterdam jewellers fixed the weight at 205 milligrammes 
(3-163 troy grains). The South African carat, according to 



Gardner Williams (general manager of the De Beers mines), is 
equal to 3- 174 grains (The Diamond Mines of South Africa, 1902). 
1 The fineness of gold is measured by a ratio with 24 carats as a 
standard; thus 2 parts of alloy make it 22-carat gold, and so on. 
CARAUSIUS, MARCUS AURELIUS, tyrant or usurper in 
Britain, a.d. 286-293, was a Menapian from Belgic Gaul, a man 
of humble origin, who in his early days had been a pilot. Having 
entered the Roman army, he rapidly obtained promotion, and 
was stationed by the emperor Maximian at Gessoriacum 
(Bononia, Boulogne) to protect the coasts and channel from 
Frankish and Saxon pirates. He at first acted' energetically, but 
was subsequently accused of having entered into partnership with 
the barbarians and was sentenced to death by the emperor. 
Carausius thereupon crossed over to Britain and proclaimed 
himself an independent ruler. The legions at once joined him; 
numbers of Franks enlisted in his service; an increased and 
well-equipped fleet secured him the command of the neighbouring 
seas. In 289 Maximian attempted to recover the island, but 
his fleet was damaged by a storm and he was defeated. Maxi- 
mian and Diocletian were compelled to acknowledge the rule 
of Carausius in Britain; numerous coins are extant with the 
heads of Carausius, Diocletian and Maximian, bearing the 
legend " Carausius et fratres sui." In 292 Constantius Chlorus 
besieged and captured Gessoriacum (hitherto in possession of 
Carausius), together with part of his fleet and naval stores. 
Constantius then made extensive preparations to ensure the 
reconquest of Britain, but before they were completed Carausius 
was murdered by Allectus, his praefect of the guards (Aurelius 
Victor, Caesares, 39; Eutropius ix. 21, 22; Eumenius, Pahe- 
gyrici ii. 12, v. 12). A Roman mile-stone found near Carlisle 
(1895) bears the inscription IMP. C[aes] M. AUR[elius] MAUS. 
The meaning of MAUS is doubtful, but it may be an anticipation 
of ARAUS (see F. J. Haverfield in Cumberland and Westmoreland 
Antiquarian Soc. Transactions, 1895, p. 437). 

A copper coin found at Richborough, inscribed Domino 
Carausio Ces., must be ascribed to a Carausius of later date, 
since the type of the reverse is not found until the middle of the 
4th century at the earliest. Nothing is known of this Carausius 
(A. J. Evans in Numismatic Chronicle, 1887, " On a coin of a 
second Carausius Caesar in Britain in the Fifth Century "). 

See J. Watts de Peyster, The History of Carausius, the Dutch 
Augustus (1858); P. H. Webb, The Reign and Coinage of Carausius 
(1908). 

CARAVACA, a town of south-eastern Spain, in the province 
of Murcia; near the left bank of the river Caravaca, a tributary 
of the Segura. Pop. (1900) 15,846. Caravaca is dominated by 
the medieval castle of Santa Cruz, and contains several convents 
and a fine parish church, with a miraculous cross celebrated 
for its healing power, in honour of which a yearly festival is 
held on the 3rd of May. The hills which extend to the north 
are rich in marble and iron. Despite the lack of railway com- 
munication, the town is a considerable industrial centre, 
with large iron-works, tanneries and manufactories of paper, 
chocolate and oil. 

CARAVAGGIO, MICHELANGELO AMERIGHI (or Merigi) 
DA (1569-1609), Italian painter, was born in the village of 
Caravaggio, in Lombardy, from which he received his name. 
He was originally a mason's labourer, but his powerful genius 
directed him to painting, at which he worked with immitigable 
energy and amazing force. He despised every sort of idealism 
whether noble or emasculate, became the head of the Naturalisti 
(unmodified imitators of ordinary nature) in painting, and 
adopted a style of potent contrasts of light and shadow, laid on 
with a sort of fury, indicative of that fierce temper which led the 
artist to commit a homicide in a gambling quarrel at Rome. 
To avoid the consequences of his crime he fled to Naples and to 
Malta, where he was imprisoned for another attempt to avenge 
a quarrel. Escaping to Sicily, he was attacked by a party sent 
in pursuit of him, and severely wounded. Being pardoned, he 
set out for Rome; but having been arrested by mistake before 
his arrival, and afterwards released, and left to shift for himself 
in excessive heat, and still suffering from wounds and hardships, 



302 



CARAVAGGIO, P. C. DA— CARAVAN 



he died of fever on the beach at Pontercole in 1609. His best 
pictures are the " Entombment of Christ," now in the Vatican; 
" St Sebastian," in the Roman Capitol; a magnificent whole- 
length portrait of a grand-master of the Knights of Malta, 
Alof de Vignacourt, and his page, in the Louvre; and the 
Borghese " Supper at Emmaus." 

CARAVAGGIO, POLIDORO CALDARA DA (1495 or 1492- 
iS43)j a celebrated painter of frieze and other decorations in the 
Vatican. His merits were such that, while a mere mortar-carrier 
to the artists engaged in that work, he attracted the admiration 
of Raphael, then e'mployed on his great pictures in the Loggie of 
the palace. Polidoro's works, as well as those of his master, 
Maturino of Florence, have mostly perished, but are well known 
by the fine etchings of P. S. Bartoli, C. Alberti, &c. On the 
sack of Rome by the army of the Constable de Bourbon in 1527, 
Polidoro fled to Naples. Thence he went to Messina, where he 
was much employed, and gained a considerable fortune, with 
which he was about to return to the mainland of Italy when he 
was robbed and murdered by an assistant, Tonno Calabrese, in 
1543. Two of his principal paintings are a Crucifixion, painted 
in Messina, and " Christ bearing the Cross " in the Naples 
gallery. 

CARAVAN (more correctly Karwan), a Persian word, adopted 
into the later Arabic vocabulary, and denoting, throughout 
Asiatic Turkey and Persia, 1 a body of traders travelling together 
for greater security against robbers (and in particular against 
Bedouins, Kurds, Tatars and the like, whose grazing-grounds the 
proposed route may traverse) and for mutual assistance in the 
matter of provisions, water and so forth. These precautions are 
due to the absence of settled government, inns and roads. 
These conditions having existed from time immemorial in the 
major part of western Asia, and still existing, caravans always 
have been the principal means for the transfer of merchandise. 
In these companies camels are generally employed for the trans- 
port of heavy goods, especially where the track, like that between 
Damascus and Bagdad, for example, lies across level, sandy 
and arid districts. The camels are harnessed in strings of fifty 
or more at a time, a hair-rope connecting the rear of one beast 
with the head of another; the leader is gaily decorated with 
parti-coloured trappings, tassels and bells; an unladen ass 
precedes the file, for luck, say some, for guidance, say others. 
Where the route is rocky and steep, as that between Damascus 
and Aleppo, mules, or even asses, are used for burdens. The 
wealthier members ride, where possible, on horseback. Every 
man carries arms; but these are in truth more for show than for 
use, and are commonly flung away in the presence of any serious 
robber attack. Should greater peril than ordinary be antici- 
pated, the protection of a company of soldiers is habitually 
pre-engaged, — an expensive, and ordinarily a useless adjunct. A 
leader or director, called Karawan-Bashi (headman), or, out of 
compliment, Karawan-Seraskier (general), but most often 
simply designated Rats (chief), is before starting appointed by 
common consent. His duties are those of general manager, 
spokesman, arbitrator and so forth; his remuneration is 
indefinite. But in the matter of sales or purchases, either on the 
way or at the destination, each member of the caravan acts for 
himself. 

The number of camels or mules in a single caravan varies from 
forty or so up to six hundred and more; sometimes, as on the 
reopening of a long-closed route, it reaches a thousand. The 
ordinary caravan seasons are the months of spring, early summer 
and later autumn. Friday, in accordance with a recommenda- 
tion made in the Koran itself, is the favourite day for setting out, 
the most auspicious hour being that immediately following 
noonday prayer. The first day's march never does more than 
just clear the starting-point. Subsequently each day's route is 
divided into two stages, — from 3 or 4 a.m. to about 10 in the 
forenoon, and from between 2 and 3 p.m. till 6 or even 8 in the 
evening. Thus the time passed daily on the road averages from 

1 In Arabia proper it is rarely employed in speech and never in 
writing, strictly Arabic words such as Rikb (" assembled riders ") or 
Qafila (" wayfaring band ") being in ordinary use. 



ten to twelve hours, and, as the ordinary pace of a laden camel 
does not exceed 2 m. an hour, that of a mule being t\, a distance 
varying from 23 to 28 m. is gone over every marching day. 
But prolonged halts of two, three, four and even more days often 
occur. The hours of halt, start and movement, the precise lines 
of route, and the selection or avoidance of particular localities are 
determined by common consent. But if, as sometimes happens, 
the services of a professional guide, or those of a military officer 
have been engaged, his decisions are final. While the caravan is 
on its way, the five stated daily prayers are, within certain 
limits, anticipated, deferred or curtailed, so as the better to 
coincide with the regular and necessary halts, — a practice 
authorized by orthodox Mahommedan custom and tradition. 

Two caravans are mentioned in Genesis xxxvii.; the route 
on which they were passing seems to have coincided with that 
nowadays travelled by Syrian caravans on their way to Egypt. 
Other allusions to caravans may be found in Job, in Isaiah and 
in the Psalms. Eastern literature is full of such references. 

The yearly pilgrim-bands, bound from various quarters of the 
Mahommedan world to their common destination, Mecca, are 
sometimes, but inaccurately, styled by European writers cara- 
vans; their proper designation is Hajj, a collective word for 
pilgrimages and pilgrims. The two principal pilgrim-caravans 
start yearly, the one from Damascus, or, to speak more exactly, 
from Mozarib, a village station three days' journey to the south of 
the Syrian capital, the other from Cairo in Egypt. 2 This latter 
was formerly joined on its route, near Akaba of the Red Sea, by 
the North African Hajj, which, however, now goes from Egypt by 
sea from Suez; the former gathers up bands from Anatolia, 
Kurdistan, Mesopotamia and Syria. Besides these a third, but 
smaller Hajj of Persians, chiefly sets out from Suk-esh-Sheiukh, 
in the neighbourhood of Meshed Ali, on the lower Euphrates; a 
fourth of negroes, Nubians, etc., unites at Yambu on the Hejaz 
coast, whither they have crossed from Kosseir in Upper Egypt; 
a fifth of Indians and Malays, centres at Jidda; a sixth and 
seventh, of southern or eastern Arabs arrive, the former from 
Yemen, the latter from Nejd. 

The Syrian Hajj is headed by the pasha of Damascus, either in 
person or by a vicarious official of high rank, and is further 
accompanied by the Sorrah Amir or " Guardian of the Purse," a 
Turkish officer from Constantinople. The Egyptian company is 
commanded by an amir or ruler, appointed by the Cairene 
government, and is accompanied by the famous " Mahmal," or 
sacred pavilion. The other bands above mentioned have each 
their own amir, besides their mekowwams or agents, whose 
business it is to see after provisions, water and the like, and are 
not seldom encumbered with a numerous retinue of servants and 
other attendants. Lastly, a considerable force of soldiery ac- 
companies both the Syrian and the Egyptian Hajj. 

No guides properly so-called attend these pilgrim-caravans, 
the routes followed being invariably the same, and well known. 
But Bedouin bands generally offer themselves by way of escort, 
and not seldom designedly lead their clients into the dangers 
from which they bargain to keep them safe. This they are the 
readier to do because, in addition to the personal luxuries with 
which many of the pilgrims provide themselves for the journey, a 
large amount of wealth, both in merchandise and coins, is habitu- 
ally to be found among the travellers, who, in accordance with 
Mahommedan tradition, consider it not merely lawful but praise- 
worthy to unite mercantile speculation with religious duty. 
Nor has any one, the pasha himself or the amir and the military, 
when present, excepted, any acknowledged authority or 
general control in the pilgrim-caravans; nor is there any orderly 
subdivision of management or service. The pilgrims do, indeed, 
often coalesce in companies among themselves for mutual help, 
but necessity, circumstance or caprice governs all details, and 
thus it happens that numbers, sometimes as many as a third of 
the entire Hajj, yearly perish by their own negligence or by 
misfortune,— dying, some of thirst, others of fatigue and sickness, 
others at the hand of robbers on the way. In fact the principal 

2 The Syrian and Egyptian hajj have been able, since 1908, to 
travel by the railway from Damascus to the Hejaz. 



CARAVANSERAI— CARBAZOL 



303 



routes are in many places lined for miles together with the bones 
of camels and men. 

The numbers which compose these pilgrim caravans are much 
exaggerated by popular rumour; yet it is certain that the 
Syrian and Egyptian sometimes amount to 5000 each, with 
25,000 or 30,000 camels in train. Large supplies of food and 
water have to be carried, the more so at times that the pilgrim 
season, following as it does the Mahommedan calendar, which is 
lunar, falls for years together in the very hottest season. Hence, 
too, the journey is usually accomplished by night marches, the 
hours being from 3 to 4 p.m. to 6 or 7 a.m. of the following day. 
Torches are lighted on the road, the pace is slower than that of 
an ordinary caravan, and does not exceed 2 m. an hour. 

See Mecca and Mahommedan Religion. 

CARAVANSERAI, a public building, for the shelter of a 
caravan (g.v.) and of wayfarers generally in Asiatic Turkey. It 
is commonly constructed in the neighbourhood, but not within 
the walls, of a town or village. It is quadrangular in form, 
with a dead wall outside; this wall has small windows high up, 
but in the lower parts merely a few narrow air-holes. Inside a 
cloister-like arcade, surrounded by cellular store-rooms, forms 
the ground floor, and a somewhat lighter arcade, giving access to 
little dwelling-rooms, runs round it above. Broad open flights of 
stone steps connect the storeys. The central court is open to the 
sky, and generally has in its centre a well with a fountain-basin 
beside it. A spacious gateway, high and wide enough to admit 
the passage of a loaded camel, forms the sole entrance, which is 
furnished with heavy doors, and is further guarded within by 
massive iron chains, drawn across at night. The entry is paved 
with flagstones, and there are stone seats on each side. The court 
itself is generally paved, and large enough to admit of three or 
four hundred crouching camels or tethered mules; the bales of 
merchandise are piled away under the lower arcade, or stored up 
in the cellars behind it. The upstairs apartments are for human 
lodging; cooking is usually carried on in one or more corners 
of the quadrangle below. Should the caravanserai be a small one, 
the merchants and their goods alone find place within, the beasts 
of burden being left outside. A porter, appointed by the muni- 
cipal authority of the place, is always present, lodged just 
within the gate, and sometimes one or more assistants. These 
form a guard of the building and of the goods and persons in it, 
and have the right to maintain order and, within certain limits, 
decorum; but they have no further control over the temporary 
occupants of the place, which is always kept open for all arrivals 
from prayer-time at early dawn till late in the evening. A small 
gratuity is expected by the porter, but he has no legal claim for 
payment, his maintenance being provided for out of the funds of 
the institution. Neither food nor provender is supplied. 

Many caravanserais in Syria, Mesopotamia and Anatolia, have 
considerable architectural merit; their style of construction is in 
general that known as Saracenic; their massive walls are of hewn 
stone; their proportions apt and grand. The portals especially 
are often decorated with intricate carving; so also is the prayer- 
niche within. These buildings, with their belongings, are works 
of charity, and are supported, repaired and so forth out of funds 
derived from pious legacies, most often of land or rentals. Some- 
times a municipality takes on itself to construct and maintain a 
caravanserai; but in any case the institution is tax-free, and its 
revenues are inalienable. When, as sometimes happens, those 
revenues have been dissipated by peculation, neglect or change 
of times, the caravanserai passes through downward stages of 
dilapidation to total ruin (of which only too many examples 
may be seen) unless some new charity intervene to repair and 
renew it. 

Khans, i.e. places analogous to inns and hotels, where not 
lodging only, but often food and other necessaries or comforts 
may be had for payment, are sometimes by inaccurate writers 
confounded with caravanserais. They are generally to be found 
within the town or village precincts, and are of much smaller 
dimensions than caravanserais. The khan of Asad Pasha at 
Damascus is a model of constructive skill and architectural 
beauty. 



CARAVEL, or Carvel (from the Gr. napafiot, a light ship, 
through the Ital. carabella and the Span, carabas), a name applied 
at different times and in different countries to ships of very 
varying appearance and build, as in Turkey to a ship of war, and 
in France to a small boat used in the herring fishery. In the 1 5th 
and 1 6th centuries, caravels were much used by the Portuguese 
and Spanish for long voyages. They were roundish ships, with a 
double tower at the stern, and a single one in the bows, and were 
galley rigged. Two out of the three vessels in which Columbus 
sailed on his voyage of discovery to America were " caravels." 
Carvel, the older English form, is now used only in the term 
" carvel-built," for a boat in which the planking is flush with 
the edges laid side to side, in distinction from " clinker-built," 
where the edges overlap. 

CARAVELLAS, a small seaport of southern Bahia, Brazil, on 
the Caravellas river a few miles above its mouth, which is 
dangerously obstructed by sandbars. Pop. (1890) of the muni- 
cipality 5482, about one-half of whom lived in the town. Cara- 
vellas was once the centre of a flourishing whale fishery, but has 
since fallen into decay. It is the port of the Bahia & Minas 
railway, whose traffic is comparatively unimportant. 

CARAWAY, the fruit, or so-called seed, of Carum Carui, an 
umbelliferous plant growing throughout the northern and 
central parts of Europe and Asia, and naturalized in waste places 
in England. The plant has finely-cut leaves and compound 
umbels of small white flowers. The fruits are laterally com- 
pressed and ovate, the mericarps (the two portions into which the 
ripe fruit splits) being subcylindrical, slightly arched, and marked 
with five distinct pale ridges. Caraways evolve a pleasant 
aromatic odour when bruised, and they have an agreeable spicy 
taste. They yield from 3 to 6 % of a volatile oil, the chief 
constituent of which is cymene aldehyde. Cymene itself is 
present, having the formula CH 3 C6H4CH(CH 3 ) 2 ; also carvone 
CioHhO, and limonene, a terpene. The dose of the oil is -5-3 
minims. The plant is cultivated in north and central Europe, 
and Morocco, as well. as in the south of England, the produce of 
more northerly latitudes being richer in essential oil than that 
grown in southern regions. The essential oil is largely obtained 
by distillation for use in medicine as an aromatic stimulant and 
carminative, and as a flavouring material in cookery and in 
liqueurs for drinking. Caraways are, however, more extensively 
consumed entire in certain kinds of cheese, cakes and bread, 
and they form the basis of a popular article of confectionery 
known as caraway comfits. 

CARBALLO, a town of north-western Spain, in the province of 
Corunna; on the right bank of the river Allones, 20 m. S.W. of 
the city of Corunna. Pop. (1900) 13,032. Carballois the central 
market of a thriving agricultural district. At San Juan de 
Carballo, on the opposite bank of the Allones, there are hot 
sulphurous springs. 

CARBAZOL, C12H9N, a chemical constituent of coal-tar and 
crude anthracene. From the latter it may be obtained by fusion 
with caustic potash when it is converted into carbazol-potassium, 
which can be easily separated by distilling off the anthracene. 
It may be prepared synthetically by passing the vapours of 
diphenylamine or aniline through a red-hot tube; by heating 
diorthodiaminodiphenyl with 25 % sulphuric acid to 200 C. for 
15 hours; by heating orthoaminodiphenyl with lime; or by 
heating thiodiphenylamine with copper powder. It is also 
obtained as a decomposition product of brucine or strychnine, 
when these alkaloids are distilled with zinc dust. It is easily 
soluble in the common organic solvents, and crystallizes in plates 
or tables melting at 238 C. It is a very stable compound, 
possessing feebly basic properties and characterized by its 
ready sublimation. It distils unchanged, even when the opera- 
tion is carried out in the presence of zinc dust. On being heated 
with caustic potash in a current of carbonic acid, it gives carbazol 
carbonic acid C^HgN-COOH; melted with oxalic acid it gives 
carbazol blue. It dissolves in concentrated sulphuric acid to a 
clear yellow solution. The potassium salt reacts with the alkyl 
iodides to give N-substituted alkyl derivatives. It gives the 
pine-shaving reaction, in this respect resembling pyrrol (q.v.). 



3°4 



CARBIDE— CARBOLIC ACID 



CARBIDE, in chemistry, a compound of carbon with another 
element. The introduction of the electric furnace into practical 
chemistry was followed by the preparation of many metallic 
carbides previously unknown, some of which, especially calcium 
carbide, are now of great commercial importance. Carbides of 
the following general formulae have been obtained by H. Moissan 
(M denotes an atom of metal and C of carbon) : — 

M 3 C = manganese, iron ; M 2 C = molybdenum ; M 3 C 2 = chro- 
mium ; MC = zirconium ; M 4 C 3 = beryllium, aluminium ; 
M 2 C 3 = uranium; MC 2 = barium, calcium, strontium, lithium, 
thorium, &c; MC 4 = chromium. 

The principal methods for the preparation of carbides may be 
classified as follows: — (1) direct union at a high temperature, 
e.g. lithium, iron, chromium, tungsten, &c; (2) by the reduc- 
tion of oxides with carbon at high temperatures, e.g. calcium, 
barium, strontium, manganese, chromium, &c; (3) by the 
reduction of carbonates with magnesium in the presence of carbon, 
e.g. calcium, lithium; (4) by the action of metals on acetylene or 
metallic derivatives of acetylene, e.g., sodium, potassium. The 
metallic carbides are crystalline solids, the greater number being 
decomposed by water into a metallic hydrate and a hydro- 
carbon; sometimes hydrogen is also evolved. Calcium carbide 
owes its industrial importance to its decomposition into acetylene; 
lithium carbide behaves similarly. Methane is yielded by alum- 
inium and beryllium carbides, and, mixed with hydrogen, by 
manganese carbide. The important carbides are mentioned in 
the separate articles on the various metals. The commercial 
aspect of calcium carbide is treated in the article Acetylene. 

CARBINE (Fr. carabine, Ger. Karabiner), a word which came 
into use towards the end of the 16th century to denote a form of 
small fire-arm, shorter than the musket and chiefly used by 
mounted men. It has retained this significance, through all 
subsequent modifications of small-arm design, to the present 
day, and is now as a rule a shortened and otherwise slightly 
modified form of the ordinary rifle (<?.».). 

CARBO, the name of a Roman plebeian family of the gens 
Papiria. The following are the most important members in 
Roman history: — 

1. Gaius Papirius Carbo, statesman and orator. He was 
associated with C. Gracchus in carrying out the provisions of the 
agrarian law of Tiberius Gracchus (see Gracchus). When 
tribune of the people (131 B.C.) he carried a law extending voting 
by ballot to the enactment and repeal of laws; another proposal, 
that the tribunes should be allowed to become candidates for the 
same office in the year immediately following, was defeated by 
the younger Scipio Africanus. Carbo was suspected of having 
been concerned in the sudden death of Scipio (129), if not his 
actual murderer. He subsequently went over to the optimates, 
and (when consul in 1 20) successfully defended Lucius Opimius, 
the murderer of Gaius Gracchus, when he was impeached for the 
murder of citizens without a trial, and even went so far as to say 
that Gracchus had been justly slain. But the optimates did not 
trust Carbo. He was impeached by Licinius Crassus on a 
similar charge, and, feeling that he had nothing to hope for from 
the optimates and that his condemnation was certain, he com- 
mitted suicide. 

See Livy, Epit. 59; Appian, Bell. Civ. i. 18; Veil. Pat. ii. 4; 
Val. Max. iii. 7. 6; A. H. J. Greenidge, History of Rome (1904). 

2. His son, Gaius Papirius Carbo, surnamed Arvina, was a 
staunch supporter of the aristocracy, and was put to death by 
the Marian party in 82. He is known chiefly for the law (Plautia 
Papiria) carried by him and M. Plautius Silvanus when tribunes 
of the people in 90 (or 89), whereby the Roman franchise was 
offered to every Italian ally domiciled in Italy at the time when 
the law was enacted, provided he made application personally 
within sixty days to the praetor at Rome (see Rome: History, 
II. " The Republic," Period C). The object of the law was to 
conciliate the states at war with Rome and to secure the loyalty 
of the federate states. Like his father, Carbo was an orator of 
distinction. 

See Cicero, Pro Archia, 4; Veil. Pat. ii. 26; Appian, Bell. Civ. 



3. Gnaeus Papirius Carbo (c. 130-82 B.C.), nephew of (1). 
He was a strong supporter of the Marian party, and took part in 
the blockade of Rome (87). In 85 he was chosen by Cinna as 
his colleague in the consulship, and extensive preparations werd 
made for carrying on war in Greece against Sulla, who had 
announced his intention of returning to Italy. Cinna and Carbo 
declared themselves consuls for the following year, and large 
bodies of troops were transported across the Adriatic; but when 
Cinna was murdered by his own soldiers, who refused to engage 
in civil war, Carbo was obliged to bring them back. In 82 
Carbo, then consul for the third time with the younger Marius, 
fought an indecisive engagement with Sulla near Clusium, but 
was defeated with great loss in an attack on the camp of Sulla's 
general, Q. Caecilius Metellus Pius [see under Metellus (6)] 
near Faventia. Although he still had a large army and the 
Samnites remained faithful to him, Carbo was so disheartened by 
his failure to relieve Praeneste, where the younger Marius had 
taken refuge, that he decided to leave Italy. He first fled to 
Africa, thence to the island of Cossyra (Pentellaria), where he was 
arrested, taken in chains before Pompey at Lilybaeum and put 
to death. 

See Appian, Bell. Civ. i. 67-98; Livy, Epit. 79, 84, 88, 89; 
Plutarch, Pompey, 5, 6, 10, and Sulla, 28; Cicero, ad Fam. ix. 21; 
Eutropius, v. 8, 9; Orosius, v. 20; Valerius Maximus, v. 3. 5, ix. 
13. 2; art. Sulla, L. Cornelius. 

CARBOHYDRATE, in chemistry, the generic name for 
compounds empirically represented by the formula C x (H 2 0) y . 
They are essentially vegetable products, and include the sugars, 
starches, gums and celluloses (q.v.). 

CARBOLIC ACID or Phenol (hydroxy-benzene), C 6 H 6 OH, an 
acid found in the urine of the herbivorae, and in small quantity 
in castoreum (F. Wohler, Ann., 1848, 67, p. 360). Its principal 
commercial source is the fraction of coal-tar which distils between 
150 and 200 C, in which it was discovered in 1834 by F. Runge. 
In order to obtain the phenol from this distillate, it is treated 
with caustic soda, which dissolves the phenol and its homologues 
together with a certain quantity of naphthalene and other 
hydrocarbons. The solution is diluted with water, and the 
hydrocarbons are thereby precipitated and separated. The 
solution is then acidified, and the phenols areliberated and form 
an oily layer on the surface of the acid. This layer is separated, 
and the phenol recovered by a process of fractional distillation. 
It may be synthetically prepared by fusing potassium benzene 
sulphonate with caustic alkalis (A. Kekule, A. Wurtz) ; by the 
action of nitrous acid on aniline; by passing oxygen into boiling 
benzene containing aluminium chloride (C. Friedel and J. M. 
Crafts, Ann.Chim. Phys., 1888 (6) 14, p. 43s); by heating phenol 
carboxylic acids with baryta; and, in small quantities by the 
oxidation of benzene with hydrogen peroxide or nascent ozone 
(A. R. Leeds, Ber., 1881, 14, p. 976). 

It crystallizes in rhombic needles, which melt at 42-5-43° C, 
and boil at 182-183° C; its specific gravity is 1-0906 (o° C). 
It has a characteristic smell, and a biting taste; it is poisonous, 
and acts as a powerful antiseptic. It dissolves in water, 1 5 parts 
of water dissolving about one part of phenol at 16-1 7 C, but it is 
miscible in all proportions at about 70° C. ; it is volatile in steam, 
and is readily soluble in alcohol, ether, benzene, carbon bisul- 
phide, chloroform and glacial acetic acid. It is also readily 
soluble in solutions of the caustic alkalis, slightly soluble in 
aqueous ammonia solution, and almost insoluble in sodium 
carbonate solution. When exposed in the moist condition to the 
air it gradually acquires a red colour. With ferric chloride it 
gives a violet coloration, and with bromine water a white 
precipitate of tribromphenol. 

When phenol is passed through a red-hot tube a complex decom- 
position takes place, resulting in the formation of benzene, toluene, 
naphthalene, &c. (J. G. Kramers, Ann., 1877, 189, p. 129). Chromium 
oxychloride reacts violently on phenol, producing hydroquinone 
ether, 0(C 6 H40H) 2 ; chromic acid gives phenoquinone, and potas- 
sium permanganate gives paradiphenol, oxalic acid, and some 
salicylic acid (R. Henriques, Ber., 1888, 21, p. 1620). In alkaline 
solution, potassium permanganate oxidizes it to inactive tartaric 
acid and carbon dioxide (O. Doebner, Ber., 1891, 24, p. 1755). When 
distilled over lead oxide, it forms diphenylene oxide, (C 6 H 4 ) 2 ; and 



CARBON 



305 



when heated with oxalic acid and concentrated sulphuric acid, it 
forms aurin, G9H14O3. It condenses with aceto-acetic ester, in the 
presence of sulphuric acid, to /5-methyl coumarin (H. v. Pechmann 
and J. B. Cohen, Ber., 1884, 17, p. 2188). 

The hydrogen of the hydroxy! group in phenol can be replaced by 
metals, by alkyl groups and by acid radicals. The metallic deri- 
vatives (phenolates, phenates or carbolates) of the alkali metals are 
obtained by dissolving phenol in a solution of a caustic alkali, in the 
absence of air. Potassium phenolate, C 6 H 6 OK, crystallizes in fine 
needles, is very hygroscopic and oxidizes rapidly on exposure. 
Other phenolates may be obtained from potassium phenolate by 
precipitation. The alkyl derivatives may be obtained t>y heating 
phenol with one molecular proportion of a caustic alkali and of an 
alkyl iodide. They are compounds which greatly resemble the 
mixed ethers of the aliphatic series. They are not decomposed by 
boiling alkalis, but on heating with hydriodic acid they split into 
their components. Anisol, phenyl methyl ether, C 6 H5-0-CH 3 , is 
prepared either by the above me'thod or by the action of diazo- 
methane on phenol, C 6 H50H+CH 2 N2 = N 2 + C 6 H 6 -G-CH 3 (H. v. 
Pechmann, Ber., 1895, 28, p. 857); by distilling anisic acid (para- 
methoxy benzoic acid) with baryta or by boiling phenyl diazonium 
chloride with methyl alcohol. It is a colourless pleasant-smelling 
liquid which boils at 154-3° C. Phenetol, phenyl ethyl ether, 
CeHs-O-CjHs, a liquid boiling at 172° C, may be obtained by similar 
methods. A. Hantzsch (Ber., 1901, 34, p. 3337) has shown that in the 
action of alcohols on diazonium salts an increase in the molecular 
weight of the alcohol and an accumulation of negative groups in the 
aromatic nucleus lead to a diminution in the yield of the ether 
produced and to the production of a secondary reaction, resulting 
in the formation of a certain amount of an aromatic hydrocarbon. 

The acid esters of phenol are best obtained by the action of acid 
chlorides or anhydrides on phenol or its sodium or potassium salt, 
or by digesting phenol with an acid in the presence of phosphorus 
oxychloride (F. Rasinski, Jour. f. prak. Chem., 1882 [2], 26, p. 62). 
Phenyl acetate, C 6 H 6 -0-COCH 3 , a colourless liquid of boiling point 
193° C, may be prepared by heating phenol with acetamide. When 
heated with aniline it yields phenol and acetanilide. Phenyl 
benzoate, CcHU-O-COCeHs. prepared from phenol and benzoyl 
chloride, crystallizes in monoclinic prisms, which melt at 68-69° C. 
and boil at 314° C. 

Phenol is characterized by the readiness with which it forms sub- 
stitution products; chlorine and bromine, for example, react readily 
with phenol, forming ortho- and para- chlor- and -bromphenol, and, 
by further action, trichlor- and tribrom-phenol. Iodphenol is 
obtained by the action of iodine and iodic acid on phenol dissolved 
in a dilute solution of caustic, potash. Nitro-phenols are readily 
obtained by the action of nitric acid on phenol. By the action of 
dilute nitric acid, ortho- and para-nitrophenols are obtained, the 
ortho-compound being separated from the para-compound-by distil- 
lation in a current of steam. Ortho-nitrophenol, C 6 H4-OH-NC>2(l-2), 
crystallizes in yellow needles which melt at 45° C. and boil at 2I4°C. 
Para-nitropbenol, C 6 H4-OH-N0 2 (l-4), crystallizes in long colourless 
needles which melt at H4°C. Meta-nitrophenol, C 6 H4-OH-NGy(i-_3), 
is prepared from meta-nitraniline by diazotizing the base and boiling 
the resulting diazonium salt with water. By nitrating phenol with 
concentrated nitric acid, no care being taken to keep the temperature 
of reaction down, trinitrophenol (picric acid) is obtained (see Picric 
Acid). By the reduction of nitro-phenols, the corresponding 
aminophenols are obtained, and of these, the meta- and para-deriva- 
tives are the most important. Para-aminophenol, C6H 4 -OH-NH 2 (l-4) 
melts at 148° C, with decomposition. Its most important derivative 
is phenacetin. Meta-aminophenol, C 6 H 4 -OH-NH 2 (l-3),and dimethyl 
meta-aminophenol, C 6 H 4 -OH-N(CH 3 )2(l-3), are extensively employed 
in the manufacture of the important dyestuffs known as the rhoda- 
mines. The aminophenols also find application as developers in 
photography, the more important of these developers being amidol, 
the hydrochloride of diaminophenol, ortol, the hydrochloride of 
para-methylaminophenol,C G H4-OH-NHCH 3 -HCl(l -4), rodinal, para- 
aminophenol, and metol, the sulphate of a methylaminophenol 
sulphonic acid. Meta-aminophenol is prepared by reducing meta- 
nitrophenol, or by heating resorcin with ammonium chloride and 
ammonia to 200° C. Dimethyl-meta-aminophenol is prepared by 
heating meta-aminophenol with methyl alcohol and hydrochloric 
acid in an autoclave; by sulphonation of dimethylaniline, the sul- 
phonic acid formed being finally fused with potash ; or by nitrating 
dimethylaniline, in the presence of sulphuric acid at 0° C. In the 
latter case a mixture of nitro-compounds is obtained which can be 
separated by the addition of sodium carbonate. The meta-nitro- 
compound, which is precipitated last, is then reduced, and the 
amino group so formed is replaced by the hydroxyl group by means 
of the Sandmeyer reaction. Dimethyl-meta-aminophenol crystallizes 
in small prisms which melt at 87° C. It condenses with phthalic 
anhydride to form rhodamine, and with succinic anhydride to 
rhodamine S. 

Phenol dissolves readily in concentrated sulphuric acid, a mixture 
of phenol-ortho- and -para-sulphonic acids being formed. These 
acids may be separated by conversion into their potassium salts, 
which are then fractionally crystallized, the potassium salt of the 
para-acid separating first. The ortho-acid, in the form of its aqueous 
solution, is sometimes used as an antiseptic, under the name of 



aseptol. A thiophenol, C 6 H 6 SH, is known, and is prepared by the 
action of phosphorus pentasulphide on phenol, or by distilling a 
mixture of sodium benzene sulphonate and potassium sulphydrate. 
It is a colourless liquid, which possesses a very disagreeable smell, 
and boils at 168° C. 

Various methods have been devised for the quantitative determina- 
tion of phenol. J. Messinger and G. Vortmann (Ber., 1890, ? 3, 
p. 2753) dissolve phenol in caustic alkali, make the solution iv, to 
known volume, take an aliquot part, warm it to 60° C, and add 
decinormal iodine solution until the liquid is of a deep yellow colour. 
The mixture is then cooled, acidified by means of sulphuric acid, 
and titrated with decinormal sodium thiosulphate solution. S. B. 
Schryver (Jour, of Soc. Chem. Industry, 1899, 18, p. 553) adds excess 
of sodamide to a solution of the phenol in a suitable solvent, absorbs 
the liberated ammonia in an excess of acid, and titrates the excess 
of acid. See also C. E. Smith, Amer. Jour. Pharm., 1898, 369. 

Pharmacology and Therapeutics. — Carbolic acid is an efficient 
parasiticide, and is largely used in destroying the fungus of 
ringworm and of the skin disease known as pityriasis versicolor. 
When a solution of the strength of about 1 in 20 is applied to 
the skin it produces a local anaesthesia which lasts for many 
hours. If concentrated, however, it acts as a caustic. It 
never produces vesication. The drug is absorbed through the 
unbroken skin — a very valuable property in the treatment of 
such conditions as an incipient whitlow. A piece of cotton wool 
soaked in strong carbolic acid will relieve the pain of dental 
caries, but is useless in other forms of toothache. Taken inter- 
nally, in doses of from one to three grains, carbolic acid will 
often relieve obstinate cases of vomiting and has some value as 
a gastric antiseptic. 

Toxicology. — Carbolic acid is distinguished from all other 
acids so-called — except oxalic acid and hydrocyanic acid — in 
that it is a neurotic poison, having a marked action directly upon 
the nervous system. In all cases of carbolic acid poisoning 
the nervous influence is seen. If it be absorbed from a surgical 
dressing there are no irritant symptoms, but when the acid is 
swallowed in concentrated form, symptoms of gastro-intestinal 
irritation occur. The patient becomes collapsed, and the skin 
is cold and clammy. The breathing becomes shallow, the drug 
killing, like nearly all neurotic poisons (alcohol, morphia, prussic 
acid, &c), by paralysis of the respiratory centre, and the patient 
dying in a state of coma. The condition of the urine is of the 
utmost importance, as it is often a clue to the diagnosis, and in 
surgical cases may be the first warning that absorption is occur- 
ring to an undue degree. The urine becomes dark green in 
colour owing to the formation of various oxidation products 
such as pyrocatechin. Fifteen grains constitute an exceedingly 
dangerous dose for an adult male of average weight. Other 
symptoms of undue absorption are vertigo, deafness, sounds 
in the ears, stupefaction, a subnormal temperature, nausea, 
vomiting and a weak pulse (Sir Thomas Fraser). 

The antidote in cases of carbplic acid poisoning is any soluble 
sulphate. Carbolic acid and sulphates combine in the blood to 
form sulpho-carbolates, which are innocuous. The symptoms 
of nerve-poisoning are due to the carbolic acid (or its salts) 
which circulate in the blood after all the sulphates in the blood 
have been used up in the formation of sulpho-carbolates (hence, 
during administration of carbolic acid, the urine should frequently 
be tested for the presence of free sulphates; as long as these 
occur in the urine, they are present in the blood and there 
is no danger). The treatment is therefore to administer an ounce 
of sodium sulphate in water by the mouth, or to inject a similar 
quantity of the salt in solution directly into a vein or into the 
subcutaneous tissues. Magnesium sulphate may be given by 
the mouth, but is poisonous if injected intravenously. If the 
acid has been swallowed, wash out the stomach and give chalk, 
the carbolate of calcium being insoluble. Alkalis which form 
soluble carbolates are useless. Give ether and brandy sub- 
cutaneously and apply hot water-bottles and blankets if there 
are signs of collapse. 

CARBON (symbol C, atomic weight 12), one of the chemical 
non-metallic elements. It is found native as the diamond 
(q.v.), graphite (q.v.), as a constituent of all animal and vegetable 
tissues and of coal and petroleum. It also enters (as carbonates) 
into the composition of many minerals, such as chalk, dolomite, 



306 



CARBON 



calcite, witherite, calamine and spathic iron ore. In combina- 
tion with oxygen (as carbon dioxide) it is also found to a small 
extent in the atmosphere. It is a solid substance which occurs 
in several modifications, differing very much in their physical 
properties. Amorphous carbon is obtained by the destructive 
distillation of many carbon compounds, the various kinds differ- 
ing very greatly as regards physical characters and purity, 
according to the substance used for their preparation. The 
most common varieties met with are lampblack, gas carbon, 
wood charcoal, animal charcoal and coke. Lampblack is prepared 
by burning tar, resin, turpentine and other substances rich in 
carbon, with a limited supply of air; the products of combustion 
being conducted into condensing chambers in which cloths are 
suspended, on which the carbon collects. It is further purified 
by heating in closed vessels, but even then it still contains a 
certain amount of mineral matter and more or less hydrocarbons. 
It is used in the manufacture of printer's ink, in the preparation 
of black paint and in calico printing. Gas carbon is produced 
by the destructive distillation of coal in the manufacture of 
illuminating gas (see Gas: Manufacture), being probably 
formed by the decomposition of gaseous hydrocarbons. It is 
a very dense form of carbon, and is a good conductor of heat 
and electricity. It is used in the manufacture of carbon rods 
for arc lights, and for the negative element in the Bunsen 
battery. 

Charcoal is a porous form of carbon; several varieties exist. 
Sugar charcoal is obtained by the carbonization of sugar. It is 
purified by boiling with acids, to remove any mineral matter, 
and is then ignited for a long time in a current of chlorine in 
order to remove the last traces of hydrogen. Animal charcoal 
(bone black) is prepared by charring bones in iron retorts. It 
is a very impure form of carbon, containing on the average about 
80% of calcium phosphate. It possesses a much greater 
decolorizing and absorbing power than wood charcoal. A 
variety of animal charcoal is sometimes prepared by calcining 
fresh blood with potassium carbonate in large cylinders, the 
mass being purified by boiling out with dilute hydrochloric 
acid and subsequent reheating. Wood charcoal is a hard and 
brittle black substance, which retains the external structure 
of the wood from which it is made. It is prepared (where wood 
is plentiful) by stacking the wood in heaps, which are covered 
with earth or with brushwood and turf, and then burning the 
heap slowly in a limited supply of air. The combustion of the 
wood is conducted from the top downwards, and from the ex- 
terior towards the centre; great care has to be taken that the 
process is carried out slowly. The disadvantage in this process 
is that the by-products, such as pyroligneous acid, acetone, 
wood spirit, &c, are lost; as an alternative method, wood is 
frequently carbonized in ovens or retorts and the volatile 
products are condensed and utilized. 

Charcoal varies considerably in its properties, depending upon the 
particular variety of wood from which it is prepared, and also upon 
the process used in its manufacture. It can be made at a temperature 
as low as 300 C, and is then a soft, very friable material possessing 
a low ignition point. When made at higher temperatures it is much 
more dense, and its ignition point is considerably higher. Charcoal 
burns when heated in air, usually without the formation of flame, 
although a flame is apparent if the temperature be raised. It is 
characterized by its power of absorbing gases; thus, according to 
J. Hunter [Phil. Mag., 1863 (4), 25, p. 363], one volume of charcoal 
absorbs (at 0° C. and 760 mm. pressure) 171-7 ccs. of ammonia, 
86-3 ccs. of nitrous oxide, 67-7 ccs. of carbon monoxide, 21-2 ccs. of 
carbon dioxide, 17-9 ccs. of oxygen, 15 -2 ccs. of nitrogen, and 4-4 ccs. 
of hydrogen [see also J. Dewar, Ann. Chim. Phys., 1904 (8), 3, p. 5]. 
It also has the power of absorbing colouring matters from solution. 
Charcoal is used as a fuel and as a reducing agent in metallurgical 
processes. 

The element carbon unites directly with hydrogen to form acetylene 
when an electric arc is passed between carbon poles in an atmosphere 
of hydrogen (M. Berthelot) ; it also unites directly with fluorine, 
producing, chiefly, carbon tetrafluoride CF4. It burns when heated 
in an atmosphere of oxygen, forming carbon dioxide, and when 
heated in sulphur vapour it forms carbon bisulphide (q.v.). When 
heated with nitrogenous substances, in the presence of carbonated or 
caustic alkali, it forms cyanides. It combines directly with silicon, 
at the temperature of the electric furnace, yielding carborundum, 
SiC; and H. Moissan has also shown that it will combine with 



many metals at the temperature of the electric furnace, to form 
carbides {q.v.). 

The specific heat of carbon varies with the temperature the 
following values having been obtained by H. F. Weber (Jahres- 
berichte, 1874, p. 63) : — 



Diamond. 


Graphite. 


Porous wood carbon. 


t°. 


Sp. Ht. 


t°. 


Sp. Ht. 


t°. 


Sp. Ht. 


-5°-5 


0-0635 


-50-3 


0-1138 


0-23 


0-1653 


— io-6 


0-0955 


-io-7 


0-1437 


0-99 


0-1935 


+ io-7 


0-1128 


+ I0-8 


0-1604 


0—223 


0-2385 


85-5 


0-1765 


61-3 


0-1990 






206- 1 


0-2733 


201-6 


0-2966 






606 -7 


0-4408 


641-9 


0-4454 






985-0 


0-4589 


977-0 


0-4670 







The atomic weight of carbon has been determined by J. B. A. Dumas 
and by J. S. Stas [Ann. Chim. Phys., 1841 (3), 1, p. 1; Jahresb., 
1849, 223] by estimating the amount of carbon dioxide formed on 
burning graphite or diamond in a current of oxygen, the value 
obtained being 12-0 (0 = 16). Confirmatory evidence has also been 
obtained by O. L. Erdmann and R. F. Marchand (Jour. Prak. Chem., 
1841, 23, p. 159; see also F. W. Clarke, Jahresb., 1881, p. 7). 

Compounds. — Three oxides of carbon are known, namely, carbon 
suboxide, Cs02, carbon monoxide, CO, and carbon dioxide, C0 2 . 
Carbon suboxide, C3O2, is formed by the action of phosphorus pent- 
ox' de on ethyl malonate (O. Dielsand B. Wolf, Tier., 1906, 39, p. 689), 
CH 2 (COOC 2 H 6 )2 = 2G>H4+2H 2 0+C30 2 . At ordinary temperatures 
it is a colourless gas, possessing a penetrating and suffocating smell. 
It liquefies at 7° C. It is an exceedingly reactive compound, com- 
bining with water to form malonic acid, with hydrogen chloride to 
form malonyl chloride, and with ammonia to form malonamide. 
When kept for some time in sealed tubes it changes to a yellowish 
liquid, from which a yellow flocculent substance gradually separates, 
and finally it suddenly solidifies to a dark red mass, which appears 
to be a polymeric form . I ts vapour density agrees with the molecular 
formula C3O2, and this formula is also confirmed by exploding the 
gas with oxygen and measuring the amount of carbon dioxide 
produced (see Ketenes). 

Carbon monoxide, CO, is found to some extent in volcanic gases. 
It was first prepared in 1776 by J. M. F. Lassone (Mem. Acad. Paris) 
by heating zinc oxide with carbon, and was for some time considered 
to be identical with hydrogen. Cruikshank concluded that it was 
an oxide of carbon, a fact which was confirmed by Clement and 
J. B. Desormes (Ann. Chim. Phys., 1801, 38, p. 285). It may be 
prepared by passing carbon dioxide over red-hot carbon, or red-hot 
iron; by heating carbonates (magnesite, chalk, &c.) with zinc dust 
or iron; or by heating many metallic oxides with carbon. It may 
also be prepared by heating formic and oxalic acids (or their salts) 
with concentrated sulphuric acid (in the case of oxalic acid, an equal 
volume of carbon dioxide is produced) ; and by heating potassium 
ferrocyanide with a large excess of concentrated sulphuric acid, 
K4Fe(CN) 6 +6H 2 S04+6H 2 0=2K2S04.+FeS04 , + 3(NH4)2S04-f-6CO. 
It is a colourless, odourless gas of specific gravity 0-967 (air = 1). It 
is one of the most difficultly liquefiable gases, its critical temperature 
being —139-5° C., and its critical pressure 35-5 atmos. The liquid 
boils at — 190° C, and solidifies at —211° C. (L. P. Cailletet, Comptes 
rendus, 1884, 99, p. 706). It is only very slightly soluble in water. 
It burns with a characteristic pale blue flame to form carbon dioxide. 
It is very poisonous, uniting with the haemoglobin of the blood to 
form carbonyl-haemoglobin. It is a powerful reducing agent, 
especially at high temperatures. It is rapidly absorbed by an 
ammoniacal or acid (hydrochloric acid) solution of cuprous chloride. 
It unites directly with chlorine, forming carbonyl chloride or phosgene 
(see below), and with nickel and iron to form nickel and iron car- 
bonyls (see Nickel and Iron). It also combines directly with 
potassium hydride to form potassium formate (see Formic Acid). 
The volume composition of carbon monoxide is established by 
exploding a mixture of the gas with oxygen, two volumes of the gas 
combining with one volume of oxygen to form two volumes of carbon 
dioxide. This fact, coupled with the determination of the vapour 
density of the gas, establishes the molecular formula CO. 

Carbon dioxide, CO2, is a gas first distinguished from air by van 
Helmont ( 1 577-1 644), who observed that it was formed in fermenta- 
tion processes and during combustion, and gave to it the name gas 
sylvestre. J. Black (Edin. Phys. and Lit. Essays, 1755) showed that 
it was a constituent of the carbonated alkalis and called it " fixed 
air." T. O. Bergman, in 1774, pointed out its acid character, and 
A. L. Lavoisier (1781-1788) first proved it to be an oxide of carbon 
by burning carbon in the oxygen obtained from the decomposition 
of mercuric oxide. It is a regular constituent of the atmosphere, 
and is found in many spring waters and in volcanic gases; it also 
occurs in the uncombined condition at the Grotto del Cane (Naples) 
and in the Poison Valley (Java). It is a constituent of the minerals 
cerussite, malachite, azurite, spathic iron ore, calamine, strontianite, 
witherite, calcite aragonite, limestone, &c. It may be prepared by 
burning carbon in excess of air or oxygen, by the direct decomposition 
of many carbonates by heat, and by the decomposition of carbonates 



CARBONADO—CARBONARI 



307 



with mineral acids, M 2 COj+2HCl=2MCl+H 2 0+C0 2 . It is also 
formed in ordinary fermentation processes, in the combustion of all 
carbon compounds (oil, gas, candles, coal, &c), and in the process of 
respiration. 

It is a colourless gas, possessing a faint pungent smell and a 
slightly acid taste. It does not burn, and does not support ordinary 
combustion, but the alkali metals and magnesium, if strongly 
heated, will continue to burn in the gas with formation of oxides and 
liberation of carbon. Its specific gravity is 1-529 (air=i). It is 
readily condensed, passing into the liquid condition at 0° C. under a 
pressure of 35 atmospheres. Its critical temperature is 31 -35° C, 
and its critical pressure is 72-9 atmos. The liquid boils at —78-2° C. 
(i atmo.), and by rapid evaporation can be made to solidify to a 
snow-white solid which meltsat — 65° C. (see Liquid Gases). Carbon 
dioxide is moderately soluble in water, its coefficient of solubility 
at 0° C. being 1-7977 (R. Bunsen). It is still more soluble in alcohol. 
The solution of the gas in water shows a faintly acid reaction and is 
supposed to contain carbonic acid, H 2 C03. The gas is rapidly 
absorbed by solutions of the caustic alkalis, with the production of 
alkaline carbonates (g.».), and it combines readily with potassium 
hydride to form potassium formate. It unites directly with ammonia 
gas to form ammonium carbamate, NH2COONH4. It may be readily 
recognized by the white precipitate which it forms when passed 
through lime or baryta water. Carbon dioxide dissociates, when 
strongly heated, into carbon monoxide and oxygen, the reaction 
being a balanced action; the extent of dissociation for varying 
temperatures and pressures has been calculated by H. Le Chatelier 
(Zeil. Phys. Chem., 1888, 2, p. 782; see H. Sainte-Claire Deville, 
Comptes renins, 1863, 56, p. 195 et seq.). The volume composition 
of carbon dioxide is determined by burning carbon in oxygen, when 
it is found that the volume of carbon dioxide formed is the same 
as that of the oxygen required for its production, hence carbon 
> dioxide contains its own volume of oxygen. Carbon dioxide finds 
industrial application in the preparation of soda by the Solvay 
process, in the sugar industry, in the manufacture of mineral waters, 
and in the artificial production of ice. 

Carbonyl chloride (phosgene), COCl 2 , was first obtained by John 
Davy {Phil. Trans., 1812, 40, p. 220). It may be prepared by 
the direct union of carbon monoxide and chlorine in sunlight (Th. 
Wilm and G. Wischin, Ann., 1868, 14, p. 150) ; by the action of 
phosphorus pentoxide on carbon tetrachloride at 200-210° C. 
(G. Gustavson, Ber., 1872, 5, p. 30), 4CCU+P4O10 =2C0 2 +4P0C1 S + 
2C0C1 2 ; by the oxidation of chloroform with chromic acid mixture 
(A. Emmerlingand B. Lengyel, Ber., 1869, 2, p. 54), 4CHCl 3 +30 2 = 
iCOCl 2 4-2H 2 0+2Cl 2 ; or most conveniently by heating carbon 
tetrachloride with fuming sulphuric acid (H. Erdmann, Ber., 1893, 
26, p. 1993), 2S0 3 -fCCl4 = S 2 6 Cl 2 +COCl 2 . 

It is a colourless gas, possessing an unpleasant pungent smell. 
Its vapour density is 3-46 (air = 1). It may be condensed to a liquid, 
which boils at 8° C. It is readily soluble in benzene, glacial acetic 
acid, and in many hydrocarbons. Water decomposes it violently, 
with formation of carbon dioxide and hydrochloric acid. It reacts 
with alcohol to form chlorcarbonic ester and ultimately diethyl 
carbonate (see Carbonates), and with ammonia it yields urea (q.v.). 
It is employed commercially in the production of colouring matters 
(see Benzophenone), and for various synthetic processes. 

Carbon oxysulphide, COS, was first prepared by C. Than in 1867 
(Ann. Suppl., 5, p. 236) by passing carbon monoxide and sulphur 
vapour through a tube at a moderate heat. It is also formed by 
the action of sulphuretted hydrogen on the isocyanic esters, 
2CONC 2 H 6 +H 2 S = COS+CO(NHC 2 H 6 ) 2 , by the action of concen- 
trated sulphuric acid on the isothiocyanic esters, RNCS+H 2 = 
COS + RNH 2 , or of dilute sulphuric acid on the thiocyanates. In the 
latter reaction various other compounds, such as carbon dioxide, 
carbon bisulphide and hydrocyanic acid, are produced. They are 
removed by passing the vapours in succession through concentrated 
solutions of the caustic alkalis, concentrated sulphuric acid, and 
triethyl phosphine; the residual gas is then purified by liquefaction 
(W. Hempel, Zeit. angew. Chemie, 1901, 14, p. 865). It is also 
formed when sulphur trioxide reacts with carbon bisulphide at 
I oo° C, CS2+3S0 3 = COS+4S0 2 , and by the decomposition of ethyl 
potassium thiocarbonate with hydrochloric acid, C0(0C 2 H 6 )SK + 
HC1 = C0S + KCI+C 2 H50H. It is a colourless, odourless gas, which 
burns with a blue flame and is decomposed by heat. Its vapour 
density is 2-1046 (air = 1). The liquefied gas boils at —47° C. under 
atmospheric pressure. It is soluble in water; the aqueous solution 
gradually decomposes on standing, forming carbon dioxide and 
sulphuretted hydrogen. It is easily soluble in solutions of the caustic 
alkalis, provided they are not too concentrated, forming solutions 
of alkaline carbonates and sulphides, C0S-|-4KH0 = K 2 C03 + 
K 2 S-|-2H 2 0. 

CARBONADO, a name given in Brazil to a dark massive form 
of impure diamond, known also as " carbonate " and in trade 
simply as carbon. It is sometimes called black diamond. 
Generally it is found in small masses of irregular polyhedral 
form, black, brown or dark-grey in colour, with a dull resinoid 
lustre; and breaking with a granular fracture, paler in colour, 



and in some cases much resembling that of fine-grained steel. 
Being slightly cellular, its specific gravity is rather less than that 
of crystallized diamond. It is found almost exclusively in the 
state of Bahia in Brazil, where it occurs in the cascalho or 
diamond-bearing gravel. Borneo also yields it in small quantity. 
Formerly of little or no value, it came into use on the introduc- 
tion of Leschot's diamond-drills, and is now extremely valuable 
for mounting in the steel crowns used for diamond-boring. 
Having no cleavage, the carbon is less liable to fracture on the 
rotation of the drill than is crystallized diamond. The largest 
piece of carbonado ever recorded was found in Bahia in 1895, 
and weighed 3150 carats. Pieces of large size are, however, 
relatively less valuable than those of moderate dimensions, 
since they require the expenditure of much labour in reducing 
them to fragments of a suitable size for mounting in the drill- 
heads. Ilmenite has sometimes been mistaken in the South 
African mines for carbonado. (F. W. R.*) 

CARBONARI (an Italian word meaning " charcoal-bumers "), 
the name of certain secret societies of a revolutionary tendency 
which played an active part in the history of Italy and France 
early in the 19th century. Societies of a similar nature had 
existed in other countries and epochs, but the stories of the 
derivation of the Carbonari from mysterious brotherhoods of 
the middle ages are purely fantastic. The Carbonari were 
probably an offshoot of the Freemasons, from whom they 
differed in important particulars, and first began to assume 
importance in southern Italy during the Napoleonic wars. In 
the reign (1808-18 15) of Joachim Murat a number of secret 
societies arose in various parts of the country with the object 
of freeing it from foreign rule and obtaining constitutional 
liberties; they were ready to support the Neapolitan Bourbons 
or Murat, if either had fulfilled these aspirations. Their watch- 
words were freedom and independence, but they were not agreed 
as to any particular form of government to be afterwards 
established. Murat's minister of police was a certain Malghella 
(a Genoese), who favoured the Carbonari movement, and was 
indeed the instigator of all that was Italian in the king's policy. 
Murat himself had at first protected the sectarians, especially 
when he was quarrelling with Napoleon, but later, Lord William 
Bentinck entered into negotiations with them from Sicily, 
where he represented Great Britain, through their leader Vin- 
cenzo Federici (known as Capobianco), holding out promises of 
a constitution for Naples similar to that which had been 
established in Sicily under British auspices in 1812. Some 
Carbonarist disorders having broken out in Calabria, Murat sent 
General Manhes against the rebels; the movement was ruth- 
lessly quelled and Capobianco hanged in September 1813 (see 
Greco, Intorno al tentativo dei Carbonari di Citeriore Calabria 
nel 18 13). But Malghella continued secretly to protect the 
Carbonari and even to organize them, so that on the return of 
the Bourbons in 1815 King Ferdinand IV. found his kingdom 
swarming with them. The society comprised nobles, officers 
of the army, small landlords, government officials, peasants and 
even priests. Its organization was both curious and mysterious, 
and had a fantastic ritual full of symbols taken from the 
Christian religion, as well as from the trade of charcoal-burning, 
which was extensively practised in the mountains of the 
Abruzzi and Calabria. A lodge was called a vendita (sale), 
members saluted each other as buoni cugini (good cousins), 
God was the " Grand Master of the Universe," Christ the 
" Honorary Grand Master," also known as " the Lamb," and 
every Carbonaro was pledged to deliver the Lamb from the Wolf, 
i.e. tyranny. Its red, blue and black flag was the standard of 
revolution in Italy until substituted by the red, white and 
green in 1831. 

When King Ferdinand felt himself securely re-established at 
Naples he determined to exterminate the Carbonari, and to this 
end his minister of police, the prince of Canosa, set up another 
secret society called the Calderai del Contrappeso (braziers of the 
counterpoise), recruited from the brigands and the dregs of the 
people, who committed hideous excesses against supposed 
Liberals, but failed to exterminate the movement. On the 



3 o8 



CARBONATES 



contrary, Carbonarism flourished and spread to other parts of 
Italy, and countless lodges sprang up, their adherents comprising 
persons in all ranks of society, including, it is said, some of royal 
blood, who had patriotic sentiments and desired to see Italy 
free from foreigners. In Romagna the movement was taken 
up with enthusiasm, but it also led to a certain number of 
murders owing to the fiery character of the Romagnols, although 
its criminal record is on the whole a very small one. Among the 
foreigners who joined it for love of Italy was Lord Byron. The 
first rising actively promoted by the Carbonari was the Nea- 
politan revolution of 1820. Several regiments were composed 
entirely of persons affiliated to the society, and on the 1st of 
July a military mutiny broke out at Monteforte, led by two 
officers named Morelli and Silvati, to the cry of " God, the King 
and the Constitution." The troops sent against them, under 
General Pepe, himself a Carbonaro, sympathized with the 
mutineers, and the king, being powerless to resist, granted the 
constitution (13th of July), which he swore on the altar to 
observe. But the Carbonari were unable to carry on the govern- 
ment, and after the separatist revolt of Sicily had broken out the 
king went to the congress of Laibach, and obtained from the 
emperor of Austria the loan of an army with which to restore 
the autocracy. He returned to Naples early in 1821 with 50,000 
Austrians, defeated the constitutionalists under Pepe, dismissed 
parliament, and set to work to persecute all who had been in 
any way connected with the movement. 

A similar movement broke out in Piedmont in March 1821. 
Here as in Naples the Carbonari comprised many men of rank, 
such as Santorre di Santarosa, Count San Marzano, Giacinto 
dj Collegno, and Count Moffa di Lisio, all officers in the army, 
and they were more or less encouraged by Charles Albert, 
the heir-presumptive to the throne. The rising was crushed, 
and a number of the leaders were condemned to death or long 
terms of imprisonment, but most of them escaped. At Milan 
there was only the vaguest attempt at conspiracy; but Silvio 
Pellico, Maroncelli and Count Confalonieri were implicated 
as having invited the Piedmontese to invade Lombardy, and 
were condemned, to pass many years in the dungeons of the 
Spielberg. 

The French revolution of 1830 had its echo in Italy, and Car- 
bonarism raised its head in Parma, Modena and Romagna the 
following year. In the papal states a society called the San- 
fedisti or Bande della Santa Fede had been formed to checkmate 
the Carbonari, and their behaviour and character resembled 
those of the Calderai of Naples. In 1831 Romagna and the 
Marches rose in rebellion and shook off the papal yoke with 
astonishing ease. At Parma the duchess, having rejected the 
demand for a constitution, left the city and returned under 
Austrian protection. At Modena, Duke Francis IV., the worst 
of all Italian tyrants, was expelled by a Carbonarist rising, and 
a dictatorship was established under Biagio Nardi on the 5th 
of February. Francis returned with an Austrian force and 
hanged the conspirators, including Ciro Menotti. The Austrians 
occupied Romagna and restored the province to the pope, but 
though many arrests of Carbonari were made there were no 
executions. Among those implicated in the Carbonarist 
movement was Louis Napoleon, who even in after years, when he 
was ruling France as Napoleon III., never quite forgot that he 
had once been a conspirator, a fact which influenced his Italian 
policy. The Austrians retired from Romagna and the Marches 
in July 1831, but Carbonarism and anarchy having broken out 
again, they returned, while the French occupied Ancona. The 
Carbonari after these events ceased to have much importance, 
their place being taken by the more energetic Giovane Italia 
Society presided over by Mazzini. 

In France, Carbonarism began to take root about 1820, and 
was more thoroughly organized than in Italy. The example 
of the Spanish and Italian revolutions incited the French Car- 
bonari, and risings occurred at Belfort, Thouars, La Rochelle and 
other towns in 1821, which though easily quelled revealed the 
nature and organization of the movement. The Carbonarist 
lodges proved active centres of discontent until 1830, when, after 



contributing to the July revolution of that year, most of their 
members adhered to Louis Philippe's government. 

The Carbonarist movement undoubtedly played an important 
part in the Italian Risorgimento, and if it did not actively 
contribute to the wars and revolutions of 1848-49, 1859-60 and 
1866, it prepared the way for those events. One of its chief 
merits was that it brought Italians of different classes and 
provinces together, and taught them to work in harmony for 
the overthrow of tyranny and foreign rule. 

Bibliography. — Much information on the Carbonari will be 
found in R. M. Johnston's Napoleonic Empire in Southern Italy 
(2 vols., London, 1904), which contains a full bibliography; D. 
Spadoni's Sctte, cospirazioni, e cospiratori (Turin, 1904) is an excellent 
monograph ; Memoirs of the Secret Societies of Southern Italy, said 
to be by one Bertoldi or Bartholdy (London, 1821, Ital. transl. by 
A. M. Cavallotti, Rome, 1904) ; Saint-Edme, Constitution et organisa- 
tion des Carbonari ; P. Colletta, Storia del Reame di Napoli (Florence, 
1848); B. King, A History of Italian Unity (London, 1899), with 
bibliography. (L. V.*) 

CARBONATES. (1) The metallic carbonates are the salts of 
carbonic acid, H 2 C0 3 . Many are found as minerals, the more 
important of such naturally occurring carbonates being cerussite 
(lead carbonate, PbC0 3 ), malachite and azurite (both basic 
copper carbonates), calamine (zinc carbonate, ZnC0 3 ), witherite 
(barium carbonate, BaC0 3 ), strontianite (strontium carbonate, 
SrC0 3 ), calcite (calcium carbonate, CaC0 3 ), dolomite (calcium 
magnesium carbonate, CaC0 3 -MgC0 3 ), and sodium carbonate, 
Na 2 C0 3 . Most metals form carbonates (aluminium and , 
chromium are exceptions), the alkali metals yielding both acid 
and normal carbonates of the types MHC0 3 and M 2 C0 3 (M = one 
atom of a monovalent metal); whilst bismuth, copper and 
magnesium appear only to form basic carbonates. The acid 
carbonates of the alkali metals can be prepared by saturating 
an aqueous solution of the alkaline hydroxide with carbon dioxide, 
MOH-j-C0 2 = MHCO3, and from these acid salts the normal salts 
may be obtained by gentle heating, carbon dioxide and water 
being produced at the same time, 2MHCO3 = M 2 C0 3 +H0 2 + C0 2 . 
Most other carbonates are formed by precipitation of salts of 
the metals by means of alkaline carbonates. All carbonates, 
except those of the alkali metals and of thallium, are insoluble 
in water; and the majority decompose when heated strongly, 
carbon dioxide being liberated and a residue of an oxide of the 
metal left. The alkaline carbonates undergo only a very slight 
decomposition, even at a very bright red heat. The carbonates 
are decomposed by mineral acids, with formation of the corre- 
sponding salt of the acid, and liberation of carbon dioxide. 
Many carbonates which are insoluble in water dissolve in water 
containing carbon dioxide. The individual carbonates are 
described under the various metals. 

(2) The organic carbonates are the esters of carbonic acid, 
H 2 C0 3 , and of the unknown ortho-carbonic acid, C(OH) 4 . The 
acid esters of carbonic acid of the type HO -CO OR are not 
known in the free state, but J. B. Dumas obtained barium 
methyl carbonate by the action of carbon dioxide on baryta 
dissolved in methyl alcohol {Ann., 1840, 35, p. 283). 

Potassium ethyl carbonate, KO-CO-OC 2 Hs, is obtained in the form 
of pearly scales when carbon dioxide is passed into an alcoholic 
solution of potassium ethylate, C0 2 + KOC 2 H 6 = KO-CO-OC 2 H 6 . It 
is not very stable, water decomposing it into alcohol and the alkaline 
carbonate. The normal esters may be prepared by the action of 
silver carbonate on the alkyl iodides, or by the action of alcohols on 
the chlorcarbonic esters. These normal esters are colourless, pleasant- 
smelling liquids, which are readily soluble in water. They show all 
the reactions of esters, being readily hydrolysed by caustic alkalis, 
and reacting with ammonia to produce carbamic esters and urea. 
By heating with phosphorus pentachloride an alkyl group is 
eliminated and a chlorcarbonic ester formed. Dimethylcarbonate, 
CO(OCH 3 ) 2 , is a colourless liquid, which boils at 90-6° C, and is 
prepared by heating the methyl ester of chlorcarbonic acid with lead 
oxide. Diethylcarbonate, CO(OC 2 H 5 ) 2 , is a colourless liquid, which 
boils at 125-8° C. ; its specific gravity is 0-978 (20°) [H. Kopp]. 
When it is heated to 120° C. with sodium ethylate it decomposes 
into ethyl ether and sodium ethyl carbonate (A. Geuther, Zeit. f. 
Chemie, 1868). 

Ortho-carbonic ester, C(OC 2 H 5 )4, is formed by the action of 

sodium ethylate on chlorpicrin (H. Bassett, Ann., 1864, 132, p. 54), 

CCl J N0 2 +4C i H50Na=C(OC,H 5 )4+NaN0 2 +3NaCl.Itisanethereal- 

1 smelling liquid, which boils at 158-159° C, and has a specific 



CARBON BISULPHIDE— CARBONIFEROUS SYSTEM 



309 



gravity of 0-925. When heated with ammonia' it yields guanidine, 
and on boiling with alcoholic potash it yields potassium carbonate. 

Chlorcarbonic ester, Cl-CO-OC 2 H 5 , is formed by the addition of 
well-cooled absolute alcohol to phosgene (carbonyl chloride). It is a 
pungent-smelling liquid, which fumes strongly on exposure to air. 
It boils at 93-1° C., and has a specific gravity of 1-144 (l5°C.). When 
heated with ammonia it yields urethane. Sodium amalgam converts 
it into formic acid; whilst with alcohol it yields the normal carbonic 
ester. It is easily broken down by many substances (aluminium 
chloride, zinc chloride, &c.) into ethyl chloride and carbon dioxide. 

Percarbonates. — Barium percarbonate, BaCC>4, is obtained by 
passing an excess of carbon dioxide into water containing barium 
peroxide in suspension; it is fairly stable, and yields hydrogen 
peroxide when treated with acids (E. Merck, Abs. J.C.S., 1907, ii. 
p. 859). Sodium percarbonates of the formulae Na 2 C04, Na2C2C>6, 
Na 2 C0 6 , NaHCCh (two isomers) are obtained by the action of gaseous 
or solid carbon dioxide on the peroxides Na 2 02, Na 2 03, NaH0 2 (two 
isomers)in the presence of water at a low temperature (R.Wolffenstein 
and E.Peltner, Ber., 1908,41, pp. 275,280). Potassium percarbonate, 
K2C2O0, is obtained in the electrolysis of potassium carbonate at 
— 10 to — 15 . 

CARBON BISULPHIDE, CS 2 , a chemical product first dis- 
covered in 1796 by W. A. Lampadius, who obtained it by heating 
a mixture of charcoal and pyrites. It may be more conveniently 
prepared by passing the vapour of sulphur over red hot char- 
coal, the unccndensed gases so produced being led into a tower 
containing plates over which a vegetable oil is allowed to flow 
in order to absorb any carbon bisulphide vapour, and then into 
a second tower containing lime, which absorbs any sulphuretted 
hydrogen. The crude product is very impure and possesses 
an offensive smell; it may be purified by forcing a fine spray of 
lime water through the liquid until the escaping water is quite 
clear, the washed bisulphide being then mixed with a little 
colourless oil and distilled at a low temperature. For further 
methods of purification see J. Singer (Journ. of Soc. Chem. Ind., 
1889, p. 93), Th. Sidot (Jahresb., 1869, p. 243), E. Allary (Bull, 
de la Soc. Chitn., 1881, 35, p. 491), E. Obach (Jour. prak. Chem., 
1882 (2), 26, p. 282). 

When perfectly pure, carbon bisulphide is a colourless, some- 
what pleasant smelling, highly refractive liquid, of specific 
gravity 1-2661 (18%°) (J- W. Briihl) or 1-29215 (o7 4 °) (T. E. 
Thorpe). It boils at 46-04° C. (T. E. Thorpe, Journ. Chem. Soc, 
1880, 37, p. 364). Its critical temperature is 277-7° C., and its 
critical pressure is 78*1 atmos. (J. Dewar, Chem. News, 1885, 
51, p. 27). It solidifies at about -116° C, and liquefies again at 
about-no°C. (K.Olszewski, Jahresb., 1883, p. 75). Itisamono- 
molecular liquid (W. Ramsay and J. Shields, Jour. Chem. Soc, 
1893, 63, p. 1089). It is very volatile, the vapour being heavy 
and very inflammable. It burns with a pale blue flame to form 
carbon dioxide and sulphur dioxide. It is almost insoluble in 
water, but mixes in all proportions with absolute alcohol, ether, 
benzene and various oils. It is a good solvent for sulphur, 
phosphorus, wax, iodine, &c. It dissociates when heated to 
a sufficiently high temperature. A mixture of carbon bisulphide 
vapour and nitric oxide burns with a very intense blue-coloured 
flame, which is very rich in the violet or actinic rays. When, 
heated with water in a sealed tube to 150° C. it yields carbon 
dioxide and sulphuretted hydrogen. Zinc and hydrochloric 
acid reduce it to tri-thioformaldehyde (CH 2 S) 3 (A. Girard, 
Comptes rendus, 1856, 43, p. 396). When passed through a 
red-hot tube with chlorine it yields carbon tetrachloride and 
sulphur chloride (H. Kolbe). Potassium, when heated, burns 
in the vapour of carbon bisulphide, forming potassium sulphide 
and liberating carbon. In contact with chlorine monoxide it 
forms carbonyl chloride and thionyl 'chloride (P. Schiitzen- 
berger, Ber., 1869, 2, p. 219). When passed with carbon dioxide 
through a red-hot tube it yields carbon oxysulphide, COS 
(C. Winkler), and when passed over sodamide it yields am- 
monium thiocyanate. A mixture of carbon bisulphide vapour 
and sulphuretted hydrogen, when passed over heated copper, 
gives, amongst other products, some methane. 

Carbon bisulphide slowly oxidizes on exposure to air, but by the 
action of potassium permanganate or chromic acid it is readily 
oxidized to carbon dioxide and sulphuric acid. By the action of 
aqueous alkalis, carbon bisulphide is converted into a mixture of 
an alkaline carbonate and an alkaline thiocarbonate (J. Berzelius, 



Pogg.^reM.,i825,6,p. 444),6KHO+3CS2 = K 2 C0 3 +2K2CS3+3H 2 0; 
on the other hand, an alcoholic solution of a caustic alkali converts 
it into a xanthate (A. Vogel, Jahresb., 1853, p. 643), 

CS 2 + KHO + R-OH = H 2 + RO-CS-SK. 
Aqueous and alcoholic solutions of ammonia convert carbon bi- 
sulphide into ammonium dithiocarbamate, which readily breaks 
down into ammonium thiocyanate and- sulphuretted hydrogen 
(A. W. Hofmann), 

CS 2 +2NH 8 -}NH 2 -CSS-NH4->H 2 S+NH4CNS. 
Carbon bisulphide combines with primary amines to form alkyl 
dithiocarbamates, which when heated lose sulphuretted hydrogen 
and leave a residue of a dialkyl thio-urea, 

CS 2 +2R-NH 2 -^R-NH-CSS-NH 3 R->CS(NHR) 2 +H 2 S; 
or if the aqueous solution of the dithiocarbamate be boiled with 
mercuric chloride or silver nitrate solution, a mustard oil (g.».) is 
formed, 

R-NH-CSS-NH 3 R+HgCl 2 ^Hg(R-NH-CSS)2-^2RNCS+HgS-t-H 2 S. 
Carbon bisulphide is used as a solvent for caoutchouc, for extracting 
essential oils, as a germicide, and as an insecticide. 

Carbon mono sulphide, CS, is formed when a silent electric discharge 
is passed through a mixture of carbon bisulphide vapour and hydrogen 
or carbon monoxide (S. M. Losanitsch and M. Z. Jovitschitsch, Ber., 
i897> 30, P- 135)- 

CARBONDALE, a city of Lackawanna county, Pennsylvania, 
U.S.A., on the Lackawanna river, 16 m. N.E. of Scranton. 
Pop. (1890) 10,833; (1900) 13,536, of whom 2553 were foreign- 
born; (1910 census) 17,040. Carbondale is served by the 
Erie, the Delaware & Hudson (which has machine shops here), 
and the New York, Ontario & Western railways. The city lies 
near the upper end of the Lackawanna valley, and the scenery 
of the surrounding mountains makes it a summer resort of some 
importance. It has a public library, a small park, an emergency 
hospital and the Carbondale city private hospital. Carbondale 
is situated in one of the richest anthracite coal regions of the 
state, and its principal interest is in coal. Among its manu- 
factures are foundry and machine shop products, sheet-iron, 
silk, glass, thermometers and hydrometers, bobbins and re- 
frigerating machines. The value of the city's factory products 
increased from $1,146,181 in 1900 to $2,315,695 in 1905, or 
102%. The settlement of the place began in 1824 with the 
opening of the coal mines, and Carbondale was chartered as a 
city in 1851. 

CARBONIC ACID, in chemistry, properly H 2 C0 3 , the acid 
assumed to be formed when carbon dioxide is dissolved in water; 
its salts are termed carbonates. The name is also given to the 
neutral carbon dioxide from its power of forming salts with 
oxides, and on account of the acid nature of its solution; and, 
although not systematic, this use is very common. 

CARBONIFEROUS SYSTEM, in geology, the whole of the great 
series of stratified rocks and associated volcanic rocks which 
occur above the Devonian or Old Red Sandstone and below 
the Permian or Triassic systems, belonging to the Carboniferous 
period. The name was first applied by W. D. Conybeare in 
1 82 1 to the coal-bearing strata of England and Wales, including 
the related grits and limestones immediately beneath them. 
The term is a relic of that early period in the history of strati- 
graphy when each group of strata was supposed to be distin- 
guished by some peculiar lithological character. In this case 
the carbonaceous beds — coal-seams — naturally appealed most 
strongly to the imagination, and the name is a good one, not- 
withstanding the fact that coal-seams occupy but a small fraction 
of the total thickness of the Carboniferous system; and although 
subsequent investigations have demonstrated the existence of 
coal in other geological formations, in none of these does it play 
so prominent a part. The stratified rocks of this system include 
marine limestones, shales and sandstones; estuarine, lagoonal 
and fresh-water shales, sandstones and marls with beds of coal, 
oil-bearing rocks, gypsum and salt. 

In many parts of the world there is no sharp line of demar- 
cation between the Devonian and the Carboniferous rocks; 
neither can the fossil faunas and floras be clearly separated at 
any well-defined line; this is true in Britain, Belgium, Russia, 
Westphalia and parts of North America. Again, at the summit 
of the Carboniferous series, both the rocks and their fossil 
contents merge gradually into those of the succeeding Permian 



3io 



CARBONIFEROUS SYSTEM 



system, as in Russia, Bohemia, the Saar region and Texas. 
This has led certain geologists to classify the Devonian, Car- 
boniferous and Permian into one grand system; E. Renevier 
in 1874 proposed to include these three into a single " Carbon- 
ique " system, later he retained only the two latter groups. 




There seems to be sufficient reason, however, to maintain each of 
these groups as a separate system and limit the term Carboni- 
ferous (fiarboniferien) in the manner indicated above. At the 
same time it must be remembered that there is in India, South 
Africa, the Urals, in Australasia and parts of North America 
an important series of rocks, with a " Permo-Carboniferous " 
fauna, which constitutes a passage formation between the Car- 
boniferous, sensu stricto, and Jurassic rocks. 

Stratigraphy. — No assemblage of stratified rocks has received such 
careful and detailed examination as the Carboniferous system ; 
consequently our knowledge of the stratigraphical sequence in 
isolated local areas, where the coals have been exploited, is very full. 

In Europe, the system is very completely developed in the British 
Isles, where was made the first successful attempt at a classification 
of its various members, although at a somewhat earlier date Omalius 
d'Halloy had recognized a terrain bituminifere or coal-bearing series 
in the Belgian region. 

The area within which the Carboniferous rocks of Britain occur is 
sufficiently extensive to contain more than one type of the system, 
and thus to cast much light on the varied geographical conditions 
under which these rocks were accumulated. In prosecuting the 
study of this part of British geology it is soon discovered, and it is 
essential to bear in mind, that, during the Carboniferous period, 
the land whence the chief supplies of sediment were derived rose 
mainly to the north and north-west, as it seems to have done from 
very early geological time. While therefore the centre and south 
of England lay under clear water of moderate depth, the north of 
the country and the south of Scotland were covered by shallow 
water, which was continually receiving sand and mud from the 
adjacent northern land. Hence vertical sections of the Carboniferous 
formations of Britain differ greatly according to the districts in 
which they are taken. 

The Coal-Measures and Millstone Grit are usually grouped together 
in the Upper Carboniferous, the Carboniferous Limestone series 
constituting the Lower Carboniferous. 

In addition to the above broad subdivisions, Murchison and 
Sedgwick, when working upon the rocks of Devonshire and Cornwall, 
recognized, with the assistance of W. Lonsdale, another phase of 
sedimentation. This comprised dark shales, with grits and thin 
limestones and thin, impure coals, locally called " culm " (q.v.). 
These geologists appropriated the term " culm " for the whole of 
this tacies in the west of England, and subsequently traced the same 
type on the European continent, where it is widely developed in the 
western centre. 

Besides the considerable exposed area of Carboniferous rocks in 
Great Britain, there is as much or more that is covered by younger 
formations; this is true particularly of the eastern side of England 
and the south-eastern counties, where the coal-measures have already 
been found at Dover. 

From England, Carboniferous rocks can be followed across 
northern and central France, into Germany, Bohemia, the Alps, 
Italy and Spain. In Russia this system occupies some 30,000 sq. m., 
and it extends northward at least as far as Spitzbergen. Carboni- 
ferous rocks are present in North and South Africa, and in India and 
Australasia ; in China they cover thousands of square miles, and in 



Millstone 
Grit. 



the United States ahd British North America they occupy no less 
than 200,000 sq. m. ; they are known also in South America. 

The subjoined table expresses the typical subdivisions which can 
be recognized, with modifications, in the United Kingdom. 

Upper: Red and grey sandstones, marls and clays 

with occasional breccias, thin coals and limestones 

with Spirorbis, workable coals in the South Wales, 

Coal J Bristol, Somerset and Forest of Dean coalfields. 

Measures. 1 Middle: Sandstones, marls, shales and the most 

important of the British coals. 

Lower: Flaggy hard sandstones (ganister) , shales 
and thin coal seams. 

Grits (coarse and fine), shales, thin coal seams and 
occasional thin limestones. The fossil plants connect 
this group with the coal-measures ; the marine fossils 
have, to some extent, a Carboniferous limestone 
aspect. 

Upper black shales with thin limestones (Pendleside 
group) connecting this series with the Millstone grit 
above. 

The thick, main or scaur limestone (mountain lime- 
stone) of the centre and south of England, Wales and 
Ireland, which splits up in the Yorkshire dales 
( Yoredale group) into a succession of stout limestone 
beds between beds of sandstone and shale, and 
becomes increasingly detrital in character as it is 
traced northwards. 

Lower limestone shales of the south and centre of 
England with marine fossils, and the Calciferous 
Sandstone group of Scotland with marine, estuarine 
and terrestrial fossils. 
(See Bernician, Tuedian and Avonian.) 
At an early period, owing to the immense commercial importance 
of the coal seams, it became the practice to distinguish a " produc- 
tive " [flotzfuhrend, terrain houiller) and an "unproductive," barren 
(flotzleerer) Lower Carboniferous; these two groups correspond in 
North America to the " Carboniferous " and " Sub-Carboniferous " 
respectively, or, as they are now sometimes styled, the " Pennsyl- 
vanian " and " Mississippian." But it was soon discovered that the 
" productive " beds were not regularly restricted to the upper or 
younger division, and, as E. Kayser points out, the real state of the 
matter is more accurately represented by the subjoined tabular 
scheme. 



Carboniferous 

Limestone 

Series. 





Continental Type of 
Deposit. 


Marine Type of 
Formation. 


Upper 
Carboni- 
ferous 


Upper Productive Carboni- 
ferous 


Younger Carboniferous 
limestone and the Fusu- 
lina limestone of Russia 
and Western North 
America 


Lower 
Carboni- 
ferous 


Lower Productive Carboni- 
ferous 


Culm 
(in part) 


Lower Carboni- 
ferous lime- 
stone series 



While the continental type of deposit, with its coal beds, was the 
earliest to be formed in certain areas, and the marine series came on 
later, in other regions this order was reversed. Itshould be observed, 
however, that the repeated intercalation of marine deposits within 
the continental series and the frequent occurrence of thin coaly 
layers in the marine series makes any hard and fast distinction of 
this kind impossible. 

■ The so-called " unproductive " or barren strata, that is, those 
without workable coals, are not always limestones; quite as often 
they are shales, red sandstones and red marls. 

In subdividing the strata of the Carboniferous system and correlat- 
ing the major divisions in different areas, just as in other great 
systems, use has to be made of the fossii contents of the rocks; 
stratigraphical units, based on lithology, are useless for this purpose. 
The groups of organisms utilized for zoning and correlation by differ- 
ent workers include brachiopods, pelecypods, cephalopods, corals, 
fishes and plants; and the results of the comparison of the faunas 
and floras of different areas where Carboniferous rocks occur are 
generalized in the table below. 

The relative value of any group of animals or plants for the 
correlation of distant areas must vary greatly with the varying 
condition? of sedimentation and with the precise definition of the 
zonal species and with many other factors. It is found that the sub- 
divisions in this system demanded by palaeobotanists do not always 
coincide with those acknowledged by palaeozoologists ; nevertheless 
there is general agreement as to the main divisional lines. 

Breaks in the Stratigraphic Sequence. — The sequence of Carboni- 
ferous strata is not everywhere one of unbroken continuity. From 
central France eastward towards the Carpathians only later portions 
of the system are found. These generally rest upon crystalline rocks, 
but in places they contain evidence of the denuded surfaces of Lower 
Carboniferous, as in the basin of Charleroi, where the equivalent of 



CARBONIFEROUS SYSTEM 



3ii 



the Millstone Grit contains fragments of chert which can only have 
come from the waste of the earlier limestones. This unconformity 
is generally found about the same horizon in the continental Culm 
areas, and it occurs again in the western part of the English Culm. 

In the eastern border of the Rhenish Schiefergebirge the Permian 
rests unconformably upon Lower Carboniferous rocks. In the 

Tabular Statement of the Principal Subdivisions of the Carboniferous System. 



en 
3 
O 

Ih 

<u 

'3 


U 

U 

a. 
a. 


» u 

O u. 


European Development. 


America. 


Predominant 
Plant Types. 


Ouralien and Stephanien 
(marine type) (continental type) 


e 
S 
'2 

> 

w 

a 
c 

0) 


Ferns and 
Annularias 


Moscovien and Westphalien 
(marine type) (continental type) 


Sigillarias 

and 
Calamites 


3 
O 

& 

'a 


t-i 

a 
U 

u 



CO ■-< 

3 u 

O +-> 

si 
u 3 


Dinantien and Culm 
II II 
(marine pelagic, (marine littoral) 
including con- 
tinental de- 
posits in some 
areas) 


a 

'3. 
.£• 

"53 
en 

'33 
m 

is 


Lycopods 



United States, in Missouri, Pennsylvania, West Virginia, Kentucky, 
Ohio and elsewhere, there is an unconformable junction between the 
Lower and Upper Carboniferous, representing an interval of time 
during which the lower member was strongly eroded; it has even 
been proposed to regard the Mississippian (Lower Carboniferous) as 
a distinct geological period, mainly on account of this break in the 
succession. 

Thickness of Carboniferous Rocks. — The great variety of conditions 
under which the sediments and limestones were formed naturally 
produced corresponding inequalities in the thickness. In the 
Eurasian land area the greatest thickness of Carboniferous rocks is 
in the west; in North America it is in the east. In Britain the 
Carboniferous limestone series is 2000-3500 ft. thick; in the Ural 
mountains it is over 4500 ft. ; the Culm in Moravia is credited with 
the enormous thickness of over 42,000 ft. The Upper Carboniferous 
in Lancashire is from 12,000 to 13,000 ft.; elsewhere in Britain it is 
thinner. In western Germany this portion attains a thickness of 
10,000 ft. In Pennsylvania the sandstone and shale, at its maximum, 
reaches 4400 ft., but even within the limits of the state this formation 
has thinned out to no more than 300 ft. in places. In Colorado the 
Lower Carboniferous is only 400-500 ft. thick; while the limestones 
of the Mississippi basin amount to 1500 ft. and in Virginia are 2000 ft. 
thick. 

Life of the Carboniferous Period. — We have seen that in the 
Carboniferous rocks there are two phases of sedimentation, the one 
marine, the other continental; corresponding with these there are 
two distinct faunal facies. 

(1) Fauna of the Marine Strata. — Numerically, the most important 
inhabitants of the clear Carboniferous seas were the crinoids, corals, 
Foraminifera and brachiopods. Each of these groups contributed 
at one place or another towards the upbuilding of great masses of 
limestone. For the first time in the earth's history we find Foramini- 
fera taking a prominent part in the marine faunas; the genus 
Fusulina was abundant in what is now Russia, China, Japan, North 
America; Valvulina had a wide range, as also had Endothyra and 
Archaediscus • Saccammina is a form well known in Britain and 
Belgium, and many others have been described ; some Carboniferous 
genera are still extant. Radiolaria are found in cherts in the Culm 
of Devonshire and Cornwall, in Russia, Germany and elsewhere. 
Sponges are represented by spicules and anchor ropes. Corals, both 
reef-builders and others, flourished in the clearer waters; rugose 
forms are represented by Amplexoid, Zaphrentid and Cyathophyllid 
types, and by Lithostrotion and Phillipsastraea; common tabulate 
forms are Chaetetes, Chladochonus, Michelinia, &c. Amongst the 
echinoderms crinoids were the most numerous individually, dense 
submarine thickets of the long-stemmed kinds appear to have 
flourished in many places where-their remains consolidated into thick 
beds of rock; prominent genera are Cyathocrinus, Woodocrinus, 
Actinocrinus ; sea-urchins, Archaeocidaris , Palaeechinus, &c., were 
present ; while the curious extinct Blastoids, which included the 
groups of Pentremitidae and Codasteridae, attained their maximum 
development. 

Annelids (Spirorbis, Serpulites, &c.) are common fossils on certain 
horizons. The Bryozoa were also abundantinsomeregions (Polypora, 
Fenestella), including the remarkable form known as Archimedes. 

Brachiopods occupied an important place; most typical were the 
Productids, some of which reached a great size and had very thick 
shells. Other common genera are Spirifer, Chonetes, Athyris, 
Rhynchonellids and Terebratulids, Discina and Crania. Some 



species had an almost world-wide range with only minor variations; 
such are Productus semireticulatus, P. cora, P. pustulosus; Orthotetes 
(Streptorhynchus) crenistria, Dielasma hastata, and many others. 

Pelecypods among the true mollusca were increasing in numbers 
and importance {Aviculopecten, Posidonomya) ; Nucula, Carboni- 
cola, Edmondia. Conocardium, Modiola, Gasteropods also were 
numerous (Murchisonia, Euomphalus, Naticopsis). The 
Pteropods were well represented by Conularia and Belle- 
rophon. Amongst the Cephalopods, the most striking 
feature is the rise and development of the Goniatites 
{Glyphioceras, Gastrioceras, &c.) ; straight-shelled forms 
still lived on in some variety (Orthoceras, Actinoceras), along 
with numerous nautiloids. 

Trilobites during this period sank to a very subordinate 
position, but Ostracods (Cythere, Kirkbya, Beyrichia) were 
abundant. 

Many fish inhabited the Carboniferous seas and most of 
these were Elasmobranchs, sharks with crushing pavement 
teeth (Psammodus), adapted for grinding the shells of 
brachiopods, crustaceans, &c. Other sharks had piercing" 
teeth (Cladoselache and Cladodus); some, the petalodonts, 
had peculiar cycloid cutting teeth. The Arthrodirans, so 
prominent during the Devonian period, disappeared before 
the close of the Carboniferous. Most of the sharks lived 
in the sea continuously, but the ganoids frequenting the 
coastal waters appear to have migrated inland. About 700 
species of Carboniferous fish have been described largely 
from teeth, spines and dermal ossicles. 

(2) Flora and Fauna of the Lagoonal or Continental Facies.- 
The strata deposited during this period are the earliest in 
which the remains of plants take a prominent place. The 
fossil plants which are found in the upper beds of the preceding 
Devonian system are so closely related to those in the Lower 
Carboniferous, that from a palaeobotanical standpoint the two form 
one indivisible period. 

In the Lower Carboniferous the flora was composed of six great 
groups of plants, viz. the Equisetales (Horse-tails), the Lycopodiales 
(Club mosses), the Filicales (Ferns) and Cycadofilices, the Spheno- 
phyllales and Cordaitales. These six groups were the dominant 
types throughout the period, but during Upper Carboniferous time 
three other groups arose, the Coniferales, the Cycadophyta, and the 
Ginkgoales (of which Ginkgo biloba is the only modern representa- 
tive). Algae and fungi also were present, but there were no flowering 
plants. The true ferns, including tree ferns with a height of upwards 
of 60 ft., were associated with many plants possessing a fern-like 
habit (Cycadofilices) and others whose affinities have not yet been 
definitely determined. The fronds of some of these Carboniferous 
ferns are almost identical with those of living species. Probably 
many of the ferns were epiphytic. Pecopteris, Cyclopteris, Neuro- 
pteris, Alethopteris , Sphenopteris are common genera; Megaphyton 
and Caulopteris were tree ferns. Our modern diminutive " horse- 
tails " with scaly leaves were represented in the Carboniferous period 
by gigantic calamites, often with a diameter of I to 2 ft. and a height 
of 50 to 90 ft. The Carboniferous forerunners of the tiny club-moss 
were then great trees with dichotomously branching stems and 
crowded linear leaves, such as Lepidodendron (with its fruit cone 
called Lepidostrobus), Halonia, Lepidophloios and Sigillaria, the 
largest plants of the period, with trunks sometimes 5 ft. in diameter 
and 100 ft. high. The roots of several of these forms are known 
as Stigmaria. Sphenophyllum was a slender climbing plant with 
whorls of leaves, which was probably related both to the calamites 
and the lycopods. Cordaites, a tall plant (20-30 ft.) with yucca-like 
leaves, was related to the cycads and conifers; the catkin-like 
inflorescence, which bore yew-like berries, is called Cardiocarpus. 
Many large trees which have been looked upon as conifers on account 
of their wood structure may perhaps belong more properly to the 
Cordaitales. True coniferous trees (Walchia) do appear at the top 
of the coal measures. 

The animals preserved in the continental type of Carboniferous 
deposit naturally differ markedly from the fossil remains of the purely 
marine portions of the system. The inhabitants of the waters of 
this geographical phase include mollusca, which are supposed to have 
lived in brackish or fresh water, such as Anthracomya, Naiadites, 
Carbonicola, and many forms of Crustacea, e.g. (Bairdia Carbonia), 
phyllopods (Estheria), phyllocarids (Acanthocaris, Dithyrocaris) , 
schizopods {Anlhrapalaemon) , Eurypterids (Eurypterus, Glypto- 
scorpius). Fishes were abundant, many of the smaller ganoids are 
beautifully preserved in an entire condition, other larger forms are 
represented by fin spines, teeth and bones; Ctenodus, Uronemus, 
Acanthodes, Cheirodus, Gyracanthus are characteristic genera. 

Frequently a temporary return of marine conditions permitted 
the entombment of such salt water genera as Lingula, Orbiculoidea, 
Productus in the thin beds known as " marine bands." 

Remains of air-breathing insects, myriapods and arachnids show 
that these forms of life were both well developed and individually 
numerous. Among the insects we find the Orthoptera, Neuroptera, 
Hemiptera and Coleoptera represented ; cockroaches were particu- 
larly abundant; crickets, beetles, locusts, walking-stick insects, 
mayflies and bugs are found, but' there were neither flies, moths, 
butterflies nor bees, which is no more than we should expect from 



312 



CARBONIFEROUS SYSTEM 



the conditions of plant life. Many insects, &c, have been obtained 
from the coalfields of Saarbriick and Commentry, and from the 
hollow trunks of fossil trees in Nova Scotia. Certain British coal- 
fields have yielded good specimens : A rchaeoptilus, from the Derby- 
shire coalfield, had a spread of wing extending to more than 14 in. ; 
some specimens (Brodia) still exhibit traces of brilliant wing colours. 
In the Nova Scotian tree trunks land snails {Archaeozonites, Dendro- 
pupa) have been found. 

In the later Carboniferous rocks the earliest amphibians make 
their appearance in considerable numbers; they were all Stego- 
cephalians (Labyrinthodonts) with long bodies, a head covered with 
bony plates and weak or undeveloped limbs. The largest were 
about 7 or 8 ft. long, the smallest only a few inches. Some were 
probably fluviatile in habit (Loxomma,Anthracosaurus,Ophiderpeton) ; 
others may have been terrestrial (Dendrerpeton, Hylerpeton) . Certain 
footprints in the coal measures of Kansas have been supposed to 
belong to lacertilian or dinosaurian forms. 

The Physical Conditions during the Period. — In western Europe 
the advent of the Carboniferous period was accompanied by the 
production of a series of synclines which permitted the formation of 
organic limestones, free from the sediments which generally char- 
acterized the concluding phasesof the preceding Devonian deposition. 
The old land area still existed to the north, but doubtless much 
reduced in height; against this land, detrital deposits still continued 
to be formed, as in Scotland ; while over central Ireland and central 
and northern England the clearer waters of the sea furnished a 
suitable home for countless corals, brachiopods and foraminifera 
and great beds of sea lilies ; sponges flourished in many parts of the 
sea, and their remains contributed largely to the formation of the 
beds of chert. This clearer water extended from Ireland across 
north-central England and through South Wales and Somerset into 
Belgium and Westphalia; but a narrow ridge of elevated older 
rocks ran across the centre of England towards Belgium at this time. 

Traced eastward into north Germany, Thuringia and Silesia, the 
limestones pass into the detrital culm formations, which owe their 
existence to a southern uplifted massif, the complement of the 
synclines already mentioned. Sediments approaching to the culm 
type, with similar flora and fauna, were deposited in synclinal hollows 
in parts of France and Spain. 

Thus western Europe in early Carboniferous time was occupied by 
a series of constricted, gulf-like seas; and on account of the steady 
progress of intermittent warping movements of the crust, we find 
that the areas of clearer water, in which the limestone-building 
organisms could exist, were repeatedly able to spread, thus forming 
those thin limestones found interbedded with shale and sandstone 
which occur typically in the Yoredale district of Yorkshire and in 
the region to the north, and also in the culm deposits of central 
Europe. The spread of these limestones was repeatedly checked by 
the steady influx of detritus from the land during the pauses in 
movements of depression. Looking eastward, towards central and 
northern Russia, we find a wider and much more open sea ; but the 
continental type of deposit prevailed in the northern portion, 
and here, as in Scotland, we find coal-beds amongst the sediments 
(Moscow basin). Farther south in the Donetz basin the coals only 
appear at the close of the Lower Carboniferous. 

In North America, the crustal movements at the beginning of the 
period are less evident than in Europe, but a marked parallelism 
exists; for in the east, irt the Appalachian tract, we find detrital 
sediments prevailing, while the open sea, with great deposits of lime- 
stone, lay out towards the west in the direction of that similar open 
sea which lay towards the east of Europe and extended through Asia. 

The close of the early Carboniferous period was marked by an 
augmentation of the orogenic movements. The gentler synclines 
and anticlines of the earlier part of the period became accentuated, 
giving rise to pronounced mountain ridges, right across Europe. 

This movement commenced in the central and western part of 
the continent and continued throughout the whole Carboniferous 
period. The mountains then formed have been called the " Palaeozoic 
Alps " by E. Kayser, the " Hercynian Mountains " by M. Bertrand. 
The most western range extended from Ireland through Wales and 
the south of England to the central plateau of France; this was the 
" Armorican range " of E. Suess. The eastern part of the chain 
passed from South France through the Vosges, the Black Forest, 
Thuringia, Harz, the Fichtelgebirge, Bohemia, the Sudetes, and 
possibly farther east; this constitutes the " Varischen Alps" of 
Suess. 

The sea had gained somewhat at the beginning of the Carboniferous 
period in western Europe, but the effect of these movements, com- 
bined with the rapid formation of detrital deposits from the rising 
land areas, was to drive the sea steadily from the north towards the 
south, until the open sea (with limestones) was relegated to what is 
now the Mediterranean and to Russia and thence eastward. Similar 
events were meanwhile happening in North America, for the seas 
were steadily filled with sediments which drove them from the north- 
east towards the south-west, and doubtless those movements which 
at the close of this period uplifted the Appalachian mountains were 
already operative in the same direction. 

The folding of the Ural mountains began in the earlier part of this 
period and was continued, after its close, into the Permian; and 
there are traces of uplifts in central Asia and Armenia. 



None of these movements appears to have affected the southern 
hemisphere. 

The net result of the orogenic movements was, that at the close 
of the period there existed a great northern continental mass, 
embracing Europe, North Asia and North America ; and a great 
southern continental mass, including South America, Africa, Australia 
and India. Between these land masses lay a great Mediterranean 
sea — the " Tethys " of Suess. 

The conditions under which the beds of coal were formed will be 
found described under that head ; it will be sufficient to notice here 
that some coal seams were undoubtedly formed by jungle or swamp- 
like growths on the site of the deposit, and it is equally true that 
others were formed by the transport and deposition of vegetable 
detritus. The main point to observe in this connexion is that large 
tracts of land in many parts of the world were at a critical level as 
regards the sea, a condition highly favourable to frequent extensive 
incursions of marine waters over the low-lying areas in a period of 
extreme crustal instability. 

Vulcanicity. — In intimate relationship with the mountain-building 
orogenic crustal movements was the prevalence of volcanic activity 
during the earlier part of this period. In the Lower Carboniferous 
rocks of Scotland intercalated volcanic rocks are strikingly abundant, 
and now form an important feature in the geology of the southern 
portion of that country. Of these rocks Sir Archibald Geikie says; 
' ' Two great phases or types of volcanic action during Carboniferous 
time may be recognized — (1) Plateaus, where the volcanic materials 
discharged copiously from many scattered openings now form broad 
tablelands or ranges of hills, sometimes many hundreds of square 
miles in extent and 1500 ft. or more in thickness; (2) Puys, where 
the ejections were often confined to the discharge of a small amount 
of fragmentary materials from a single independent vent." The 
plateau type was most extensively developed during the formation 
of the Calciferous Sandstone ; the puy type was of somewhat later 
date. Basic lavas, with andesites, trachytes, tuffs and agglomerates 
are the most common Scottish rocks of this period. Similar erup- 
tions, but on a much smaller scale, took place in other parts of 
Great Britain. 

Granites, porphyries and porphyrites belonging to this period 
occur in the Saxon Erzgebirge, the Harz, Thiiringerwald, Vosges, 
Brittany, Cornwall and Christiania. Porphyrites and tuffs are 
known in the French Carboniferous. In China, at the close of the 
period, there were enormous eruptions of melaphyre, porphyrite 
and quartz-porphyry. In North America, the principal region of 
volcanic activity lay in the west ; great thicknesses of igneous rocks 
occur in the Lower Carboniferous rocks of British Columbia, and 
from the middle of the period until near its close volcanoes were 
active from Alaska to California. Igneous rocks of this period are 
found also in Australasia. 

Climate. — That the vegetation during this period was unusually 
exuberant there can be no doubt, and that a general uniformity of 
climatic conditions prevailed is shown not only by the wide distribu- 
tion of coal measures, but by the uniformity of plant types over the 
whole earth. It is well, however, to guard against an over-estima- 
tion of this exuberance; it must be borne in mind that the physio- 
graphic conditions were peculiarly favourable to the preservation 
of plant remains, conditions that do not appear to have obtained so 
completely in any other period. The climate, we may assume from 
the distribution of land and water, was generally moist, and it was 
probably mild if not warm; conditions favourable to the growth 
of certain types of plants. But there is no good evidence for an 
excess of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere — an assumption founded 
on the luxuriance of the vegetation, coupled with the fact that 
vulcanicity was active and wide-ranging. Carbon dioxide may have 
been present in the air in greater abundance in earlier periods than 
it is at present, but there is no reason to suppose that the percentage 
was appreciably higher in the Carboniferous period than it is now. 

The occurrence of red deposits in western Australia, Scotland, the 
Ural mountains, in Michigan, Montana and Nova Scotia, &c, 
associated in some instances with the formation of gypsum and salt, 
clearly points to the existence of areas of excessive evaporation, 
such as are found in land-locked waters in regions where something 
like desert conditions prevail. The xerophytic structures found in 
some of the plants might seem to corroborate this vjew ; but similar 
structures are assumed by many plants when dwelling in brackish 
marshes and morasses. 

The abundance of corals in some of the Carboniferous seas and 
possibly also the large size of some of the Productids and foraminifera 
may be taken as evidence of warm or temperate waters. 

In spite of the bulk of the evidence being in favour of geniality 
of climate, it is necessary to observe that certain deposits have been 
recognized as glacial; in the culm of the Frankenwald, in the coal 
basins of central France, and in central England, certain con- 
glomeratic beds have baen assigned, somewhat doubtfully, to this 
origin. They have also been regarded as the result of torrential 
action. Glacial deposits certainly do exist in the Permo-carboni- 
ferous formations, which are described under that head, but in the 
true Carboniferous system glaciation may be taken as not proven. 
The foreign boulders of granite, gneiss, &c, found in the coal- 
measures of some districts, are quite as likely to have been dropped 
by rafts of vegetation as to have been carried by floating icebergs. 



CARBORUNDUM— CARCAR 



3i3 



Economic Products. — Foremost among the useful products of the 
Carboniferous rocks is the coal (a.v.) itself; but associated with 
the coal seams in Great Britain, North America and elsewhere, are 
very important beds of ironstone, fire-clay, terra-cotta clay, and 
occasionally oil shale and alum shale. Oil and gas are of importance 
in the Lower Carboniferous Pocono sandstone of West Virginia 
and in the Berea grit of Ohio, where brine also occurs. 

In the Carboniferous Limestone series, the purer kinds of limestone 
are used for the manufacture of lime, bleaching powder and similar 
products, also as a flux in the smelting of iron ; some of the less pure 
varieties are used in making cement. The beds of chert are utilized 
in the pottery industry, and some of the harder and more crystalline 
limestones are beautiful marbles, capable of taking a high polish. 

The sandstones are used for building, and for millstones and grind- 
stones. Within the Carboniferous rocks, but due to the action of 
various agencies long after their deposition, are important ore 
formations; such are the Rio Tinto ores of Spain, the lead and zinc 
ores and some haematite of the Pennine and Mendip hills and other 
British localities, and many ore regions in the United States. 

References.. — For a good general account of the Carboniferous 
system, see A. Geikie, Text Book of Geology, vol. ii. (4th ed., 1903) ; 
and for the American development see T. C. Chamberlin and R. D. 
Salisbury, Geology, vol. ii. (1906). These two works give abundant 
references to the literature of the subject. See also, Recent Additions 
to Geological Literature, published annually by the Geological Society 
of London since 1 893; and Neues Jahrbuch fur Mineralogie 
(Stuttgart). (J. A. H.) 

CARBORUNDUM, a silicide of carbon formed by the action 
of carbon on sand (silica) at high temperatures, which on account 
of its great hardness is an important abrasive, and also has 
possible applications in the metallurgy of iron and steel. Its 
name was derived from carbon and corundum (a form of alumina) , 
from a mistaken view as to its composition. It was first ob- 
tained accidentally in 189 1 by Acheson in America, when he 
was experimenting with the electric furnace in the hope of pro- 
ducing artificial diamonds. The experiments were followed 
up in an incandescence furnace, which on a larger scale is now 
employed for the industrial manufacture of the product. A full 
description of the process has been given in the Journ. Soc. Chem. 
Industry, 1897, vol. xvi. p. 863. The furnace is rectangular, 
about 16 ft. long and 5 ft. wide by 5 ft. high, with massive 
brick end walls 2 ft. thick, through which are built the carbon 
poles, consisting of bundles of 60 parallel 3-in. carbon rods, each 
3 ft. in length, with a copper rod let into the outer end to connect 
it with a copper cap, which in turn is connected with one of the 
terminals of the generating dynamo. The spaces between the 
carbons of the electrode are packed tightly with graphite. In 
preparing the furnace for use, transverse iron screens are placed 
temporarily across each end, the space between these and the 
end walls being rammed with fine coke, and that in the interior 
is filled to the level of the centre of the carbon poles with the 
charge, consisting of 34 parts of coke, with 54 of sand, 10 of 
sawdust and 2 of salt. A longitudinal trench is then formed 
in the middle, and in this is arranged a cylindrical pile of frag- 
ments of coke about J in. or more in diameter, so that they form 
a core, about 21 in. in diameter, connecting the carbon poles in 
the end waifs. Temporary side walls are then built up, the iron 
screens are removed, and a further quantity of charge is heaped 
up about 3 ft. above the top of the furnace. An alternating 
current of about 1700 amperes at 190 volts is now switched on; 
as the mass becomes heated by the passage of the current the 
resistance diminishes, and the current is regulated until after 
about 2 hours or less from starting it is maintained constant at 
about 6000 amperes and 125 volts. Carbon monoxide is given 
off and burns freely around the sides and top of the furnace, tinged 
yellow after a time by the sodium in the salt mixed with the 
charge. Meanwhile a shrinkage takes place, which is made good 
by the addition of a further quantity of charge until the operation 
is complete, usually in about 36 hours from the commencement. 
The current is then switched off, and the side walls, after cooling 
for a day, are taken down, the comparatively unaltered charge 
from the top is removed, and the products are carefully extracted. 
These consist of the inner carbon core, which at the temperature 
of the furnace will have been for the most part converted into 
graphite, then a thin black crust of graphite mixed with car- 
borundum, next a layer of nearly pure crystallized carborundum 
about a foot in thickness, then grey amorphous carbide of silicon 



mixed with increasing proportions of unaltered charge, and 
lastly, on the outside, the portion of the charge which had never 
reached the temperature necessary for reaction, and which is 
altered only by the intrusion of salt from the inner part of the 
furnace. Special precautions are taken in making and breaking 
the intense current here used (amounting at the end to about 
750 kilowatts, or 1000 E.H.P.), a water-regulator consisting of 
removable iron plates dipped in salt water being used for the 
purpose. In such a furnace as that above described the charge 
weighs about 14 tons, the yield of carborundum is about 3 tons, 
and the expenditure of energy about 3-9 kilowatt-hours (5-2 
H. P. -hours) per pound of finished product. The carborundum 
thus produced is crystalline, greenish, bluish or brownish in 
colour, sometimes opaque, but often translucent, resisting the 
action of even the strongest acids, and the action of air or of 
sulphur at high temperatures. The crude product can therefore 
be treated with hot sulphuric acid to purify it. In hardness it 
nearly equals the diamond, and it is used for tool-grinding in the 
form of vitrified wheels (mixed with powdered porcelain and 
iron, pressed into shape and fired in a kiln). Carborundum 
paper, made like emery paper, is now largely used in place of 
garnet paper in American shoe factories, and finds a market 
in other directions. The amorphous carbide, which was at 
first a waste product, has been tried, it is reported, with success 
as a lining for steel furnaces, as it is said not to be affected by 
iron or iron oxide at a white heat. (W. G. M.) 

CARBOY (from the Pers. qarabah, a flagon), a large globular 
glass vessel or bottle, encased in wicker or iron-work for pro- 
tection, used chiefly for holding vitriol, nitric acid and other 
corrosive liquids. 

CARBUNCLE (Lat. carbunculus, diminutive of carbo, a glowing 
coal), in mineralogy, a garnet (<?.».) cut with a convex surface. 
In medicine the name given to an acute local inflammation of 
the deeper layers of the skin, followed by sloughing. It is 
accompanied by great local tension and by constitutional dis- 
turbance, and in the early stages the pain is often extremely 
acute. A hard flattened swelling of a deep-red colour is noticed 
on the back, face or extremities. This gradually extends until 
in some instances it may become as large as a dinner-plate. 
Towards the centre of the mass numerous small openings form 
on the surface, from which blood and matter escape. Through 
these openings a yellow slough or " core " of leathery consistence 
can be seen. Carbuncle is an intense local inflammation caused 
by septic germs which have in some manner found their way 
to the part. It is particularly apt to occur in persons whose 
health is depressed by mental worries, or by such troubles as 
chronic disease of the kidneys or blood-vessels, or by diabetes. 
The attack ends in mortification of the affected tissue, and, 
after much suffering, the core or mortified part slowly comes 
away. The modern treatment consists in cutting into the in- 
flamed area, scraping out the germ-laden core at the earliest 
possible moment, and applying germicides. This method 
relieves the pain at once, materially diminishes the risk of blood- 
poisoning, and hastens convalescence. (E. O.*) 

CARCAGENTE, or Carcajente, a town of eastern Spain, in 
the province of Valencia; near the right bank of the river Jucar, 
at the junction between the Valencia-Murcia and Carcagente- 
Denia railways. Pop. (1900) 12,262. Carcagente is a pictur- 
esque town, of considerable antiquity. Various Roman remains 
have been found in its neighbourhood. It is surrounded by 
groves of orange, palm and mulberry trees, and contains many 
Moorish houses, whose old-fashioned blue-tiled cupolas contrast 
with the chimneys of the silk mills and linen factories opened 
in modern times. An important local industry is the cultivation 
of rice, for which the moist and warm climate of the low-lying 
Jucar valley is well suited. 

CARCAR, a town of the province of Cebu, island of Cebu, 
Philippine Islands, on the Carcar river near its mouth at the head 
of Carcar Bay, 23 m. S.W. of Cebu, the capital. It is connected 
with Cebu by a railway, and a branch of this railway extending 
across the island to Barili and Dumanjug was projected in 
1908. Carcar has some coast trade. The surrounding country 



314 



CARCASS— CARDAN 



is rugged, and produces Indian corn and sugar in considerable 
quantity. The language is Cebu-Visayan. Carcar was founded 
in 1624. 

CARCASS, the dead body of an animal. As a butcher's term, 
the word means the body of an animal without the head, ex- 
tremities and offal. It is also used of a hollow iron case filled 
with combustibles, and fired from a howitzer to set fire to 
buildings, ships, &c, the flames issuing through holes pierced 
in the sides. The word is common in various forms to Romanic 
languages, but the ultimate origin is obscure. Possible deriva- 
tions are from the Lat. caro, flesh, and Ital. casso or cassa, chest, 
or from a Med. Gr. rapucunov, a quiver, for which the Fr. is 
carquois, and Port, carcaz. 

CARCASSONNE, a city of south-western France, capital of the 
department of Aude, 57 m. S.E. of Toulouse, on the Southern 
railway between that city and Narbonne. Pop. (1906) 25,346. 
Carcassonne is divided by the river Aude into two distinct towns, 
the Ville Basse and the Cite, which are connected by two bridges, 
one modern, the other dating from the i3th'century. The Cite 
occupies the summit of an abrupt and isolated hill on the right 
bank of the river. Its dirty and irregular streets are inhabited 
by a scanty population of workpeople, and its interest lies 
mainly in its ancient fortifications (see Fortification and 
Siegecraft) which, for completeness and strength, are unique 
in France and probably in Europe. They consist of a double 
line of ramparts, of which the outer measures more than 1600 yds. 
in circumference. These are protected at frequent intervals by 
towers, and can be entered only by two gates, one to the east, 
the other to the west, both of which are themselves elaborately 
fortified (see Gate). In the interior, and to the north of the 
western gate, a citadel adjoins the fortifications. A portion of 
the inner line is attributed to the Visigoths of the 6th century; 
the rest, including the castle, seems to belong to the nth or 12th 
century, while the outer circuit has been referred mainly to 
the end of the 13th. The old cathedral of St Nazaire dates from 
the nth to the 14th centuries. The nave was begun in 1096 
and is Romanesque in style; the transept and choir, which 
contain magnificent stained glass of the Renaissance period, 
are of Gothic architecture. Both the fortifications and the 
church were restored by Viollet-le-Duc between 1850 and 1880. 
On the left bank of the Aude, between it and the Canal du Midi, 
lies the new town, clean, well-built and flourishing, with streets 
intersecting each other at right angles. It is surrounded by 
boulevards occupying the site of its ramparts, and is well 
provided with fountains, public squares and gardens planted 
with fine plane-trees. The most interesting buildings are the 
cathedral of St Michel, dating from the 13th century but restored 
in modern times, and St Vincent, a church of the 14th century, 
remarkable for the width of its nave. 

Carcassonne is the seat of a bishop, a prefect and a court of 
assizes, and has tribunals of first instance and of commerce, 
a chamber of commerce and a branch of the Bank of France. 
It also has a lycee for boys, training-colleges, theological semi- 
naries, a library and a museum rich in paintings. The old cloth 
industry is almost extinct. The town is, however, an important 
wine-market, and the vineyards of the vicinity are the chief 
source of its prosperity, which is enhanced by its port on the 
Canal du Midi. Tanning and leather-dressing, distilling, the 
manufacture of agricultural implements, furniture and corks, 
cooperage and the preparation of preserved fruits, are prominent 
industries. 

Carcassonne occupies the site of Carcaso, an ancient city of 
Gallia Narbonensis, which belonged to the Volcae Tectosages. 
It was a place of some importance at the time of Caesar's in- 
vasion, but makes almost no appearance in Roman history. 
On the disintegration of the empire, it fell into the hands of the 
Visigoths, who, in spite of the attacks of the Franks, especially 
in 585, retained possession till 724, when they were expelled 
by the Arabs, destined in turn to yield before long to Pippin 
the Short. From about 819 to 1082 Carcassonne formed a 
separate countship, and from the latter date till 1247 a viscount- 
ship. Towards the end of the nth century the viscounts of 



Carcassonne assumed the style of viscounts of Beziers, which 
town and its lords they had dominated since the fall of the 
Carolingian empire. The viscounty of Carcassonne, together 
with that of Beziers, was confiscated to the crown in 1247, as 
a result of the part played by the viscount Raymond Roger 
against Simon de Montfort in the Albigensian crusade, during 
which in 1209 the city was taken by the Crusaders (see Albi- 
genses). A revolt of the city against the royal authority was 
severely punished in 1262 by the expulsion of its principal 
inhabitants, who were, however, permitted to take up their 
quarters on the other side of the river. This was the origin of 
the new town, which was fortified in 1347. During the religious 
wars, Carcassonne several times changed hands, and it did not 
recognize Henry IV. till 1596. 

See E. E. Viollet-le-Duc, La Cite de Carcassonne (Paris, 1858); 
L. Fedie, Histoire de Carcassonne (Carcassonne, 1887). 

CARDAMOM, the fruit of several plants of the genera Elettaria 
and Amomum, belonging to the natural order Zingiberaceae, the 
principal of which is Elettaria Cardamomum, from which the 
true officinal or Malabar cardamom is derived. The Malabar 
cardamom plant is a large perennial herb with a thick fleshy 
root-stock, which sends up flowering stems, 6 to 12 ft. high. The 
large leaves are arranged in two rows, have very long sheaths 
enveloping the stem and a lanceolate spreading blade 1 to 25 ft. 
long. The fruit is an ovate-triangular, three-celled, three-valved 
capsule (about \ in. long, of a dirty yellow colour) enclosing 
numerous angular seeds, which form the valuable part of the 
plant. It is a native of the mountainous parts of the Malabar 
coast of India, and the fruits are procured either from wild 
plants or by cultivation throughout Travancore, western Mysore, 
and along the western Ghauts. A cardamom of much larger 
size found growing in Ceylon was formerly regarded as belonging 
to a distinct species, and described as such under the name of 
Elettaria major; but it is now known to be only a variety of the 
Malabar cardamom. In commerce, several varieties are distin- 
guished according to their size and flavour. The most esteemed 
are known as " shorts," a name given to such capsules as are 
from a quarter to half an inch long and about a quarter broad. 
Following these conre " short-longs " and " long-longs," also 
distinguished by their size, the largest reaching to about an inch 
in length. The Ceylon cardamom attains a length of an inch and 
a half and is about a third of an inch broad, with a brownish 
pericarp and a distinct aromatic odour. Among the other plants, 
the fruits of which pass in commerce as cardamoms, are the 
round or cluster cardamom, Amomum Cardamomum, a native 
of Siam and Java; the bastard cardamom of Siam, A. xan- 
thioides — the Bengal cardamom, which is the fruit of A. subu- 
latum, a native of Nepal; the Java cardamom, produced by 
A. maximum; and the Korarima cardamom of Somaliland. The 
last-named is the product of a plant which is unknown botani- 
cally. Cardamoms generally are possessed of a pleasant aromatic 
odour, and an agreeable, spicy taste. On account of their flavour 
they are much used with other medicines, and they form a 
principal ingredient in curries and compounded spices. In the 
north of Europe they are much used as a spice and flavouring 
material for cakes and liqueurs; and they are very extensively 
employed in the East for chewing with betel, &c. 

CARDAN [Ital. Cardano], GIROLAMO [Geronymo or 
Hieronimo] (1501-1576), Italian mathematician, physician 
and astrologer, born at Pavia on the 24th of September 1501, was 
the illegitimate son of Facio Cardano (1444-1524), a learned 
jurist of Milan, himself distinguished by a taste for mathematics. 
He was educated at the university of Pavia, and subsequently 
at that of Padua, where he graduated in medicine. He was, 
however, excluded from the College of Physicians at Milan on 
account of his illegitimate birth, and it is not surprising that his 
first book should have been an exposure of the fallacies of the 
faculty. A fortunate cure of the child of the Milanese senator 
Sfondrato now brought him into notice, and the interest of his 
patron procured him admission into the medical body. About 
this time (1539) he obtained additional celebrity by the publica- 
tion of his Practica arithmeticae generalis, a work of great merit 



CARDAN 



3i5 



for the time, and he became engaged in a correspondence with 
Niccolo Tartaglia, who had discovered a solution of cubic 
equations. This discovery Tartaglia had kept to himself, but 
he was ultimately induced to communicate it to Cardan under a 
solemn promise that it should never be divulged. Cardan, 
however, published it in his comprehensive treatise on algebra 
(Artis magnae sive de regulis Algebrae liber unus) which appeared 
at Nuremberg in 1545 (see Algebra: History). Two years 
previously he had published a work even more highly regarded 
by his contemporaries, his celebrated treatise on astrology. As 
a believer in astrology Cardan was on a level with the best minds 
of his age; the distinction consisted in the comparatively 
cautious spirit of his inquiries and his disposition to confirm his 
assertions by an appeal to facts, or what he believed to be such. 
A very considerable part of his treatise is based upon observations 
carefully collected by himself, and seemingly well calculated to 
support his theories so far as they extend. Numerous instances 
of his belief in dreams and omens may be collected from his 
writings, and he especially valued himself on being one of the 
five or six celebrated men to whom, as to Socrates, had been 
vouchsafed the assistance of a guardian daemon. 

In 1547 he was appointed professor of medicine at Pavia. 
The publication of his works on algebra and astrology at this 
juncture had gained for him a European renown, and procured 
him flattering offers from Pope Paul III. and the king of Denmark, 
both of which he declined. In 1551 his reputation was crowned 
by the publication of his great work, De Subtilitate Rerum, which 
embodied the soundest physical learning of his time and simul- 
taneously represented its most advanced spirit of speculation. 
It was followed some years later by a similar treatise, De Varietate 
Rerum (1557), the two making in effect but one book. A great 
portion of this is occupied by endeavours, commonly futile, to 
explain ordinary natural phenomena, but its chief interest for 
us consists in the hints and glimpses it affords of principles beyond 
the full comprehension of the writer himself, and which the world 
was then by no means ready to entertain. The inorganic realm 
of Nature he asserts to be animated no less than the organic; 
all creation is progressive development; all animals were origin- 
ally worms; the inferior metals must be regarded as conatus 
naturae towards the production of gold. The indefinite varia- 
bility of species is implied in the remark that Nature is seldom 
content with a single variation from a customary type. The 
oviparous habits of birds are explained by their tendency to 
favour the perpetuation of the species, precisely in the manner 
of modern naturalists. Animals were not created for the use 
of man, but exist for their own sakes. The origin of life depends 
upon cosmic laws, which Cardan naturally connects with his 
favourite study of astrology. The physical divergencies of man- 
kind arise from the effects of climate and the variety of human 
circumstances in general. Cardan's views on the dissimilarity of 
languages are much more philosophical than usual at his time; 
and his treatise altogether, though weak in particular details, 
is strong in its pervading sense of the unity and omnipotence of 
natural law, which renders it in some degree an adumbration of 
the course of science since the author's day. It was attacked 
by J. C. Scaliger, whom Cardan refuted without difficulty. 

The celebrity which Cardan had acquired led in the same 
year (1551) to his journey to Scotland as the medical adviser 
of Archbishop Hamilton of St Andrews. The archbishop was 
supposed to be suffering from consumption, a complaint which 
Cardan, under a false impression, as he frankly admits, had 
represented himself as competent to cure. He was of great 
service to the archbishop, whose complaint proved to be asth- 
matical; but the principal interest attaching to his expedition is 
derived from his account of the disputes of the medical faculty at 
Paris, and of the court of Edward VI. of England. The Parisian 
doctors were disturbed by the heresies of Vesalius, who was 
beginning to introduce anatomical study from the human subject. 
Cardan's liberality of temper led him to sympathize with the 
innovator. His account of Edward VI. 's disposition and 
understanding is extremely favourable, and is entitled to credit 
as that of a competent observer without bias towards either side 



of the religious question. He cast the king's nativity, and 
indulged in a number of predictions which were effectually 
confuted by the royal youth's death in the following year. 

Cardan had now attained the summit of his prosperity, and the 
rest of his life was little but a series of disasters. His principal 
misfortunes arose from the crimes and calamities of his sons, one 
of whom was an utter reprobate, while the tragic fate of the other 
overwhelmed the father with anguish. This son, Giovanni 
Battista, also a physician, had contracted an imprudent marriage 
with a girl of indifferent character, Brandonia Seroni, who 
subsequently proved unfaithful to him. The injured husband 
revenged himself with poison; the deed was detected, and the 
exceptional severity of the punishment seems to justify Cardan in 
attributing it to the rancour of his medical rivals, with whom he 
had never at any time been on good terms. The blow all but 
crushed him; his reputation and his practice waned; he addicted 
himself to gaming, a vice to which he had always been prone; 
his mind became unhinged and filled with distempered imagina- 
tions. He was ultimately banished from Milan on some accusa- 
tion not specified, and although the decree was ultimately 
rescinded, he found it advisable to accept a professorship at 
Bologna (1562). While residing there in moderate comfort, and 
mainly occupied with the composition of supplements to his 
former works, he was suddenly arrested on a charge not stated, 
but in all probability heresy. Though he had always been 
careful to keep on terms with the Church, the bent of his mind 
had been palpably towards free thought, and the circumstance 
had probably attracted the attention of Pius V., who then ruled 
the Church in the spirit, as he had formerly exercised the func- 
tions, of an inquisitor. Through the intercession, as would 
appear, of some influential cardinals, Cardan was released, but 
was deprived of his professorship, prohibited from teaching and 
publishing any further, and removed to Rome, where he spent 
his remaining years in receipt of a pension from the pope. It 
seems to have been urged in his favour that his intellect had been 
disturbed by grief for the loss of his son — an assertion to which 
his frequent hallucinations lent some countenance, though the 
existence of any serious derangement is disproved by the lucidity 
and coherence of his last writings. He occupied his time at 
Rome in the composition of his commentaries, De Vita Propria, 
which, along with a companion treatise, De Libris Propriis, 
is our principal authority for his biography. Though he had 
burned much, he left behind him more than a hundred MSS., 
not twenty of which have been printed. He died at Rome on 
the 21st of September 1576. 

Alike intellectually and morally, Cardan is one of the most 
interesting personages connected with the revival of science in 
Europe. He had no especial bent towards any scientific pursuit, 
but appears as the man of versatile ability, delighting in research 
for its own sake. He possessed the true scientific spirit in 
perfection; nothing, he tells us, among the king of France's 
treasures appeared to him so worthy of admiration as a certain 
natural curiosity which he took for the horn of a unicorn. It has 
been injurious to his fame to have been compelled to labour, 
partly in fields of research where no important discovery was 
then attainable, partly in those where his discoveries could only 
serve as the stepping-stones to others, by which they were 
inevitably eclipsed. His medical career serves as an illustration 
of the former case, and his mathematical of the latter. His 
medical knowledge was wholly empirical; restrained by the 
authority of Galen, and debarred from the practice of anatomy, 
nothing more could be expected than that he should stumble on 
some fortunate nostrums. As a mathematician, on the other 
hand, he effected important advances in science, but such as 
merely paved the way for discoveries which have obscuredhis own. 
From his astrology no results could be expected; but even here 
the scientific character of his mind is displayed in his common- 
sense treatment of what usually passed for a mystical and occult 
study. His prognostications are as strictly empirical as his 
prescriptions, and rest quite as much upon the observations 
which he supposed himself to have made in his practice. As 
frequently is the case with men incapable of rightly ordering 



316 



CARDENAS— CARDIFF 



their own lives, he is full of wisdom and sound advice for others; 
his ethical precepts and practical rules are frequently excellent. 
To complete the catalogue of his accomplishments, he is no 
contemptible poet. 

The work of Cardan's, however, which retains most interest for 
this generation is his autobiography, De Vita Propria. In its 
clearness and frankness of self-revelation this book stands almost 
alone among records of its class. It may be compared with the 
autobiography of another celebrated Italian of the age,Benvenuto 
Cellini, but is much more free from vanity and self -consciousness, 
unless the extreme candour with which Cardan reveals his own 
errors is to be regarded as vanity in a more subtle form. The 
general impression is highly favourable to the writer, whose 
impetuosity and fits of reckless dissipation appear as mere 
exaggerations of the warmth of heart which imparted such 
strength to his domestic affections, and in the region of science 
imparted that passionate devotion to research which could alone 
have enabled him to persevere so resolutely and effect such 
marked advances in such multifarious fields of inquiry. 

Cardan's autobiography has been most ably condensed, and at 
the same time supplemented by information from the general body 
of his writings and other sources, by Henry Morley (Jerome Cardan, 
1854, 2 vols). His capital treatises, De Subtilitate and De Varietate 
Rerum, are combined and fully analysed in vol. ii. of Rixner and 
Siber's Leben und Lehrmeinungen beruhmter Physiker am Ende des 
xvi. und am Anfange des xvii. Jahrhunderts (Sulzbach, 1820). 
Cardan's works were edited in ten volumes by Sponius (Lyons, 
1663). A biography was prefixed by Gabriel Naude, whose un- 
reasonable depreciation has unduly lowered Cardan's character with 
posterity. (R. G.) 

CARDENAS (San Juan de Dios de Cdrdenas) , a maritime town 
of Cuba, in Matanzas province, about 75 m. E. of Havana, on the 
level and somewhat marshy shore of a spacious bay of the 
northern coast of the island, sheltered by a long promontory. 
Pop. (1907) 24,280. It has railway communication with the 
trunk railway of the island, and communicates by regular 
steamers with all the coast towns. The city lies between the sea 
and hills. There are broad streets, various squares (including 
the Plaza de Colon, with a bronze statue of Columbus given to the 
city by Queen Isabel II. and erected in 1862) and substantial 
business buildings. Cardenas is one of the principal sugar- 
exporting towns of Cuba. The shallowness of the harbour 
necessitates lighterage and repeated loading of cargoes. The 
surrounding region is famed for its fertility. A large quantity of 
asphalt has been taken from the bed of the harbour. A flow of 
fresh water from the bed of the harbour is another peculiar 
feature; it comes presumably from the outlets of subterranean 
rivers. There is a large United States business element, which 
has been, indeed, prominent in the city ever since its foundation. 
At El Varadero, on a peninsula at the mouth of the bay, there is 
fine sea-bathing on a long beach, and El Varadero is a winter 
resort. Cardenas was founded in 1828, and in 1861 already had 
12,910 inhabitants. In 1850 General Narciso Lopez landed here 
on a filibustering expedition, and held the town for a few hours, 
abandoning it when he saw that the people would not rise to 
support him in his efforts to secure Cuban independence. On the 
nth of May 1898 an American torpedo-boat and revenue cutter 
here attacked three Spanish gun-boats, and Ensign Worth 
Bagley (1874-1898) was killed — the first American naval officer 
to lose his life in the Spanish-American War. 

CARDIFF, a city, municipal, county and parliamentary 
borough, seaport and market-town, and the county town of 
Glamorganshire, South Wales, situated on the Taff, 1 m. above 
its outflow, 1455 m. from London by the Great Western railway 
via Badminton, 405 m. W. of Bristol and 45J m. E.S.E. of 
Swansea. Cardiff is also the terminus of both the Taff Vale and 
the Rhymney railways, the latter affording the London & 
North- Western railway access to the town. The Barry line from 
Barry dock joins the Great Western and Taff Vale railways at 
Cardiff, and the Cardiff Railway Company (which owns all the 
docks) has a line from Pontypridd via Llanishen to the docks. 
The Glamorganshire canal, opened in 1794, runs from Cardiff to 
Merthyr Tydfil, with a branch to Aberdare. The increase of the 
population of Cardiff during the 19th century was phenomenal; 



from 1870 inhabitants in 1801, and 6187 in 1831 it grew to 
32,954 in 1861. The borough, which originally comprised only 
the parishes of St John's and St Mary's, was in 1875 and 1895 
extended so as to include Roath and a large part of Llandaff, 
known as Canton, on the right of the Taff. The whole area was 
united as one civil parish in 1903, and the population in 1901 was 
164,333, of whom only about 8% spoke Welsh. 

Probably no town in the kingdom has a nobler group of 
public buildings than those in Cathays Park, which also com- 
mands a view of the castle ramparts and the old keep. On 
opposite sides of a fine avenue are the assize courts and new 
town hall (with municipal offices), which are both in the Renais- 
sance style. The Glamorgan county council has also a site of 
one acre in the park for offices. 

The University College of South Wales and Monmouthshire, 
founded in 1883, under the principalship of J. Viriamu Jones, for 
some time carried on its work in temporary buildings, pending the 
erection of the commodious and imposing building from the plans 
of Mr W. D. Caroe, in Cathays Park, where the registry of the 
university of Wales (of which the college is a constituent) is also 
situated. The Drapers' Company has given £15,5°° towards 
building a library, in addition to previous donations to the 
engineering department and the scholarship fund of the college. 
The college has departments for arts, pure and applied science 
and technology, medicine, public health, music, and for the 
training of men and women teachers for elementary and secondary 
schools. Its library includes the Salesbury collection of books 
relating to Wales. Aberdare Hall is a hostel for the women 
students. The Baptist theological college of Pontypool was 
removed to Cardiff in 1895. 

The public library and museum were founded in 1863, but in 
1882 were removed to a new building which was enlarged in 
1896. The library is especially rich in books and MSS. relating 
to Wales and in Celtic literature generally. These comprise the 
Welsh portion of the MSS. which belonged to Sir Thomas 
Phillipps of Middlehill (including the Book of Aneurin — one of 
the " Four ancient books of Wales "), purchased for £3500. A 
catalogue of the printed books in the Welsh department, which 
soon became a standard work of reference, was published in 
1898, while a calendar of the Welsh MSS. was issued by the 
Historical MSS. Commission in 1903. There are six branch 
libraries, while a scheme of school libraries has been in operation 
since 1899. The chief features of the museum are collections of 
the fossils, birds and flora of Wales and of obsolete Welsh 
domestic appliances, casts of the pre-Norman monuments of 
Wales, and reproductions of metal and ivory work illustrating 
various periods of art and civilization. There is also a unique 
collection of Swansea and Nantgarw china. The fine arts 
department contains twenty-seven oil paintings by modern 
English and continental artists bequeathed by William Menelaus 
of Dowlais in 1883, the Pyke-Thompson collection of about 100 
water-colour paintings presented in 1899, and some 3000 prints 
and drawings relating to Wales. In 1905 Cardiff was selected 
by a privy council committee to be the site of a state-aided 
national museum for Wales, the whole contents of the museum 
and art gallery, together with a site in Cathays Park, having been 
offered by the corporation for the purpose. A charter providing 
for its government was granted on the 19th of March 1907. In 
Cathays Park there is also a " gorsedd " or bardic circle of huge 
monoliths erected in connexion with the eisteddfod of 1899. 

The other public buildings of the town include the infirmary 
founded in 1837, the present buildings being erected in 1883, 
and subsequently enlarged; the sanatorium, the seamen's 
hospital, the South Wales Institute of Mining Engineers (which 
has a library) built in 1894, the exchange, an institute for the 
blind, a school for the deaf and dumb, and one of the two prisons 
for the county (the other being at Swansea). There are a 
technical school, an intermediate school for boys and another for 
girls, a " higher-grade " and a pupil teachers' school. A musical 
festival is held triennially. 

In the business part the buildings are also for the most 
part imposing and the thoroughfares spacious, while the chief 



CARDIFF 



3i7 



suburban streets are planted with trees. The Taff is spanned 
by two bridges, one a four-arched bridge rebuilt in 1858-1859 
leading to Llandaff, and the other a cantilever with a central 
swinging span of 190 ft. 8 in. 

In virtue of its being the shire-town, Cardiff acquired in 1535 
the right to send one representative to parliament, which it did 
until 1832, from which date Cowbridge and Llantrisant have 
been joined with it as contributory boroughs returning one 
member. The great sessions for the county were during their 
whole existence from 1542 to 1830 held at Cardiff, but the 
assizes (which replaced them) have since then been held at 
Swansea and Cardiff alternately, as also are the quarter sessions 
for Glamorgan. The borough has a separate commission of the 
peace, having a stipendiary magistrate since 1858. It was 
granted a separate court of quarter sessions in 1890, it was con- 
stituted a county borough in 1888, and, by letters patent dated 
the 28th of October 1905, it was created a city and the dignity 
of lord mayor conferred on its chief magistrate. The corporation 
consists of ten aldermen and thirty councillors, and the area of 
the municipal borough is 8408 acres. 

Under powers secured in 1884, the town obtains its chief water 
supply from a gathering ground near the sources of the Taff on 
the old red sandstone beyond the northern out-crop of the 
mineral basin and on the southern slopes of the Brecknock 
Beacons. Here two reservoirs of a combined capacity of 668 
million gallons have been constructed, and a conduit some 36 m. 
long laid to Cardiff at a total cost of about £1,250,000. A third 
reservoir is authorized. A gas company, first incorporated in 
1837, supplies the city as well as Llandaff and Penarth with gas, 
but the corporation also supplies electric power both for lighting 
and working the tramways, which were purchased from a private 
company in 1898. The city owned in 1905 about 290 acres 
of parks and " open spaces," the chief being Roath Park of 100 
acres (including a botanical garden of 15 acres), Llandaff fields of 
70 acres, and Cathays Park of 60 acres, which was acquired 
in 1900 mainly with the view of placing in it the chief public 
buildings of the town. 

Commerce and Industries. — Edward II. 's charter of 1324 
indicates that Cardiff had become even then a trading and 
shipping centre of some importance. It enjoyed a brief existence 
as a staple town from 1327 to 1332. During the reigns of Eliza- 
beth and James I. it was notorious as a resort of pirates, while 
some of the ironfounders of the district were suspected of secretly 
supplying Spain with ordnance. It was for centuries a " head 
port," its limits extending from Chepstow to Llanelly; in the 
18th century it sank to the position of " a creek " of the port 
of Bristol, but about 1840 it was made independent, its limits 
for customs' purposes being defined as from the Rumney estuary 
to Nash Point, so that technically the "port of Cardiff" includes 
Barry and Penarth as well as Cardiff proper. Down to the end 
of the 1 8th century there was only a primitive quay on the river 
side for shipping purposes. Coal was brought down from the 
hills on the backs of mules, and iron carried in two-ton wagons. 
In 1798 the first dock (12 acres in extent) was constructed at 
the terminus of the Glamorgan canal from Merthyr. The com- 
mercial greatness of Cardiff is due to the vast coal and iron 
deposits of the country drained by the Taff and Rhymney, 
between whose outlets the town is situated. But a great impetus 
to its development was given by the 2nd marquess of Bute, who 
has often been described as the second founder of Cardiff. In 
1830 he obtained the first act for the construction of a dock 
which (now known as the West Bute dock) was opened in 1839 
and measures (with its basin) 19J acres. The opening of the Taff 
Vale railway in 1840 and of the South Wales railway to Cardiff 
in 1850 necessitated further accommodation, and the trustees 
of the marquess (who died in 1848) began in 1851 and opened in 
1855 the East Bute dock and basin measuring 46J acres. The 
Rhymney railway to Cardiff was completed in 1858 and the trade 
of the port so vastly increased that the shipment of coal and coke 
went up from 4562 tons in 1839 to 1,796,000 tons in i860. In 
1864 the Bute trustees unsuccessfully sought powers for con- 
structing three additional docks to cost two millions sterling, but 



under the more limited powers granted in 1866, the Roath basin 
(12 acres) was opened in 1874, and (under a substituted act 
of 1882) the Roath dock (33 acres) was opened in 1887. All these 
docks were constructed by the Bute family at a cost approaching 
three millions sterling. Still they fell far short of the requirements 
of the district for in 1865 the Taff Vale Railway Company opened 
a dock of 26 acres under the headland at Penarth, while in 1884 
a group of colliery owners, dissatisfied with their treatment at 
Cardiff, obtained powers to construct docks at Barry which are 
now 114 acres in extent. The Bute trustees in 1885 acquired the 
Glamorgan canal and its dock, and in the following year obtained 
an act for vesting their various docks and the canal in a company 
now known as the Cardiff Railway Company. The South Bute 
dock of 50J acres, authorized in 1894 and capable of accommodat- 
ing the largest vessels afloat, was opened in 1907, bringing the 
whole dock area of Cardiff (including timber ponds) to about 
210 acres. There are also ten private graving and floating docks 
and one public graving dock. There is ample equipment of fixed 
and movable staiths and cranes of various sizes up to 70 tons, 
the Lewis-Hunter patent cranes being largely used for shipping 
coal owing to their minimizing the breakage of coal and securing 
its even distribution. The landing of foreign cattle is permitted 
by the Board of Trade, and there are cattle lairs and abattoirs 
near the Cardiff wharf. The total exports of the Cardiff docks 
in 1906 amounted to 8,767,502 tons, of which 8, 433, 629 tons were 
coal, coke and patent fuel, 151,912 were iron and steel and their 
manufactures, and 181,076 tons of general merchandise. What 
Cardiff lacks is a corresponding import trade, for its imports in 
1906 amounted to only 2,108,133 tons, of which the chief items 
were iron ore (895,610 tons), pit-wood (303,407), grain and 
flour (298,197). Taking " the port of Cardiff " in its technical 
sense as including Barry and Penarth, it is the first port in the 
kingdom for shipping cleared to foreign countries and British 
possessions, second in the kingdom for its timber imports, and 
first in the world for shipment of coal. 

The east moors, stretching towards the outlet of the Rhymney 
river, have become an important metallurgical quarter. Copper 
works were established here in 1866, followed long after by tin- 
stamping and enamel works. In 1888 the Dowlais Iron Company 
(now Messrs Guest, Keen & Nettlefold, Ltd.) acquired here some 
ninety acres on which were built four blast furnaces and six 
Siemens' smelting furnaces. There are also in the city several 
large grain mills and breweries, a biscuit factory, wire and hemp 
roperies, fuel works, general foundries and engineering works. 
At Ely, 35 m. out of Cardiff, there are also breweries, a small 
tin works and large paper works. The newspapers of Cardiff 
include two weeklies, the Cardiff Times and Weekly Mail, 
founded in 1857 and 1870 respectively, two morning dailies, 
the South Wales Daily News and Western Mail, established in 
1872 and 1869 respectively, and two evening dailies. 

History and Historic Buildings. — In documents of the first 
half of the 12th century the name is variously spelt as Kairdif, 
Cairti and Kardid. The Welsh form of the name, Caerdydd 
(pronounced Caerdeeth, with the accent on the second syllable) 
suggests that the name means " the fort of (Aulus ?) Didius," 
rather than Caer Daf (" the fortress on the Taff "), which is 
nowhere found (except in Leland), though Caer Dyv once existed 
as a variant. No traces have been found of any pre-Roman 
settlement at Cardiff. Excavations carried out by the marquess 
of Bute from 1889 onward furnished for the first time conclusive 
proof that Cardiff had been a Roman station, and also revealed 
the sequence of changes which it had subsequently undergone. 
There was first, on the site occupied by the present castle, a 
camp of about ten acres, probably constructed after the conquest 
of the Silures a.d. 75-77, so as to command the passage of the 
Taff, which was here crossed by the Via Maritima running from 
Gloucester to St David's. In later Roman times there were 
added a series of polygonal bastions, of the type found at Caer- 
went. To this period also belongs the massive rampart, over 
10 ft. thick, and the north gateway, one of the most perfect 
Roman gateways in Great Britain. After the departure of 
the Romans the walls became ruinous or were partly pulled down, 



3i8 



CARDIGAN, LORD 



perhaps by sea rovers from the north. In this period of anarchy 
the native princes of Glamorgan had their principal demesne, 
not at the camp but a mile to the north at Llystalybont, now 
merely a thatched farmhouse, while some Saxon invaders threw 
up within the camp a large moated mound on which the Normans 
about the beginning of the 12th century built the great shell- 
keep which is practically all that remains of their original 
castle. Its builder was probably Robert, earl of Gloucester, who 
also built Bristol castle. Then or possibly even earlier the old 
rampart was for two-thirds of its circuit buried under enormous 
earthworks, the remainder being rebuilt. It was in the keep, 
and not, as tradition says, in the much later " Black Tower " 
(also called " Duke Robert's Tower "), that Robert, duke of 
Normandy, was imprisoned by order of his brother Henry I. 
from 1 108 until his death in 1134. Considerable additions of 
later date, in the Decorated and Perpendicular styles, are due 
to the Despensers and to Beauchamp, earl of Warwick, while the 
present residential part is of various dates ranging from the 15th 
century down to the last half of the 19th, when a thorough 
restoration, including the addition of a superbly ornamented 
clock-tower, was carried out. The original ditch, about 20 yds. 
wide, still exists on three sides, but it is now converted into a 
" feeder " for the docks and canal. Geoffrey of Monmouth was 
at one time chaplain of the castle, where he probably wrote 
some of his works. The scene of the " sparrow-hawk " tourna- 
ment, described in Geraint and Enid, one of the Arthurian 
romances, is laid at Cardiff. 

On the conquest of the district by the Normans under Fitz 
Hamon, Cardiff became the caput of the seigniory of Glamorgan, 
and the castle the residence of its lords. The castle and lordship 
descended by heirship, male and female, through the families 
of De Clare, Despenser, Beauchamp and Neville to Richard III., 
on whose fall they escheated to the Crown, and were granted later, 
first to Jasper Tudor, and finally by Edward VI. in 1550 to Sir 
William Herbert, afterwards created Baron Herbert of Cardiff 
and earl of Pembroke. Through the daughter and grand- 
daughter of the 7 th earl the castle and estates became the 
property of the 1st marquess of Bute (who was created 
Baron Cardiff in 1776), to whose direct descendant they now 
belong. 

The town received its earliest known grant of municipal 
privileges sometime before 1147 from Fitz Hamon's successor 
and son-in-law Robert, earl of Gloucester. In 1284 the inhabit- 
ants petitioned the burgesses of Hereford for a certified copy of 
the customs of the latter town, and these furnished a model 
for the later demands of the growing community at Cardiff from 
its lords, while Cardiff in turn furnished the model for the 
Glamorgan towns such as Neath and Kenfig. In 1324 Edward II. 
granted a number of exemptions to Cardiff and other towns in 
South Wales, and this grant was confirmed by Edward III. 
in 1350, Henry IV. in 1400, Henry VI. in 1452, and Edward IV. 
in 1465. 

Its most important early charter was that granted in 1340 
by Hugh le Despenser, whereby the burgesses acquired the right 
to nominate persons from whom the constable of the castle 
should select a bailiff and other officers, two ancient fairs, held 
on the 29th of June and 19th of September, were confirmed, 
and extensive trading privileges were granted, including the 
right to form a merchant gild. A charter granted in 1421 by 
Richard de Beauchamp provided that the town should be 
governed by twelve elected aldermen, but that the constable 
of the castle should be mayor. In 1581 Queen Elizabeth granted 
a confirmatory charter to the mayor and bailiffs direct without 
reference to the lord of the castle. The town was treated as a 
borough by prescription until 1608, when James I. confirmed 
its status by express incorporation, adding also to its rights of 
self-government, and granting it a third fair (on the 30th of 
November) . In 1687 the town surrendered this charter to James 
II., who in a substituted one, which, however, was never acted 
upon, reserved to the Crown the right of removing any member 
of the corporation from office. The first step towards the modern 
improvement of the town was taken in 1774; when a special act 



was obtained for the purpose. Nineteen private acts and 
provisional orders were obtained during the 19th century. 

Among the many early English kings who visited or passed 
through Cardiff was Henry II., on whom in 1171, outside St 
Piran's chapel (which has long since disappeared) , was urged 
the duty of Sunday observance. About n 53, Ivor Bach (or 
the Little), a neighbouring Welsh chieftain, seized the castle 
and for a time held William, earl of Gloucester, and the countess 
prisoners in the hills. In 1404 Owen Glendower burnt the town, 
except the quarters of the Friars Minors. In 1645, after the 
battle of Naseby, Charles I. visited the town, which until then 
had been mainly Royalist, but about a month later was taken 
by the Parliamentarians. In 1648, a week after the Royalists 
had been decisively defeated by Colonel Horton at St Fagan's, 
4 m. west of Cardiff, Cromwell passed through the town on his 
way to Pembroke. 

Outside the north-west angle of the castle, Richard de Clare 
in 1256 founded a Dominican priory, which was burnt by Glen- 
dower in 1404. Though rebuilt, the building fell into decay 
after the Dissolution. The site was excavated in 1887. Outside 
the north-east angle a Franciscan friary was founded in 1280 
by Gilbert de Clare,which at the Dissolution became the residence 
of a branch of the Herbert family. Its site was explored in 1896. 
The only other building of historic interest is the church of St 
John the Baptist, which is in the Perpendicular style, its fine 
tower having been built about 1443 by Hart, who also built 
the towers of Wrexham and St Stephen's, Bristol. In the 
Herbert chapel is a fine altar tomb of two brothers of the family. 
A sculptured stone reredos by W. Goscombe John was erected 
in 1896. The original church of St Mary's, at the mouth of the 
river, was swept away by a tidal wave in 1607: Wordsworth 
took this as a subject for a sonnet. 

In 1555 Rawlins White, a fisherman, was burnt at Cardiff 
for his Protestantism, and in 1679 two Catholic priests were 
executed for recusancy. Cardiff was the birthplace of Christo- 
pher Love (b. 1618), Puritan author, and of William Erbury, 
sometime vicar of St Mary's in the town, who, with his curate, 
Walter Cradock, were among thefounders of Welsh nonconformity. 

As to Roman Cardiff see articles by J. Ward in the Archaeologia 
for 1901 (vol. lvii.), and in Archaeologia Cambrensis for 1908. As 
to the castle and the Black and Gray Friars see Archaeologia Cam- 
brensis, 3rd series, viii. 251 (reprinted in Clark's Medieval Military 
Architecture), 5th series, vi. 97; vii. 283; xvii. 55; 6th series, i. 69. 
The charters of Cardiff and " Materials for a History of the County 
Borough from the Earliest Times " were published by order of the 
corporation in Cardiff Records (5 vols., 1898, sqq.). See also a 
Handbook of Cardiff and District, prepared for the use of the British 
Association, 1891; Cardiff, an Illustrated Handbook, 1896; the 
Annual Report of the Cardiff Chamber of Commerce; the Calendar 
of the University College. (D. Ll. T.) 

CARDIGAN, JAMES THOMAS BRUDENELL, 7 th Earl oe 
(1797-1868), English lieutenant-general, son of the 6th earl 
of Cardigan (the title dating from 1661), was born at Hambleden, 
Bucks, on the 16th of October 1797. He studied for several 
terms at Christ Church, Oxford; and in 18 18 entered parliament. 
He entered the army in 1824 as cornet in the 8th Hussars, and 
was promoted within eight years, by purchase, to be lieutenant- 
colonel in the 15th Hussars. With this regiment he made himself 
one of the most unpopular of commanding officers. He gave the 
reins to his natural overbearing and quarrelsome temper, treating 
his men with excessive rigour and indulging in unscrupulous 
licentiousness. Within two years he held 105 courts-martial, 
and made more than 700 arrests, although the actual strength 
of his regiment was only 350 men. In consequence of one of his 
numerous personal quarrels, he left the regiment in 1834; but 
two years later, at the urgent entreaty of his father, he was 
appointed to the command of the nth Hussars. He played 
the same part as before, and was censured for it; but he was 
allowed to retain his post, and the discipline and equipment of 
his regiment, in which he took great pride, and on which he spent 
large sums of money, received high commendation from the duke 
of Wellington. He succeeded to the peerage on the death of his 
father in August 1837. In September 1840 Lord Cardigan 
fought a duel, on Wimbledon common, with one of his own 



CARDIGAN— CARDIGANSHIRE 



319 



officers. The latter was wounded, and Lord Cardigan, was tried 
before the House of Lords on a charge of feloniously shooting his 
adversary. But the trial was a mere sham, and on a trivial 
technical ground he was acquitted. In 1854, at the outbreak 
of the Crimean War, he was appointed to the command of the 
light cavalry brigade, with the rank of major-general, and he 
spent a very large sum in the purchase of horses and on the 
equipment of his regiment. He took a prominent part in the 
early actions of the campaign, and displayed throughout the 
greatest personal courage and the greatest recklessness in exposing 
his men. In the charge of the light brigade at Balaklava (q.v.) 
he was the first man to reach the line of the Russian guns; and 
Cardigan and his men alike have been credited by the bitterest 
critics of the charge with splendid daring and unquestioning 
obedience to orders. At the close of the war he was created 
K.C.B., and was appointed inspector-general of cavalry, and this 
post he held till i860. In 1863 he engaged without success in 
legal proceedings against an officer who had published an account 
of Balaklava which the earl held to contain a reflection on his 
military character. He attained the rank of lieutenant-general 
in 1861. He was twice married, in 1826 and 1858, but had 
no children. On his death, which took place on the 28th of 
March 1868, the family titles (including the English barony of 
Brudenell, cr. 1628) passed to his relative, the second marquess 
of Ailesbury. 

CARDIGAN (Aberteifi), a seaport, market-town and municipal 
borough, and the county town of Cardiganshire, Wales, pictur- 
esquely situated on the right bank of the Teifi about 3 m. above 
its mouth. Pop. (1901) 3511. It is connected by an ancient 
stone bridge with the suburb of Bridgend on the southern or 
Pembroke bank of the river. It is the terminal station of the 
Whitland-Cardigan branch of the Great Western railway. 
Owing to the bar at the estuary of the Teifi, the shipping trade is 
inconsiderable, but there are brick-works and foundries in the 
town ; and as the centre of a large agricultural district, Cardigan 
market is well attended. There is a curious local custom of 
mixing " culm," a compound of clay and small coal, in the streets. 
The town has for the most part a modern and prosperous ap- 
pearance. Two bastions with some of the curtain wall of the 
ancient castle remain, whilst the dwelling-house known as 
Castle Green contains part of a drum tower, and some vaulted 
chambers of the 13 th century. The chancel of the Priory 
church of St Mary is an interesting specimen of early Perpen- 
dicular work, and the elaborate tracery of its fine east window 
contains some fragments of ancient stained glass. It is the only 
existing portion of a Benedictine house which was originally 
founded by Prince Rhys ap Griffith in the 12th century. 

Although a Celtic settlement doubtless existed near the mouth 
of the Teifi from an early period, it was not until Norman times 
that Cardigan became a place of importance. Its castle was 
first erected by Roger de Montgomery about the year 1001, and 
throughout the 12th and 13th centuries this stronghold of Car- 
digan played no small part in the constant warfare between 
Welsh and English, either side from time to time gaining posses- 
sion of the castle and the small town dependent on it. In 1136 
the English army under Randolf, earl of Chester, was severely 
defeated by the Welsh at Crug Mawr, now called Bank-y- Warren, 
a rounded hill 2 m. north-east of the town. During the latter 
part of the 12 th century the castle became the residence of Rhys 
ap Griffith, prince and justiciar of South Wales (d. n 96), who 
kept considerable state within its walls, and entertained here in 
1 188 Archbishop Baldwin and Giraldus Cambrensis during their 
preaching of the Third Crusade. In 1284 Edward I. spent a 
month in the castle, settling the affairs of South Wales. This 
famous pile was finally taken and destroyed by the Parliamen- 
tarian Major-General Laugharne in 1645. The lordship, castle 
and town of Cardigan formed part of the dower bestowed on 
Queen Catherine of Aragon by King Henry VII. Henry VIII. 's 
charter of 1542 confirmed earlier privileges granted by Edward I. 
and other monarchs, and provided for the government of the 
town by a duly elected mayor, two bailiffs and a coroner. In 
Jt887 the assizes and quarter sessions were removed hence to 



Lampeter, which has a more central position in the county. 
Cardigan was declared a parliamentary borough in 1536, but in 
1885 its representation was merged in that of the county. 

CARDIGANSHIRE (Ceredigion, Sir Aberteifi), a county of 
South Wales, bounded N. by Merioneth, E. by Montgomery, 
Radnor and Brecon, S. by Carmarthen and Pembroke, and W. by 
Cardigan Bay of the Irish Sea. It has an area of 688 sq. m., so 
that it ranks fifth in size of the Welsh countries. The whole of 
Cardiganshire is hilly or undulating, with the exception of the 
great bogs of Borth and Tregaron, but the mountains generally 
have little grandeur in their character; Plinlimmon itself, on 
the boundary of the county with Montgomeryshire, in spite of its 
elevation of 2463 ft., being singularly deficient in boldness of 
outline. Of other hills, only Tregaron Mountain (1778 ft.) 
exceeds 1500 ft. in height. Of the rivers by far the most im- 
portant is the Teifi, or Tivy, which rises above Tregaron in Llyn 
Teifi, one of a group of tiny lakes which are usually termed 
the Teifi Pools, and flows southward through the county as far 
as Lampeter, forming from this point onwards its southern 
boundary. A succession of deep pools and rushing shallows, the 
Teifi has from the earliest times been celebrated for the quantity 
and quality of its salmon, which are netted in great numbers on 
Cardigan Bar. Trout and sewin (a local species of sea-trout) are 
also plentiful, so that the Teifi is much frequented by anglers. 
This river is also believed to have been the last British haunt of 
the beaver (afangc, lost-llydan) , for the slaying of which a very 
heavy penalty was exacted by the old royal laws of Wales. 
Giraldus Cambrensis, Michael Drayton, and other writers allude 
to this circumstance, though at what date the beaver became 
extinct in these waters is quite uncertain. On the Teifi may 
frequently be observed fishermen in coracles. Other rivers 
worthy of mention are the Dovey (Dyfi), separating Cardigan 
from Merioneth in the extreme north; the Rheidol and the 
Ystwyth, which rise in Plinlimmon; and the Aeron, which has its 
source in Llyn Eiddwen, a pool in the hilly district known as 
Mynydd Bach. All these streams flow westward into Cardigan 
Bay. 

The valley of the Teifi presents many points of great beauty 
and interest between Llandyssul and the sea. The rapids of 
Henllan, the falls of Cenarth and the wooded cliffs of Coed- 
more constitute some of the finest scenery in South Wales. 
The valley of the Aeron is well wooded and fertile, while the 
Rheidol contains amidst striking surroundings the famous 
cascade spanned by the Devil's Bridge, which is known to the 
Welsh as Pont-ar-Fynach (the Monks' Bridge). 

Geology. — The rocks of Cardiganshire consist of shales, slates and 
grits which have been folded and uptilted so that nowhere do they 
retain their original horizontality. They belong entirely to the 
Ordovician and Silurian periods; they have yielded few fossils, 
and much work remains to be done upon them, before the strati- 
graphical subdivisions can be clearly denned. Many metalliferous 
lodes occur in the rocks, and the lead mines have long been famous; 
it was from the profits of his mining speculations, carried on chiefly 
in this county, that the celebrated Sir Hugh Myddleton was enabled 
to carry out his gigantic project for supplying London with water 
by means of the New River. Copper and zinc ores have also been 
obtained. Tregaron is the centre of the mining district, and the 
Lisburne, Goginan and Cwm Ystwyth mines are among the most 
important. 

The slates have been worked at Devil's Bridge, Corris, Strata 
Florida, Goginan, &c. Glacial drift occupies some of the lower 
ground, and peaty bogs are common on the mountains. A small 
tract of blown sand lies at the mouth of the river Dovey. 

Industries. — The climate on the coast is mild and salubrious, 
but that of the hill country is cold, bleak and rainy. The 
cultivated crops consist of oats, wheat, barley, turnips and 
potatoes; and in the lower districts on the coast, especially in 
the neighbourhood of Cardigan, Aberaeron and Llanrhystyd, 
good crops are raised. The uplands are mostly covered by wild 
heathy pastures, which afford good grazing for Welsh mountain 
sheep and ponies. The country has long been celebrated for its 
breed of " Cardiganshire cobs," for which high prices are often 
obtained from English dealers, who frequent the local horse 
fairs, especially Dalis Fair at Lampeter. Cattle, sheep, pigs, 
butter, oats, wool, flannel and coarse slates form the principal 



3 20 



CARDIGANSHIRE 



articles of export. Hand-looms are by no means uncommon in 
the remote parts of the country, and clog-making of alder wood 
meets a local demand. The North Cardiganshire lead-mines, of 
which the Lisburne, Goginan and Cwm Ystwyth mines are the 
most noted, have been famous, and are said to have been worked 
by the Romans. Some of the lead raised is very rich in silver, 
and in the 1 7th century so great was the amount of silver obtained 
that a mint for coining it was erected by virtue of letters patent 
at Aberystwyth. 

Communications. — The railways within the county are the 
Cambrian, by means of which access is given to Aberystwyth 
from all parts of the kingdom; and the former Manchester & 
Milford line, which runs south from Aberystwyth by Lampeter 
to Pencader, and has been acquired by the Great Western 
railway. The lower valley of the Teifi, or Tivyside, is reached by 
means of two branch lines of the Great Western railway— one 
from Whitland to Cardigan, and the other from Pencader to 
Llandyssul and Newcastle-Emlyn. 

Population and Administration. — The area of the administra- 
tive county is 443,071 acres, with a population in 1891 of 63,467, 
andin 1901 of 60,237. The municipal boroughs are Aberystwyth 
(pop. 8013), Cardigan (3511) and Lampeter (1722). Aberaeron 
and New Quay are urban districts. Other towns are Tregaron 
(1509), an ancient but decayed market- town in a wild boggy 
district; Aberaeron (1331), a small seaport, and Llandyssul 
(2801,) a rising place on the Teifi with woollen factories. In 
modern times several small watering-places have sprung up on 
the coast, notably at Borth, New Quay, Tresaith, Aberporth and 
Gwbert. Quarter sessions are held at Lampeter, and here also 
are held the assizes for the county, which lies in the South Wales 
circuit. The county returns one member of parliament, and has 
no parliamentary borough. Ecclesiastically it lies wholly in the 
diocese of St David's, and contains sixty-six parishes. 

History. — In spite of its poverty and sparse population, 
Cardiganshire has never ceased to play a prominent part in 
all Welsh political, literary and educational movements. The 
early history of the district is obscure, but at the time of the 
Roman invasion it was tenanted by the Dimetae, a Celtic tribe, 
within whose limits was comprised the greater portion of the 
south-west of Wales. After the departure of the Romans, the 
whole basin of the Teifi eventually fell into the power of Ceredig, 
son of Cunedda Wledig of North Wales; and the . district, 
peopled with his subjects and nearly co-extensive with the 
existing shire, obtained the name of Ceredigion, later corrupted 
into Cardigan. During the 5th and 6th centuries Ceredigion was 
largely civilized by Celtic missionaries, notably by St David and 
St Padarn, the latter of whom founded a bishopric at Llanbadarn 
Fawr, which in the 8th century became merged in the see of St 
David's. Two important local traditions, evidently based on 
fact, are associated with this remote era: — the inundation of the 
Cantref-y-Gwaelod and the synod of Llanddewi Brefi. The 
Cantref-y-Gwaelod (the lowland Hundred), a large tract of flat 
pasture-land containing sixteen townships, and protected from 
t^.e inrcad of the sea by sluices, was suddenly submerged at an 
uncertain date about the year 500. The legend of its destruc- 
tion declares that Seithenyn, the drunken keeper of the sluices, 
carelessly let in the waters of the bay, with the result that the 
land was lost for ever, and Prince Gwyddno and his son Elphin, 
with all their subjects, were forced to migrate to the wild region 
of Snowdon. This tale has ever been a favourite theme with 
Welsh bards, so that " the sigh of Gwyddno when the wave 
turned over his land " remains a familiar figure of speech through- 
out Wales. In support of this story it may be mentioned that 
there are indications of submerged dwellings and roads (e.g. the 
Sam Cynfelin and Sarn Badrig) between the mouth of the Dovey 
and Cardigan Head. The famous synod of Brefi, an historical 
fact clouded by miraculous details, probably took place early in 
the 6th century, when at a largely attended meeting of the 
Welsh clergy held at Brefi, near the source of the Teifi, St David's 
eloquence for ever silenced the champions of the Pelagian heresy. 
In the 10th and nth centuries the coast of Ceredigion suffered 
much from the inroads of the Danes, and in later times of the 



Normans and Flemings; but on the whole the native inhabitants 
seem tc have maintained a successful resistance. By the close of 
the nth century most of Ceredigion had been reduced by the 
Normans, and during the 12th and 13th centuries it formed a 
favourite battle ground between the Welsh princes and the 
English forces. By the Statutes of Rhuddlan (1284) Edward I. 
constituted Ceredigion out of the former principality of Wales a 
shire on the English model, dividing the new county into six 
hundreds and fixing the assizes at Carmarthen. By the act of 
Union in the reign of Henry VIII., the boundaries of the county 
were subsequently enlarged to their present size by the addition 
of certain outlying portions of the Marches round Tregaron and 
Cardigan, and the assizes were assigned to the county town. 
During the rebellion of Owen Glendower in the opening years of 
the 15th century, the county was again disturbed, and Owen for 
a short time actually held a court in Aberystwyth Castle. In 
the year 1485, according to local tradition, Henry of Richmond 
marched through South Cardiganshire on his way to Bosworth 
Field, and he is stated to have raised recruits round Llanarth, 
where the old mansion of Wern, still standing, is pointed out as 
his halting-place on this occasion. Under Henry VIII. Cardigan- 
shire was for the first time empowered to send a representative 
member to parliament, and under Mary the same privilege 
was extended to the boroughs. During the Great Rebellion the 
county — which possessed at least three leading Parliamentarians 
in the persons of Sir John Vaughan, of Crosswood, afterwards 
chief justice of the common pleas; Sir Richard Pryse, of 
Gogerddan; and James Philipps, of Cardigan Priory — seems to 
have been less Royalist in its sympathies than other parts of 
Wales. At this time the castles of Cardigan and Aberystwyth, 
both held in the name of King Charles, were reduced to ruins 
by the Cromwellian army. In the 18th century the Methodist 
movement found great support in the county; in fact, Daniel 
Rowland (1713-1790), curate of Llangeitho, was one of the chief 
leaders of this important revival. The 19th century witnessed 
the foundation of two important educational centres in the 
county: — St David's College at Lampeter (1827), and one of the 
three colleges of the university of Wales at Aberystwyth (1872). 
In the years 1842-1843 the county was much disturbed by the 
Rebecca Riots, during which a large number of turnpike gates 
were destroyed by local mobs. Forty-five years later it was 
affected by the Welsh agrarian agitation against payment of 
tithe, which produced some scenes of violence against the dis- 
training police, especially in the district round Llangranog. 

Chief amongst the county families of Cardigan is that of Lloyd, 
descendants of the powerful Cadifor ap Dinawal, lord of Castle 
Howell, in the 12th century. Certain branches of this family, 
such as the Lloyds of Millfield (Maes-y-felin), the Lloyds of 
Llanlyr and the Lloyds of Peterwell, are extinct, but others are 
still flourishing. The family of Vaughan of Crosswood, or 
Trawscoed (now represented by the earl of Lisburne), has held its 
family estates in the male line for many centuries. A representa- 
tive in the female line of the ancient house of Pryse, long 
prominent in the annals of the county, still possesses the old 
family seat of Gogerddan. Other families worthy of mention 
are Lloyd of Bronwydd, Powell of Nanteos and Johnes of Hafod 
and Llanfair-Clydogau. 

Antiquities. — Scattered over all parts of the county are 
numerous British or early medieval tumuli and camps. Traces 
of the ancient Roman road, the Via Occidentalis — called by the 
Welsh Sarn Helen, a corruption of Sarn Lleon, Road of the 
Legion — are to be found in the eastern districts of the county; 
and at Llanio are to be seen what are perhaps the remains of 
the Roman military station of Loventium. There are also 
various inscribed and incised stones, of which good examples 
exist in the churchyards of Llanbadarn Fawr and Llanddewi 
Brefi. In buildings of interest Cardiganshire is singularly 
deficient. Besides the ruins of Aberystwyth and Cardigan 
Castles, and of Strata Florida Abbey, there is a large cruciform 
church of the 12th century at Llanbadarn Fawr; whilst the 
massive parish church of Llanddewi Brefi once formed part of 
the minster of a prebendal college founded by Bishop Beck of 



CARDINAL 



321 



St David's towards the close of the 13th century. Tregaron, 
Llanwenog, Llandyssul and Llanarth own parish churches with 
western towers of early date, but for the most part the ecclesi- 
astical structures of Cardiganshire are small in size and mean in 
appearance, and many of them were entirely rebuilt during the 
latter half of the 19th century. The little church of Eglwys 
Newydd, near the Devil's Bridge, contains one of Sir Francis 
Chantrey's masterpieces, a white marble group in memory of 
Mariamne Johnes (1818), the daughter of Thomas Johnes, of 
Hafod (1748-1816), the translator of Froissart. 

Customs, etc. — The old Welsh costume, customs and super- 
stitions are fast disappearing, although the^ linger in remote 
districts such as the neighbourhood of Llangeitho. The steeple- 
crowned beaver hat has practically vanished, although it was in 
general use within living memory; but the short petticoat and 
overskirt (pais-a-gwn-bdch) , the frilled mob-cap, little check 
shawl and buckled shoes are still worn by many of the older 
women. Of peculiarly Welsh customs, the bidding (gwahoddiad) 
is not quite extinct in the county. The bidding was a formal 
invitation sent by a betrothed pair through a bidder (gwahoddwr) 
to request the presence and gifts of all their neighbours at the 
forthcoming marriage. All presents sent were duly registered in a 
book with a view to repayment, when a similar occasion should 
arise in the case of the donors. When printing became cheap 
and common, the services of the professional bidder were often 
dispensed with, and instead printed leaflets were circulated. 
The curious horse wedding (priodas ceffylau) at which the man 
and his friends pursued the future bride to the church porch on 
horseback, and then returned home at full gallop, became 
obsolete before the end of the 19th century. Of the practices 
connected with death, the wake, or watching of the corpse, alone 
remains; but the habit of attending funerals, even those of 
strangers, is still popular with both sexes, so that a funeral pro- 
cession in Cardiganshire is often a very imposing sight. Nearly 
all the old superstitions, once so prevalent, concerning the fairies 
(tylwyth teg) and fairy rings, goblins (bwbachod), and the teulu, or 
phantom funeral, are rapidly dying out; but in the corpse candle 
(canwll corph), a mysterious light which acts as a death-portent 
and is traditionally connected with St David, are still found many 
believers. 

Authorities. — Sir S. R. Meyrick, History and Antiquities of 
Cardiganshire (London, 1806); Rev. G. Eyre Evans, Cardiganshire 
and its Antiquities (Aberystwyth, 1903); E. R. Horsfall-Turner, 
Walks and Wanderings in_County Cardigan (Bingley). 

CARDINAL (Lat. cardinalis), in the Roman Church, the title of 
the highest dignitaries next to the pope. The cardinals constitute 
the council or senate of the sovereign pontiff, his auxiliaries in the 
general government of the Church; it is they who act as ad- 
ministrators of the Church during a vacancy of the Holy See and 
elect the new pope. Together they constitute a spiritual body 
called the Sacred College. The dignity of cardinal is not an 
essential part of the legal constitution of the Church; it is a 
reflection of and participation in the sovereign dignity of the 
Head of the Church, by the chief clergy of the Church of Rome. 
The present position is the result of a long process of evolution, of 
which there are several interesting survivals. 

The name is derived from cardo, hinge; like many other words 
(the word pope in particular) it was originally of a more general 
application, before it was reserved exclusively to the members of 
the Sacred College, and the word is still used adjectivally in the 
sense of pre-eminent or that on which everything else " hinges." 
As early as the 6th century we find mentioned, in the letters 
of St Gregory, cardinal bishops and priests. This expression 
signifies clergy who are attached to their particular church in a 
stable relation, as a door is attached to a building by its hinges 
(see Thomassin, Vetus et nova discipl. vol. 1, lib. ii. cap. 113-115). 
Moreover, this sense is still preserved in the present day in the 
expressions incardinatio, excardinatio, which signify the act by 
which a bishop permanently attaches a foreign cleric to his 
diocese, or allows one of his own clergy to leave his diocese in 
order to belong to another. For a long time, too, the superior 
clergy, and especially the canons of cathedrals or the heads of 
v. 11 



important churches, were cardinales (see examples in Du Cange, 
Glossarium, s.v.). Gradually, however, this title was confined by 
usage to the Roman cardinals, until Pius V., by his constitution 
of the 15th of February 1568, reserved it to them exclusively. 

The grouping of the cardinals into a body called the Sacred 
College, the College of Cardinals, is connected, in the case at 
least of cardinal priests, with the ancient presbyterium, 
which existed in each church from the earliest times. sacred 
The Sacred College as such was not, however, de- college. 
finitively .constituted until the uniting of the three 
orders of cardinals into a single body, the body which was to 
elect the pope; and this only took place in the 12th century. 
Up till that time the elements remained distinct, and there were 
separate classes: the " Roman " bishops, i.e. bishops of sees 
near Rome, presbyters of the " titles " (tituli) of Rome, and 
deacons of the Roman Church. Nowadays, the Sacred College is 
still composed of three orders or categories: cardinal bishops, 
cardinal priests, and cardinal deacons. But the process of evolu- 
tion has not been the same in the case of all these orders. 

Cardinal bishops are the bishops of suburbicarian churches, 
situated in the immediate neighbourhood of Rome. Very 
early we find them assisting the pope in his ritual 
functions and in dealing with important business; bishops. 
they formed a kind of permanent synod (cf. the 
cvpoSos hSruuovaa of Constantinople): and they also took the 
place of the pope in the ceremonies of the liturgy, excepting the 
most important ones, and especially in the service of the cathedral 
at Rome, the Lateran. A passage from the life of Stephen II. 
(a.d. 769), in the Liber Pontificalis (ed. Duchesne, i. p. 478), 
shows clearly that they were seven in number and served for 
a week in turn: Hie constituit ut omni dominico die a septem 
Episcopis cardinalibus hebdomadariis, qui in ecclesia Salvatoris 
(the Lateran) observant, missarum solemnia super altare Beati 
Petri celebrarentur. They were called " cardinal bishops of the 
Lateran church," as recorded by St Peter Damian in. 1058 (Ep. 1, 
lib. ii.). Their sees are the same to-day as they were then: 
Ostia, Porto, Santa Rufina (Sylva Candida), Albano, Sabina, 
Tusculum (Frascati) and Palestrina. From time immemorial 
the bishop of Ostia has had the privilege of sacring the pope, and 
on this ground he enjoys the right of wearing the " pallium "; 
he is ex officio dean of the suburbicarian bishops, and consequently 
dean of the Sacred College. His episcopal see having been in 
ruins for a long time, that of Velletri has been joined to it. The 
second rank belongs to the bishop of Porto, who is ex officio vice- 
dean of the Sacred College; his episcopal see being also in ruins 
Calixtus II. added to it that of Santa Rufina, thus reducing the 
number of suburbicarian bishoprics and cardinal bishops to six; 
this number was adhered to by Sixtus V., and has not varied since. 

The second order of cardinals is that of the cardinal priests. 
It represents and is a continuation of the ancient presbyterium; 
but in Rome the process of evolution was different 
from that in the other episcopal towns. In the latter, priests. 
the division into parishes was but slowly accom- 
plished; there is no authority for their existence before the year 
1000; the bishop with the higher clergy, now developed into the 
chapter, were in residence at the cathedral, which formed, as it 
were, the one parish in the town. At Rome, on the contrary (and 
doubtless at Alexandria), certain churches, to which were at- 
tached certain districts, were at an early date entrusted to one 
or more priests. These churches, in which the liturgy was cele- 
brated, or certain sacraments administered, were called tituli 
(titles). According to the Liber Pontificalis (ed. Duchesne, i. pp. 
122, 126, 164), the titles of Rome, numbering twenty-five, were 
already established as early as the 1st century; this seems 
hardly probable, but it was certainly the case in the 5th century. 
The priest serving one of these churches was the priest of that 
title, and, similarly, the church which he served was that priest's 
title. When several priests were attached to the same church, 
only the first, or principal one, had the title; he alone was the 
presbyter cardinalis. This practice explains how it is that the 
Roman presbyterium did not give rise to a cathedral chapter, 
but to cardinal priests, each attached to his title. As the higher 

11 



322 



CARDINAL 



clergy of Rome gradually acquired a more important status, the 
relations between the cardinal priest and the church of which he 
bore the title became more and more nominal; but they have 
never entirely ceased. Even to-day every cardinal priest has his 
title, a church in Rome of which he is the spiritual head, and the 
name of which appears in his official signature, e.g. " Herbertus 
tituli sanctorum Andreae et Gregorii sanctae romanae ecclesiae 
presbyter cardinalis Vaughan." When the attachment of the 
cardinal priest to his title had become no more than a tradition, 
the number of cardinal titles, which in the nth century had 
reached twenty-eight, was increased according to need, and it 
was held an honour for a church to be made titulary. The last 
general rearrangement of the titular churches was begun by 
Clement VIII. and completed by Paul V. ; Leo XIII. made a 
title of the church of San Vitale. To-day, according to the 
Gerarchia Pontificia the cardinal titles number fifty- three; since 
the highest possible number of cardinal priests is fifty, and this 
number is never reached, it follows that there are always a certain 
number of vacant titles. The first title is that of San Lorenzo in 
Lucina, and the cardinal priest of the oldest standing takes the 
name of " first priest," protopresbyter. 

The third order of cardinals is that of the cardinal deacons. 
For a long time the Roman Church, faithful to the example of 
the primitive church at Jerusalem (Acts vi.), had only 
deacons seven deacons. Their special function was the ad- 
ministration of her temporal property, and particularly 
works of charity. Between them were divided at an early date 
the fourteen districts (regiones) of Rome, grouped two by two 
so as to constitute the seven ecclesiastical districts. Now the 
charitable works were carried on in establishments called 
diaconiae, adjoining churches which were specially appropriated 
to each diaconia. The connexion between the names (diaconus) 
and (diaconia) and the presence of a church in connexion with 
each diaconia gradually established for the deacons a position 
analogous to that of priests. In the 8th century Pope Adrian 
found sixteen diaconiae and founded two others (Lib. Pont. 
ed. Duchesne, i. p. 509); in the 12th century the cardinal 
deacons, who then numbered eighteen, were no longer distin- 
guished by an ecclesiastical district, as they had formerly been, 
but by the name of the church connected with some diaconia 
(loc. cit. p. 364). By the time of Sixtus V. the connexion between 
a cardinal deacon and his diaconia was merely nominal. Sixtus 
reduced the number of cardinal deacons to fourteen; and this 
is still the number to-day. Except that his church is called a 
diaconia, and not a title, the cardinal deacon is in this respect 
assimilated to the cardinal priest; but he docs not mention his 
diaconia in his official signature: e.g. "Joannes Henri cus 
diaconus cardinalis Newman." There are at present sixteen 
diaconiae, the chief being that of Santa Maria in Via lata; the 
cardinal deacon of longest standing takes the name of " first 
deacon," protodiaconus. 

Cardinals can pass from one order, title or see to another, by a 
process of " option." When a suburbicarian see falls vacant,_ the 
cardinals resident at Rome have the right of " opting " for it in 
order of rank, — that is to say, of claiming it in consistory and 
receiving their promotion to it. In the same wuy cardinal deacons 
can pass after ten years to the order of priests, while retaining after 
their passage the rank in the Sacred College given them by the date 
of their promotion. 

With the exception of the classes resulting from the order to 
which they belong, there are no distinctions between the rights of 
the various cardinals. As to the ordination obligatory upon them, 
it is that indicated in their title; cardinal bishops must naturally 
be bishops; for cardinal priests it is enough to have received the 
priesthood, though many of them are actually bishops; similarly, 
it is enough for cardinal deacons to have received the diaconate, 
though most of them are priests; cases have occurred, however, 
even in quite recent times, of cardinals who have only received the 
diaconate, e.g. Cardinal Mertel. 

There is one cardinal chosen by the pope from among the Sacred 
College to whom is entrusted the administration of the_ common 
property; this is the cardinal camerlengo or chamberlain (came- 
rarius). His office is an important one, for during the vacancy of the 
Holy See it is He who exercises all external authority, especially that 
connected with the Conclave. 

The number of the cardinals reaches a total of 70: six cardinal 



bishops, fifty cardinal priests and fourteen cardinal deacons. 
This number was definitively fixed by Sixtus V. (constit. Number 
Postquam, 5th December 1586); but the Sacred Col- and 
lege never reaches its full number, and there are always distribu- 
tee or so " vacant hats," as the saying goes. Though °"' 
the rule laid down by Sixtus V. has not been modified since, 
before him the number of cardinals was far from being constant. 
For a long time it varied in the neighbourhood of twenty; in 
1331 John XXII. said that there were twenty cardinals; in 
1378 they were reckoned at 23. Their number increased during 
the Great Schism because there were several rival obediences. 
The councils of Constance and Basel reduced the number of 
cardinals to 24; but it did not rest at that for long, and in the 
1 6th century was more than doubled. In 1517 Leo X., in order 
to introduce strong supporters of himself into the Sacred College, 
created 31 cardinals at the same time. The highest number 
was reached under Pius IV., when the cardinals numbered as 
many as 76. 

The composition of the Sacred College is subject to no definite 
law; but the necessity for giving a first representation to different 
interests, especially in view of the election of the popes, has for 
a long time past thrown open the Sacred College to representa- 
tives of the episcopate of the Catholic nations. From the nth 
century onwards are to be found cases in which the pope sum- 
moned to its ranks persons who did not belong to the Roman 
Church, particularly abbots, who were not even required to 
give up the direction of their monasteries. In the following 
century occur a few cases of bishops being created cardinals 
without having to leave their see, and of cardinals upon whom 
were conferred foreign bishoprics (cf. Thomassin, loc. cit. cap. 
114, n. 9). Of the cardinals created by the popes of Avignon the 
majority were French, and in 133 1 John XXII. remarks that 
17 cardinals were French out of the 20 who then existed. The 
councils of Constance and Basel forbade that more than a third 
of the cardinals should belong to the same country. After the 
return of the popes to Rome and after the Great Schism, the 
ancient customs were soon resumed; the cardinals were for the 
most part Italians, the entire number of cardinals' hats conferred 
on the other Catholic nations only amounting to a minority. 
The non-Italian cardinals, with rare exceptions, are not resident 
in Rome; together with the rank of cardinal they receive a 
dispensation from residing in curia; they are none the less, 
as cardinals, priests or deacons of the Roman Church. 

The reform of the College of Cardinals inaugurated by the 
councils of Constance and Basel, though without much immediate 
success, was not only concerned with the number and 
nationality of the cardinals ; it also dealt with conditions fj ons , 
of age, learning and other qualifications: men of the 
most honourable character, aged not less than thirty, were to be 
chosen; at least a third were to be chosen from among the 
graduates of the universities; persons of royal blood and princes 
were not to be admitted in too great numbers, and lastly, rela- 
tives of the pope were to be set aside. Moreover, in order to 
secure the effectiveness of these reforms, selection of the new 
cardinals was to be made by the votes of the members of the 
Sacred College given in writing. This mode of control was per- 
haps excessive, and the reform consequently remained ineffective. 
Up to the middle of the 16th century there were still instances 
of unfortunate and even scandalous appointments to the car- 
dinalate of very young men, of relatives or favourites of the 
popes and of men whose qualifications were by no means eccles- 
iastical. In the Sacred College as elsewhere nepotism and an 
exaggerated estimate of temporal interests were rife. At last 
a real reform was effected. The council of Trent (sess. xxiv. 
cap. i. de reform.) requires for cardinals all the qualifications 
prescribed by law for bishoDS- Sixtus V. defined these still 
more clearly, and his regulations are still in force: a cardinal 
must, in the year of his promotion, be of the canonical age 
required for his reception into the order demanded by his ranx-. 
i.e. 22 for the diaconate, 23 for the priesthood and 30 for the 
episcopate, and if not already ordained he must take orders 
in the year of his appointment. Men of illegitimate birth are 



CARDINAL 



323 



excluded, as well as near relatives of the pope (with one exception) 
and of the cardinals; the personal qualities to be most sought 
for are learning, holiness and an honourable life. All these 
recommendations have been, on the whole, well observed, and 
are so better than ever in the present day. We may add that 
the religious orders have had a certain number of representa- 
tives, four, at least, in the Sacred College, since Sixtus V., 
several of whom, as we know, became popes. As to the cardinals' 
hats granted at the request of the heads of Catholic states, they 
are subject to negotiations analogous to those concerning 
nominations to the episcopate, though entailing no concordatory 
agreement, strictly speaking, on the part of the popes. 

The creation of cardinals (to use the official term) is in fact 
nowadays the function of the pope alone. It is accomplished 
Creation by the publication of the persons chosen by the pope 
in secret consistory (g.v.). No other formality is 
essential; and the provision of Eugenius IV., which required 
the reception of the insignia of the cardinalate for the pro- 
motion to be valid, was abrogated before long, and definitely 
annulled by the declaration of Pius V. of the 2 6th of January 1 5 7 1 . 
Similarly neither the consent nor the vote of the Sacred College 
is required. It is true that a Roman Ceremoniale of 1338 (Thomas- 
sin, loc. cit. cap. 114, n. 12) still enjoins upon the pope to consult 
the Sacred College, on the Wednesdays during Ember days, as 
to whether it is necessary to nominate new cardinals, and if so, 
how many; but this is only a survival of the ritual of the ancient 
form of ordination. The injunctions of the councils of Constance 
and Basel as to the written vote of the cardinals became before 
very long a dead letter, but there still remains a relic of them. 
In the consistory, when the pope has nominated those whom he 
desires to raise to the purple, he puts to the cardinals present 
the question: "Quid vobis videtur?" The cardinals bend 
the head as a sign of their consent, and the pope then continues: 
" Itaque, auctoritate omnipotentis Dei, sanctorum Apostolorum 
Petri etPauli,et Nostra, creamus et publicamus sanctae romanae 
Ecclesiae cardinales N. et N., etc." 

The new dignitary, who has been warned of his nomination 
several weeks in advance by " biglietto " (note) from the office 
of the secretary of state, is then officially informed of it by a 
ceremoniarius of the pope; he at once waits upon the pope, 
to whom he is presented by one of the cardinals. The pope 
first invests him with the rochet and red biretta, but there is no 
formal ceremony. The conferring of the cardinal's red hat takes 
place a few days later in a public consistory; while placing the 
hat on his head the pope pronounces the following words: 
" Ad laudem omnipotentis Dei et Sanctae Sedis ornamentum, 
accipe galerum rubrum, insigne singularis dignitatis cardinalatus, 
per quod designatur quod usque ad mortem et sanguinis effusio- 
nem inclusive pro exaltatione sanctae fidei, pace et quiete populi 
christiani, augmento et statu sacrosanctae romanae Ecclesiae, 
te intrepidum exhibere debeas, in nomine Patris et Filii et 
Spiritus Sancti." While pronouncing the last words the pope 
makes the sign of the cross three times over the new cardinal. 
The public consistory is immediately followed by a secret con- 
sistory, to accomplish the last ceremonies. The pope begins 
by closing the mouth of the new cardinal, who is led before him, 
as a symbol of the discretion he should observe; after this he 
bestows on him the cardinal's ring, assigns him a title or diaconia; 
and finally, after going through the formality of consulting the 
Sacred College, finishes with the symbolic ceremony of the opening 
of the mouth, signifying the right and duty of the new cardinal 
to express his opinion and vote in the matters which it will 
fall to him to consider. 

When the cardinals are resident abroad and appointed at the 
request of the heads of their state, a member of the Noble 
Guard is sent 'on the same day that the consistory is held to take 
the new dignitary the cardinal's "calotte"; after a few days 
the red biretta is brought to him by a Roman prelate, with the 
powers of an ablegatus; the biretta is conferred on him with 
great pomp by the head of the state. But the conferring of the 
red hat always takes place at the hands of the pope in a public 
consistory. 



Cardinals 
In 



Sometimes, after nominating the cardinals, the pope adds that 
he also appoints a certain number of others, whose names he 
does not divulge, but reserves the right of publishing 
at a later date. These cardinals, whose names he con- 
ceals " in his breast," are for that reason called cardinals petto. " 
in pectore (Ital. in petto). This practice seems to go 
back to Martin V., who may have had recourse to this expedient 
in order to avoid the necessity of soliciting the votes of the 
cardinals; but for a long time past the popes have only resorted 
to it for quite other reasons. If the pope dies before making 
known the cardinals in petto, the promotion is not valid; if 
he publishes them, the cardinals take rank from the day on 
which they were reserved in pectore, the promotion acting 
retrospectively, even in the matter of emoluments. This method 
has sometimes been used by the popes to ensure to certain prelates 
who had merit, but were poor, the means of paying the expenses 
of their promotion. In March 1875 Pius IX. announced the nomi- 
nation of several cardinals in petto, whose names would be given 
in his will. It was pointed out to the pope that this posthumous 
publication would not be a pontifical act, and ran the risk of 
being contested, or even declared invalid; Pius IX. gave way 
before this reasoning, and published the names in a subsequent 
consistory (Sept. 17). 

The dignity of the cardinals is a participation in that of the 
sovereign pontiff, and as such places them above all the other 
ecclesiastical dignitaries and prelates. This rank, Dignity. 
however, has not always been assigned to them; 
but was attributed to the cardinal bishops before it was to 
the rest. Their common prerogative was definitively estab- 
lished when they became the sole electors of the pope, at 
a period when the papacy, under pontiffs like Innocent III.,' 
shone with its most brilliant lustre. For example, at the council 
of Lyons in 1245 all the cardinals took precedence of the arch- 
bishops and bishops. It was in 1 245, or perhaps the year before, 
that Innocent IV. granted the cardinals the privilege of wearing 
the red hat; as to the scarlet robe which still forms their costume 
of ceremony, it was already worn by cardinals performing the 
functions of legate; and the use was soon extended to all. 
As to their civil relations, cardinals were assimilated by the 
Catholic kings to the rank of princes of the blood royal, cardinals 
being the highest in the Church, after the pope, just as princes of 
the blood royal are the first in the kingdom after the king. Of 
the many ecclesiastical privileges enjoyed by the cardinals, we 
will mention only two: the real, though nowadays restricted, 
jurisdiction which they exercise over the churches forming 
their title or diaconia; and the official style of address conferred 
on them by Urban VIII. (10th of June 1630), of Eminence, 
Eminentissimo signore. 

The most lofty function of the cardinals is the election of the 
pope (see Conclave). But this function is necessarily inter- 
mittent, and they have many others to fulfil sede Functio ns. 
plena. On those rare occasions on which the pope 
officiates in person, they carry out, according to their respective 
orders, their former functions in the ritual. But they are, 
above all, the assistants of the pope in the administration of the 
Church; they fill certain permanent offices, such as those of 
chancellor, penitentiary, &c; or again, temporary missions, 
such as that of legate a latere; they have seats in the councils 
and tribunals which deal with the affairs of the Church, and the 
Roman congregations of cardinals (see Curia Romana) . 

Bibliography. — All works on canon law contain a treatise on the 
cardinals. See particularly, for the history, Thomassin, Vetus et 
nova discipl., torn. I., lib. ii., cap. 113-115. For history and law, 
Phillips, Kirchenrecht, vol. vi. ; Hinschius, System des kathol, Kirchen- 
rechts, vol. i. p. 312. For the canonical aspect, Ferraris, Prompta 
bibliolheca, s.v. " Cardinales;" Bouix, De curia romana (Paris, 
1859), pp. 5-141; Card, de Luca, Relatio curiae romanae, disc. 5. 
For details of the ceremonies and costume, Grimaldi, Les Congrega- 
tions romaines (Sienna, 1890), p. 99 et seq. ; Barbier de Montault, 
he Costume et les usages ecclesiastiques (Paris), s.d. For a list of the 
names of the cardinals, according to their titles, see De Mas-Latrie, 
Tresor de chronologie, col. 2219-2264; and in the chronological order 
of their promotion, from St Leo IX. to Benedict XIV., ibid. 1177- 
1242; also Dictionnaire des cardinaux (Paris, 1856). (A. Bo.*) 



324 



CARDINAL VIRTUES— CARDS, PLAYING 



CARDINAL VIRTUES (Lat. cardo, a hinge; the fixed point 
on which anything turns), a phrase used for the principal virtues 
on which conduct in general depends. Socrates and Plato 
(see Republic, iv. 427) take these to be Prudence, Courage 
(or Fortitude), Temperance and Justice. It is noticeable that 
the virtue of Benevolence, which has played so important a 
part in Christian ethics and in modern altruistic and sociological 
theories, is omitted by the ancients. Further, against the Platonic 
list it may be urged (1) that it is arbitrary, and (2) that the 
several virtues are not specifically distinct, that the basis of 
the division is unsound, and that there is overlapping. It is 
said that St Ambrose was the first to adapt the Platonic classifica- 
tion to Christian theology. By the Roman Catholic Church 
these virtues are regarded as natural as opposed to the theological 
virtues, Faith, Hope and Charity. Some authors, combining 
the two lists, have spoken of the Seven Cardinal Virtues. In 
English literature the phrase is found as far back as the Cursor 
Mundi (1300) and the Ayenbile of Inwit (134°)- 

See B. Jowett, Republic of Plato (Eng. trans., Oxford, 1887, 
Introd. p. lxiii) ; Plato, Protagoras (329-330) ; Aristotle, Nicomachean 
Ethics, vi. 13. 6; Th. Ziegler, Gesch. d. chr. Eth. (2nd ed.) ; H. 
Sidgwick, History of Ethics (5th ed.), pp. 44, 133, 143; and Methods 
of Ethics, p. 375. 

CARDING, the process of using the " card " (Lat. carduus, 
a thistle or teasel) for combing textile fibrous materials. The 
practice of carding is of such great antiquity that its origin 
cannot be traced. It consists in combing or brushing fibres 
until they are straight and placed in parallel lines; in doing this, 
imperfect fibres are separated from perfect ones, all impurities 
are removed, and the sound fibres are in condition for further 
treatment. The teasels once used have long given place to hand 
cards, and these in turn to what, in the rudest form, were known 
as " stock cards," namely, two wire brushes, each 4 in. broad 
by 1 2 in. long, and having teeth bent at a uniform angle. One 
was nailed upon a bench with the teeth sloping from the operator, 
the other was similarly secured upon a two-handled bar with 
the teeth sloping towards the operator. The material to be 
treated was thinly spread upon the fixed card, and the movable 
one drawn by hand to and fro over it. When sufficiently carded, 
a rod furnished with parallel projecting needles, called a " needle 
stick," was pushed amongst the card teeth to strip the fibres from 
the comb. The strip thus procured was rolled into a sliver and 
spun. James Hargreaves, the inventor of the spinning jenny, 
suspended the movable comb by passing two cords over pulleys 
fixed in the ceiling and attached balance weights to opposite 
ends of the cords. This enabled him to lengthen the cards, 
to apply two or three to the same stock and to manipulate the 
top one with less labour, as well as to produce more and better 
work. In May of 1748, Daniel Bourn, of Leominster, patented 
a machine in which four parallel rollers were covered with cards, 
and set close together. Fibres were fed to the first rotating 
roller, each in turn drew them from the preceding one, and a 
grid was employed to remove the carded material from the 
last roller. This introduced the principle of carding with revolvin g 
cylinders whose surfaces were clothed with cards working point to 
point. In December of the same year Lewis Paul, of Birmingham , 
the inventor of drawing rollers, patented two types of carding 
engines. In one, parallel rows of spaced cards were nailed upon 
a cylinder which was revolved by a winch handle. Beneath the 
cylinder a concave trough had a card fixed on the inside, so that 
as the fibres passed between the two series of teeth they were 
combed. This was the origin of "flat-carding," namely, nailing 
strips of stationary cards upon transverse pieces of wood and 
adjusting the strips or flats by screws to the cylinder. In 
1762, the father of Sir Robert Peel, with the assistance of Har- 
greaves, erected and used a cylinder carding engine which 
differed in some important particulars from Bourn's invention. 
But although roller-carding and flat-carding are the only principles 
in use at the present time, to Sir Richard Arkwright belongs 
the merit of introducing an automatic carding engine, for 
between the years 1773 and 1775 he combined the various 
improvements of his predecessors, entirely remodelled the 



machine, and added parts which made the operation con- 
tinuous. So successful were these cards that some of them 
were in use at the beginning of the present century. Not- 
withstanding the numerous and important changes that have 
been made since Arkwright's time, carding remains essen- 
tially the same as established by him. (See Cotton-Spinning 
Machinery.) (T. W. F.) 

CARDIOID, a curve so named by G. F. M. M. Castillon (1708- 
1701), on account of its heart-like form (Gr. KapSla, heart). It 
was mathematically treated by Louis Carre in 1705 and Koersma 
in 1741. It is a particular form of the limacon (q.v.) and is 
generated in the same way. It may be regarded as an epicycloid 
in which the roiling and fixed circles are equal in diameter, 
as the inverse of a parabola for its focus, or as the caustic pro- 
duced by the reflection at a spherical surface of rays emanating 
from a point on the circumference. The polar equation to the 
cardioid is r = a(i-\-cosd). There is symmetry about the initial 
line and a cusp at the origin. The area is -fra 2 , i.e. if times the 
area of the generating circle; the length of the curve is 8a. 
(For a figure see Limacon.) 

CARDO NA (perhaps the anc. Udura), a town of north-eastern 
Spain, in the province of Barcelona; about 55 m. N.W. of 
Barcelona, on a hill almost surrounded by the river Cardoner, 
a branch of the Llobregat. Pop. (1900) 3855. Cardona is a 
picturesque and old-fashioned town, with Moorish walls and 
citadel, and a 14th-century church. It is celebrated for the 
extensive deposit of rock salt in its vicinity. The salt forms a 
mountain mass about 300 ft. high and 3 m. in circumference, 
covered by a thick bed of a reddish-brown clay, and apparently 
resting on a yellowish-grey sandstone. It is generally more or 
less translucent, and large masses of it are quite transparent. 
The hill is worked like a mine; pieces cut from it are carved by 
artists in Cardona into images, crucifixes and many articles 
of an ornamental kind. 

CARDOON, Cynara cardunculus (natural order Compositae), 
a perennial plant from the south of Europe and Barbary, a near 
relation of the artichoke. The edible part, called the chard, 
is composed of the blanched and crisp stalks of the inner leaves. 
Cardoons are found to prosper on light deep soils. The seed 
is sown annually about the middle of May, in shallow trenches, 
like those for celery, and the plants are thinned out to 10 or 12 in. 
from each other in the lines. In Scotland it is preferable to sow 
the seed singly in small plots, placing them in a mild temperature, 
and transplanting them into the trenches after they have attained 
a height of 8 or 10 in. Water must be copiously supplied in 
dry weather, both to prevent the formation of flower-stalks 
and to increase the succulence of the leaves. In autumn the 
leaf-stalks are applied close to each other, and wrapped round 
with bands of hay or straw, only the points being left free. 
Earth is then drawn up around them to the height of 15 or 
18 in. Sometimes cardoons are blanched by a more thorough 
earthing up, in the manner of celery, but in this case the operation 
must be carried on from the end of summer. During severe frost 
the tops of the leaves should be defended with straw or litter. 
Besides the common and Spanish cardoons, there are the prickly- 
leaved Tours cardoon, the red-stemmed cardoon and the Paris 
cardoon, all of superior quality, the Paris being the largest 
and most tender. The common artichoke is also used for the 
production of chard. 

CARDS, PLAYING. As is the case with all very ancient 
pastimes, the origin of playing-cards is obscure, many nations 
having been credited with the invention, but the generally 
accepted view is that they come from Asia. In the Chinese 
dictionary, Ching-tsze-tung (1678), it is said that cards were 
invented in the reign of Seun-ho, n 20 a.d., for the amusement 
of his concubines. There is a tradition that cards have existed 
in India from time immemorial — very ancient ones, round in 
form, are preserved in museums — and that they were invented 
by the Brahmans. Their invention has also been assigned to 
the Egyptians, with whom they were said to have had a religious 
meaning, and to the Arabs. A very ingenious theory, founded on 
numerous singular resemblances to the ancient game of chess 



CARDS, PLAYING 



325 



{chaturanga, the four angas or members of an army), has been 
advanced that they were suggested by chess (see " Essay on the 
Indian Game of Chess," by Sir William Jones, in his Asiatic 
Researches, vol. ii.). 

The time and manner of the introduction of cards into Europe 
are matters of dispute. The 3 8th canon of the council of Worces- 
ter (1240) is often quoted as evidence of cards having been known 
in England in the middle of the 13th century; but the games 
de rege et regina there mentioned are now thought to have been a 
kind of mumming exhibition (Strutt says chess). No queen is 
found in the earliest European cards. In the wardrobe accounts 
of Edward I. (1278), Walter Stourton is paid 8s. sd. ad opus 
regis ad ludendum ad quatuor reges, a passage which has been 
thought to refer to cards, but it is now supposed to mean chess, 
which may have been called the " game of four kings," as was 
the case in India (chaturaji). If cards were generally known 
in Europe as early as 1278, it is very remarkable that Petrarch, 
in his dialogue that treats of gaming, never once mentions them; 
and that, though Boccaccio, Chaucer and other writers of that 
time notice various games, there is not a single passage in them 
that can be fairly construed to refer to cards. Passages have 
been quoted from various works, of or relative to this period, 
but modern research leads to the supposition that the word 
rendered cards has often been mistranslated or interpolated. 
An early mention of a distinct series of playing cards is the entry 
of Charles or Charbot Poupart, treasurer of the household of 
Charles VI. of France, in his book of accounts for 1392 or 1393, 
which runs thus: Donnt a Jacquemin Gringonneur , peintre, 
pour trois jeux de cartes, dor eta diver sescouleurs, ornis de plusieurs 
devises, pour porter devers le Seigneur Roi, pour son Abatement, 
cinquante-six sols parisis. This, of course, refers only to the 
painting of a set or pack of cards, which were evidently already 
well known. But, according to various conjectural interpreta- 
tions of documents, the earliest date of the mention of cards has 
been pushed farther back by different authorities. For instance, 
in the account-books of Johanna, duchess of Brabant, and her 
husband, Wenceslaus of Luxemburg, there is an entry, under 
date of the 14th of May 1379, as follows: " Given to Monsieur 
and Madame four peters, two florins, value eight and a half 
moutons, wherewith to buy a pack of cards" (Quartspel met te 
copen). This proves their introduction into the Netherlands at 
least as early as 1379. In a British Museum MS. (Egerton, 
2, 419) mention is made of a game of cards {qui ludus 
cartarum appellatur) in Germany in 1377. The safe conclusion 
with regard to their introduction is that, though they may 
possibly have been known to a few persons in Europe about the 
middle of the 14th century, they did not come into general use 
until about a half-century later. Whence they came is another 
question that has not yet been answered satisfactorily. If we 
may believe the evidence of Covelluzzo of Viterbo (15th century) 
cards were introduced into Italy from Arabia. On the authority 
of a chronicle of one of his ancestors he writes: " In the year 
1379 was brought into Viterbo the game of cards, which comes 
from the country of the Saracens, and is with them called 
naib." The Crusaders, who were inveterate gamblers, may 
have been the instruments of their introduction (see Istoria 
della citta di Viterbo, by F. Bussi, Rome, 1743). According to 
other authorities, cards came first to Spain from Africa with the 
Moors, and it is significant that, to this day, playing cards are 
called in Spain naipes (probably a corruption of the Arabic Nabi, 
prophet) . Taken in connexion with the statement of Covelluzzo, 
this fact would seem to prove the wide popularity of the game of 
naib, or cards, among the Arab tribes. The meaning of the word 
(prophet) has been suggested to refer to the fortune-telling 
function of cards, and the theory has been advanced that they 
were used by the Moorish gypsies for that purpose. Gypsies 
are, however, not known to have appeared in Spain before the 
15th century, at a time when cards were already well known. 
In regard to the word naib, the Italian language still preserves 
the name naibi, playing cards. 

Towards the end of the 14th century cards seem to have 
become common, for in an edict of the provost of Paris, 1397, 



working-people are forbidden to play at tennis, bowls, dice, cards 
or nine-pins on working days. From an omission of any mention 
of cards in an ordonnance of Charles V. in 1369, forbidding certain 
other games, it may be reasonably concluded that cards became 
popular in France between that date and the end of the century. 
In Italy it is possible that they were generally known at a 
somewhat earlier date. In the 15th century they were often the 
object of the attacks of the clergy. In 1423 St Bernardino of 
Siena preached a celebrated sermon against them at Bologna, 
in which, like the English Puritans after him, he attributed their 
invention to the devil. Cards in Germany are referred to in a 
manuscript of Nuremberg about 1384, which illustrates the rapid 
spread of the new game throughout Europe. In form the earliest 
cards were generally rectangular or square, though sometimes 
circular. 

Not long after their introduction, cards began to be used for 
other purposes than gaming. In 1 509 a Franciscan friar, Thomas 
Murner, published an exposition of logic in the form of a pack 
of cards, and a pack invented in 1651 by Baptist Pendleton 
purported to convey a knowledge of grammar. These were soon 
followed by packs teaching geography and heraldry, the whole 
class being called " scientiall cards." Politics followed, and in 
England satirical and historical sets appeared, one of them 
designed to reveal the plots of the Popish agitators. The first 
mention of cards in the New World is found in the letters of 
Herrera, a companion of Cortes, who describes the interest 
manifested by the Aztecs in the card games of the Spanish 
soldiers. 

Early in the 15th century the making of cards had become 
a regular trade in Germany, whence they were sent to other 
countries. Cards were also manufactured in Italy at least as 
early as 1425, and in England before 1463; for by an act of 
parliament of 3 Edw. IV. the importation of playing cards is 
forbidden, in consequence, it is said, of the complaints of manu- 
facturers that importation obstructed their business. No cards 
of undoubted English manufacture of so early a date have been 
discovered; and there is reason to believe, notwithstanding the 
act of Edward IV., that the chief supplies came from France or 
the Netherlands. In the reign of Elizabeth the importation of 
cards was a monopoly; but from the time of James I. most of 
the cards used in this country were of home manufacture. A 
duty was first levied on cards in the reign of James I.; since 
when they have always been taxed. 

It has been much disputed whether the earliest cards were 
printed from wood-blocks. If so, it would appear that the art 
of wood-engraving, which led to that of printing, may have been 
developed through the demand for the multiplication of imple- 
ments of play. The belief that the early card-makers or card- 
painters of Ulm, Nuremberg and Augsburg, from about 1418- 
1450, were also wood-engravers, is founded on the assumption 
that the cards of that period were printed from wood-blocks. 
It is, however, clear that the earliest cards were executed by 
hand, like those designed for Charles VI. Many of the earliest 
wood-cuts were coloured by means of a stencil, so it would seem 
that at the time wood-engraving was first introduced, the art of 
depicting and colouring figures by means of stencil plates was 
well known. There are no playing cards engraved on wood 
to which so early a date as 1423 (that of the earliest dated 
wood-engraving generally accepted) can be fairly assigned; and 
as at this period there were professional card-makers established 
in Germany, it is probable that wood-engraving was employed 
to produce cuts for sacred subjects before it was applied to 
cards, and that there were hand-painted and stencilled cards 
before there were wood-engravings of saints. The German 
Briefmaler or card-painter probably progressed into the wood- 
engraver; but there is no proof that the earliest wood-engravers 
were the card-makers. 

It is undecided whether the earliest cards were of the kind now 
common, called numeral cards, or whether they were tarocchi 
or tarots, which are still used in some parts of France, Germany 
and Italy, but the probability is that the tarots were the earlier. 
A pack of tarots consists of seventy-eight cards, four suits of 



326 



CARDUCCI 



numeral cards and twenty-two emblematic cards, called atutti 
or atouts ( = trumps). Each suit consists of fourteen cards, 
ten of which are the pip cards, and four court (or more properly 
coat cards), viz. king, queen, chevalier and valet. The atouts 
are numbered from i to 2 1 ; the unnumbered card, called the fou, 
has no positive value, but augments that of the other atouts 
(see Acadimie desjeux, Corbet, Paris, 1814, for an account of the 
mode of playing tarocchino or tarots). 

The marks of the suits on the earliest cards (German) are hearts, 
bells, leaves and acorns. No ace corresponding to the earliest 
known pack has been discovered; but other packs of about 
the same date have aces, and it seems unlikely that the suits 
commenced with the deuces. 

Next in antiquity to the marks mentioned are swords, batons, 
cups and money. These are the most common on Italian 
cards of the late 15 th century, and are used both in Italy and in 
Spain. French cards of the 16th century bear the marks now 
generally used in France and England, viz. coeur (hearts), 
trifle (clubs), pique (spades) and carreau (diamonds). 

The French tr'efle, though so named from its resemblance to 
the trefoil leaf, was in all probability copied from the acorn; 
and the pique similarly from the leaf (grun) of the German suits, 
while its name is derived from the sword of the Italian suits. 
It is not derived from its resemblance to a pike head, as commonly 
supposed. In England the French marks are used, and are 
named — hearts, clubs (corresponding to trifle, the French symbol 
being joined to the Italian name, bastoni), spades (corresponding 
to the French pique, but having the Italian name, spade = swords) 
and diamonds. This confusion of names and symbols is accounted 
for by Chatto thus — " If cards were actually known in Italy and 
Spain in the latter part of the 14th century, it is not unlikely that 
the game was introduced into this country by some of the English 
soldiers who had served, under Hawkwood and other free captains, 
in the wars of Italy and Spain. However this may be, it seems 
certain that the earliest cards commonly used in this country 
were of the same kind, with respect to the marks of the suits, 
as those used in Italy and Spain." 

About the last quarter of the 15th century, packs with animals, 
flowers and human figures, for marks of the suits, were engraved 
upon copper; and later, numerous variations appeared, dictated 
by the caprice of individual card-makers; but they never came 
into general use. 

The court cards of the early packs were king, chevalier and 
knave. The Italians were probably the first to substitute a 
queen for the chevalier, who in French cards is altogether 
superseded by the queen. The court cards of French packs 
received fanciful names, which varied from time to time. 

Authorities. — Abbe Rive, Eclaircissements sur I'invention des 
cartes a jouer (Paris, 1780) ; J. G. I. Breitkopf, Versuch den Ursprung 
der Spielharten zu erforschen (Leipzig, 1784) ; Samuel Weller Singer, 
Researches into the History of Playing Cards, with Illustrations of the 
Origin of Printing and Engraving on Wood (London, 1816); G. 
Peignot, Analyse critique et raisonnee de toutes les recherches publiees 
jusqu'a ce jour, sur I'origine des cartes d, jouer (Dijon, 1826); M. C. 
Leber, Etudes historiques sur les cartes a jouer, principalement sur les 
cartes frangaises (Paris, 1842); William Andrew Chatto, Facts and 
Speculations on the Origin and History of Playing Cards (London, 
1848); P. Boiteau D'Ambly, Les Cartes d, jouer et la' cartomancie 
(Paris, 1854), translated into English with additions under the title 
of The History of Playing Cards, with Anecdotes of their use in Conjur- 
ing, Fortune-telling, and Card-sharping, edited by the Rev. E. S. 
Taylor, B.A. (London, 1865); W. Hughes Wiltshire, M.D., A 
Descriptive Catalogue of Playing and other Cards in the British 
Museum, printed by order of the trustees (London, 1876); Origine 
des cartes a jouer, by R. Merlin (Paris, 1869); The Devil's Picture 
Books, by Mrs J. K. Van Rensselaer (New York, 1890) ; Bibliography 
of Works in English on Playing Cards and Gaming, by F. Jessel 
(London, 1905) ; and especially Les Cartes a. jouer, by Henri Rene 
d'Allemagne (Paris, 1906) (an exhaustive account). 

CARDUCCI, BARTOLOMMEO (1560-1610), Italian painter, 
better known as Carducho, the Spanish corruption of his Italian 
patronymic, was born in Florence, where he studied architecture 
and sculpture under Ammanati, and painting under Zuccaero. 
The latter master he accompanied to Madrid, where he painted 
the ceiling of the Escorial library, assisting also in the production 
of the frescos that adorn the cloisters of that famous palace. 



He was a great favourite with Philip III., and lived and died in 
Spain, where most of his works are to be found. The most 
celebrated of them is a Descent from the Cross, in the church 
of San Felipe el Real, in Madrid. 

His younger brother Vincenzo (1 568-1638), was born in Flor- 
ence, and was trained as a painter by Bartolommeo, whom he 
followed to Madrid. He worked a great deal for Philip III. and 
Philip IV., and his best pictures are those he executed for the 
former monarch as decorations in the Prado. Examples of his 
work are preserved at Toledo, at Valladolid, at Segovia, and at 
several other Spanish cities. For many years he laboured in 
Madrid as a teacher of his art, and among his pupils were Giovanni 
Ricci, Pedro Obregon, Vela, Francisco Collantes, and other 
distinguished representatives of the Spanish school during the 
17th century. He was also author of a treatise or dialogue, 
De las Excelencias de laPintura, which was published in 1633. 

CARDUCCI, GIOSUE (1836-1907), Italian poet, was born 
at Val-di-Castello, in Tuscany, on the 27th of July 1836, his 
father being Michele Carducci, a physician, of an old Florentine 
family, who in his youth had suffered imprisonment for his 
share in the revolution of 1831. Carducci received a good 
education. He began life as a public teacher, but soon took to 
giving private lessons at Florence, where he became connected 
with a set of young men, enthusiastic patriots in politics, and in 
literature bent on overthrowing the reigning romantic taste by 
a return to classical models. These aspirations always constituted 
the mainsprings of Carducci's poetry. In i860 he became pro- 
fessor at Bologna, where, after in 1865 astonishing the public 
by a defiant Hymn to Satan, he published in 1868 Levia Gravia, 
a volume of lyrics which not only gave him an indisputable 
position at the head of contemporary Italian poets, but made 
him the head of a school of which the best Italian men of letters 
have been disciples, and which has influenced all. Several other 
volumes succeeded, the most important of which were the 
Decennalia (1871), the Nuove Poesie (1872), and the three series 
of the Odi Barbare (1877-1889). 

Carducci had been brought into more fraternal contact with 
the aims of the younger generation by the efforts of Angelo 
Sommaruga who became, about 1880, the publisher of a group 
of young unknown writers all destined to some, and a few to 
great, accomplishment. The period of his prosperity was a 
strange one for Italy. The first ten years of the newly constituted 
kingdom had passed more in stupor than activity; original 
contributions to literature had been scarce, and publishers 
had preferred bringing out inferior translations of not always 
admirable French authors to encouraging the original work 
of Italians — work which it must be confessed was generally 
mediocre and entirely lifeless. Sommaruga's creation, a literary 
review called La Cronaca Bizantina, gathered together such 
beginners as Giovanni Marradi,Matilde Serao,Edoardo Scarf oglio, 
Guido Magnoni and Gabriele d' Annunzio. In order to obtain the 
sanction of what he considered an enduring name, the founder 
turned to Giosue Carducci, then living in retirement at Bologna, 
discontented with his fate, and still not generally known by the 
public of his own country. The activity of Sommaruga exercised 
a great influence on Giosue Carducci. Within the next few years 
he published the three admirable volumes of his Confessioni e 
Batlaglie, the Qa Ira sonnets, the Nuove Odi Barbare, and a 
considerable number of articles, pamphlets and essays, which 
in their collected edition form the most living part of his work. 
His lyrical production, too, seemed to reach its perfection in 
those five years of tense, unrelenting work; for the Canzone 
di Legnano, the Odes to Rome and to Monte Mario, the Elegy on 
the urn of Percy Bysshe Shelley, the ringing rhymes of the Inter- 
mezzo, in which he happily blended the satire of Heine with the 
lyrical form of his native poetry — all belong to this period, 
together with the essays on Leopardi and on Parini, the admirable 
discussions in defence of his Qa Ira, and the pamphlet called 
Eterno Femminino regale, a kind of self-defence, undertaken to 
explain the origin of the Alcaic metre to the queen of Italy, which 
marks the beginning of the last evolution in Carducci's work 
(1881). The revolutionary spirits of the day, who had always 



CARDWELL, E.— CARDWELL 



327 



looked upon Giosue Carducci as their bard and champion, 
fell away from him after this poem written in honour of a queen, 
and the poet, wounded by the attitude of his party, wrote what 
he intended to be his defence and his programme for the future 
in pages that will remain amongst the noblest and most powerful 
of contemporary literature. From that time Carducci appears 
in a new form, evolved afterwards in his last Odes, II Piemonte, 
Li Bicocca di San Giacomo, the Ode to the daughter of Francesco 
Crispi on her marriage, and the one to the church where Dante 
once prayed, Alia Chiesetta dei Polenta, which is like the with- 
drawing into itself of a warlike soul weary of its battle. 

For a few months in 1876 Carducci had a seat in the Italian 
Chamber. In 1881 he was appointed a member of the higher 
council of education. In 1890 he was made a senator. And in 
1906 he was awarded the Nobel prize for literature. He died at 
Bologna on the 16th of February 1907. By his marriage in 1859 
he had two daughters, who survived him, and one son, who died 
in infancy. 

The same qualities which placed Carducci among the classics of 
Italy in his earlier days remained consistently with him in later 
life. His thought flows limpid, serene, sure of itself above an 
undercurrent of sane and vigorous if pagan philosophy. Patriot- 
ism, the grandeur of work, the soul-satisfying power of justice, 
are the poet's dominant ideals. For many years the national 
struggle for liberty had forced the best there was in heart and 
brain into the atmosphere of political intrigue and from one 
battlefield to another; Carducci therefore found a poetry emas- 
culated by the deviation into other channels of the intellectual 
virility of his country. On this mass of patriotic doggerel, of 
sickly, languishing sentimentality as insincere as it was inane, he 
grafted a poetry not often tender, but always violently felt and 
thrown into a mould of majestic form; not always quite expected 
or appreciated by his contemporaries, but never commonplace 
in structure; always high in tone and free in spirit. The adapta- 
tion of various kinds of Latin metres to the somewhat sinewless 
language he found at his disposal, whilst it might have been an 
effort of mere pedantry in another, was a life-giving and strength- 
ening inspiration in his case. Another of his characteristics, 
which made him peculiarly precious to his countrymen, is the 
fact that his poems form a kind of lyric record of the Italian 
struggle for independence. The tumultuous vicissitudes of 
all other nations, however, and the pageantry of the history 
of all times, have in turns touched his particular order of imagina- 
tion. The more important part of his critical work which belongs 
to this later period consists of his Conversazioni critiche, his 
Storia filosofica della letteratura Italiana, and a masterly edition 
of Petrarch. That he should have had the faults of his qualities 
is not remarkable. Being almost a pioneer in the world of 
criticism, his essays on the authors of other countries, though 
appearing in the light of discoveries to his own country, absorbed 
as it had hitherto been in its own vicissitudes, have little of 
value to the general student beyond the attraction of robust 
style. And in his unbounded admiration for the sculptural 
lines of antique Latin poetry he sometimes relapsed into that 
fascination by mere sound which is the snare of his language, and 
against which his own work in its great moments is a reaction. 

CARDWELL, EDWARD (1787-1861), English theologian, was 
born at Blackburn in Lancashire in 1787. He was educated at 
Brasenose College, Oxford (B.A. 1809; M.A. 1812; B.D. 1819; 
D.D. 183 1), and after being for several years tutor and lecturer, 
was appointed, in 1814, one of the examiners to the university. 
In 1825 he was chosen Camden professor of ancient history; 
and during his five years' professorship he published an edition 
of the Ethics of Aristotle, and a course of his lectures on The 
Coinage of the Greeks and Romans. In 183 1 he succeeded 
Archbishop Whately as principal of St Alban's Hall. He 
published in 1837 a student's edition of the Greek Testament, and 
an edition of the Greek and Latin texts of the History of the 
Jewish War, by Josephus, with illustrative notes. But his most 
important labours were in the field of English church history. 
He projected an extensive work, which was to embrace the 
entire synodical history of the church in England, and was to be 



founded on David Wilkins's Concilia Magnae Britanniae et 
Hiberniae. Of this work he executed some portions only. The 
first published was Documentary Annals of the Reformed Church 
of England from 1546 to 1716, which appeared in 1839. It was 
followed by a History of Conferences, &c, connected with the 
Revision of the Book of Common Prayer (1840). On 1842 appeared 
Synodalia, a Collection of Articles of Religion, Canons, and 
Proceedings of Convocation from 1547 to 1717, completing the 
series for that period. Closely connected with these works is the 
Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasttcarum (1850), which treats of the 
efforts for reform during the reigns of Henry VIII., Edward VI., 
and Elizabeth. Cardwell also published in 1854 a new edition of 
Bishop Gibson's Synodus Anglicana. He was one of the best 
men of business in the university, and held various important 
posts, among which were those of delegate of the press, curator of 
the university galleries, manager of the Bible department of 
the press, and private secretary to successive chancellors of the 
university- He established the Wolvercot paper mill. He died 
at Oxford on the 23rd of May 1861. 

CARDWELL, EDWARD CARDWELL, Viscount (1813-1886), 
English statesman, was the son of a merchant of Liverpool, 
where he was born on the 24th of July 1813. After a brilliant 
career at Oxford, where he gained a double first-class, he entered 
parliament as member for Clitheroe in 1842, and in 1845 was 
made secretary to the treasury. He supported Sir Robert Peel's 
free-trade policy, and went out of office with him. In 1847 he 
was elected for Liverpool, but lost his seat in 1852 for having 
supported the repeal of the navigation laws. He soon found 
another constituency at Oxford, and upon the formation of Lord 
Aberdeen's coalition ministry became president of the Board of 
Trade, although debarred by the jealousy of his Whig colleagues 
from a seat in the cabinet. In 1854 he carried, almost without 
opposition, a most important and complicated act consolidating 
all existing shipping laws, but in 1855 resigned, with his Peelite: 
colleagues, upon the appointment of Mr Roebuck's Sevastopol 
inquiry committee, declining the offer of the chancellorship of 
the Exchequer pressed upon him by Lord Palmerston. In 1858 
he moved the famous resolution condemnatory of Lord Ellen- 
borough's despatch to Lord Canning on the affairs of Oude, 
which for a time seemed certain to overthrow the Derby govern- 
ment, but which ultimately dissolved into nothing. He obtained 
a seat in Lord Palmerston's cabinet of 1859, and after filling the 
uncongenial posts of secretary for Ireland and chancellor of the 
duchy of Lancaster (1861), became secretary for the colonies in 
1864. Here he reformed the system of colonial defence, refusing 
to keep troops in the colonies during time of peace unless their 
expense was defrayed by the colonists; he also laid the founda- 
tion of federation in Canada and, rightly or wrongly, censured 
Sir George Grey's conduct in New Zealand. Resigning with his 
friends in 1866, he again took office in 1868 as secretary for war. 
In this post he performed the most memorable actions of his life 
by the abolition of purchase and the institution of the short 
service system and the reserve in the army, measures which 
excited more opposition than any of the numerous reforms 
effected by the Gladstone government of that period, but which 
were entirely justified by their successful working afterwards. 
On the resignation of the Gladstone ministry in 1874 he was 
raised to the peerage as Viscount Cardwell of Ellerbeck, but took 
no further prominent part in politics. His mental faculties, 
indeed, were considerably impaired during the last few years of 
his life, and he died at Torquay on the 15th of February 1886. 
He was not a showy, hardly even a prominent politician, but 
effected far more than many more conspicuous men. The great 
administrator and the bold innovator were united in him in an 
exceptional degree, and he allowed neither character to pre- 
ponderate unduly. 

CARDWELL, a town of Cardwell county, Queensland, Australia, 
on Rockingham Bay, about 800 m. direct N.W. by N. of Brisbane. 
Pop. of town and district (1901) 3435. It has one of the best 
harbours in the state, easy of access in all weathers, with a depth 
ranging from 4 to 10 fathoms. Various minerals, including gold 
and tin, exist in the district; and there are preserve and sauce 



328 



CAREW, G. 



factories, and works for meat extract and tinning. The dugong 
fishery is carried on, and the oil is extracted. There are large 
timber forests in the district, and much cedar is exported. 

CAREW, GEORGE (d. about 1613), English diplomatist and 
historian, second son of Sir Wymond Carew of Antony, was 
educated at Oxford, entered the Inns of Court, and passed' some 
years in continental travel. At the recommendation of Queen 
Elizabeth, who conferred on him the honour of knighthood, he 
was appointed secretary to Sir Christopher Hatton, and after- 
wards, having been promoted to a* mastership in chancery, was 
sent as ambassador to the king of Poland. In the reign of James 
he was employed in negotiating the treaty of union with Scotland, 
and for several years was ambassador to the court of France. 
On his return he wrote a Relation of the State of France, with 
sketches of the leading persons at the court of Henry IV. It is 
written in the classical style of the Elizabethan age, and was 
appended by Dr Birch to his Historical View of the Negotiations 
between the Courts of England, France and Brussels, from i§g2 
to 1617. Much of the information regarding Poland contained 
in De Thou's History of His Own Times was furnished by Carew. 

CAREW, RICHARD (1555-1620), English poet and antiquary, 
was born on the 17th of July 1555, at Antony House, East 
Antony, Cornwall. At the age of eleven, he entered Christ 
Church, Oxford, and when only fourteen was chosen to carry 
on an extempore debate with Sir Philip Sidney, in presence of 
the earls of Leicester and Warwick and other noblemen. From 
Oxford he removed to the Middle Temple, where he spent three 
years, and then went abroad. By his marriage with Juliana 
Arundel in 1577 he added Coswarth to the estates he had already 
inherited from his father. In 1586 he was appointed high-sheriff 
of Cornwall; he entered parliament in 1584; and he served 
under Sir Walter Raleigh, then lord lieutenant of Cornwall, as 
treasurer. He became a member of the Society of Antiquaries 
in 1589, and was a friend of William Camden and Sir Henry 
Spelman. His great work is the Survey of Cornwall, published 
in r6o2, and reprinted in 1769 and 181 1. It still possesses 
interest, apart from its antiquarian value, for the picture it gives 
of the life and interests of a country gentleman of the days of 
Elizabeth. Carew's other works are: — a translation of the first 
five Cantos of Tasso's Gerusalemme (1594), printed in the first 
instance without the author's knowledge, and entitled Godfrey 
of Balloigne, or the Recouerie of Hierusalam ; The Examination 
of Men's Wits (1594), a translation of an Italian version of John 
Huarte's Examen de Ingenios; and An Epistle concerning the 
Excellences of the English Tongue (T605). Carew died on the 
6th of November 1620. 

His son, Sir Richard Carew (d. 1643?), was the author of a 
True and Readie Way to learn the Latine Tongue, by writers of 
three nations, published by Samuel Hartlib in 1654. 

CAREW, THOMAS (1 595-1645?), English poet, was the son 
of Sir Matthew Carew, master in chancery, and his wife, Alice 
Ingpenny, widow of Sir John Rivers, lord mayor of London. 
The poet was probably the third of the eleven children of his 
parents, and was born at West Wickham in Kent, in the early 
part of 1595, for he was thirteen years of age in June 1608, when 
he matriculated at Merton College, Oxford. He took his degree 
of B.A. early in 161 1, and proceeded to study at the Middle 
Temple. Two years later his father complained to Sir Dudley 
Carleton that he was doing little at the law. He was in conse- 
quence sent to Italy, as a member of Sir Dudley's household, and 
when the ambassador returned from Venice, he seems to have 
kept Thomas Carew with him, for he is found in the capacity 
of secretary to Sir Dudley Carleton, at the Hague, early in 1616. 
From this office he was dismissed in the autumn of that year for 
levity and slander; he had great difficulty in finding another 
situation. In August 1618 his father died, and Carew entered 
the service of Lord Herbert of Cherbury, in whose train he 
started for France in March 1619, and it is believed that he 
travelled in Herbert's company until that nobleman returned 
to England, at the close of his diplomatic missions, in April 1624. 
Carew " followed the court before he was of it," not receiving 
the definite appointment of gentleman of the privy chamber 



-CAREY, H. 

until 1628. While Carew held this office, he displayed his tact 
and presence of mind by stumbling and extinguishing the candle 
he was holding to light Charles I. into the queen's chamber, 
because he saw that Lord St Albans had his arm round her 
majesty's neck. The king suspected nothing, and the queen 
heaped favours on the poet. Probably in 1630, Carew was made 
" server " or taster-in-ordinary to the king. To this period may 
be attributed his close friendship with Sir John Suckling,' Ben 
Jonson and Clarendon; the latter says that Carew was " a 
person of pleasant and facetious wit." Donne, whose celebrity 
as a court-preacher lasted until his death in 1631, exercised a 
powerful if not entirely healthful influence over the genius of 
Carew. In February 1633 a masque by the latter, entitled Coelum 
Britanicum, was acted in the banqueting-house at Whitehall, 
and was printed in 1634. The close of Carew's life is absolutely 
obscure. It was long supposed that he died in 1639, and this 
has been thought to be confirmed by the fact that the first edition 
of his Poems, published in 1640, seems to have a posthumous 
character. But Clarendon tells us that " after fifty years of life 
spent with less severity and exactness than it ought to have been, 
he died with the greatest remorse for that licence." If Carew 
was more than fifty years of age, he must have died in or after 
1645, and in fact there were final additions made to his Poems 
in the third edition of 1651. Walton tells us that Carew in 
his last illness, being afflicted with the horrors, sent in great 
haste to " the ever-memorable " John Hales (1584-1656); Hales 
" told him he should have his prayers, but would by no means 
give him then either the sacrament or absolution." 

Carew's poems, at their best, are brilliant lyrics of the purely 
sensuous order. They open to us, in his own phrase, " a mine of 
rich and pregnant fancy." His metrical style was influenced by 
Jonson and his imagery still more clearly by Donne, for whom he 
had an almost servile admiration. His intellectual power was 
not comparable with Donne's, but Carew had a lucidity and 
directness of lyrical utterance unknown to Donne. It is perhaps 
his greatest distinction that he is the earliest of the Cavalier 
song-writers by profession, of whom Rochester is the latest, 
poets who turned the disreputable incidents of an idle court-life 
into poetry which was often of the rarest delicacy and the purest 
melody and colour. The longest and best of Carew's poems, 
" A Rapture," would be more widely appreciated if the rich 
flow of its imagination were restrained by greater reticence 
of taste. 

The best edition of Carew's Poems is that prepared by Arthur 
Vincent in 1899. (E. G.) 

CAREY, HENRY (d. 1743), English poet and musician, reputed 
to be an illegitimate son of George Savile, marquess of Halifax, 
was born towards the end of the 17th century. His mother is 
supposed to have been a schoolmistress, and Carey himself 
taught music at various schools. He owed his knowledge of 
music to Olaus Linnert, and later he studied with Roseingrave 
and Geminiani. He wrote the words and the music of The 
Contrivances; or More Ways than One, a farce produced at 
Drury Lane in 171 5. His Hanging and Marriage; or The Dead 
Man's Wedding was acted at Lincoln's Inn Fields in 1722. 
Chrononhotonthologos (1734), described as "The most Tragical 
Tragedy that ever was tragedized by any Company of Tra- 
gedians," was a successful burlesque of the bombast of the 
contemporary stage. The best of his other pieces were A 
Wonder; or the Honest Yorkshireman (1735), a ballad opera, and 
the Dragon of Wantley (1737), a burlesque opera, the music of 
which was by J. F. Lampe. He was the author of Namby- 
Pamby, a once famous parody of Ambrose Philips's verses to 
the infant daughter of the earl of Carteret. Carey is best remem- 
bered by his songs. " Sally in our Alley " (printed in his Musical 
Century) was a sketch drawn after following a shoemaker's 
'prentice and his sweetheart on a holiday. The present tune set 
to these words, however, is not the one written by Carey, but is 
borrowed from an earlier song, " The Country Lasse," which is 
printed in The Merry Musician (vol. hi., c. 1716). It has been 
claimed for him that he was the author of " God save the King " 
(see National Anthems). He died in London on the 4th of 



CAREY, H. C— CARGILL 



329 



October 1743, and it was asserted, without justification, that he 
had committed suicide. Edmund Kean, the tragedian, was 
one of his great-grandchildren. 

The completest edition of his poems is Poems on Several Occasions 
(1729). His dramatic works were published by subscription in 1743. 

CAREY, HENRY CHARLES (1793-1879), American econo- 
mist, was born in Philadelphia on the 15th of December 1793. 
At the age of twenty-eight he succeeded his father, Mathew 
Carey (1760-1839) — an influential economist, political reformer, 
editor, and publisher, of Irish birth, but for many years a resident 
of Philadelphia — as a member of the publishing firm of Carey 
& Lea, which was long the most conspicuous in America. He 
died in Philadelphia on the 13th of October 1879. 

Among Mathew Carey's many writings had been a collection 
(1822) of Essays on Political Economy, one of the earliest of 
American treatises favouring protection, and Henry C. Carey's 
life-work was devoted to the propagation of the same theory. 
He retired from business in 1838, almost simultaneously with 
the appearance (183 7-1 840) of his Principles of Political 
Economy. This treatise, which was translated into Italian and 
Swedish, soon became the standard representative in the United 
States of the school of economic thought which, with some 
interruptions, has since dominated the tariff system of that 
country. Carey's first large work on political economy was 
preceded and followed by many smaller volumes on wages, 
the credit system, interest, slavery, copyright, &c; and in 
1858-1859 he gathered the fruits of his lifelong labours into 
The Principles of Social Science, in three volumes. This work 
is a most comprehensive as well as mature exposition of his 
views. In it Carey sought to show that there exists, inde- 
pendently of human wills, a natural system of economic laws, 
which is essentially beneficent, and of which the increasing 
prosperity of the whole community, and especially of the work- 
ing classes, is the spontaneous result — capable of being defeated 
only by the ignorance or perversity of man resisting or impeding 
its action. He rejected the Malthusian doctrine of population, 
maintaining that numbers regulate themselves sufficiently in 
every well-governed society, and that their pressure on sub- 
sistence characterizes the lower, not the more advanced, stages 
of civilization. He denied the universal truth, for all stages of 
cultivation, of the law of diminishing returns from land. 

His fundamental theoretic position relates, to the antithesis 
of wealth and value. Carey held that land, as we are concerned 
with it in industrial life, is really an instrument of production 
which has been formed as such by man, and that its value is due 
to the labour expended on it in the past — though measured, not 
by the sum of that labour, but by the labour necessary under 
existing conditions to bring new land to the same stage of 
productiveness. He studied the occupation and reclamation 
of land with peculiar advantage as an American, for whom the 
traditions of first settlement were living and fresh, and before 
whose eyes the process was indeed still going on. The diffi- 
culties of adapting a primitive soil to the work of yielding 
organic products for man's use can be lightly estimated only 
by an inhabitant of a country long under cultivation. It is, 
in Carey's view, the overcoming of these difficulties by arduous 
and continued effort that entitles the first occupier of land to his 
property in the soil. Its present value forms a very small pro- 
portion of the cost expended on it, because it represents only 
what would be required, with the science and appliances of our 
time, to bring the land from its primitive into its present state. 
Property in land is therefore only a form of invested capital — 
a quantity of labour or the fruits of labour permanently incor- 
porated with the soil; for which, like any other capitalist, the 
owner is compensated by a share of the produce. He is not 
rewarded for what is done by the powers of nature, and society 
is in no sense defrauded by his sole possession. The so-called 
Ricardian theory of rent is a speculative fancy, contradicted by 
all experience. Cultivation does not in fact, as that theory 
supposes, begin with the best, and move downwards to the poorer 
soils in the order of their inferiority. The light and dry higher 
lands are first cultivated; and only when population has become 



dense and capital has accumulated, are the low-lying lands, with 
their greater fertility, but also with their morasses, inundations, 
and miasmas, attacked and brought into occupation. Rent, 
regarded as a proportion of the produce, sinks, like all interest 
on capital, in process of time, but, as an absolute amount, 
increases. The share of the labourer increases, both as a pro- 
portion and an absolute amount. And thus the interests of 
these different social classes are in harmony. But, Carey pro- 
ceeded to say, in order that this harmonious progress may be 
realized, what is taken from the land must be given back to it. 
All the articles derived from it are really separated parts of it, 
which must be restored on pain of its exhaustion. Hence the 
producer and the consumer must be close to each other; the 
products must not be exported to a foreign country in exchange 
for its manufactures, a nd thus go to enrich as manure a foreign soil. 
In immediate exchange value the landowner may gain by such 
exportation, but the productive powers of the land will suffer. 

Carey, who had set out as an earnest advocate of free trade, 
accordingly arrived at the doctrine of protection: the "co- 
ordinating power" in society must intervene to prevent private 
advantage from working public mischief. He attributed his 
conversion on this question to his observation of the effects of 
liberal and protective tariffs respectively on American pros- 
perity. This observation, he says, threw him back on theory, 
and led him to see that the intervention referred to might be 
necessary to remove (as he phrases it) the obstacles to the 
progress of younger communities created by the action of older 
and wealthier nations. But it seems probable that the influence 
of List's writings, added to his own deep-rooted and hereditary 
jealousy and dislike of English predominance, had something 
to do with his change of attitude (see Protection). 

CAREY, WILLIAM (1761-1834), English Oriental scholar, 
and the pioneer of modern missionary enterprise, was born at 
Paulerspury, Northamptonshire, on the 17th of August 1761. 
When a youth he worked as a shoemaker; but having joined 
the Baptists when he was about twenty-one, he devoted much 
of his time to village preaching. In 1787 he became pastor of 
a Baptist church in Leicester, and began those energetic move- 
ments among his fellow religionists which resulted in the for- 
mation of the Baptist Missionary Society, Carey himself being 
one of the first to go abroad. On reaching Bengal in 1793, 
he and his companions lost all their property in the Hugh; but 
having received the charge of an indigo factory at Malda, he 
was soon able to prosecute the work of translating the Bible 
into Bengali. In 1799 he quitted Malda for Serampore, where 
he established a church, a school, and a printing-press for the 
publication of the Scriptures and philological works. In 1801 
Carey was appointed professor of Oriental languages in a college 
founded at Fort William by the marquess of Wellesley. From 
this time to his death he devoted himself to the preparation 
of numerous philological works, consisting of grammars and 
dictionaries in the Mahratta,, Sanskrit, Punjabi, Telinga, Bengali 
and Bhotanta dialects. The Sanskrit dictionary was unfortun- 
ately destroyed by a fire which broke out in the printing establish- 
ment. From the Serampore press there issued in his lifetime 
over 200,000 Bibles and portions in nearly forty different lan- 
guages and dialects, Carey himself undertaking most of the 
literary work. He died on the 9th of June 1834. 

See Lives by J. Culross (1881) and G. Smith (1884). 

CARGILL, DONALD (1610-1681), Scottish Covenanter, wa? 
born in 1610. Tip was educated at St Andrews, and afterwards 
attached himself to the Protesters. After his appointment to 
one of the churches in Glasgow, he openly resisted the measures 
of the government. Compelled to remain at a distance from his 
charge, he ventured back to celebrate the Communion, and was 
arrested, but was liberated at the instance of some of his private 
friends. He was afterwards wounded at the battle of Bothwell 
Bridge, and fled to Holland, where he remained a few months. 
On his return he joined Richard Cameron in publishing the 
Sanquhar declaration, and boldly excommunicated the king and 
his officials. He was soon afterwards apprehended, and brought 
to Edinburgh, where he was beheaded on the 27th of July 1681. 



33° 



CARGO— CARIBS 



CARGO (Span, for "loading," from Lat. carrus, car), a ship- 
load, or the goods (or even, less technically, persons) carried on 
board a ship; and so, by analogy, a term used for any Jarge 
amount. The maritime law affecting the cargo of a ship is dealt 
with in the articles Average, Affreightment, Insurance, 
Salvage, Bottomry, Lien; and the specialities of cargo-ships 
under Ship. 

CARIA, an ancient district of Asia Minor, bounded on the N. 
by Ionia and Lydia, on the W. and S. by the Aegean Sea, and on 
the E. by Lycia and a small part of Phrygia. The coast-line 
consists of a succession of great promontories alternating with deep 
inlets. The most important inlet, the Ceramic Gulf, or Gulf of Cos, 
extends inland for 70 m., between the great mountain promontory 
terminating at Myndus ori the north, and that which extends to 
Cnidus and the remarkable headland of Cape Krio on the south. 
North of this is the deep bay called in ancient times the Gulf of 
Iasus (now known as the Gulf of Mendeliyah), and beyond this 
again was the deeper inlet which formerly extended inland 
between Miletus and Priene, but of which the outer part has 
been entirely filled up by the alluvial deposits of the Maeander, 
while the innermost arm, the ancient Latmic Gulf, is now a lake. 
South of Cape Krio again is the gulf known as the Gulf of Doris, 
with several subordinate inlets, bounded on the south by the 
rugged promontory of Cynossema (mod. Cape Alupo). Between 
this headland and the frontier of Lycia is the sheltered bay of 
Marmarice, noted in modern times as one of the finest harbours 
of the Mediterranean. 

Almost the whole of Caria is mountainous. The two great 
masses of Cadmus (Baba-dagh) and Salbacum (Boz-dagh), which 
are in fact portions of the great chain of Taurus (see Asia Minor) , 
form the nucleus to which the whole physical framework of the 
country is attached. From these lofty ranges there extends a 
broad tableland (in many parts more than 3000 ft. high), while it 
sends down offshoots on the north towards the Maeander, and on 
the west towards the Aegean. Of these ranges the summit of 
Mt Latmus alone reaches 4500 ft. 

The coast is fringed by numerous islands, in some instances 
separated only by narrow straits from the mainland. Of these 
the most celebrated are Rhodes and Cos. Besides these are 
Syme, Telos, Nisyros, Calymnos, Leros and Patmos, all of which 
have been inhabited, both in ancient and modern times, and 
some of which contain excellent harbours. Of these Nisyros 
alone is of volcanic origin; the others belong to the same lime- 
stone formation with the rocky headlands of the coast. The 
country known as Caria was shared between the Carians proper 
and the Caunians, who were a wilder people, inhabiting the 
district between Caria and Lycia. They were not considered 
to be of the same blood as the Carians, and were, therefore, 
excluded from the temple of the Carian Zeus at Mylasa, which 
was common to the Carians, Lydians and Mysians, though their 
language was the same as that of the Carians proper. Herodotus 
(i. 172) believed the Caunians to have been aborigines, the 
Carians having been originally called Leleges, who had been 
driven from the Aegean islands by the invading Greeks. This 
seems to have been a prevalent view among the Greek writers, 
for Thucydides (i. 8) states that when Delos was "purified" 
more than half the bodies found buried in it were those of 
" Carians." Modern archaeological discovery, however, is 
against this belief; and the fact that Mysus, Lydus and Car were 
regarded as brothers indicates that the three populations who 
worshipped together in the temple of Mylasa all belonged to the 
same stock. Homer (//. x. 428-429) distinguishes the Leleges 
(g.v.) from the Carians, to whom is ascribed the invention of 
helmet-crests, coats of arms, and shield handles. 

A considerable number of short Carian inscriptions has been 
found, most of them in Egypt. They were first noticed by 
Lepsius at Abu-Simbel, where he correctly inferred that they 
were the work of the Carian mercenaries of Psammetichus. 
The language, so far as it has been deciphered, is "Asianic" 
and not Indo-European. 

The excavations of W.R. Paton at Assarlik (Journ. Hell. Studies, 
1887) and of F. Winter at Idrias have resulted in the discovery 



of Late-Mycenaean and Geometric pottery. Caria, however, 
figured but little in history. It was absorbed into the kingdom 
of Lydia, where Carian troops formed the bodyguard of the king. 
Cnidus and Halicarnassus on the coast were colonized by Dorians. 
At Halicarnassus (q.v.) the Mausoleum, the monument erected 
by Artemisia to her husband Mausolus, about 360 B.C., was 
excavated by Sir C. T. Newton in 1857-1858. Cnidus (g.v.) was 
excavated at the same time, when the " Cnidian Lion," now in 
the British Museum, was found crowning a tomb near the site of 
the old city (C. T. Newton, History of Discoveries at Cnidus, 
Halicarnassus and Branchidae). On the border-land between 
Caria and Lydia lay other Greek cities, Miletus, Priene, and 
Magnesia (see articles s.v.), colonized in early times by the Ionians. 
Inland was Tralles (mod. Aidin), which also had an Ionic popula- 
tion, though it never belonged to the Ionic confederacy (see 
Tralles). The excavations of the English in 1868-1869, of the 
French under O. Rayet and A. Thomas in 1873, and more 
recently of the Germans under Th. Wiegand and Schrader in 
1895-1898 have laid bare the site of the Greek Priene, and the 
same has been done for the remains of Magnesia ad Maeandrum 
by French excavators in 1842-1843 and the German expedition 
under K. Humann in 1891-1893. A German expedition under 
Th. Wiegand carried on excavations at Miletus (see articles on 
these towns). 

In the Persian epoch, native dynasts established themselves 
in Caria and even extended their rule over the Greek cities. The 
last of them seems to have been Pixodarus, after whose death the 
crown was seized by a Persian, Orontobates, who offered a 
vigorous resistance to Alexander the Great. But his capital, 
Halicarnassus, was taken after a siege, and the principality of 
Caria conferred by Alexander on Ada, a princess of the native 
dynasty. Soon afterwards the country was incorporated into 
the Syrian empire and then into the kingdom of Pergamum. 

See W. M. Ramsay, " Historical Geography of Asia Minor " 
{R.G.S. iv., 1890); W. Ruge and E. Friedrich, Archaologische Karte 
von Kleinasien (1899) ; Perrot and Chipiez, History of Art in Phrygia, 
Lydia, Caria and Lycia (Eng. trans., 1892); A. H. Sayce, "The 
Karian Language and Inscriptions" {T.S.B.A. ix. 1, 1887); P. 
Kretschmer, Einleitung in die Geschichte der griechischen Sprache, 
PP- 376-384 (1896). For the coinage see Numismatics. (A. H. S.) 

CARIACO, or San Felipe de Austria, a town on the north 
coast of Venezuela, 40 m. east of the city of Cumani at the head 
of the gulf bearing the same name. Pop. (1908, estimate) 7000. 
It stands a short distance up the Cariaco river and its port 
immediately on the coast is known as Puerto Sucre. The 
surrounding district produces cotton, tobacco, cacao, cattle 
and fruit, and there is considerable trade through Puerto Sucre, 
although that port has no regular connexion with foreign ports. 

CARIBBEE ISLANDS, a name chiefly of historical importance, 
sometimes applied to the whole of the West Indies, but strictly 
comprehending only the chain of islands stretching from Porto 
Rico to the coast of South America. These are also known as 
the Lesser Antilles, and the bulk of them are divided into the 
two groups of the Leeward and Windward Islands. 

CARIBS, the name, used first by Columbus (from Cariba, 
said to mean "a valiant man"), of a South American people, 
who, at the arrival of the Spanish, occupied parts of Guiana 
and the lower Orinoco and the Windward and other islands in 
what is still known as the Caribbean Sea. They were believed 
to have had their original home in North America, spreading 
thence through the Antilles southward to Venezuela, the Guianas, 
and north-east Brazil. This view has been abandoned, as Carib 
tribes, the Bakairi and Nahuquas, using an archaic type of 
Carib speech and primitive in habits, have been met by German 
explorers in the very heart of Brazil. It may thus be assumed 
that the cradle of the race was the centre of South America; 
their first migrating movements being to Guiana and the Antilles. 
A cruel, ferocious and warlike people, they made a stout resist- 
ance to the Spaniards. They were cannibals, and it is to them 
that we owe that word, Columbus's Caribal being transformed 
into Cannibal in apparent reference to the canine voracity of 
the Caribs. They are physically by no means a powerful race, 
being distinguished by slight figures with limbs well formed but 



CARICATURE 



331 



lacking muscle, and with a tendency to be pot-bellied, due 
apparently to their habit of drinking paiwari (liquor prepared 
from the cassava plant) in great quantities. Their colour is a 
red cinnamon, but varies with different tribes. Their hair is 
thick, long, very black, and generally cut to an even edge, at 
right angles to the neck, round the head. The features are 
strikingly Mongoloid. Among the true Caribs a 2-in. broad 
belt of cotton is knitted round each ankle, and just below each 
knee of the young female children. All body-hair in both sexes 
is pulled out, even to the eye-brows. Among the women the 
lower lips are often pierced, pins of wood being passed through 
and forming a sort of chevaux de frise round the mouth. Some- 
times a bell-shaped ornament is hung by men to a piece of string 
passed through the lower lip. The Carib government was 
patriarchal. Though the women did most of the hard work, 
they were kindly treated. Polygamy prevailed. Very little 
ceremony attended death. The Caribs of the West Indies, 
known as "Red" and "Black," the first pure, the second mixed 
with negro blood, after a protracted war with the British were 
transported in 1 796 to the number of 5000 from Dominica and 
St Vincent to the island of Ruatan near the coast of Honduras. 
A few were subsequently allowed back to St Vincent, but the 
majority are settled in Honduras and Nicaragua. 

CARICATURE (Ital. caricatura, i.e. " ritratto ridicolo," from 
caricare, to load, to charge; Fr. charge), a general term for the 
art of applying the grotesque to the purposes of satire, and for 
pictorial and plastic ridicule and burlesque. The word, " cari- 
catura " was first used as English by Sir Thomas Browne (1605- 
1682), in his Christian Morals, a posthumous work; it is next 
found, still in its Italian form, in No. 537 of the Spectator; it 
was adopted by Johnson in his dictionary (1757), but does not 
appear in Bailey's dictionary, for example, as late as 1773; 
and it only assumed its modern guise towards the end of the 
1 8th century, when its use and comprehension became general. 

Little that is not conjectural can be written concerning 
caricature among the ancients. Few traces of the comic are 
discoverable in Egyptian art — such papyri of a satirical tendency 
as are known to exist appearing to belong rather to the class of 
ithyphallic drolleries than to that of the ironical grotesque. 
Among the Greeks, though but few and dubious data are extant, 
it seems possible that caricature may not have been altogether 
unknown. Their taste for pictorial parody, indeed, has been 
sufficiently proved by plentiful discoveries of pottery painted 
with burlesque subjects. Aristotle, moreover, who disapproved 
of grotesque art, condemns in strong terms the pictures of a 
certain Pauson, who, alluded to by Aristophanes, and the subject 
of one of Lucian's anecdotes, is hailed by Champfleury as the 
doyen of caricaturists. That the grotesque in graphic art con- 
ceived in the true spirit of intentional caricature was practised 
by the Romans is evident from the curious frescoes uncovered 
at Pompeii and Herculaneum; from the mention in Pliny of 
certain painters celebrated for burlesque pictures; from the 
curious fantasies graven in gems and called Grylli; and from 
the number of ithyphallic caprices that have descended to 
modern times. But in spite of these evidences of Greek and 
Roman humour, in spite of the famous comic statuette of Cara- 
calla, and of the more famous graffito of the Crucifixion, the 
caricaturists of the old world must be sought for, not among 
its painters and sculptors, but among its poets and dramatists. 
The comedies of Aristophanes and the epigrams of Martial were, 
to the Athens of Pericles and the Rome of Domitian, what the 
etchings of Gillray and the lithographs of Daumier were to the 
London of George III. and the Paris of the Citizen King. 

During the middle ages a vast mass of grotesque material was 
accumulated, but selection becomes even more difficult than 
with the scarce relics of antiquity. With the building of the 
cathedrals originated a new style of art; a strange mixture of 
memories of paganism and Christian imaginings was called 
into being for the adornment of those great strongholds of urban 
Catholicism, and in this the coarse and brutal materialism of 
the popular humour found its largest and freest expression. 
On missal-marge and sign-board, on stall and entablature, in 



gargoyle and initial, the grotesque displayed itself in an infinite 
variety of forms. The import of this inextricable tangle of 
imagery, often obscene and horrible, often quaint and fantastic, 
is difficult, if not impossible, to determine. We recognize the 
prevalence of three great popular types or figures, each of which 
may be credited with a satirical intention — of Reynard the Fox, 
the hero of the famous medieval romance; of the Devil, that 
peculiarly medieval antithesis of God; and of Death, the sar- 
castic and irreverent skeleton. The popularity of the last is 
evidenced by the fact that no fewer than forty-three towns in 
England, France and Germany are enumerated as possessing 
sets of the Dance of Death, that grandiose all-levelling series of 
caprices in the contemplation of which the middle ages found 
so much consolation. It was reserved for Holbein (1498-1554), 
seizing the idea and resuming all that his contemporaries thought 
and felt on the subject, to produce, in his fifty-three magnificent 
designs of the Danse Macabre, the first and perhaps the greatest 
set of satirical moralities known to the modern world. 

It is in the tumult of the Renaissance, indeed, that caricature 
in its modern sense may be said to have been born. The great 
popular movements required some such vehicle of comment or 
censure; the perfection to which the arts of design were attain- 
ing supplied the means; the invention of printing ensured its 
dissemination. The earliest genuine piece of graphic irony that 
has been discovered is a caricature (1499) relating to Louis XII. 
and his Italian war. But it was the Reformation that produced 
the first full crop of satirical ephemerae, and the heads of Luther 
and Alexander VI. are therefore the direct ancestors of the masks 
that smirk and frown from the "cartoons" of Punch and the 
Charivari. Fairly started by Lucas Cranach, a friend of Luther, 
in his Passionate of Christ and Antichrist (1521), caricature was 
naturalized in France under the League, but only to pass into 
the hands of the Dutch, who supplied the rest of Europe with 
satirical prints during the whole of the next century. A curious 
reaction is visible in the work of Pieter Breughel (1510-1570) 
towards the grotesque diablerie and macaberesque morality of 
medieval art, the last original and striking note of which is 
caught in the compositions of Jacques Callot (1593-1635), and, 
in a less degree, in those of his followers, Stefano della Bella 
(1610—1664) and Salvator Rosa (1615-1673). On the other 
hand, however, Callot, one of the greatest masters of the 
grotesque that ever lived, in certain of his Caprices, and in his 
two famous sets of prints, the Miseres de la guerre, may be said 
to anticipate certain productions of Hogarth and Goya, and so 
to have founded the modern school of ironic genre. 

In England one of the earliest caricatures extant is that in the 
margin of the Forest Roll of Essex, 5, ed. 1, now at the Record 
Office; it is a grotesque portrait of "Aaron fil Diabole" (Aaron, 
son of the devil), probably representing Cok, son of Aaron. It 
is dated 1277. Another caricature, undated, appears on a Roll 
containing an account of the tallages and fines paid by Jews, 
17. Henry III., belonging to 1233 (Exch. of Receipt, Jews' Roll, 
No. 8). It is an elaborate satirical design of Jews and devils, 
arranged in a pediment. During the 16th century, caricature 
can hardly be said to have existed at all, — a grotesque of Mary 
Stuart as a mermaid, a pen and ink sketch of which is yet to be 
seen in the Rolls Office, being the only example of it known. 
The Great Rebellion, however, acted as the Reformation had 
done in Germany, and Cavaliers and Roundheads caricatured 
each other freely. At this period satirical pictures usually did 
duty as the title-pages of scurrilous pamphlets; but one instance 
is known of the employment during the war of a grotesque 
allegory as a banner, while the end of the Commonwealth 
produced a satirical pack of playing cards, probably of Dutch 
origin. The Dutch, indeed, as already has been stated, were the 
great purveyors of pictorial satire at this time and during the 
early part of the next century. In England the wit of the 
victorious party was rather vocal than pictorial;. in France the 
spirit of caricature was sternly repressed; and it was from 
Holland, bold in its republican freedom, and rich in painters 
and etchers, that issued the flood of prints and medals 
which illustrate, through cumbrous allegories and elaborate 



332 



CARICATURE 



symbolization, the principal political passages of both the former 
countries, from the Restoration (1660) to the South Sea Bubble 
(1720). The most distinguished of the Dutch artists was Romain 
de Hooghe (1638-17 20), a follower of Callot, who, without any 
of the weird power of his master, possessed a certain skill in 
grouping and faculty of grotesque suggestiveness that made his 
point a most useful weapon to William of Orange during the long 
struggle with Louis XIV. 

The 1 8th century, however, may be called emphatically the 
age of caricature. The spirit is evident in letters as in art; in 
the fierce grotesques of Swift, in the coarser charges of Smollett, 
in the keen ironies of Henry Fielding, in the Aristophanic 
tendency of Foote's farces, no less than in the masterly moralities 
of Hogarth and the truculent satires of Gillray. The first event 
that called forth caricatures in any number was the prosecution 
(1710) of Dr Sacheverell; most of these, however, were importa- 
tions from Holland, and only in the excitement attendant on the 
South Sea Bubble, some ten years later, can the English school 
be said to have begun. Starting into active being with the 
ministry of Walpole (17 21), it flourished under that statesman 
for some twenty years, — the " hieroglyphics," as its prints were 
named, graphically enough, often circulating on fans. It con- 
tinued to increase in importance and audacity till the reign 
of Pitt (1757-1761), when its activity was somewhat abated. 
It rose, however, to a greater height than ever during the rule 
of Bute (1761-1763), and since that time its influence has 
extended without a check. The artists whose combinations 
amused the ■ public during this earlier period are, with few 
exceptions, but little known and not greatly esteemed. Among 
them were two amateurs, Dorothy, wife of Richard Boyle, 
3rd earl of Burlington, and General George Townshend (after- 
wards 1st Marquess Townshend); Goupy, Boitard and Liotard 
were Frenchmen; Vandergucht and Vanderbank were Dutch- 
men. This period witnessed also the rise of William Hogarth 
(169 7- 1 7 64). As a political caricaturist Hogarth was not 
successful, save in a few isolated examples, as in the portraits 
of Wilkes and Churchill; but as a moralist and social satirist 
he has not yet been equalled. The publication, in 1732, of his 
Modern Midnight Conversation may be said to mark an epoch in 
the history of caricature. Mention must also be made of Paul 
Sandby (1725-1809), who was not a professional caricaturist, 
though he joined in the pictorial hue-and-cry against Hogarth 
and Lord Bute, and who is best remembered as the founder of 
the English school of water-colour; and of John Collet (1723- 
said to have been a pupil of Hogarth, a kindly and indus- 



trious humorist, rarely venturing into the arena of politics. 
During the latter half of the century, however, political caricature 
began to be somewhat more skilfully handled than of old by 
James Sayer, a satirist in the pay of the younger Pitt, while 
social grotesques were pleasantly treated by Henry William 
Bunbury (1750-1811) and George Moutard Woodward. These 
personalities, however, interesting as they are, are dwarfed into 
insignificance by the great figure of James Gillray (1757-1815), 
in whose hands political caricature became almost epic for 
grandeur of conception and far-reaching suggestiveness. It is 
to the works of this man of genius, indeed, and (in a less degree) 
to those of his contemporary, Thomas Rowlandson (1756-1827), 
an artist of great and varied powers, that historians must turn 
for the popular reflection of all the political notabilia of the end 
of the 1 8th and the beginning of the 19th centuries. England 
may be said to have been the chosen home of caricature during 
this period. In France, timid and futile under the Monarchy, 
it had assumed an immense importance under the Revolution, 
and a cloud of hideous pictorial libels was the result; but even 
the Revolution left no such notes through its own artists, though 
Fragonard (1732-1806) himself was of the number, as came from 
the gravers of Gillray and Rowlandson. In Germany caricature 
did not exist. Only in Spain was there to be found an artist 
capable of entering into competition with the masters of the 
satirical grotesque of whom England could boast. The works 
of Francesco Goya y Lucientes (1746-1828) are described by 
Theophile Gautier as " a mixture of those of Rembrandt, 



Watteau, and the comical dreams of Rabelais," and Champfleury 
discovers analogies between him and Honore Daumier, the 
greatest caricaturist of modern France. 

The satirical grotesque of the 18th century had been character- 
ized by a sort of grandiose brutality, by a certain vigorous 
obscenity, by a violence of expression and intention, that appear 
monstrous in these days of reserve and restraint, but that 
doubtless sorted well enough with the strong party feelings and 
fierce political passions of the age. After the downfall of Napoleon 
(181 5), however, when strife was over and men were weary and 
satisfied, a change in matter and manner came over the carica- 
ture of the period. In connection with this change, the name 
of George Cruikshank (1792-1878), an artist who stretches 
hands on the one side towards Hogarth and Gillray, and on the 
other towards Leech and Tenniel, deserves honourable mention. 
Those of Cruikshank's political caricatures which were designed 
for the squibs of William Hone (1779-1842) are, comparatively 
speaking, uninteresting; his ambition was that of Hogarth — 
the production of " moral comedies." Much of his work, there- 
fore, may be said to form a link in the chain of development 
through which has passed that ironical genre to which reference 
has already been made. In 1829, however, began to appear the 
famous series of lithographs, signed H. B., the work of John 
Doyle (1798-1868). These jocularities are interesting otherwise 
than politically; thin and weakly as they are, they inaugurated 
the style of later political caricature. In France, meanwhile, 
with the farcical designs of Edme Jean Pigal (b. 1794) and the 
realistic sketches of Henri Monnier (1805-1872), the admirable 
portrait-busts of Jean Pierre Dantan the younger (1800-1869) 
and the fine military and low-life drolleries of Nicolas Toussaint 
Charlet (1792-1845) were appearing. Up to this date, though 
journalism and caricature had sometimes joined hands (as in 
the case of the Craftsman and the Anti-Jacobin, and particularly 
in Les Revolutions de France et de Brabant and Les Actes des 
Apdtres), the alliance had been but brief; it was reserved for 
Charles Philipon (1802-1862), who may be called the father of 
comic journalism, to make it lasting. The foundation of La 
Caricature, by Philipon in 1831, suppressed in 1835 after a brief 
but glorious career, was followed by Le Charivari (December 
1832), which is perhaps the most jenowned of the innumerable 
enterprises of this extraordinary man. Among the artists he 
assembled round him, the highest place is held by Honore 
Daumier (1808-1879), a draughtsman of great skill, and a 
caricaturist of immense vigour and audacity. Another of 
Philipon's band was Sulpice Paul Chevalier (1801-1866), better 
known as Gavarni, in whose hands modern social caricature, 
advanced by Cruikshank and Charlet, assumed its present 
guise and became elegant. Mention must also be made of 
Grandville (J. I. I. Gerard) (1803-1847), the illustrator of La 
Fontaine, and a modern patron of the medieval skeleton; of 
Charles Joseph Travies de Villers, the father of the famous 
hunchback " Mayeux "; and of Amedee de Noe, or " Cham," 
the wittiest and most ephemeral of pictorial satirists. In 1840 
the pleasantries of " H. B. " having come to an end, there was 
founded, in imitation of this enterprise of Philipon, the comic 
journal which, under the title of Punch, or the London Charivari, 
has since become famous all over the world. Among its early 
illustrators were John Leech (1817-1864) and Richard Doyle 
(1824-1883), whose drawings were full of the richest grotesque 
humour. 

In 1862 Carlo Pellegrini, in Vanity Fair, began a series of 
portraits of public men, which may be considered the most 
remarkable instances of personal caricature in England. 

For the later developments of caricature, it is convenient to take 
them by countries in the following sections : — 

Great Britain. — During the later 19th century the term caricature, 
somewhat loosely used at all times, came gradually to cover almost 
every form of humorous art, from the pictorial wit and wisdom of 
Sir John Tenniel to the weird grotesques of Mr S. H. Sime, from the 
eay pleasantries of Randolph Caldecott to the graceful but sedate 
fancies of Mr Walter Crane. It is made to embrace alike the social 
studies, satirical and sympathetic, of Du Maurier and Keene, the 
political cartoons of Mr Harry Furniss and Sir F. C. Gould, the 
unextenuating likenesses of " Ape," and " Spy," and " Max," the 



CARICATURE 



333 



subtle conceits of Mr Linley Sambourne, the whimsicalities of Mr 
E. T. Reed, the exuberant burlesques of Mr J. F. Sullivan, the 
frank buffooneries of W. G. Baxter. Of these diverse forms of graphic 
humour, some have no other object than to amuse, and therefore do 
not call for serious notice. The work of Mr Max Beerbohm (" Max ") 
has the note of originality and extravagance too; while that of 
" Spy " (Mr Leslie Ward) in Vanity Fair, if it does not rival the 
occasional brilliancy of his predecessor " Ape " (Carlo Pellegrini, 
1839-1889), maintains a higher average of merit. The pupil, too, is 
much more genial than the master, and he is content if his pencil 
evokes the comment, " How ridiculously like!" Caricature of this 
kind is merely an entertainment. Here we are concerned rather 
with those branches of caricature which, merrily or mordantly, 
reflect and comment upon the actual life we live. In treating of 
recent caricature of this kind, we must give the first place to Punch. 
Mr Punch's outlook upon life has not changed much since the 
'seventies of the last century. His influence upon the tone of 
caricature made itself felt most appreciably in the days of John 
Leech and Richard Doyle. Their successors but follow in their steps. 
In their work, says a clever German critic, is to be found no vestige 
of the " sour bilious temper of John Bull " that pervaded the 
pictures of Hogarth and Rowlandson. Charles Keene (1823-1891) 
and Du Maurier (1834- 1896), he declares, are not caricaturists or 
satirists, but amiable and tenderly grave observers of life, friendly 
optimists. The characterization is truer of Keene, perhaps, than of 
Du Maurier. Charles Keene's sketches are almost always cheerful ; 
almost without exception they make you smile or laugh. In many 
of Du Maurier's, on the other hand, there is an underlying serious- 
ness. While Keene looks on at life with easy tolerance, an amused 
spectator, Du Maurier shows himself sensitive, emotional, sym- 
pathetic, taking infinite delight in what is pretty and gay and 
charming, but hurt and offended by the sordid and the ugly. Thus 
while Keene takes things dispassionately as they come, seeing only 
the humorous side of them, we find Du Maurier ever and anon 
attacking some new phase of snobbishness or philistinism or cant. 
For all his kindliness in depicting congenial scenes, he is at times as 
unrelenting a satirist as Rowlandson. The other Punch artists, 
whose work is in the same field, resemble Keene in this respect rather 
than Du Maurier. Mr Leonard Raven-Hill recalls Charles Keene 
not merely in temperament but in technique; like Keene, too, he 
finds his subjects principally in bourgeois life. Mr J. Bernard 
Partridge, though, like Du Maurier, he has an eye for physical 
beauty, is a spectator rather than a critic of life, yet he has made 
his mark as a " cartoonist." Phil May (d. 1903), a modern Touch- 
stone, is less easily classified. Though he wears the cap and bells, 
he is alive to the pity of things ; he sees the pathos no less than the 
humour of his street-boys and " gutter-snipes." He is, however, a 
jester primarily: an artist, too, of high achievement. Two others 
stand out as masters of the art of social caricature — Frederick 
Barnard and Mr J. F. Sullivan. Barnard's illustrations to Dickens, 
like his original sketches, have a lively humour — the humour of 
irrepressible high spirits — and endless invention. High spirits and 
invention are characteristics also of Mr Sullivan. It is at the British 
artisan and petty tradesman — at the grocer given to adulteration 
and the plumber who outstays his welcome — that he aims his most 
boisterous fun. He rebels, too, delightfully, against red tape and all 
the petty tyrannies of officialdom. In political caricature Sir John 
Tenniel (q.v.) remained the leading artist of his day. The death of 
Abraham Lincoln, Bismarck's fall from power, the tragedy of 
Khartum — to subjects such as these, worthy of a great painter, 
Tenniel has brought a classic simplicity and a sense of _ dignity 
unknown previously to caricature. It is hard to say in which field 
Tenniel most excels — whether in those ingenious parables in which 
the British Lion and the Russian Bear, John Chinaman, Jacques 
Bonhomme and Uncle Sam play their part — or in the ever-changing 
scenes of the great parliamentary Comedy — or in sombre dramas 
of Anarchy, Famine or Crime — or in those London extravaganzas 
in which the symbolic personalities of Gog and Magog, Father Thames 
and the Fog Fiend, the duke of Mudford and Mr Punch himself, 
have become familiar. Subjects similar to these have been treated 
also for many years by Mr Linley Sambourne in his fanciful and often 
beautiful designs. In the field of humorous portraiture also, as in 
cartoon-designing, Mr Sambourne has made his mark, and he may 
be said almost to have originated, in a small.way, that practice of 
illustrating the doings of parliament with comic sketches in which 
Mr Furniss, Mr E. T. Reed and Sir F. C. Gould were his most 
notable successors. Mr Furniss satirized the Royal Academy as 
effectively as the Houses of Parliament, but he has been above all 
the illustrator of parliament — the creator of Mr Gladstone's collars, 
the thief of Lord Randolph Churchill's inches, the immortalizer of so 
many otherwise obscure politicians who has worked the House of 
Commons and its doings into so many hundreds of eccentric designs. 
But Mr Furniss was never, like Sir F. C. Gould (of the Westminster 
Gazette), a politician first and a caricaturist afterwards. Gould is 
an avowed partisan, and his caricatures became the most formidable 
weapons of the Radical party. Caustic, witty and telling, not 
specially well drawn, but drawn well enough — the likenesses un- 
failingly caught and recognizable at a glance — his " Picture Politics " 
won him a place unique in the ranks of caricaturists. There is no 
evidence of such strenuousness in the work of Mr E. T. Reed (of 



Punch). In his parliamentary sketches, as in his " Animal Land " 
and " Prehistoric Peeps," Mr Reed is a wholly irresponsible humorist 
and parodist. One finds keen satire, however, in those " Ready- 
made Coats of Arms," in which he turned at once his heraldic lore 
and his insight into character to excellent account. In his more 
serious picture in which he has drawn a parallel between the tricoteuses 
awaiting with grim enjoyment the fall of the guillotine and those 
modern English gentlewomen who flock to the Old Bailey as to the 
play, we have the true Hogarthian touch. Mr Gunning King, 
Mr F.H.Townshend, Mr C. E. Brock, Mr Tom Browne, are among the 
younger humorists who have advanced to the front rank. Though 
there have been some notable competitors with Punch, there has 
never been a really " good second." In Matt Morgan the Tomahawk 
(1865-1867) could boast an original cartoonist after Tenniel's style, 
but without Tenniel's power and humour. Morgan's Tomahawk 
cartoons gained in effect from an ingenious method of printing in 
two colours. In Fred Barnard, W. G. Baxter, and Mr J. F. Sullivan, 
Judy (founded in 1867) possessed a trio of pictorial humorists of the 
first rank, and in W. Bowcher a political cartoonist thoroughly to 
the taste of those hot and strong Conservatives to whom Punch's 
faint Whiggery was but Radicalism in disguise. His successor, Mr 
William Parkinson, was not less loyal to Tory ideas, though more 
urbane in his methods. Fun has had cartoonists of high merit in 
Mr Gordon Thomson and in Mr John Proctor, who worked also for 
Moonshine (founded in 1879, now extinct). Moonshine afterwards 
enlisted the services of Alfred Bryan, to whose clever pencil the 
Christmas number of the World was indebted for many years. Ally 
Sloper, founded in 1884, is notable only as the widely circulated 
medium for W. G. Baxter's wild humours, kept up in the same spirit 
by Mr W. F. Thomas, his successor. Pick-me-up could once count a 
staff which rivalled at least the social side of Punch; Mr Raven-Hill, 
Phil May, Mr Maurice Greiffenhagen and Mr Dudley Hardy all 
contributed in their time to its sprightly pages, while Mr S. H. Sime 
made it the vehicle for his " squint-brained " imaginings. The'Will 
o' the Wisp, the Butterfly and the Unicorn, kindred ventures, though 
on different lines, all met with an early death. Lika Joko, founded 
in 1894 by Mr Harry Furniss, who in that year abandoned Punch, 
and afterwards Fair Game, were also short-lived. To this brief list 
of purely comic or satirical journals should be added the names of 
several daily and weekly publications — and among monthlies the 
Idler, with its caricatures by Mr Scott Rankin, Mr Sime and Mr 
Beerbohm — which have made a special feature of humorous art. 
Among these are the Graphic, whose Christmas numbers were first 
brightened by Randolph Caldecott; the Daily Graphic, enlivened 
sometimes by Phil May and Mr A. S. Boyd ; Vanity Fair, with its 
grotesque portraits; Truth, to whose Christmas numbers Sir F. C. 
Gould contributed some of his best and most ambitious work, 
printed in colours; the Sketch, with Phil May and others; Black 
and White, with Mr Henry Meyer; the Pall Mall Gazette, first with 
Sir F. C. Gould, and later with Mr G. R. Halkett. The St Stephen's 
Review, whose crudely powerful cartoons, the work of Tom Merry, 
were so popular, ceased publication in 1892. A tribute should be 
paid in conclusion to the coloured cartoons of the Weekly Freeman 
and other Irish papers, often remarkable for their humour and talent. 
(See also Cartoon and Illustration.) 

France. — In that peculiar branch of art which is based on irony, 
fun, oddity and wit, and in which Honore Daumier (1808-1879), 
next to " Gavarni " (1804-1866), remains the undisputed master, 
France— as has already been shown — can produce an unbroken 
series of draughtsmen of strong individuality. Though " Cham " 
died in 1879, Eugene Giraud in 1881, " Randon " in 1884, " Andre 
Gill " in 1885, " Marcelin " in 1887, Edouard de Beaumont in 1888, 
Lami in 1891, Alfred Grevin in 1892, and " Stop " in 1899, a new 
group arose under the leadership of " Nadar " (b. 1820) and Etienne 
Carjat (b. 1828). Mirthful or satirical, and less philosophical than 
of yore, neglecting history for incident, and humanity for the puppets 
of the day, their drawings, which illustrate daily events, will 
perpetuate the manner and anecdotes of the time, though the illustra- 
tions to newspapers, or prints which need a paragraph of explanation, 
show nothing to compare with the Propos de Thomas Virelocque by 
" Gavarni." Quantity perhaps makes up for quality, and some of 
these artists deserve special mention. " Draner " (b. 1833) and 
" Henriot " (b. 1857) are journalists, carrying on the method first 
introduced by " Cham " in the Vnivers Illustre: realistic sketches, 
with no purpose beyond the droll illustration of facts, amusing at the 
time, but of no value to the print-collector. M. J. L. Forain, born 
at Reims in 1852, studied at the Ecole des Beaux Arts under Jean 
Leon Ger6me and J. B. Carpeaux. He first worked for the Courrier 
Francais in 1887, and afterwards for Figaro; he was then drawn 
into the polemical work of politics. Though he has created some 
great types of flunkeydom, the explanatory story is more to him 
than the picture, which is often too sketchy, though masterly. 
Reduced reproductions of his work have been issued in volumes, a 
common form of popularity never attempted with Daumier's fine 
lithographs. M. A. L. Willette, born at Chalons-sur-Marne in 1857, 
a son of Colonel Willette, the aide-de-camp to Marshal Bazaine, 
worked for four years in Alexandre Cabanel's studio, and so gained 
an artistic training which alone would have distinguished him from 
his fellows, even without the delightful poetical fancy and Watteau- 
like grace which are somewhat unexpected amid the ugliness of 



334 



CARICATURE 



modern life. His work has the value, no doubt, of deep and various 
meaning, but it has also intrinsic artistic worth. M. Willette is, in 
fact, the ideal delineator of the more voluptuous and highly spiced 
aspects of contemporary life. " Caran d'Ache," a native of Moscow, 
born in 1858, borrowed from the German caricaturists — mainly from 
W. Busch — his methods of illustrating " a story without words." 
He makes fun even of animals, and is a master of canine physiog- 
nomy. His simple and unerring outline is a method peculiarly his 
own; now and again his wit rises to grandiloquence, as in his 
Bellona, rushing on an automobile through massacre and con- 
flagrations, and in his Itpopee (Epic) of shadows thrown on a sheet. 
Among his followers may be included A. Guillaume and Gerbault. 
M. C. L. Leandre, born at Champsecret (Orne), in 1862, is, like 
"Andre Gill," a draughtsman of monstrosities; he can get a perfect 
likeness of a face while exaggerating some particular feature, gives 
his figure a hump-back, as Dantan did in his statuettes, and has a 
facial dexterity which sometimes does scant justice to his very 
original wit. At the same time he has a true sense of beauty. 
M. Theophile A. Steinlen, born at Lausanne in 1859, went to Paris 
in 1 88 1. He should be studied in his illustrations to Bruant. He 
knows the inmost core of the Butte-Montmartre, and depicts it 
with realistic and brutal relish. M.Albert Robida,born at Compiegne 
in 1848, collaborated with Decaux in 1871 to found La Caricature; 
he is a paradoxical seer of the possible future and a curiosity-hunter 
of the past. Old Paris has no secrets from him ; he knows all the 
old stones and costumes of the middle ages, and has illustrated 
Rabelais ; and for fertility of fancy he reminds us of Gustave Dore, 
but with a sense of movement so vibrant as to be almost distressing. 
" Bac," born at Vienna in 1859, has infused a strain of the Austrian 
woman into the Parisienne ; representing her merely as a pleasure- 
and love-seeking creature, as the toy of an evening, he has recorded 
her peccadilloes, her witcheries and her vices. Others who have shot 
folly, as it flies are M. Albert Guillaume, who illustrated the Exhibi- 
tion of 1900 in a series of remarkable silhouettes; " Mars "; " Henri 
Somm"; Gerbault; and Griin. M. Huard depicts to perfection 
the country townsfolk in their elementary psychology. M. Hermann 
Paul, M. Forain's not unworthy successor on the Figaro, is a cruel 
satirist, who in a single face can epitomize a whole class of society, 
and could catalogue the actors of the comedie humaine in a series of 
drawings. M. Jean Veber loves fantastic subjects, the gnomes of 
fairy-tales and myths ; but he has a biting irony for contemporary 
history, as in the Butcher's Shop, where Bismarck is the blood-stained 
butcher. M. Abel Faivre, a refined and charming painter, is a 
whimiscal humorist with the pencil. He shows us monstrous women, 
fabulously hideous, drawing them with a sort of realism which is 
droll by sheer ugliness. Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec startles us by 
extraordinary dislocations, scrawled limbs and inexplicable 
anatomy; he has left an inimitable series of sketches of Mme 
Yvette Guilbert when she was at her thinnest. M. Felix Vallotton 
reproduces crows in blots of black with a Japanese use of the brush. 
M. G. Jeanniot, a notable illustrator, sometimes amuses himself by 
contributing to Le Rire, Le Sourire, Le Pompon, L'Assiette au 
Beurre, &c, drawing the two types he most affects: the fashionable 
world and soldiers. M. Ibels, Capiello and many more might be 
enumerated, but it is impossible to chronicle all the clever humorous 
artists of the illustrated papers. 

It is the frequent habit of French caricaturists to employ a nom- 
de-guerre. We therefore give here a list of the genuine names 
represented by the pseudonyms used above, together with others 
familiar to the public :— 



Piff " 



" Andre Gill " 
" Bac (" Cab 

" Saro ") . . . 
" Caran d'Ache " 
" Cham " ... 
"Crafty" . . . 
" Draner " (and " Paf 
" Faustin "... 
" Gavarni "... 
" Gedeon "... 
" Grandville " 
" Henriot" (and 
" Henri Somm " 
"Job" . . 
" Marcelin " . 
" Mars " . 
" Moloch " . 
" Montbard " 
" Nadar " 
" Pasquin " 
" Pepin " 
" Randon " . 
"Sahib" . . 
" Said " . . 
" Sem " . . 
" Stop " . . 



and 



= L. A. Gosset de Guine (1840-1885). 

= Ferdinand Bach (b. 1859). 

= Emmanuel Poire. 

= Comte Amedee de Noe (b. 1818). 

= Victor Gerusez (b. 1840). 

= Jules Renard (b. 1833). 

= Faustin Betbeder (b. 1847). 

= S. G. Chevalier (1804-1866). 

= Gedeon Baril (b. 1832). 

= J. I. I. Gerard (1803-1847). 

= Henri Maigrot (b. 1857). 

= Henri Sommier (b. 1844). 

=J. O. de Breville (b. 1858). 

= fimile Planat (1825-1887). 

= Maurice Bonvoisin (b. 1849). 

= Colomb (b. 1849). 

= C. A. Loye (1841-1905). 

= Felix Tournachon (b. 1820). 

= Georges Coutan (b. 1853). 

= Ed. Guillaume (b. 1842). 

= Gilbert (1814-1845). 

= L. E. Lesage (b. 1847). 

= Alphonse Levy (b. 1845). 

= George Goursat. 

= L. P. Morel-Retz (b. 1825). 



Germany. — During the later 19th century German caricature 
flourished principally in the comic papers Kladderadatsch of Berlin 
and Fliegende Blatter of Munich; the former a political paper with 



little artistic value, in which the ideas alone are clever, whilst the 
illustrations are merely a more or less clumsy adjunct to the text, 
while the Fliegende Blatter, on the contrary, has artistic merit as 
well as wit. Wilhelm Busch (b. 1832), the most brilliant German 
draughtsman of the last generation, made his debut with an illustrated 
poem " The Peasant and the Miller," and won a world-wide reputa- 
tion with the following works: Pater Filucius, Die Fromme Helene, 
Max und Moritz, Der heilige Antonius, Maler Kleksel, Balduin 
Bdhlamm, Die Erlebnisse Knopps des Junggesellen. Busch stands 
alone among the caricaturists of his nation, inasmuch as he is both 
the author and the illustrator of these works, his witty doggerel 
supplying Germany with household words. The drawings that 
accompany the text are amazing for the skill and directness with 
which he hits the vital mark. A flourish or two and a few touches 
are enough to set before us figures of intensely comical aspect. This 
distinguishes Busch from Adolf Oberlander (1845), who became the 
chief draughtsman on Fliegende Blatter. Busch's drawings would 
have no meaning apart from the humorous words. Oberlander 
works with the pencil only. Men, animals, trees, objects, are en- 
dowed by him with a mysterious life of their own. Without the 
help of any verbal joke, he achieves the funniest results simply by 
seeing and accentuating the comical side of everything. His 
drawings are caricature in the strict sense of the word, its principle 
being the exaggeration of some natural characteristic. The new 
generation of contributors to Fliegende Blatter do not work on these 
lines. Busch and Oberlander were both offshoots of the romantic 
school; they made fun of modern novelties. Hermann Schlittgen, 
Meggendorfer, H. Vogel-Plauen, Rene Reinicke, Adolf Hengeler 
and Fritz Wahle are the sons of a self-satisfied time, triumphing in 
its own chic, elegance and grace; hence they do not parody what 
they see, but simply depict it. The wit lies exclusively in the text ; 
the illustrations aim merely at a direct representation of street or 
drawing-room scenes. It is this which gives to Fliegende Blatter 
its value as a pictorial record of the history of German manners. Its 
pages are a permanent authority on the subject for those who desire 
to see the social aspects of Germany during the last quarter of the 
19th century onwards. At the same time a f alling-off inthe.brilliancy 
of this periodical was perceptible. Its fun became domestic and 
homely; it has faithfully adhered to the old technique of wood- 
engraving, and made no effort to keep pace with the modern methods 
of reproduction. German caricature, to live and flourish, was not 
keeping pace with the development of the art ; it had to take into 
its service the gay effects of colour, and derive fresh inspiration 
from the sweeping lines of the ornamental draughtsman. This led 
to the appearance of three new weekly papers : Jugend, Das Narren- 
schiff and Simplicissimus. Jugend, started in 1896 by Georg Hirth 
in Munich, collected from the first a group of gifted young artists, 
more especially Thony, Bernhard Pankok and Julius Diez, who 
based their style on old German wood-engraving; Fidus, who 
lavished the utmost beauty of line in unshaded pen-and-ink work; 
Rudolf Wilke, whose grotesques have much in common with Forain's 
clever drawings; Angelo Jank and R. M. Eichler, who work with a 
delightful bonhomie. Among the draughtsmen on the Narrenschiff 
(The Ship of Fools), Hans Baluschek is worthy of mention as having 
made the types of Berlin life all his own ; and while this paper gives 
us for the most part inoffensive satire on society, Simplicissimus, 
first printed at Munich and then at Zurich, under the editorship of 
Albert Langen, shows a marked Socialist and indeed Anarchist 
tendency, subjecting to ridicule and mockery everything that has 
hitherto been held as unassailable by such weapons; it reminds us 
of the scathing satire of Honore Daumier in La Caricature at the 
time of Louis Philippe. Thomas Theodor Heine (1867) is unsurpassed 
in this style for his power of expression and variety of technique. 
We must admire his delicate draughtsmanship, or again, his drawing 
of the figure with the heavy line of heraldic ornament, and his broad 
and monumental grasp of the grotesque. His laughter is often 
insolent, but he is more often the preacher, scourge in hand, who 
ruthlessly unveils all the dark side of life. Next to him come Paul, 
an incomparable limner of student life and the manners and customs 
of the Bavarian populace; E. Thony, a wonderfully clever cari- 
caturist of the airs and assumption of the Prussian Junker and the 
Prussian subaltern; J. C. Eugh and F. von Regnieck, who make 
fun of the townsman and political spouter in biting and searching 
satire. The standard of caricature is at the present time a high one 
in Germany; indeed, the modern adoption of the pen-line, which 
has arisen since the impressionists in oil-painting repudiated line, 
had its origin in the influence of caricature. 

United States. — The proverbial irreverence of the American mind 
even towards its most cherished personages and ideals has made it 
particularly responsive to the appeal of caricature. At first an 
importation, it developed but slowly; then it burst into luxuriant 
growth, sometimes exceeding the limits of wise and careful cultiva- 
tion. In the early period of American caricature, almost the only 
native is F. O. C. Darley (1822-1888), an illustrator of some im- 
portance; the other names include the engraver Paul Revere (chiefly 
famous for a picturesque exploit in the War of Independence) ; a 
Scotsman, William Charles; the Englishmen, Matt Morgan and 
E. P. Bellew; and the Germans, Thomas Nast and Joseph Keppler. 

The name of Thomas Nast overshadows and sums up American 
political caricature. Nast, who was born in Bavaria in 1840, was 



CARICATURE 



335 



brought to America at the age of six; and his training and all his 
interests were strongly American. At fourteen he was an illustrator 
on Leslie's Weekly, and was sent at twenty to England to illustrate 
the famous Sayers-Heenan prize-fight. He then went as recorder 
of Garibaldi's campaign of i860. He returned to America known 
only as an illustrator. The Civil War did not awaken his latent 
genius till 1864, when he published a cartoon of fierce irony against 
the political party which opposed Lincoln's re-election and advocated 
peace measures with the Southern confederacy. This cartoon not 
only made Nast famous, but may be said to contain the germ of 
American caricature; for all that had gone before was too crude in 
technique to pass muster even as good caricature. 

The magnificent corruption of Tammany Hall under the leader- 
ship of William M. Tweed, the first of the great municipal"' bosses," 
gave Nast a subject worth attacking. Siegfried, earnest but light- 
hearted, armed with the mightier sword of the pen of ridicule, 
assailed the monster ensconced in his treasure-cave, and after a 
long battle won a brilliant victory. Nast did not always rely on a 
mere picture to carry his thrust ; often his cartoon consisted of only 
a minor figure or two looking at a large placard on which a long and 
poignantly-worded attack was delivered in cold type. At other times 
the most ingenious pictorial subtlety was displayed. This long series 
sounds almost the whole gamut of caricature, from downright 
ridicule to the most lofty denunciation. A very happy device was 
the representation of Tweed's face by a money-bag with only dollar 
marks for features, a device which, strangely enough, made a 
curiously faithful likeness of the " boodle "-loving despot. When, 
finally, Tweed took to flight, to escape imprisonment, he was recog- 
nized and caught, it is said, entirely through the wide familiarity 
given to his image in Nast's cartoons. 

When Nast retired from Harper's Weekly, he was succeeded by 
Charles Green Bush (born 1842; died 1909). With even greater 
technical resources, he poured forth a series of cartoons of 
remarkable evenness of skill and interest; he soon left weekly for 
daily journalism. He never won, single-handed, such a battle as 
Nast's, but his drawings have a more general, perhaps a more lasting 
interest. When he left Harper's Weekly he was succeeded by W. A. 
Rogers, who composed many ingenious and telling cartoons. 

The vogue which, through Nast, Harper's Weekly gave to cari- 
cature, prepared the way for the first purely comic weekly paper, 
Puck, founded by two Germans, and for long published in a German 
as well as an English edition — a journal which has cast its influence 
generally in favour of the Democratic party. It is worth noting 
that not only the founders "but the spirit of American caricature 
have been rather German than English, the American comic papers 
more closely resembling Fliegende Blatter, for example, than Punch. 
One of the founders of Puck was Joseph Keppler (1838-1894), long 
its chief caricaturist. 

The Republican party soon found a champion in Judge, a weekly 
satirical paper which resembles Puck closely in its crudely coloured 
pages, though somewhat broader and less ambitious in the spirit and 
execution of its black-and-white illustrations. These two papers 
have kept rather strictly to permanent staffs, and have furnished 
the opening for many popular draughtsmen, such as Bernhard 
Gillam (d. 1896), and his brother, Victor; J. A. Wales (d. 1886); 
E. Zimmerman, whose extremely plebeian and broadly treated types 
often obscure the observation and Falstaffian humour displayed in 
them ; Grant Hamilton ; Frederick Opper, for many years devoted 
to the trials of suburban existence, and later concerned_ in combating 
the trusts; C. J. Taylor, a graceful technician; H. Smith ; Frank A. 
Nankivell, whose pretty athletic girls are prone to attitudinizing; 
J. Mortimer Flagg; F. M. Howarth; Mrs Frances O'Neill Latham, 
whose personages are singularly well modelled and alive; and Miss 
Baker Baker, a skilful draughtswoman of animals. 

A stimulus to genuine art in caricature was given by the establish- 
ment (1883) of the weekly Life, edited by J. A. Mitchell, a clever 
draughtsman as well as an original writer. It is to this paper that 
America owes the discovery and encouragement of its most remark- 
able artist humorist, Charles Dana Gibson, whose technique has 
developed through many interesting phases from exceeding delicacy 
to a sculpturesque boldness of line without losing its rich texture, 
and without becoming monotonous. Mr Gibson is chiefly beloved 
by his public for his almost idolatrous realizations of the beautiful 
American woman of various types, ages and environments. _ His 
works are, however, full of the most subtle character-observations, 
and American men of all walks of life, and foreigners of every type, 
impart as much importance and humour to his pages as his " Gibson 
girls " give radiance. His admitted devotion to Du Maurier, in 
reverence for the beautiful woman beautifully attired, has led some 
critics to set him down as a mere disciple, while his powerful indi- 
viduality has led others to accuse him of monotony; but a serious 
examination of his work has seemed to reveal that he has gone 
beyond the genius of Du Maurier in sophistication, if not in variety, 
of subjects and treatment. As much as any other artist Mr Gibson 
has studiously tried new experiments in the new fields opened by 
modernized processes of photo-engraving, and has been an important 
influence in both English and American line-illustration. 

Among other students of society, particular success has been 
achieved by C. S. Reinhart (1844-1896), Charles Howard Johnson 
(d. 1895), H. W. M'Vickar, S, W. van Schaick, A. E. Sterner, W. H. 



Hyde, W. T. Smedley and A. B. Wenzell, each of them strongly 
individual in manner and often full of verve and truth. 

Life, and other comic papers, including for many years Truth, 
also brought forward caricaturists of distinct worth and a marked 
tendency to specialization. F. E. Atwood (d. 1900) was ingenious 
in cartoons lightly allegorical ; Oliver Herford has shown a fascina- 
tion elusive of analysis in his drawings as in his verse ; T. S. Sullivant 
has made a quaintly intellectual application of the old-world devices 
of large heads, small bodies, and the like ; Peter Newell has developed 
individuality both in treatment and in humour; E. W. Kemble is 
noteworthy among the exploiters of negro life; and H. B. Eddy, 
Augustus Dirk, Robert L. Wagner, A. Anderson, F. Sarka and J. 
Swinnerton have all displayed marked individuality. 

In distinction from the earlier period, the modern school of 
American caricature is strongly national, not only in subject, but 
in origin, training and in mental attitude, exception being made 
of a few notable figures, such as Michael Angelo Woolf, born in 
England, and of a somewhat Cruikshankian technique. He came 
to America while young, and contributed a long series of what may 
be called slum-fantasies, instinct alike with laughter and sorrow, 
at times strangely combining extravagant melodrama with a most 
plausible and convincing impossibility. His drawings must always 
lie very close to the affections of the large audience that welcomed 
them. American also by adoption is Henry Mayer, a German by 
birth, who has contributed to many of the chief comic papers of 
France, England, Germany and America. 

Entirely native in every way is the art of A. B. Frost (b. 1851), a 
prominent humorist who deals with the life of the common people. 
His caricature (he is also an illustrator of versatility and importance) 
is distinguished by its anatomical knowledge, or, rather, anatomical 
imagination. Violent as the action of his figures frequently is, it is 
always convincing. Such triumphs as the tragedy of the kind- 
hearted man and the ungrateful bull-calf; the spinster's cat that 
ate rat poison, and many others, force the most serious to laughter 
by their amazing velocity of action and their unctuousness of ex- 
pression. Frost is to American caricature what " Artemus Ward " 
has been to American humour, and his field of publication has been 
chiefly the monthly magazine. 

The influence of the weekly periodicals has been briefly traced. 
A later development was the entrance of the omnivorous daily 
newspaper into the field of both the magazine and the weekly. 
For many years almost every newspaper has printed its daily car- 
toon, generally of a political nature. Few of the cartoonists have 
been able to keep up the pace of a daily inspiration, but C. G. Bush 
has been unusually successful in the attempt. Yet an occasional 
success atones for many slips, and the cartoonists are known and 
eagerly watched. The most influential has doubtless been Homer 
C. Davenport, whose slender artistic resources have been eked out 
by a vigour and mercilessness of assault rare even in American 
annate. He has a Rabelaisian complacency and skill in making a 
portrait magnificently repulsive, and his caricatures are a vivid 
example 6f the school of cartoonists who believe in slashing rather 
than merely prodding or tickling the object of attack. Charles 
Nelan (1859-1904) frequently scored, and in the wide extent of the 
United States one finds keen wits busily assailing the manifold evils 
of life. Noteworthy among them are: Thos. E. Powers, H. R. 
Heaton, Albert Levering, Clare Angell and R. C. Swayne. 

Scandinavia. — Caricature flourishes also in the Scandinavian 
countries, but few names are known beyond their borders. Professor 
Hans Tegner of Denmark is an exception ; his illustrations to Hans 
Andersen (English edition, 1900) have carried his name wherever 
that_ author is appreciated, yet his reputation was made in the 
Danish Punch, which was founded after the year 1870 but has long 
ceased to exist. Alfred Schmidt and Axel Thiess have contributed 
notable sketches to Puk and its successor Klockhaus, but in point 
of style they scarcely carry on the tradition of their predecessor, 
Fritz Jiirgensen. Among humorous artists of Norway, Th. Kittelsen 
perhaps holds the leading place, and in Sweden, Bruno Liljefors, 
best known as a brilliant painter of bird life. 

Bibliography. — Rules for Drawing Caricature, with an Essay on 
Comic Painting, by Francis Grose (8vo, London, 1788) ; Historical 
Sketch of the Art of Caricaturing, by J. Peller Malcolm (4to, London, 
1 8 13) ; History of Caricature and Grotesque in Literature and Art, by 
Thomas Wright (8vo, London, 1865) ; Musee de la caricature, by 
Jaime; (a) Histoire de la caricature antique; (b) Histoire de la 
caricature au moyen age et sous la renaissance; (c) Histoire de la 
caricature sous la reforme et la ligue; (d) Histoire de la caricature 
sous la republique, V empire, et la restauration; (e) Histoire de la 
caricature moderne (5 vols.), by Champfleury (i.e. Jules Fleury), 
(8vo, Paris) ; Le Musee secret de la caricature, by Champfleury (i.e. 
Jules Fleury), (8vo, Paris); L' Art du rire et de la caricature, by 
Arsene Alexandre (8vo, Paris); Caricature and other Comic Art, by 
James Parton (sm. 4to, New York, 1878) ; Le Miroir de la vie: la 
Caricature, by Robert de la Sizeranne (8vo, Paris, 1902), (tracing 
the aesthetic development of the art and spirit of caricature) ; La 
Caricature d, travers les siecles, by Georges Veyrat (4to, Paris) ; La 
Caricature et les caricaturistes, by Emile Bagaud (with a preface by 
Ch. Leandre), (fo., Paris); Le Rire et la caricature, by Paul Gaultier 
(with a preface by Sully Prudhomme), (8vo, Paris, 1906), (a work 
of originality, dwelling not only on the aesthetic but on the essentially 



33 6 



CAR1GARA— CARINTHIA 



pessimistic side of satiric art) ; English Caricaturists and Graphic 
Humorists of the Nineteenth Century, by Graham Everitt {i.e. William 
Rodgers Richardson), (4to, London, 1886), (a careful and interesting 
survey) ; La Caricature en Angleterre, by Augustin Filva (8vo, Paris, 
1902), (an able criticism from the point of view of psycho-sociology) ; 
The History of Punch, by M. H. Spielmann (8vo, London, 1895), 
(dealing with caricature art of England during the half-century 
covered by the book) ; Magazine of Art, passim, for biographies of 
English caricaturists — " Our Graphic Humorists "; Social Pictorial 
Satire, by George du Maurier (i2mo, London, 1898); Les Mxurs 
et la caricature en France, by J. Grand-Carteret (8vo, Paris, 1885) ; 
La Caricature et Vhumeur frangais au XIX' siecle, by Raoul Deberdt 
(8vo, Paris) ; Les Maitres de la caricature francaise en XIX' siecle, 
by Armand Dayot (Paris) ; Nos humoristes, by Ad. Brisson (4to, 
Paris, 1900); Les Mxurs et la caricature en Allemagne, &c, by 
J. Grand-Carteret (8vo, Paris, 1885). See also biographies of 
Charles Keene, H. Daumier, John Leech, &c, indicated under those 
names. (M. H. S.) 

CARIGARA, a town of the province of Leyte, island of Leyte, 
Philippine Islands, on Carigara Bay, 22 m. W. of Tacloban, 
the capital. Pop. (1903) 19,488, including that of Capoocan 
(3106), annexed to Carigara in the same year. Carigara is open 
to coast trade, exports large quantities of hemp, raises much 
rice, and manufactures cotton and abaca fabrics. It also has 
important fisheries. 

CARIGNANO, a town of Piedmont, Italy, in the province of 
Turin, 1 1 m. S. by steam tramway from the town of Turin. Pop. 
(1901) town, 4672, commune, 7104. It has a handsome church 
(S. Giovanni Battista) erected in 17 56-1 766 by the architect 
Benedetto Alfieri di Sostegno (1700-1767), uncle of the poet 
Alfieri. S. Maria delle Grazie contains the tomb of Bianca 
Palaeologus, wife of Duke Charles I. of Savoy, at whose court 
Bayard was brought up. The town passed into the hands of the 
counts of Savoy in 1418. 

Carignano was erected by Charles Emmanuel I. of Savoy into 
a principality as an appanage for his third son, Thomas Francis 
(1596-1656), whose descendant, Charles Albert, prince of Carig- 
nano, became king of Sardinia on the extinction of the elder line 
of the house of Savoy with the death of Charles Felix in 1831. 
The house of Carignano developed two junior branches, those of 
Soissons and Villafranca. The first of these, which became 
extinct in 1734, was founded by Eugene Maurice, second son of 
Thomas, by his wife Marie de Conde, countess of Soissons, who 
received his mother's countship as his appanage. In 1662 the 
town of Yvois in the Ardennes was raised by Louis XIV. into a 
duchy in his favour, its name being changed at the same time to 
Carignan. The famous Prince Eugene was the second son of 
the first duke of Carignan. The branch of Villafranca started with 
Eugene Marie Louis (d. 1785), second son of Louis Victor of 
Carignano, whose grandson Eugene (1816-1888), afterwards an 
admiral in the Italian navy, was created prince of Savoy- 
Carignano, by King Charles Albert in 1834. He had contracted 
a morganatic marriage, and in 1888, on the occasion of his 
silver wedding, the title of countess of Villafranca was bestowed 
upon his wife, his eldest son, Filiberto, being at the, same time 
created count of Villafranca, and his younger son, Vittorio, 
count of Soissons. 

CARILLON, an arrangement for playing tunes upon a set of 
bells by mechanical means. The word is said to be a Fr. form 
of Late Lat. or Ital. quadriglio, a simple dance measure on four 
notes or for four persons (Lat. quattuor) ; and is used sometimes 
for the tune played, sometimes (and more commonly in England) 
for the set of bells used in playing it. The earliest medieval 
attempts at bell music, as distinct from mere noise, seem to have 
consisted in striking a row of small bells by hand with a hammer, 
and illustrations in MSS. of the 12th and 13th centuries show 
this process on three, four or even eight bells. The introduction 
of mechanism in the form either of a barrel (see Barrel-Organ) 
set with pegs or studs and revolving in connexion with the 
machinery of a clock, or of a keyboard struck by hand {carillon 
a clavier), made it possible largely to increase the number of 
bells and the range of harmonies. In Belgium, the home of the 
carillon the art of the carillonneur was at one time brought to 
great perfection and held in high esteem (see Bell); but even 
there it is gradually giving way to mechanism. In England 



manual skill has never been much employed, though keyboards 
on the continental model have been introduced, e.g. at the 
Manchester town hall, at Eaton Hall, and elsewhere; carillon 
music being mainly confined to hymn tunes at regular intervals 
(generally three hours), or chimes at the hours and intervening 
quarters. The " Cambridge " and " Westminster " chimes are 
very familiar; and more recently chimes have been composed 
by Sir John Stainer for Freshwater in the Isle of Wight (" Tenny- 
son" Chimes), and by Sir Charles Stanford for " Bow Bells " in 
London. 

CARINI, a town in the province of Palermo, Sicily, 13 m. 
by rail W.N.W. of Palermo. Pop. (1901) 13,931. On the coast 
are some ruins of the ancient Hyccara, the only Sican settlement 
(probably a fishing village) on the coast. It was stormed and 
taken by the Athenians in 415 B.C., and the inhabitants, among 
them the famous courtesan Lais, sold as slaves. At La Grazia 
Christian catacombs have been found (Not.degliScavi, 1899, 362). 

CARINTHIA (Ger. Kdrnten) , a duchy and crownland of Austria, 
bounded E. by Styria, N. by Styria and Salzburg, W. by Tirol, 
and S. by Italy, Gorz and Gradisca and Carniola. It has an 
area of 4005 sq. m. Carinthia is for the most part a mountainous 
region, divided by the Drave, which traverses it from west to east 
into two parts. To the north of the valley of the Drave the duchy 
is occupied by the Hohe Tauern and the primitive Alps of Carin- 
thia and Styria, which belong to the central zone of the Eastern 
Alps. The Hohe Tauern contains the massifs of the Gross 
Glockner (12,455 ft-), the Hochriarr (10,670 ft.) and the Ankogel 
(11,006 ft.), and is traversed by the saddles of the Hochthor 
and the Malnitzer Tauern, which separates these groups from 
one another. To the east of the Hohe Tauern stretches the group 
of the primitive Alps of Carinthia and Styria, namely the Pollaer 
Alps with the glacier-covered peak of the Hafner Eck (10,041 ft.) ; 
the Stang Alps with the highest peak the Eisenhut (8007 ft.); 
the Saualpe with the highest peak the Grosse Saualpe (6825 ft.); 
and finally the Koralpen chain or the Stainzer Alps (7023 ft.) 
separated from the preceding group by the Lavant valley. The 
country south of the Drave is occupied by several groups of the 
southern limestone zone, namely the Carnic Alps, the Julian 
Alps, the Karawankas and the Steiner Alps. The Carnic Alps 
are divided by the Gail valley into the South Carnic group and the 
northern Gailthal Alps. They are traversed by the Pontebba 
or Pontafel Pass, through which passes one of the principal 
Alpine roads from Italy to Austria. The road is covered by the 
fortress of Malborgeth, where Captain Hensel with a handful 
of men met with a heroic death defending the place against an 
overwhelming French force in the campaign of 1809. A similar 
fate overtook, on the same day, the 18th of May 1809, Captain 
Hermann von Hermannsdorf and his small garrison, who were 
defending the Predil fort. This fort covers the road which 
traverses the Predil Pass in the Julian Alps and is the principal 
road leading from Carinthia to the Coastland. Commemorative 
monuments have been erected in both places. The Gailthal 
Alps end with the Dobratsch or Villacher Alp (7107 ft.), situated 
to the south-west of Villach {q.v.), which is celebrated as one of the 
finest views in the whole eastern Alps. South of Hermagor, the 
principal place of the Gail valley, is the chain of mountains which 
is famous as being the only place where the beautiful Wulfenia 
Carinthiaca is found. The highest peaks in the Karawankas 
are the Grosse Mittagskogel (7033 ft.), the Och Obir (7023 ft.) 
and the Petzen (6934 ft.). The Ursula Berg (5563 ft.) ends the 
group of the Karawankas, which are continued by the Steiner Alps. 

The principal river is the Drave, which flows from west to east 
through the length of the duchy, and receives in its course the 
waters of all the other streams, except the Fella, which reaches 
the Adriatic by its junction with the Tagliamento. Its principal 
tributaries are the Gail on the right, and the Moll, the Lieser, 
the Gurk with the Glan, and the Lavant on the left. Carinthia 
possesses a great number of Alpine lakes, which, unlike the other 
Alpine lakes, lie in the longitudinal valleys. The principal 
lakes are: the Millstatter-see (8| sq. m. in extent, 908 ft. deep, 
at an altitude of 1902 ft.), the Worther-see (17 sq. m. in extent, 
212 ft. deep, at an altitude of 1438 ft,), the Ossiach-see (ioj sq. m. 



CARINUS— CARISBROOKE 



337 



in extent, 1 50 ft. deep, at an altitude of 1 599 ft.) , and the elongated 
Weissen-see (4I m. long, 309 ft. deep, at an altitude of 3037 ft.). 

The climate is severe in the north and north-west parts, but the 
south and south-east districts are milder, while the most favoured 
part is the Lavant valley. Of the total area only 1 3 • 7 1 % is arable 
land, 10-50% is occupied by meadows and gardens, 5-18% by 
pastures, while 44-24% is covered by forests, almost exclusively 
pine-forests. Cattle-rearing is well developed, and the horses 
bred in Carinthia enjoy a good reputation. The mineral wealth of 
Carinthia is great, and consists in lead, iron, zinc and coal. Iron 
ore is extracted in the region of the Saualpe, and is worked in the 
foundries of St Leonhard, St Gertraud, Pravali, Hirt, Treibach 
and Eberstein. About two-thirds of the total production of 
lead in Austria is extracted in Carinthia, the principal places 
being Bleiberg and Raibl. The metallurgic industries are well 
developed, and consist in the production of iron, steel, machinery, 
small-arms, lead articles, wire-cables and rails. The principal 
manufacturing places are Pravali, Briickl, Klagenfurt, Lippitz- 
bach, Wolfsberg, St Veit and Buchscheiden near Feldkirchen. 
The manufacture of small-arms is concentrated at Ferlach. 
Other trades are the manufacture of paper, leather, cement 
and the exploitation of forests. 

The population of Carinthia in 1900 was 367,344, which 
corresponds to 91 inhabitants per sq. m. According to nation- 
ality, 71-54% were Germans, and 28-39% Slovenes, mostly 
settled in the districts adjoining the Slovene province of Carniola. 
Over 94 % of the population were Roman Catholics. The local 
diet, of which the bishop of Gurk is a member ex officio, is com- 
posed of 37 members, and Carinthia sends 10 deputies to the 
Reichsrat at Vienna. For administrative purposes, the province 
is divided into seven districts, and an autonomous municipality, 
Klagenfurt (pop. 24,314), the capital. Other principal places 
are: Villach (9690), Wolfsberg (4852), St Veit (4667), an old 
town, the former capital of Carinthia up to 1518, Pravali (4047), 
Travis (3640), a favourite summer-resort and tourist place, 
Bleiberg (3435), Volkermarkt (2606) and Spittal (2564). 

Carinthia is so called from the Carni, a Celtic people, and in 
the time of Augustus it formed part of Noricum. After the fall 
of the Roman empire, it was the nucleus of the kingdom of 
Carentania, which was founded by Samo, a Frankish adventurer, 
but soon fell to pieces after his death. Under Charlemagne 
it constituted a margravate, which in 843 passed into the hands 
of Louis the German, whose grandson Arnulf was the first to 
bear the title of duke of Carinthia. The duchy was held by various 
families during the nth, 12th and 13th centuries, and at length 
in 1335 was bestowed by Louis the Bavarian on the dukes of 
Austria. It was divided into Upper or Western Carinthia and 
Lower or Eastern; of these the former fell to France in 1809, 
but was reconquered in 1813. It was created a separate crown- 
land in 1849. 

See Aelschker. Geschichte Kdrntens (Klagenfurt, 1885). 

CARINUS, MARCUS AURELIUS, Roman emperor, a.d. 
283-284, was the elder son of the emperor Carus, on whose 
accession he was appointed governor of the western portion of 
the empire. He fought with success against the German tribes, 
but soon left the defence of the Upper Rhine to his legates and 
returned to Rome, where he abandoned himself to all kinds of 
debauchery and excess. He also celebrated the ludi Romani 
on a scale of unexampled magnificence. After the death of 
Carus, the army in the East demanded to be led back to Europe, 
and Numerianus, the younger son of Carus, was forced to comply. 
During a halt at Chalcedon, Numerianus was murdered, and 
Diocletian, commander of the body-guards, was proclaimed 
emperor by the soldiers. Carinus at once left Rome and set out 
for the East to meet Diocletian. On his way through Pannonia 
he put down the usurper M. Aurelius Julianus, and encountered 
the army of Diocletian in Moesia. Carinus was successful in 
several engagements, and at the battle on the Margus (Morava), 
according to one account, the valour of his troops had gained 
the day, when he was assassinated by a tribune whose wife he 
had seduced. In another account, the battle is represented as 
having resulted in a complete victory for Diocletian. Carinus 



has the reputation of having been one of the worst of the 
emperors. 

Vopiscus, Carinus (mainly the recital of his crimes) ; Aurelius 
Victor, De Caesaribus, 38, Epit. 38; Eutropius ix. 18-20; Zonaras 
xii. 30; Orosius vii. 25; Pauly-Wissowa, Realencyclopddie, ii. 24 ff. 
(Henze) . 

CARIPE, a small town of Venezuela in the state of Bermudez, 
about 53 m. E.S.E. of Cumana. It is the chief station of the 
Capuchin missions to the Chayma Indians, founded toward the 
close of the 17th century, and stands 2635 ft. above sea -level, 
in a fertile valley of the Sierra Bergantin, long celebrated for its 
cool, invigorating climate. The locality is also celebrated for 
the extensive system of caves in the limestone rocks found in its 
vicinity, which were described by Humboldt in his Personal 
Narrative. The principal cave, known aslhe Cueva del Guacharo, 
extends inward a distance of 2800 ft. with a height of 70-80 ft. 
These caves are frequented by a species of night-hawk, called 
guacharo, which nests in the recesses of the rocks. The young are 
killed in great numbers for their oil. Caripc itself has a popula- 
tion of only 580, but the valley and neighbouring stations have 
about ten times that number. Caripe should not be confounded 
with Rio Caribe, a town and port on the Caribbean coast a short 
distance east of Carupano, which has a population of about6ooo. 

CARISBROOKE, a town in the Isle of Wight, England, 1 m. 
S. of Newport. Pop. (1991) 3993. The valley of the Lugley 
brook separates the village from the steep conical hill crowned 
by the castle, the existence of which has given Carisbrooke 
its chief fame. There are remains of a Roman villa in the valley, 
but no reliable mention of Carisbrooke occurs in Saxon times, 
though it has commonly been identified with the Saxon Wiht- 
garaburh captured by Cerdic in 530. Carisbrooke is not mentioned 
by name in the Domesday Survey, butBowcombe, its principal 
manor, was a dependency of the royal manor of Amesbury, and 
was obtained from the king by William Fitz Osbern in exchange 
for three Wiltshire manors. The castle is mentioned in the 
Survey under Alvington, and was probably raised by William 
Fitz Osbern, who was made first lord of the Isle of Wight. From 
this date lordship of the Isle of Wight was always associated 
with ownership of the castle, which thus became the seat of 
government of the island. Henry I. bestowed it on Richard de 
Redvers, in whose family it continued until Isabella de Fortibus 
sold it to Edward I., after which the government was entrusted 
to wardens as representatives of the crown. The keep was 
added to the castle in the reign of Henry I., and in the reign of 
Elizabeth, when the Spanish Armada was expected, it was 
surrounded by an elaborate pentagonal fortification. The castle 
was garrisoned by Baldwin de Redvers for the empress Maud 
in 1 136, but was captured by Stephen. In the reign of Richard II. 
it was unsuccessfully attacked by the French; Charles I. was im- 
prisoned here for fourteen months before his execution. After- 
wards his two youngest children were confined in the castle, 
and the Princess Elizabeth died there. In 1904 the chapel of St 
Nicholas in the castle was reopened and reconsecrated, having 
been rebuilt as a national memorial of Charles I. The remains 
of the castle are extensive and imposing, and the keeper's house 
and other parts are inhabited, but the king's apartments are in 
ruins. Within the walls is a well 200 ft. deep; and another in 
the centre of the keep is reputed to have been still deeper. The 
church of St Mary, Carisbrooke, has a beautiful Perpendicular 
tower, and contains transitional Norman portions. Only the 
site can be traced of the Cistercian priory to which it belonged. 
This was founded shortly after the Conquest and originated 
from the endowment which the monks of Lyre near Evreux held 
in Bowcombe, including the church, mill, houses, land and tithes 
of the manor. Richard II. bestowed it on the abbey of Mount- 
grace in Yorkshire. It was restored by Henry IV., but was 
dissolved by act of parliament in the reign of Henry V., who 
bestowed it on his newly-founded charter-house at Sheen. 
Carisbrooke formerly had a considerable market, several milk. 
and valuable fisheries, but it never acquired municipal or repre- 
sentative rights, and was important only as the site of the castle. 

See Victoria County History — Hampshire; William Westall, ffis- 
tory of Carisbrooke Castle (1850). 



338 



CARISSIMI— CARLILE 



CARISSIMI, QIACOMO (c. 1604-1674), one of the most cele- 
brated masters of the Italian, or, more accurately, the Roman 
school of music, was born about 1604 in Marino (near Rome). 
Of his life almost nothing is known. At the age of twenty he 
became chapel-master at Assisi, and in 1628 he obtained the same 
position at the church of St Apollinaris belonging to the Collegium 
Germanicum in Rome, which he held till his death on the 12th 
of January 1674, at Rome. He seems never to have left Italy. 
The two great achievements generally ascribed to him are the 
further development of the recitative, lately introduced by 
Monteverde, and of infinite importance in the history of dramatic 
music; and the invention of the chamber-cantata, by which 
Carissimi superseded the madrigals formerly in use. His position 
in the history of church music and vocal chamber music is 
somewhat similar to that of Cavalli in the history of opera. It 
is impossible to say who was really the inventor of the chamber- 
cantata; but Carissimi and Luigi Rossi were the composers who 
first made this form the vehicle for the most intellectual style of 
chamber-music, a function which it continued to perform until 
the death of Alessandro Scarlatti, Astorga and Marcello. Of his 
oratorios Jephthah has been published by Novello & Co., and is 
well known; this work and others are important as definitely 
establishing the form of oratorio unaccompanied by dramatic 
action, which has maintained its hold to the present day. He 
also may claim the merit of having given greater variety and 
interest to the instrumental accompaniments of vocal composi- 
tions. Dr Burney and Sir John Hawkins published specimens of 
his compositions in their works on the history of music; and Dr 
Aldrich collected an almost complete set of his compositions, at 
present in the library of Christ Church, Oxford. The British 
Museum also possesses numerous valuable works by this great 
Italian master. Most of his oratorios are in the Bibliotheque 
Nationale at Paris. 

CARLETON, WILLIAM (1794-1869), Irish novelist, was born 
at Prillisk, Clogher, Co. Tyrone, on the 4th of March 1794. 
His father was a tenant farmer, who supported a family of 
fourteen children on as many acres, and young Carleton passed 
his early life among scenes precisely similar to those he after- 
wards delineated with so much power and truthfulness. His 
father was remarkable for his extraordinary memory, and had a 
thorough acquaintance with Irish folklore; the mother was noted 
throughout the district for the sweetness of her voice. The 
beautiful character of Honor, the miser's wife, in Fardorougha, 
is said to have been drawn from her. 

The education received by Carleton was of a very humble 
description. As his father removed from one small farm to 
another, he attended at various places the hedge-schools, which 
used to be a notable feature of Irish life. The admirable little 
picture of one of these schools is given in the sketch called 
" The Hedge School " included in Traits and Stories of Irish 
Peasantry. Most of his learning was gained from a curate 
named Keenan, who taught a classical school at Donagh (Co. 
Monaghan) , which Carleton attended from 1814 to 1816. Before 
this Carleton had resolved to prosecute his education as a poor 
scholar at Munster, with a view to entering the church; but 
in obedience to a warning dream, the story of which is told 
in the Poor Scholar, he returned home, where he received the 
unbounded veneration of the neighbouring peasantry for his 
supposed wonderful learning. An amusing account of this 
phase of his existence is given in the ittle sketch, " Denis 
O'Shaughnessy." About the age of nineteen he undertook one 
of the religious pilgrimages then common in Ireland. His 
experiences as a pilgrim, narrated in " The Lough Derg Pilgrim," 
made him resign for ever the thought of entering the church, 
and he eventually became a Protestant. His vacillating ideas 
as to a mode of life were determined in a definite direction by 
the reading of Gil Bias. He resolved to cast himself boldly upon 
the world, and try what fortune had in store for him. He went 
to Killanny, Co Louth, and for six months acted as tutor in the 
family of a farmer named Piers Murphy, and after some other 
experiments he set out for Dublin, and arrived in the metropolis 
with 2s 9d. in his pocket. He first sought occupation as a bird- 



stuffer, but a proposal to use potatoes and meal as stuffing failed 
to recommend him. He then determined to become a soldier, 
but the colonel of the regiment in which he desired to enlist 
persuaded him — Carleton had applied in Latin: — to give up the 
idea. He obtained some teaching and a clerkship in a Sunday 
School office, began to contribute to the journals, and his paper 
" The Pilgrimage to Lough Derg," which was published in the 
Christian Examiner, excited great attention. In 1830 appeared 
the first series of Traits and Stories of the Irish Peasantry (2 vols.), 
which at once placed the author in the first rank of Irish novelists. 
A second series (3 vols.), containing, among other stories, "Tubber 
Derg, or the Red Well," appeared in 1833, and Tales of Ireland 
in 1834. From that time till within a few years of his death 
Carleton's literary activity was incessant. " Fardorougha the 
Miser, or the Convicts of Lisnamona " appeared in 1837-1838 
in the Dublin University Magazine. Among his other famous 
novels are: Valentine McClutchy, the Irish Agent, or Chronicles 
of the Castle Cumber Property (3 vols., 1845); The Black Prophet, 
a Tale of the Famine, in the Dublin University Magazine (1846), 
printed separately in the next year; The Emigrants of Ahadarra 
(1847); Willy Reilly and his dear Colleen Baum (in The Inde- 
pendent, London, 1850); and The Tithe Proctor (1849), the 
violence of which did his reputation harm among his own 
countrymen. Some of his later stories, The Squanders of Castle 
Squander (1852) for instance, are defaced by the mass of political 
matter with which they are overloaded. In spite of his very 
considerable literary production Carleton remained poor, but 
his necessities were relieved in 1848 by a pension of £200 a year 
granted by Lord John Russell in response to a memorial on 
Carleton's behalf signed by numbers of distinguished persons 
in Ireland. He died at Sandford, Co. Dublin, on the 30th of 
January 1869. 

Carleton's best work is contained in the Traits and Stories 
of the Irish Peasantry. He wrote from intimate acquaintance 
with the scenes he described; and he drew with a sure hand a 
series of pictures of peasant life, unsurpassed for their appreciation 
of the passionate tenderness of Irish home life, of the buoyant 
humour and the domestic virtues which would, under better 
circumstances, bring prosperity and happiness. He alienated 
the sympathies of many Irishmen, however, by his unsparing 
criticism and occasional exaggeration of the darker side of 
Irish character. He was in his own words the " historian of their 
habits and manners, their feelings, their prejudices, their super- 
stitions and their crimes." (Preface to Tales of Ireland.) 

During the last months of his life Carleton began an autobiography 
which he brought down to the beginning of his literary career. This 
forms the first part of The Life of William Carleton ... (2 vols., 
1896), by D. J. O'Donoghue, which contains full information about 
his life, and a list of his scattered writings. A selection from his 
stories (1889), in the " Camelot Series," has an introduction by 
Mr W. B. Yeats. He must not be confused with Will Carleton 
(b. 1845), the American author of Farm Ballads (1873). 

CARLETON PLACE, a town and port of entry of Lanark 
county, Ontario, Canada, 28 m. S.W. of Ottawa, on the Mississippi 
river, and at the junction of the main line and Brockville branch 
of the Canadian Pacific railway. It has abundant water-power 
privileges, and extensive railway-repair shops and woollen 
mills. Pop. (1901) 4059. 

CARLILE, RICHARD (1 790-1 843), English freethinker, was 
born on the 8th of December 1790, at Ashburton, Devonshire, 
the son of a shoemaker. Educated in the village school, he was 
apprenticed to a tinman against whose harsh treatment he fre- 
quently rebelled. Having finished his apprenticeship, he obtained 
occupation in London as a journeyman tinman. Influenced by 
reading Paine's Rights of Man, he became an uncompromising 
radical, and in 1817 started pushing the sale of the Black Dwarf, 
a new weekly paper, edited by Jonathan Wooler, all over London, 
and in his zeal to secure the dissemination of its doctrines fre- 
quently walked 30 m. a day. In the same year he also printed 
and sold 25,000 copies of Sou they 's Wat Tyler, reprinted the 
suppressed Parodies of Hone, and wrote himself, in imitation of 
them, the Political Litany. This work cost him eighteen weeks 
imprisonment. In 181 8 he published Paine's works, for which 



CARLINGFORD— CARLISLE, EARLS OF 



339 



and for other publications of a like character he was fined £1500, 
and sentenced to three years' imprisonment in Dorchester gaol. 
Here he published the first twelve volumes of his periodical 
the Republican. The publication was continued by his wife, who 
was accordingly sentenced to two years' imprisonment in 182 1. 
A public subscription, headed by the duke of Wellington, was 
now raised to prosecute Carlile's assistants. At the same time 
Carlile's furniture and stock-in-trade in London were seized, 
three years were added to his imprisonment in lieu of payment 
of his fine, his sister was fined £500 and imprisoned for a year 
for publishing an address by him, and nine of his shopmen 
received terms of imprisonment varying from six months to 
three years. In 1825 the government decided to discontinue the 
prosecutions. After his release m that year Carlile edited the 
Gorgon, a weekly paper, and conducted free discussions in the 
London Rotunda. For refusing to give sureties for good behaviour 
after a prosecution arising out of a refusal to pay church rates, 
he was again imprisoned for three years, and a similar resistance 
cost him ten weeks' more imprisonment in 1834-1835. He died 
on the 10th of February 1843, after having spent in all nine years 
and four months in prison. 

CARLINGFORD, CHICHESTER SAMUEL FORTESCUE, 
Baron (1823-1898), British statesman, son of Chichester Fortes- 
cue (d. 1826), M.P. for Louth in the Irish parliament, was born 
in January 1823. He came of an old family settled in Ireland 
since the days of Sir Faithful Fortescue (1581-1666), whose uncle, 
Lord Chichester, was lord deputy. The history of the family was 
written by his elder brother Thomas (1815-1887), who in 1852 
was created Baron Clermont. The future Lord Carlingford, 
then Mr Chichester Fortescue, went to Christ Church, Oxford, 
where he took a first in classics (1844) and won the chancellor's 
English essay (1846); and in 1847 ne was elected to parliament 
for Louth as a Liberal. He became a junior lord of the treasury 
in 1854, and subsequently held minor offices in the Liberal 
administrations till in 1865 he was made chief secretary for 
Ireland under Lord Russell, a post which he again occupied 
under Gladstone in 1868-1870; he then became president of the 
Board of Trade (1871-1874), and later lord privy seal (1881-1885) 
and president of the council (1883-1885). He was raised to the 
peerage in 1874. He parted from Gladstone on the question of 
Irish Home Rule, but in earlier years he was his active supporter 
on Irish questions. His influence in society was due largely 
to his wife, Frances (18 21-1879), previously the wife of the 7th 
Earl Waldegrave, whom he married in 1863. In 1887 his brother, 
Lord Clermont, died, and Carlingford inherited his peerage; 
but on his own death without issue on the 30th of January 1898 
both titles became extinct. 

CARLINGFORD, a small market town and port of Co. Louth, 
Ireland, in the north parliamentary division. Pop. (1901) 606. 
It is beautifully situated on the western shore of Carlingford 
Lough, at the foot of Carlingford Mountain (1935 ft.), facing the 
fine heights of the Mourne Mountains across the lough in Co. 
Down. It has a station on the railway connecting Greenore 
and Newry, owned by the London & North- Western railway of 
England. It was formerly a place of great importance, as attested 
by numerous remains. King John's Castle (1210) commands the 
lough from an isolated rock. There are other remains of the 
castellated houses erected during the Elizabethan and previous 
wars. A Dominican monastery was founded in 1305, and com- 
bines ecclesiastical and military remains. The town received 
several charters between the reigns of Edward II. and James II., 
was represented in the Irish parliament until the Union, and 
possessed a mint from 1467. The lough is a typical rock-basin 
hollowed out by glacial action, about 4 fathoms deep at its 
entrance, but increasing to four times that depth within. The 
oyster-beds are valuable. 

CARLI-RUBBI, GIOVANNI RINALDO, Count of (1720-1795), 
Italian economist and antiquarian, was born at Capo d' Istria, in 
1720. At the age of twenty-four he was appointed by the senate 
of Venice to the newly established professorship of astronomy 
and navigation in the university of Padua, and entrusted 
with the superintendence of the Venetian marine. After filling 



these offices for seven years with great credit, he resigned them, 
in order to devote himself to the study of antiquities and political 
economy. His principal economic works are his Delle monete, 
e della instituzione delle zecche d' Italia; his Ragionamento 
sopra i bilanci economici delle nazioni (1759), in which he 
maintained that what is termed the balance of trade between 
two nations is no criterion of the prosperity of either, since 
both may be gainers by their reciprocal transactions; and 
his Sul liber commercio dei grani (17 71), in which he argues 
that free trade in grain is not always advisable. Count Carli's 
merits were appreciated by Leopold of Tuscany, afterwards 
emperor, who in 1765 placed him at the head of the council of 
public economy and of the board of public instruction. In 
1769 he became privy councillor, in 1771 president of the new 
council of finances. He died at Milan in February 1795. During 
his leisure he completed and published his Antichita Italiche, 
in which the literature and arts of his country are ably discussed. 
Besides the above, he published many works on antiquarian, 
economic and other subjects, including L' Uomo libero, in 
confutation of Rousseau's Contrat Social; an attack upon the 
abbe Tartarotti's assertion of the existence of magicians; 
Observazioni sulla musica antica e moderna; and several 
poems. 

CARLISLE, EARLS OF. This English title has been held by 
two families, being created for James Hay in 1622, and being 
extinct in that line on the death of his son in 1660, and then 
being given in 166 1 to Charles Howard, and descending to the 
present day in the Howard family. 

James Hay, 1st earl of Carlisle (d. 1636), was the son of Sir 
James Hay of Kingask (a member of a younger branch of the 
Enroll family) , and of Margaret Murray, cousin of George Hay, 
afterwards 1st earl of Kinnoull. He was knighted and taken 
into favour by James VI. of Scotland, brought into England 
in 1603, treated as a " prime favourite " and made a gentleman 
of the bedchamber. In 1604 he was sent on a mission to France 
and pleaded for the Huguenots, which annoyed Henry IV. 
and caused a substantial reduction of the present made to the 
English envoy. On the 21st of June 1606 he was created by 
patent a baron for life, with precedence next to the barons, 
but without a place or voice in parliament, no doubt to render his 
advancement less unpalatable to the English lords. The king 
bestowed on him numerous grants, paid his debts, and secured 
for him a rich bride in the person of Honora, only daughter and 
heir of Edward, Lord Denny, afterwards earl of Norwich. In 
1610 he was made a knight of the Bath, and in 1613 master of 
the wardrobe, while in 161 5 he was created Lord Hay of Sawley, 
and took his seat in the House of Lords. He was sent to France 
next year to negotiate the marriage of Princess Christina with 
Prince Charles, and on his return, being now a widower, married 
in 1617 Lady Lucy Percy (1599-1660), daughter of the 9th earl 
of Northumberland, and was made a privy councillor. In 1618 
he resigned the mastership of the wardrobe for a large sum in 
compensation. He was created Viscount Doncaster, and in 
February 1619 was despatched on a mission to Germany, where 
he identified himself with the cause of the elector palatine and 
urged James to make war in his support. In 1621 and 1622 he 
was sent to France to obtain peace for the Huguenots from Louis 
XIII. , in which he was unsuccessful, and in September 1622 was 
created earl of Carlisle. Next year he went to Paris on the occa- 
sionof Prince Charles's journey to Madrid, andagainin 1624 to join 
Henry Rich, afterwards Lord Holland, in negotiating the prince's 
marriage with Henrietta Maria, when he advised James without 
success to resist Richelieu's demands on the subject of religious 
toleration. On the 2nd of July 1627 Lord Carlisle obtained from 
the king a grant of all the Caribbean Islands, including Barbados, 
this being a confirmation of a former concession given by James 
I. He was also a patentee and councillor of the plantation of 
New England, and showed great zeal and interest in the colonies. 
He became gentleman of the bedchamber to King Charles I. 
after his accession. In 1628, after the failure of the expedition to 
Rhe, he was sent to make a diversion against Richelieu in Lor- 
raine and Piedmont; he counselled peace with Spain and the 



34° 



CARLISLE, EARLS OF 



vigorous prosecution of the war with France, but on his return 
home found his advice neglected. He took no further part in 
public life, and died in March 1636. Carlisle was a man of good 
sense and of accommodating temper, with some diplomatic 
ability. His extravagance and lavish expenditure, his " double 
suppers " and costly entertainments, were the theme of satirists 
and wonder of society, and his debts were said at his death to 
amount to more than £80,000. " He left behind him," says 
Clarendon, " a reputation of a very fine gentleman and a most 
accomplished courtier, and after having spent, in a very jovial 
life, above £400,000, which upon a strict computation he received 
from the crown, he left not a house or acre of land to be 
remembered by." 

The charms and wit of his second wife, Lucy, countess of 
Carlisle, which were celebrated in verse by all the poets of the 
day, including Carew, Cartwright, Herrick and Suckling, and 
by Sir Toby Matthew in prose, made her a conspicuous figure 
at the court of Charles I. There appears no foundation for the 
scandal which made her the mistress successively of Strafford 
and of Pym. Strafford valued highly her sincerity and services, 
but after his death, possibly in consequence of a revulsion of 
feeling at his abandonment by the court, she devoted herself 
to Pym and to the interests of the parliamentary leaders, to 
whom she communicated the king's most secret plans and 
counsels. Her greatest achievement was the timely disclosure 
to Lord Essex of the king's intended arrest of the five members, 
which enabled them to escape. But she appears to have served 
both parties simultaneously, betraying communications on both 
sides, and doing considerable mischief in inflaming political 
animosities. In 1647 sne attached herself to the interests of the 
moderate Presbyterian party, which assembled at her house, and 
in the second Civil War showed great zeal and activity in the 
royal cause, pawned her pearl necklace for £1500 to raise money 
for Lord Holland's troops, established communications with 
Prince Charles during his blockade of the Thames, and made 
herself the intermediary between the scattered bands of royalists 
and the queen. In consequence her arrest was ordered on the 
21st of March 1649, and she was imprisoned in the Tower, 
whence she maintained a correspondence in cipher with the king 
through her brother, Lord Percy, till Charles went to Scotland. 
According to a royalist newsletter, while in the Tower she was 
threatened with the rack to extort information. She was 
released on bail on the 25th of September 1650, but appears 
never to have regained her former influence in the royalist 
counsels, and died soon after the Restoration, on the 5th of 
November 1660. 

The first earl was succeeded by James, his only surviving son 
by his first wife, at whose death in 1660 without issue, the peerage 
became extinct in the Hay family. 

Charles Howard, 1st earl of Carlisle in the Howard line 
(1629-1685), was the son and heir of Sir William Howard, of 
Naworth in Cumberland, by Mary, daughter of William, Lord 
Eure, and great-grandson of Lord William Howard, " Belted 
Will " (1563-1640), and was born in 1629. In 1645 he became 
a Protestant and supported the government of the common- 
wealth, being appointed high sheriff of Cumberland in 1650. 
He bought Carlisle Castle and became governor of the town. 
He distinguished himself at the battle of Worcester on Crom- 
well's side, was made a member of the council of state in 1653, 
' chosen captain of the protector's body-guard and selected to 
carry out various public duties. In 1655 he was given a regiment, 
was appointed a commissioner to try the northern rebels, and a 
deputy major-general of Cumberland, Westmorland and North- 
umberland. In the parliament of 1653 he sat for Westmorland, 
in those of 1654 and 1656 for Cumberland. In 1657 he was 
included in Cromwell's House of Lords and voted for the pro- 
tector's assumption of the royal title the same year. In 1659 
he urged Richard Cromwell to defend his government by force 
against the army leaders, but his advice being refused he used his 
influence in favour of a restoration of the monarchy, and after 
Richard's fall he was imprisoned. In April 1660 he sat again in 
parliament for Cumberland, and at the Restoration was made 



cuslos rotulorum of Essex and lord-lieutenant of Cumberland and 
Westmorland. On the 20th of April 1661 he was created Baron 
Dacre of Gillesland, Viscount Howard of Morpeth, and earl of 
Carlisle; the same year he was made vice-admiral of North- 
umberland, Cumberland and Durham, and in 1662 joint com- 
missioner for the office of earl marshal. In 1663 he was appointed 
ambassador to Russia, Sweden and Denmark, and in 1668 he 
carried the Garter to Charles XI. of Sweden. In 1667 he was 
made lieutenant-general of the forces and joint commander-in- 
chief of the four northernmost counties. In 1672 he became 
lord-lieutenant of Durham, and in 1673 deputy earl marshal. 
In 1678 he was appointed governor of Jamaica, and reappointed 
governor of Carlisle. He died on the 24th of February 1685, 
and was buried in York Minster. He married Anne (d. 1696), 
daughter of Edward, 1st Lord Howard of Escrick; his eldest 
son Edward (c. 1646-1692) succeeded him as 2nd earl of 
Carlisle, the title descending to his son Charles (1674-1738) 
and grandson Henry (1694-1758). 

Frederick Howard, 5th earl (1748-1825), son of the 4th 
earl, was born in 1748. During his youth he was chiefly known 
as a man of pleasure and fashion; and after he had reached 
thirty years of age, his appointment on a commission sent out 
by Lord North to attempt a reconciliation with the American 
colonies was received with sneers by the opposition. The failure 
of the embassy was not due to any incapacity on the part of the 
earl, but to the unpopularity of the government from which 
it received its authority. He was, indeed, considered to have 
displayed so much ability that he was entrusted with the vice- 
royalty of Ireland in 1780. The time was one of the greatest 
difficulty; for while the calm of the country was disturbed by 
the American rebellion, it was drained of regular troops, and 
large bands of volunteers not under the control of the government 
had been formed. Nevertheless, the two years of Carlisle's rule 
passed in quietness and prosperity, and the institution of a 
national bank and other measures which he effected left per- 
manently beneficial results upon the commerce of the island. 
In 1789, in the discussions as to the regency, Carlisle took a 
prominent part on the side of the prince of Wales. In 1791 
he opposed Pitt's policy of resistance to the dismemberment of 
Turkey by Russia; but on the outbreak of the French Revolution 
he left the opposition and vigorously maintained the cause of 
war. In 181 5 he opposed the enactment of the Corn Laws; 
but from this time till his death, in 1825, he took no important 
part in public life. Carlisle was the author of some political 
tracts, a number of poems, and two tragedies, The Father's 
Revenge and The Stepmother, which received high praise from his 
contemporaries. His mother was a daughter of the 4th Lord 
Byron, and in 1798 he was appointed guardian to Lord Byron, 
the poet, who lampooned him in English Bards and Scotch 
Reviewers. 

George Howard, 6th earl (17 73-1 848), eldest son of the 5th 
earl, entered parliament as Lord Morpeth in 1795 as a Whig. 
He was appointed to the Indian board in 1806, when the "Ministry 
of all the Talents " took office, but resigned in 1807, though he 
remained prominent in the House of Commons. After his 
elevation to the House of Lords (1825), he held various cabinet 
offices under Canning and Grey. He made some minor con- 
tributions to literature and left the reputation of an amiable 
scholar. 

George William Frederick Howard, 7th earl (1802-1864), 
was born in London on the 18th of April 1802. He was the 
eldest son of the 6th earl by his wife Lady Georgiana Cavendish, 
eldest daughter of the duke of Devonshire. He was educated at 
Eton and Christ Church, Oxford, where (as Lord Morpeth) he 
earned a reputation as a scholar and writer of graceful verse, 
obtaining in 182 1 both the chancellor's and the Newdigate 
prizes for a Latin and an English poem. In 1826 he accompanied 
his uncle, the duke of Devonshire, to Russia, to attend the 
coronation of the tsar Nicholas, and became a great favourite 
in society at St Petersburg. At the general election of the same 
year he was returned to parliament as member for the family 
borough of Morpeth. In one of his earliest speeches he undertook, 



CARLISLE 



34i 



at the risk of forfeiting the good opinion of the Liberal party, 
the defence of the Russian emperor against severe attacks made 
on him in reference to the suppression of the Polish insurrection 
of 1830. In the agitation for parliamentary reform he took the 
side of Earl Grey; and after the dissolution of parliament, which 
took place about that time, he was elected member for Yorkshire. 
This seat he held till after the passing of the Reform Bill in 1832. 
He was then returned for the West Riding; and in 1835 he 
was appointed by Lord Melbourne chief secretary for Ireland, 
a position at that time of great difficulty, O'Connell being then 
at the height of his reputation. This post he held for about six 
years (being included in the cabinet in 1839), winning great 
popularity by his amiable manners and kindly disposition. 
Losing his seat at the election of 1841, he visited the United 
States, but in 1846 he was again returned for the West Riding, 
and was made chief commissioner of woods and forests in Lord 
John Russell's cabinet. Succeeding to the peerage in 1848, he 
became chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster in 1850. The great 
event of his life, however, was his appointment by Lord Palmer- 
ston to the lord-lieutenancy of Ireland in 1855. This office he 
continued to hold till February 1858, and again from June 1850 
till within a few months of his death. His literary tastes and 
culture were displayed in various popular lectures and in several 
published works. Among these may be mentioned a lecture 
on The Life and Writings of Pope (1851); The Last of the Greeks, 
a tragedy (1828); a Diary in Turkish and Greek Waters (1854), 
the fruit of travels in the East in 1853 and 1854; and a volume 
of Poems, published after his death. In 1866 appeared his 
Viceregal Speeches, collected and edited by J. Gaskin. He took 
warm interest in the reformation of juvenile criminals, and 
established on his own estate one of the best conducted reforma- 
tories in the country. Lord Carlisle died at Castle Howard on 
the 5th of December 1864. He was never married, and was 
succeeded in the peerage by his brother, the Rev. William 
George Howard (d. 1889), as 8th earl. 

George James Howard, 9th earl, born in 1843, was the son 
of Charles, fourth son of the 6th earl. He was educated at 
Eton and Trinity, Cambridge, and, then being only Mr Howard, 
married in 1864 Rosalind, daughter of the 2nd Lord Stanley 
of Alderley. He sat in parliament as a Liberal in 1879-1880, 
and again from 1881 to 1885; and succeeded his uncle in the 
peerage in 1889. His wife, a more active Liberal politician 
than himself, took a prominent part in the temperance movement 
and other advanced causes; and Lord Carlisle became best known 
as an art patron and an artist of considerable ability, whose 
landscape painting had considerable affinity to the work of 
Giovanni Costa. His position as a connoisseur was recognized 
by his being made one of the trustees of the National Gallery. 
His son, Viscount Morpeth (b. 1867), had a distinguished career 
at Oxford, and after various defeats in other constituencies was 
returned to parliament for South Birmingham as a Unionist 
supporter of Mr Chamberlain in 1904. 

CARLISLE, a city, municipal and parliamentary borough, 
and the county town of Cumberland, England, 299 m. N.N.W. 
of London, and 8 m. S. of the Scottish border. Pop. (1901) 
45,480. It lies on the south bank of the river Eden, a little below 
the point where it debouches upon the Solway Plain, 8 m. above 
its mouth in the Solway Firth, at the junction of two tributaries 
from the south, the Caldew and the Petteril. The city grew 
Up originally on and about the two slight eminences of the penin- 
sula enclosed between these three streams. To the north of the 
Eden lies the suburb of Stanwix, connected with the city by a 
handsome bridge (1812-1815). The rivers are not navigable, 
and a canal opened in 1823, connecting the city with Port 
Carlisle on the Solway Firth, was unsuccessful, and was converted 
into a railway. Silloth, on the Irish Sea, is the nearest port of 
importance (21 m.). Carlisle, however, is one of the principal 
railway centres in Great Britain. The London & North- Western 
and the Midland railways of England, and the Caledonian, 
North British and Glasgow & South-Western of Scotland, 
here make a junction for through traffic between England 
and Scotland; and the city is further served by the North 



Eastern (from Newcastle) and the Maryport & Carlisle 
railways. 

Carlisle is the seat of a bishop. Bede, in his life of St Cuthbert, 
alludes to a monastery here, and the saint was also believed to 
have founded a convent and school. But all was swept away 
by the Northmen, and though William Rufus, who rehabilitated 
the town, doubtless made provision for an ecclesiastical founda- 
tion, it was left for Henry I., in 1133, to create a bishopric out of 
the house of Augustinian canons, founded in 1102. This was 
the sole episcopal chapter of regular canons of St Augustine in 
England. It was dissolved in 1540. Between 1156 and 1204 
the bishop's throne was unoccupied, but thereafter there was 
a continuous succession. The diocese covers the whole of 
Westmorland, and practically of Cumberland, with Furness 
and the adjacent district in the north of Lancashire. The 
cathedral as it stands is a fine cruciform building with a central 
tower, but it is incomplete. Of the Norman nave, built by 
^Ethelwold, the first prior and bishop, only two bays are standing, 
the remainder having been destroyed by the Parliamentarians 
in 1646. The south transept, and the lower part of the tower 
piers, are also of this period. Remarkable distortion is seen in 
the nave arches, owing to the sinking of the foundations. The 
thinness of the aisle walls, and the rude masonry of the founda- 
tions of the original apse which have been discovered, point to 
native, not Norman, workmanship. The choir is ornate and 
beautiful, and the huge Decorated east window, with its wonderful 
elaborate tracery, is perhaps the finest of its kind extant. The 
reconstruction of the Norman choir was begun in the middle of 
the 13 th century, but the work was almost wholly destroyed by 
fire in 1292. The north transept and the tower also suffered. 
Building began again c. 1352, and the present tower, erected with 
some difficulty on the weak foundations of the Norman period, 
dates from 1400-1419. The conventual buildings are scanty, 
including little more than a Perpendicular gateway and refectory. 
A stone inscribed with runes, and a well, are among the objects 
of interest within the cathedral. Among the numerous memorials 
is one to Archdeacon Paley; and a stained-glass window com- 
memorates the five children of Archibald Campbell Tait, dean of 
the cathedral, and afterwards archbishop of Canterbury. Of the 
two eminences within the three rivers, the cathedral occupies 
one, the castle the other. It was moated and very strong; but 
has been so far altered that only the keep is of special interest. 
A tower in which Mary, queen of Scots, was imprisoned was 
taken down in 1835. The castle serves as barracks. Fragments 
of the old city walls are seen on the western side over against 
the river Caldew. At Carlisle are the county gaol and the 
Cumberland infirmary, in connexion with which there is a sea- 
side convalescent institution at Silloth. Other notable public 
buildings are the city hall, the court-houses, museum and art 
gallery. The grammar school, of very early foundation, received 
endowment from Henry VIII. Industries include the manu- 
facture of cotton and woollen goods, and there are iron foundries, 
breweries, tanneries and large railway works. There is also a 
considerable agricultural trade. The parliamentary borough 
returns one member. The municipal borough is under a mayor, 
10 aldermen and 30 councillors. Area, 2025 acres. 

This was the Romano-British Luguvallium, probably rather 
a town than a fort, being one of the few towns as distinct from 
forts in.the north of Britain. It lay a mile south of Hadrian's wall. 
There are no traces above ground in situ; but many inscriptions, 
potsherds, coins and other such-like relics have been discovered. 

Carlisle (Caer Luel, Karliol) is first mentioned in 685, when 
under the name of Luel it was bestowed by Ecgfrith on St 
Cuthbert to form part of his see of Lindisfarne. It was then a 
thriving and populous city, and when St Cuthbert visited it in 
686 he was shown with pride the ancient walls and a Roman 
fountain of marvellous construction. Nennius, writing in the 
9th century, mentions it in a list of British cities under the name 
of Caer Luadiit, Caer Ligualid or Caer Lualid, but about this 
time it was either wholly or in part destroyed by the Danes, and 
vanishes completely from history until in 1092 it was re-estab- 
lished as the political centre of the district by William Rufus, 



342 



CARLISLE— CARLOMAN 



who built the castle and sent husbandmen.to dwell there and till 
the land. During the centuries of border-strife which followed, 
the history of Carlisle centres round that of the castle, which 
formed the chief bulwark against the Scots on the western border, 
and played an important part in the history of the country down 
to the rebellion of the young Pretender in 1745. In 1292 a great 
fire destroyed nearly all the buildings and muniments of the 
city, so that no original charter is extant before that date. A 
charter from Edward I., dated 1293, however, exemplifies two 
earlier grants. The first, from Henry II., confirmed the liberties 
and customs which the city had theretofore enjoyed, granting 
in addition a free gild merchant, with other privileges. This 
grant is exemplified in the second charter, from Henry III., 
dated 1251. By a writ dated 5 Henry III. the citizens were 
allowed to hold the city direct from the king, paying a fee-farm 
rent of £60, instead of the former rent of £50, paid by the medium 
of the sheriff. A charter from Edward II., dated 1316, grants 
to the citizens the city, the king's mills in the city, and the 
fishery in the Eden, at a fee-farm rent of £80 a year. A charter 
from Edward III. in 1352 enumerates the privileges and liberties 
hitherto enjoyed by the citizens, including a market twice a week, 
on Wednesday and Saturday; a fair for sixteen days at the 
feast of the Assumption of the Virgin (r 5th of August); free 
election of a mayor, bailiffs and two coroners; and the right to 
hold their markets in the place called " Battailholm." It also 
mentions that the city was greatly impoverished by reason of 
the devastations of the Scots and by pestilence. Confirmations 
of former privileges were issued by Richard II., Henry IV. and 
Henry VI. A charter from Edward IV. in 1461, after reciting 
the damage sustained by the city through fire, reduced the fee- 
farm rent from £80 to £40, and granted to the citizens the fishery 
called the sheriff's net, free of rent. Further confirmations were 
granted by later sovereigns. Although the city had been under 
the jurisdiction of a mayor and bailiffs at least as early as 
1290, the first charter of incorporation was granted by Elizabeth 
in 1566; it established a corporation under the style of " a mayor, 
eleven worshipful persons, and twenty-four able persons." A 
charter of James I. confirmed former liberties, and in 1638 
Charles I. granted a charter under which the town continued to 
be governed until 1835. It declared Carlisle a city by itself, 
and established a corporation consisting of a mayor, 1 1 aldermen, 
24 capital citizens, 2 bailiffs, 2 coroners and a recorder; the 
mayor, the recorder and 2 senior aldermen to be justices of the 
peace, and the mayor to be clerk of the market; other officers 
were a common clerk, a sword-bearer and three serjeants-at-mace. 
Two charters from Charles II. in 1664 and 1684 were never 
accepted. The latter granted a three days' fair or market 
on the first Wednesday in June. Much valuable information 
relating to the early history and customs of Carlisle is furnished 
both by the Dormont Book, which contains an elaborate set 
of bye-laws dated 1561, and by the records of the eight craft 
gilds — weavers, smiths, tailors, tanners, shoemakers, skinners, 
butchers and merchants. The defensive and offensive warfare 
in which the citizens were constantly engaged until the union of 
the crowns of England and Scotland left little time for the 
development of commercial pursuits, and Fuller, writing in the 
17th century, says that the sole manufacture, that of fustian, 
though established shortly after the Restoration, had met with 
scant encouragement. In 1750 the manufacture of coarse linen 
cloth was established, and was followed in a few years by the 
introduction of calico stamperies. The commercial prosperity of 
Carlisle, however, began with the railway development of the 19th 
century. In 1 283 the citizens of Carlisle were summoned to send 
two representatives to parliament, but no return is recorded. 
From 1295 Carlisle continued to return two members until 
the Redistribution Act of 1885. At the time of the Scottish wars 
Edward I. held two parliaments at Carlisle — in 1300 and in 1307. 

See Victoria County History, Cumberland; R. S. Ferguson, Some 
Municipal Records of the City of Carlisle (Cumberl. and Westm. Antiq. 
and Archaeol. Soc, Carlisle and London, 1887), and Royal Charters 
of Carlisle (ditto, Carlisle, &c, 1894) ; Mandell Creighton, Carlisle in 
" Historic Towns " series (London, 1889). 



CARLISLE, a borough and the county-seat of Cumberland 
county, Pennsylvania, U.S.A., 18 m. W. by S. of Harrisburg 
and 118 m. W. by N. of Philadelphia. Pop. (1890) 7620; 

(1900) 9626 (1148 being negroes); (1910) 10,303. It is served by 
the Cumberland Valley (controlled by the Pennsylvania railway) 
and the Gettysburg & Harrisburg railways. The borough is 
pleasantly situated in the central part of the fertile Cumberland 
Valley, which is here 12 m. wide. Mount Holly Springs and 
Boiling Springs are near, and are important summer attractions. 
In Carlisle is Dickinson College, founded in 1 783 by Presbyterians, 
and named in honour of John Dickinson (q.v.), a benefactor 
of the college; it was reorganized in 1833 as a Methodist Epis- 
copal College, and is now divided into the college, the school of 
law (founded in 1834) and Conway Hall, the preparatory 
department. President James Buchanan and Chief Justice 
R. B. Taney were graduates. Here are also Metzger College for 
young ladies, and a well-known United States Indian industrial 
school, established in 1879 through the efforts of Lieutenant (later 
Brigadier- General) Richard Henry Pratt (b. 1840), its superin- 
tendent until 1904 ; the school pays especial attention to industrial 
and agricultural training, and its athletic organizations are 
famous. A great effort is made to preserve and develop Indian 
arts and crafts; the instruction given by Mrs Angel Decora 
Dietz, a Winnebago, in colour work and design, decorating 
leather, making beadwork and weaving rugs, is particularly 
noteworthy. On the initiative of the pupils the Leupp Indian 
Art School was built on the campus in 1906-1907, all materials 
being purchased with the funds of the athletic association and 
all work being done by the students. The building is named 
in honour of Francis Ellington Leupp (b. 1849), U.S. commissioner 
of Indian affairs in 1905. Carlisle is prominent for the manu- 
facture of boots and shoes, and has machine shops and manufac- 
tories of carriages, ribbons, railway frogs and switches, carpets 
and paper boxes. In 1905 the value of all the factory products 
was $1,985,743, of which $1,078,401 was the value of boots and 
shoes. The place was laid out as a town in 1751, was named 
from Carlisle, Cumberland, England, and was incorporated 
as a borough in 1872. In 1753 Benjamin Franklin, with two 
other commissioners, negotiated a treaty with the Ohio Indians 
here. During the War of Independence the Americans kept 
here for secure confinement a number of British prisoners, 
among them Major John Andre, and in 1 794 Carlisle was the head- 
quarters of George Washington during the Whisky Rebellion. On 
the night of the 1st of July 1863 Carlisle was bombarded by 
Confederate troops. 

CARLOFORTE, a town of Sardinia, in the province of Cagliari, 
the capital of the small island (6 by 5 m.) of San Pietro (anc. 
Accipitrum or 'lepaKovvijeros) off the west coast of Sardinia. Pop. 

(1901) 7693. It lies on the east coast of the island, 6 m. west 
by sea from Portoscuso, which is 47 m. west by rail from Cagliari. 
It was founded in 1737 by Charles Emmanuel III. of Savoy, 
who planted a colony of Genoese, whose dialect and costume 
still prevail. In 1798 it was attacked by the Tunisians and 933 
inhabitants taken away as slaves. They were ransomed after 
five years and the place fortified. It is now a centre of the 
tunny fishery, and there are manganese mines also. The coral 
banks, which were once important, are now exhausted. Three 
m. to the south-east is the island of S. Antioco. 

CARLOMAN (828-880), king of Bavaria and Italy, was the 
eldest son of Louis the German, king of the East Franks. In 
856 he undertook the defence of the eastern frontier of Bavaria 
against the Bohemians and Moravians, and won considerable 
fame in various campaigns. . He married a daughter of Ernest, 
count of the Bohemian mark, and in conjunction with his 
father-in-law resisted the authority of his father in 861. For 
some years he alternated between rebellion and submission to 
his father, but in 865 an arrangement was made by which he 
became possessed of Bavaria and Carinthia as his expectant share 
of the kingdom of Louis. During the troubles between Louis and 
his two younger sons Carloman remained faithful to his father, 
and carried on the war with the Moravians so successfully that 
in 870 their territory was completely under the power of the 



CARLOMAN— CARLOS, DON 



Franks; and when peace was made at Forchheim in 874, they 
recognized the Frankish supremacy. In 875 the emperor Louis II. 
died, having named his cousin Carloman as his successor in Italy. 
Carloman crossed the Alps to claim his inheritance, but was 
cajoled into returning by the king of the West Franks, Charles 
the Bald. In 876, on his father's death, Carloman became 
actually king of Bavaria, and after a short campaign against the 
Moravians he went again to Italy in 877 and was crowned king 
of the Lombards at Pavia; but his negotiations with Pope 
John VIII. for the imperial crown were fruitless, and personal 
illness added to the outbreak of an epidemic in his army com- 
pelled him to return to Bavaria. Stricken with paralysis, 
Carloman was unable to prevent his brother Louis from seizing 
Bavaria; so making a virtue of necessity, he bequeathed the 
whole of his lands to Louis. He died on the 22nd of September 
880 at Ottingen, where he was buried, leaving an illegitimate 
son, afterwards the emperor Arnulf. 

See " Annates Fuldenses," "Annates Bertiniani," ReginovonPrum, 
" Chronicon," all in the Monumenta Germaniae historica. Scriptores, 
Bandi. (Hanover and Berlin, 1 826 -1892) ; E. Miihlbacher,Z)Jei<!eg«/eM 
des Kaiserreichs unter den Karolingern (Innsbruck, 1881); and E. 
Diimmier, Geschichte des ostfrdnkischen Reiches (Leipzig, 1887-1888). 
CARLOMAN, the name of three Frankish princes. 
Carloman (d. 7 54) , mayor of the palace under the Merovingian 
kings, was a son of Charles Martel, and, together with his brother, 
Pippin the Short, became mayor on his father's death in 741, 
administering the eastern part of the Frankish kingdom. He 
was successful in extending the power of the Franks in various 
wars with his troublesome neighbours, and was not less zealous 
in seeking to strengthen and reform the church in the lands 
under his rule. In 747 Carloman laid down his office and retired 
to a monastery which he founded on Monte Soracte, but troubled 
by the number of his visitors, he subsequently entered a monastery 
on Monte Casino. He died at Vienne on the 17th of August 754. 
Carloman (751-771), king of the Franks, was a son of King 
Pippin the Short, and consequently a brother of Charlemagne. 
The brothers became joint kings of the Franks on Pippin's 
death in 768, and some trouble which broke out between them 
over the conduct of the war in Aquitaine was followed by Carlo- 
man's death at Samoussy on the 4th of December 771. He married 
Gerberga, a daughter of Desiderius, king of the Lombards, who, 
together with her children, vanished from history soon after her 
husband's death. 

Carloman (d. 884), king of France, was the eldest son of King 
Louis II., the Stammerer, and became king, together with his 
brother Louis III., on his father's death in 870. Although some 
doubts were cast upon their legitimacy, the brothers obtained 
recognition and in 880 made a division of the kingdom, Carloman 
receiving Burgundy and the southern part of France. In 882 he 
became sole king owing to his brother's death, but the kingdom 
was in a very deplorable condition, and his power was very 
circumscribed. Carloman met his death while hunting on the 
1 2th of December 884. 
See E. Lavisse, Histoire de France, tome ii. (Paris, 1903). 

CARLOS I. ( 1 863-1 908), king of Portugal, the third sovereign 
of Portugal of the line of Braganza-Coburg, son of King Louis I. 
and Maria Pia, daughter of King Victor Emmanuel of Italy, 
was born on the 28th of September 1863. When about twenty 
years of age he spent a considerable time in travelling, visiting 
England in 1883. On the 22nd of May 1886 he married Marie 
Amelie, daughter of Philippe, due d'Orleans, comte de Paris, 
and on the death of his father (19th of October 1889) he suc- 
ceeded to the throne of Portugal. In that year the British 
government found it necessary to make formal remonstrances 
against Portuguese encroachments in South Africa, and relations 
between the two countries were greatly strained for some time. 
The king's attitude during this critical period was one of concilia- 
tion, and his temperate, though firm, speech on opening the 
Cortes in January 1890 did much to strengthen the party of 
peace. In 1900-1901 also his friendly attitude towards Great 
Britain was shown by cordial toasts at a banquet to the officers 
of the British fleet at Lisbon. King Carlos distinguished himself 
as a patron of science and literature, and was himself an artist 



343 

of some repute. In March 1894 he took a very active part in 
the celebration of the 500th anniversary of the birth of Prince 
Henry the Navigator, and a year later he decorated the Portuguese 
poet, Joao de Deus, with much honour at Lisbon. He took a 
great personal interest in deep-sea soundings and marine explora- 
tion, and published an account of some of his own investiga- 
tions, the results themselves being shown at an oceanographic 
exhibition opened by him on the 12th of April 1897. In May 
1907 the king suspended the constitution of Portugal and 
temporarily appointed Senhor Franco as dictator with a view 
to carrying out certain necessary reforms. Some discontent 
was aroused by this proceeding; this was increased by Franco's 
drastic measures, and on the 1st of February 1908 King Carlos 
and his elder son, Louis, duke of Braganza (1887-1908), were 
assassinated whilst driving through the streets of Lisbon. The 
king was succeeded by his only surviving son, Manuel, duke of 
Beja (b. 1889), who took the title of Manuel II. 

See S. M. El Rei D. Carlos I. e sua obra artislica e scientific^ 
(Lisbon, 1908). 

CARLOS, DON (1 545-1 568), prince of Asturias, was the son of 
Philip II. king of Spain, by his first wife Maria, daughter of John 
III., king of Portugal, and was born at Valladolid on the 8th of 
July 1545. His mother died a few days after his birth, and the 
prince, who was very delicate, grew up proud, wilful and indolent, 
and soon began to show signs of insanity. In 1559 he was be- 
trothed to Elizabeth, daughter of Henry II., king of France, 
a lady who a few months later became the third wife of his 
father; in 1560 he was recognized as the heir to the throne of 
Castile, and three years later to that of Aragon. Other brides 
werethensuggestedfortheprince; Mary, queen of Scots, Margaret, 
another daughter of Henry II., and Anne, a daughter of the 
emperor Maximilian II.; but meanwhile his mental derangement 
had become much more acute, and his condition could no longer 
be kept secret. In 1562 he met with an accident which was 
followed by a serious illness, and after his recovery he showed 
more obvious signs of insanity, while his conduct both in public 
and in private was extremely vicious and disorderly. He took 
a marked dislike to the duke of Alva, possibly because he wished 
to proceed to the Netherlands instead of the duke, and he 
exhibited a morbid antipathy towards his father, whose murder 
he even contemplated. At length in January 1568, when he had 
made preparations for flight from Spain, he was placed in con- 
finement by order of Philip, and on the 24th of July of the same 
year he died. This event is still enveloped in some mystery. 
Philip has been accused of murdering his son, and from what 
is known of the king's character this supposition is by no means 
improbable. It is known that the king appointed commissioners 
to try the prince, and he may have been put to death for treason in 
accordance with their verdict. It has also been suggested that 
his crime was heresy, and that his death was due to poison, and 
other solutions of the mystery have been put forward. On the 
other hand, it should be remembered that the health of Carlos 
was very poor, and that his outrageous behaviour in captivity 
would have undermined a much stronger constitution than his 
own. Consequently there is nothing strange or surprising in 
his death from natural causes, and while no decisive verdict 
upon this question can be given, Philip may perhaps be granted the 
benefit of the doubt. By some writers the sad fate and early 
death of Carlos have been connected with the story of his unlaw- 
ful attachment to his promised bride, Elizabeth, who soon 
became his stepmother, and whose death followed so quickly 
upon his own. There is circumstantial evidence for this tale. 
The loss of an affianced bride, followed by hatred between 
supplanted and supplanter, who were father and son, then the 
increasing infirmity of the slighted prince, and finally the almost 
simultaneous deaths of the pair.. But mature historical research 
dismisses this story as a fable. It has, however, served as the 
subject for romance. Schiller and Alfieri, J. G. de Campristron 
in Andronic, and Lord John Russell have made it the subject 
of dramas, and other dramas based upon the life of Don Carlos 
have been written by Thomas Otway, M. A. Ch6nier, J. P. de 
Montalvan, and D. X. de Enciso. 



344 



CARLOS, DON 



See C. V. de Saint Real, Don Carlos, nouvelle historique (Paris, 
1672). This gives the story of the attachment of Carlos and Eliza- 
beth, which has been refuted by L. von Ranke, Zur Gesckichte des 
don Carlos (Vienna, 1829) ; and J. A. Llorente, Histoire critique de 
V Inquisition (French translation, Paris, 1817). See also L. P. 
Gachard, Don Carlos et Philippe II (Brussels, 1863) ; C. de Moiiy, 
Don Carlos et Philippe II (Paris, 1863); M. Budiuger, Don Carlos, 
Haft und Tod (Vienna, 1891); L. A. WarnkSnig, Don Carlos, Leben, 
Verhaftung und Tod (Stuttgart, 1864); W. Maurenbrecher, Don 
Carlos (Berlin, 1876) ; and W. H. Prescott, History of the Reign of 
Philip II. vol. ii. (London, 1855, 1859). 

CARLOS, DON (1788-1855), the first of the Carlist claimants 
of the throne of Spain, was the second surviving son of King 
Charles IV. and his wife, Louisa Maria of Parma. He was born 
on the 29th of March 1788, and was christened Carlos Maria 
Isidro. From 1808 till 1814 he was a prisoner in France at 
Valencay with his brothers, who had been imprisoned by Napoleon 
when he seized the whole royal family of Spain at Bayonne. 
After his return he lived quietly as a prince at Madrid. In 
September 1816 he married Maria Francesca de Asis, daughter 
of King John VI. of Portugal, and sister of the second wife of 
his elder brother King Ferdinand VII. Though he took no part 
in the government of Spain, except to hold a few formal offices, 
Don Carlos was known for the rigid orthodoxy of his religious 
opinions, the piety of his life, and his firm belief in the divine 
right of kings to govern despotically. During the revolutionary 
troubles of 1820-1823 he was threatened by the extreme radicals, 
but no attack was made on him. When the revolutionary 
agitation was put down by French intervention in 1823, Don 
Carlos continued to behave as the affectionate brother and 
loyal subject of Ferdinand VII. The family affection between 
them was undoubtedly sincere, and was one of the very few 
amiable traits in the character of the elder brother. Towards 
the close of Ferdinand's reign Don Carlos was forced against his 
own will into the position of a party leader, or rather into the 
position of a prince whom a great party was forced to take as 
its leader. The extreme clericals among the Spaniards, who were 
the partisans of despotism because they rightly considered 
it as most favourable to the church, began to be discontented 
with King Ferdinand, who seemed wanting in energy. When 
the king showed his intention to alter the law of succession in 
order to secure the crown for his daughter Isabella, the clericals 
(in the Spanish phrase, " apostolicos ") banded to protect the 
rights of Don Carlos. There can be no question that if he had 
been disposed to place himself at the head of an insurrection he 
would have been followed, and might have put Ferdinand under 
restraint. But Don Carlos held his principles honestly. He 
considered rebellion as a sin in a prince as much as in other men, 
and as wicked when made by " apostolicos " as by liberals. 
He would do no more than assert his rights, and those of his 
children, in words. His wife and her sister, the princess of 
Beira, widow of his first cousin the infante Pedro, were less 
scrupulous. They were actively engaged in intrigues with the 
" apostolicos." In March 1833 the princess of Beira was informed 
by the king that her brother Don Miguel, then regent in Portugal, 
desired her presence, and that she must pay him a visit. On 
the 1 6th of March Don Carlos left for Portugal with his wife, 
in company with the princess, after an interview with his brother 
the king which is said to have been friendly. In the following 
month he was called upon by the king to swear allegiance to the 
infanta Isabella, afterwards queen. Don Carlos refused, in 
respectful terms but with great firmness, to renounce his rights 
and those of his sons, in a public letter dated the 29th of April. 
The death of his brother on the 29th of September 1833 gave him 
an opportunity to vindicate his claims without offence to his 
principles, for in his own opinion and that of his partisans he 
was now king. But he was entangled in the civil war of Portugal 
and was shut off from Spain. He did, and perhaps could do, 
nothing to direct the Spaniards who rose on his behalf, and had 
proclaimed him king as Charles V. When the Miguelite party 
was beaten in Portugal, Don Carlos escaped to England on the 
1st of June 1834 in H.M.S. " Donegal." His stay in England 
was short. On the 2nd of July he passed over to France, where 
he was actively aided by the legitimist party, and on the nth 



he joined his partisans at Elizondo in the valley of Bastan, in 
the western Pyrenees. On the 27 th of October of this year 
he was deprived of his rights as infante by a royal decree, con- 
firmed by the Cortes on the 15th of January 1837. Don Carlos 
remained in Spain till the defeat of his party, and then escaped 
to France on the 14th of September 1839. During these years 
he accompanied his armies, without displaying any of the qualities 
of a general or even much personal courage. But he endured a 
good deal of hardship, and was often compelled to take to hiding in 
the hills. On these occasions he was often carried over difficult 
places on the back of a stout guide commonly known as the royal 
jackass (burro real). The semblance of a court which he main- 
tained was torn by incessant personal intrigues, and by con- 
flicts between his generals and the ecclesiastics who exercised 
unbounded influence over his mind. The defeat of his cause, 
which had many chances of success, was unquestionably due to 
a very large extent to his want of capacity, his apathy, and his 
increasing absorption in practices of puerile piety. His first 
wife having died in England, Don Carlos married her elder sister, 
the princess of Beira, in Biscay in October 1837. After his 
flight from Spain, Don Carlos led a life of increasing insignificance. 
He abdicated in May 1845, took a title of count of. Molina, and 
died at Trieste on the 10th of March 1855. 

By his first marriage, Don Carlos had three sons, Charles 
(1818-1861), John (1822-1887), and Ferdinand (1824-1861). 
Charles succeeded to the claims of his father, and was known to 
his partisans as Don Carlos VI., but was more commonly known 
as the count of Montemolin. In 1846, when the marriage of queen 
Isabella was being negotiated, the Austrian government endeav- 
oured to arrange an alliance between her and the count of 
Montemolin. But as he insisted on the complete recognition of 
his rights, the Spanish government refused to hear of him as 
a candidate. The Carlists took up arms on his behalf between 
1846 and 1848, but the count, who had been expelled from 
France by the police, did not join them in the field. In April 
i860 he and his brother Ferdinand landed at San Carlos de la 
Rapita, at the mouth of the Ebro, in company with a feather- 
headed officer named Ortega, who held a command in the Balearic 
islands. They hoped to profit by the fact that the bulk of the 
Spanish army was absent in a war with Morocco. But no Carlist 
rising took place. The men who had been brought from the 
islands by Ortega deserted him. Montemolin and his brother, 
together with their devoted partisan General Elio, who had 
accompanied them from exile, lurked in hiding for a fortnight and 
were then captured. Ortega was shot, but the princes saved their 
lives, and that of Elio, by making an abject surrender of their 
claims. When he had been allowed to escape and had reached 
Cologne, the count of Montemolin publicly retracted his renunica- 
tion on the 15th of June, on the ignominious ground that it had 
been extorted by fear. Montemolin and his brother Ferdinand 
died within a fortnight of one another in January 1861 without 
issue. 

The third brother, John, who had advanced his own claims 
before his brother's retraction, now came forward as the repre- 
sentative of the legitimist and Carlist cause. As he had shown 
a disposition to accept liberalism, and to make concessions to 
the spirit of the age, he was unpopular with the party. On the 
3rd of October 1868 he made a formal renunciation in favour of 
his son Charles (Don Carlos VII. ) , who is separately noticed below. 

See Hermann Baumgarten, Gesckichte Spaniens (Leipzig, 1861); 
H. Butler Clarke, Modern Spain (Cambridge, 1906), which containsa 
useful bibliography. 

CARLOS, DON (Charles Maria de los Dolores Juan 
Isidore Joseph Francis Quirin Antony Michael Gabriel 
Raphael) (i848-i909),princeof Bourbon, claimant,as Don Carlos 
VII., to the throne of Spain, was born at Laibach on the 30th 
of March 1848, being the eldest surviving son of Don Juan (John) 
of Bourbon and of the archduchess Maria Beatrix, daughter of 
Francis IV., duke of Modena. Don Carlos was the grandson of 
the first pretender, noticed above. He married in February 1867, 
at Frohsdorf , Princess Marguerite, daughter of the duke of Parma 
and niece of the comte de Chambord, who was born on the 1st 



CARLOW 



345 



of January 1847, and who bore him a son, Don Jaime, in 1870, 
and three daughters. Don Carlos boldly asserted his pretensions 
to the throne of Spain two years after the revolution of 1868 
had driven Queen Isabella II. and the other branch of the Bour- 
bons into exile. His manifesto, addressed to his brother Alphonso, 
namesake of his rival, Alphonso XII., found an echo in the 
fanatical priesthood and peasantry of many provinces of the 
Peninsula, but little support among the more enlightened 
middle classes, especially in the towns. The first rising was 
started in Catalonia by the brother of the pretender, who himself 
entered Spain by way of Vera, in the Basque provinces, on the 
21st of May 1872. The troops of King Amadeus under General 
Moriones, a progressist officer, who was one of Spain's ablest 
and most popular commanders, surprised and very nearly cap- 
tured the pretender at Oroquista, sending him a fugitive to France 
in headlong flight with a few followers. For more than a year 
he loitered about in the French Pyrenees, the guest of old noble 
houses who showed him much sympathy, while the French 
authorities winked at the fact that he was fomenting civil war 
in Spain, where his guerilla bands, many of them led by priests, 
committed atrocities, burning, pillaging, shooting prisoners of 
war, and not unfrequently ill-using even foreign residents and 
destroying their property. When the Federal Republic was 
proclaimed on the abdication of King Amadeus, the Carlists had 
overrun Spain to such an extent that they held all the interior 
of Navarre, the three Basque provinces, and a great part of 
Catalonia, Lower Aragon, and Valencia, and had made raids 
into the provinces of Old Castile and Estremadura. Don Carlos 
re-entered Spain on the 15th of July 1873, just before the Carlists 
took Estella, in Navarre, which became, with Tolosa and Durango 
in the Basque provinces, his favourite residence. He displayed 
very lax morals and an apathy which displeased his staff and 
partisans. Don Carlos was present at some fights around 
Estella, and was in the neighbourhood of Bilbao during its 
famous siege of three months in 1874 until its relief by Marshals 
Serrano and Concha on the 2nd of May. He was also present 
at the battle near Estella on the 27th of June 1874, in which 
Marshal Concha was killed and the liberals were repulsed with 
loss. Twice he lost golden opportunities of making a rush for 
the capital — in 1873, during the Federal Republic, and after 
Concha's death. From the moment that his cousin Alphonso XII. 
was proclaimed king at Sagunto, at Valencia, in Madrid, and 
at Logroiio, by General Campos, Daban, Jovellar, Primo de 
Rivera, and Laserna, the star of the pretender was on the wane. 
Only once, a few weeks after the Alphonsist restoration, the 
army of Don Carlos checked the Liberal forces in Navarre, and 
surprised and made prisoners half a brigade, with guns and 
colours, at Lacar, almost under the eyes of the new king and his 
headquarters. This was the last Carlist success. The tide of war 
set in favour of Alphonso XII., whose armies swept the Carlist 
bands out of central Spain and Catalonia in 1875, while Marshal 
Quesada, in the upper Ebro valley, Navarre, and Ulava, prepared 
by a series of successful queries the final advance of 180,000
men, headed by Quesada and the king, which defeated the Carlists 
at Estella, Pefia Plata, and Elgueta, thus forcing Don Carlos 
with a few thousand faithful Carlists to retreat and surrender to 
the French frontier authorities in March 1876. 

The pretender went to Pau, and there, singularly enough, 
issued his proclamations bidding temporary adieu to the nation 
and to his volunteers from the same chateau where Queen 
Isabella, also a refugee, had issued hers in 1868. From that date 
Don Carlos became an exile and a wanderer, travelling much in 
the Old and New World, and raising some scandal by his mode of 
life. He fixed his residence for a time in England, then in Paris, 
from which he was expelled at the request of the Madrid govern- 
ment, and next in Austria, before he took up his abode at 
Viarreggio in Italy. Like all pretenders, he never gave in, and 
his pretensions, haughtily reasserted, often troubled the courts 
and countries whose hospitality he enjoyed. His great dis- 
appointment was the coldness towards him of Pope Leo XIII. , 
and the favour shown by that pontiff for Alphonso XII. and his 
godson, Alphonso XIII. Don Carlos had two splendid chances 



of testing the power of his party in Spain, but failed to profit 
by them. The first was when he was invited to unfurl his flag 
on the death of Alphonso XII., when the perplexities and un- 
certainties of Castilian politics reached a climax during the first 
year of a long minority under a foreign queen-regent. The second 
was at the close of the war with the United States and after the 
loss of the colonies, when the discontent was so widespread 
that the Carlists were able to assure their prince that many 
Spaniards looked upon his cause as the one untried solution of the 
national difficulties. Don Carlos showed his usual lack of decision; 
he wavered between the advice of those who told him to unfurl 
his standard with a view to rally all the discontented and dis- 
appointed, and of those who recommended him to wait until a great 
pronunciamienio, chiefly military, should be made in his favour — 
a day-dream founded upon the coquetting of General Weyler and 
other officers with the Carlist senators and deputies in Madrid. 
Afterwards the pretender continued to ask his partisans to go 
en organizing their forces for action some day, and to push 
their propaganda and preparations, which was easy enough 
in view of the indulgence shown them by all the governments 
of the regency and the open favour exhibited by many of the 
priesthood, especially in the rural districts, the religious orders, 
and the Jesuits, swarming all over the kingdom. After the 
death of his first wife in 1893, Don Carlos married in the following 
year Princess Marie Bertha of Rohan. He died on the 18th of 
July 1909. His son by his first wife, Don Jaime, was educated 
in Austrian and British military schools before he entered the 
Russian army, in which he became a colonel of dragoons. 

CARLOW, a county of Ireland in the province of Leinster, 
bounded N. by the counties Kildare and Wicklow, E. by Wicklow 
and Wexford, S. by Wexford, and W. by Queen's county and 
Kilkenny. Excepting Louth, it is the smallest county in Ireland, 
having an area of 221,424 acres, or about 346 sq. m. The surface 
of the county is in general level or gently undulating, and of 
pleasing appearance, except the elevated tract of land known 
as the ridge of Old Leighlin (Gallows Hill Bog, 974 ft.), forming 
the beginning of the coal-measures of Leinster, and the south- 
eastern portion of the county bordering on Wexford, where the 
wild and barren granitic elevations of Knockroe (1746 ft.) 
and Mount Leinster (2610 ft.) present a bolder aspect. Glacial 
deposits, which overspread the lower grounds, sometimes afford 
good examples of the ridge-forms known as eskers, as in the 
neighbourhood of Bagenalstown. There are no lakes nor canals 
in the county, nor does it contain the source of any important 
river; but on its western side it is intersected from north to 
south by the Barrow, which is navigable throughout the county 
and affords means of communication with the port of Waterford; 
while on the eastern border the Slaney, which is not navigable 
in any part of its course through the county, passes out of 
Carlow into Wexford at Newtownbarry. 

Carlow is largely a granite county; but here the Leinster 
Chain does not form a uniform moorland. The mica-schists and 
Silurian slates of its eastern flank are seen in the diversified 
and hilly country on the pass over the shoulder of Mt. Leinster, 
between Newtownbarry and Borris. The highland drops west- 
ward to the valley of the Barrow, Carlow and Bagenalstown 
lying on Carboniferous Limestone, which here abuts upon the 
granite. On the west of the hollow, the high edge of the Castle- 
comer coalfields rises, scarps of limestone, grit, and coal-measures 
succeeding one another on the ascent. Formerly clay-ironstone 
was raised from the Upper Carboniferous strata. 

The soil is of great natural richness, and the country is among 
the most generally fertile in the island. Agriculture is the chief 
occupation of the inhabitants, but is not so fully developed as 
the capabilities of the land would suggest; in effect, the extent 
of land under tillage shows a distinctly retrograde movement, 
being rather more than half that under pasture. The pasture 
land is of excellent quality, and generally occupied as dairy farms, 
the butter made in this county maintaining a high reputation 
in the Dublin market. The farms are frequently large, and care 
is given to the breeding of cattle. Sheep and poultry, however, 
receive the greatest attention. The staple trade of the county is 



346 



CARLOW— CARLSBAD 



in corn, flour, meal, butter and provisions, which are exported 
in large quantities. There are no manufactures. The sandstone 
of the county is frequently of such a nature as to split easily 
into layers, known in commerce as Carlow flags. 

Porcelain clay exists in the neighbourhood of Tullow; but no 
attempt is made to turn this product to use. 

The Great Southern & Western railway from Kildare to Wexford 
follows the river Barrow through the county, with a branch from 
Bagenalstown to Kilkenny, while another branch from the north 
terminates at Tullow. 

As regards population (41,964 in 1891; 37,748 in 1901), 
the county shows a decrease among the more serious of Irish 
counties, and correspondingly heavy emigration returns. Of the 
total, about 89% are Roman Catholics, and nearly the whole 
are rural. Carlow (pop. 6513), Bagenalstown (1882), and 
Tullow (1725) are the only towns. The county is divided into 
seven baronies, and contains forty-four civil parishes and parts 
of parishes. It belongs to the Protestant diocese of Dublin and 
the Roman Catholic diocese of Kildare and Leighlin. The 
assizes are held at Carlow, and quarter sessions at that town 
and also at Bagenalstown and Tullow. One member is returned 
to parliament. 

Carlow, under the name of Catherlogh, is among the counties 
generally considered to have been created in the reign of John. 
Leinster was confirmed as a liberty to William Marshal, earl of 
Pembroke, by John, and Carlow, among other counties in this 
area, had the privileges of a palatinate on descending to one of 
the earl's heiresses. The relics of antiquity in the county com- 
prise large cromlechs at Browne's Hill near Carlow and at 
Hacketstown, and a rath near Leighlin Bridge, in which were 
found several urns of baked earth, containing only small quan- 
tities of dust. Some relics of ecclesiastical and monastic buildings 
exist, and also the remains of several castles built after the 
English settlement. Old Leighlin, where the 12th century 
cathedral of St Lazerian is situated, is merely a village, although 
until the Union it returned two members to the Irish parliament. 

CARLOW, the county town of Co. Carlow, Ireland, on the 
navigable river Barrow. Pop. of urban district (1901) 6513. 
It is 56 m. S.W. of Dublin by the Great Southern & Western 
railway. The castle (supposed to have been founded by Hugh 
de Lacy, appointed governor of Ireland in n 79, but sometimes 
attributed to King John), situated on an eminence overlooking 
the river, is still a chief feature of attraction in the general 
view of the town, although there is not much of the original 
building left. It consisted of a hollow quadrangle, with a 
massive round tower at each angle. The principal buildings are 
the Roman Catholic College of St Patrick (1793), a plain but 
spacious building in a picturesque park adjoining the Roman 
Catholic cathedral of the diocese of Kildare and Leighlin; the 
Protestant parish church, with a handsome steeple of modern 
erection ; the court-house, where the assizes are held, an octagonal 
stone building with a handsome Ionic portico ; and other county 
buildings. The cathedral, in the Perpendicular style, has a 
highly ornamented west front, and a monument to Bishop James 
Doyle (d. 1834). The Wellington Bridge over the river Barrow 
connects Carlow with the suburb of Graigue. Two m. N.E. of 
the town is one of the finest cromlechs in Ireland, and 3 m. 
to the west is the notable church, of Norman and pre-Norman 
date, of Killeshin in Queen's county. The industries of Carlow 
consist of brewing and flour-milling, and a considerable trade is 
carried on in the sale of butter and eggs. 

Carlow was of early importance. In the reign of Edward III. 
the king's exchequer was removed thither, and £500, a large 
sum at that period, applied towards surrounding the town with 
a strong wall. In the early part of the reign of Queen Elizabeth 
the castle was taken, and the town burned by the Irish chieftain, 
Rory Oge O'More. When summoned to surrender by Ireton, 
the Commonwealth general, during the war of 1641, Carlow 
submitted without resistance. In the insurrection of 1798 the 
castle was attacked by an undisciplined body of insurgents. 
They were speedily repulsed, and suffered severe loss, no quarter 
being given; and, in the confusion of their flight, many of the 



insurgents took refuge in houses, which the king's troops im- 
mediately set on fire. Carlow obtained a charter of incorporation 
as early as the 13th century, and was reincorporated, with 
enlarged privileges, by James I. The corporation, which was 
styled " The Sovereign, Free Burgesses and Commonalty of 
the Borough of Catherlogh," was authorized to return two 
members to the Irish parliament. The town returned one 
member to the Imperial parliament until 1885. 

CARLSBAD, or Kaiser-Karlsbad (Czech, Karlovy Vary), 
a town and celebrated watering-place of Bohemia, Austria, 
116 m. W.N.W. of Prague by rail. Pop. (1900) 14,640. It is 
situated at an altitude of 1227 ft. and lies in the beautiful 
narrow and winding valley of the Tepl at its junction with the 
Eger, being hemmed in by precipitous granite hills, covered with 
magnificent forests of pine. The town is spread on both banks 
of the river and in the valley of the Eger, its houses being built 
up the mountain sides in tier above tier of terraces approached 
by long flights of steps or steep and tortuous roads. This 
irregularity of site and plan, together with the varied form and 
high-pitched roofs of the houses, makes the place very picturesque. 
Among the principal buildings of Carlsbad are the Catholic 
parish church, built in 1732-1736 in rococo style; the gorgeous 
Russian church, finished in 1897; the English church; and a 
handsome synagogue. In the first rank of the other buildings 
stands the famous Muhlbrunnen Colonnade, erected between 
1871 and 1878, which, with its 103 monolithic granite Corinthian 
columns, is a fine example of modern classical architecture; 
the Kurhaus (1865); the magnificent Kaiserbad, built in 1895 
in the French Renaissance style, and several other bathing 
establishments; the Sprudel Colonnade, an imposing iron and 
glass structure, built in 1879, within which rises the Sprudel, 
the principal spring of Carlsbad; and several hospitals and 
hospices for poor patients. Both banks of the Tepl are provided 
with quais, planted with trees, which constitute the chief pro- 
menades of the centre of the town; and there are, besides, a 
municipal park and several public gardens. 

The mineral springs, to which Carlsbad owes its fame, rise 
from beneath a very hard kind of rock, known as Sprudelschale or 
Sprudeldecke, beneath which it is believed that there exists 
a large common reservoir of the hot mineral water, known as 
the Sprudelkessel. Several artificial apertures in the rock have 
been made for the escape of the steam of this subterranean 
cauldron, which, owing to the incrustations deposited by the 
water, require to be cleared at regular intervals. Altogether 
there are seventeen warm springs, with a temperature varying 
from 164 F. to 107-7° F., and two cold ones. The oldest, best- 
known, and at the same time the most copious spring is the 
Sprudel, a hot geyser with a temperature of 164° F., which 
gushes up in jets of i| ft. thick to a height of about 35 ft., and 
delivers about 405 gallons of water per minute. Other springs 
are the Muhlbrunnen, with a temperature of 121° F., which is 
after the Sprudel the most used spring; the Neubrunnen 
(138° F.); the Kaiser-Karl-Quelle (112 F.); the Theresien- 
brunnen (134° F.), &c. The warm springs belong to the class 
of alkaline-saline waters and have all the same chemical com- 
position, varying only in their degree of temperature. The 
chemical composition of the Sprudel, taken to a thousand parts 
of water, is: 2-405 sulphate of soda, 1-298 bicarbonate of soda, 
1-042 chloride of soda, o- 186 sulphate of potash, o- 166 bicarbonate 
of magnesia, o-or2 bicarbonate of lithium, and 0-966 carbonic 
acid gas. They contain also traces of arsenic, antimony, selenium, 
rubidium, t'n and organic substances. The water is colourless and 
odourless, with a slightly acidulated and salt taste, and has a 
specific gravity of 1-0053 at 64-4° F. The waters are used both 
for drinking and bathing, and are very beneficent in cases of liver 
affections, biliary and renal calculi, diabetes, gout, rheumatism, 
and uric acid troubles. They are very powerful in their effect 
and must not be used except under medical direction, and during 
the cure, a carefully-regulated diet must be observed, coupled 
with a moderate amount of exercise in the open air. The number 
of visitors in igor was 51,454; in 1756 it was only 257; in 1828 
it was 3713; and it attained 14,182 in 1869, and 34,396 in 1890. 



CARLSBAD DECREES 



347 



Carlsbad is encircled by mountains, covered with beautiful 
forests of pine, which are made accessible by well-kept paths. 
Just above the town towers the Hirschensprung (1620 ft.), 
a little farther the Freundschaftshohe (1722 ft.); the Franz- 
Josefs-Hohe (1663 ft.); and the Aberg (1980 ft.). On the 
opposite bank of the Tepl lies the Rudolfshohe (1379 ft.); 
the Dreikreuzberg (1805 ft.); the Konig Otto's Hohe (i960 ft.); 
and the Ewiges Leben (2086 ft.), with the Stephaniewarte, a 
tower, 98 ft. high, built in 1889, which commands a superb view. 
The town is the centre of the porcelain and stoneware industry 
of Bohemia, and manufactures a special liqueur (Karlsbader 
Bitter), besides various objects from the Sprudel rock and con- 
fectionery. It exported, in 1901, 2j millions of bottles of mineral 
water, and 160,000 lb of Sprudel salt, i.e. salt obtained by 
evaporation from the water of the Sprudel. 

Many interesting places are to be found near Carlsbad. To 
the north is the village of Dallwitz, with a porcelain factory, 
a handsome castle and beautiful oaks extolled by Theodor 
Korner, under which he composed in 181 2 his touching elegy on 
the downfall of Germany. To the east is the watering-place of 
Giesshiibl-Puchstein with celebrated springs, which contain 
alkaline waters impregnated with carbonic acid gas. To the west 
in the valley of the Eger, the village of Aich, with a porcelain 
factory, and a little farther the much-visited Hans Heiling's 
Rock, a wild and romantic spot, with which a very touching 
legend is connected: To the south-east the ruined castle of 
Engelhaus, situated on a rock of phonolite, 2340 ft. high, built 
probably in the first part of the 13 th century and destroyed by 
the Swedes in 1635. At the foot of the mountain lies the actual 
village of Engelhaus. 

According to legend the springs of Carlsbad were discovered 
during a hunting expedition by the emperor Charles IV., who 
built the town, which derives its name from him, on both banks 
of the Tepl. But the hot springs were already known two 
centuries before, as is indicated by the name of the river Tepl 
(warm), under which name the river was known in the 12th 
century. Besides, on the same spot stood already in the 13th 
century a place called Vary, which means the Sprudel. The 
truth is, that the emperor Charles IV., after being cured here, 
built about 1358 a castle in the neighbourhood and accorded 
many privileges to the town. It obtained its charter as a town 
in 1370; the fame of the waters spread and it was created a royal 
free town in 1 707 by the emperor Joseph I. The waters were 
used only for bathing purposes until 1520, when they began to be 
prescribed also for drinking. The first Kurhaus was erected in 
1 71 1 near the Muhlbrunnen, and was replaced by a larger one, 
built in 1 76 1 by the empress Maria Theresa. Carlsbad was 
nearly completely destroyed by fire in 1604, and another great 
fire raged here in 1759. It also suffered much from inundations, 
especially in 1582 and 1890. In August 1819 a meeting of the 
ministers of the German courts took place here under the presi- 
dency of Prince Metternich, when many reactionary measures, 
embodied in the so-called " Carlsbad Decrees " (see below), 
were agreed upon and introduced in the various states of the 
German Confederation. 

Among the extensive literature of the place see Mannl, Carlsbad 
and its Mineral Springs (Leipzig, 1850); Cartellieri, Karlsbad als 
Kurort (Karlsbad, 1888); Friedenthal, Der Kurort Karlsbad Topo- 
graphisch und Medizinisch (Karlsbad, 1895). 

CARLSBAD DECREES (Karlsbader Beschlusse), the name 
usually given to a series of resolutions (Beschlusse) passed by a 
conference of the ministers and envoys of the more important 
German states, held at Carlsbad from the 6th to the 31st of 
August 1819. The occasion of the meeting was the desire of 
Prince Metternich to take advantage of the consternation caused 
by recent revolutionary outrages (especially the murder of the 
dramatist Kotzebue by Karl Sand) to persuade the German 
governments to combine in a system for the suppression of the 
Liberal agitation in Germany. The pretended urgency of the 
case served as the excuse for only inviting to the conference those 
states whose ministers happened to be visiting Carlsbad at the 
time. The conferences were, therefore, actually attended by 



the representatives of Austria, Prussia, Saxony, Bavaria, Wtirt- 
temberg, Hanover, Baden, Nassau and Mecklenburg; at the 
fourth conference (August 9th) Baron von Fritsch, minister of 
state for Saxe-Weimar, who " happened to be present " at 
Carlsbad on that day, attended by special invitation. Prince 
Metternich presided over the conferences, and Friedrich von 
Gentz acted as secretary. 

The business to be discussed, as announced in Metternich's 
opening address, was twofold: (1) Matters of urgeift importance 
necessitating immediate action; (2) Questions affecting the 
fundamental constitution of the German Confederation, demand- 
ing more careful and prolonged discussion. To the first class 
belonged (a) the urgent necessity for a uniform system of press 
regulation in Germany; (b) the most urgent measures in regard 
to the supervision of universities and schools; (c) measures in 
view of the already discovered machinations of the political 
parties. To the second class belonged (a) the more clear 
definition of article XIII. of the Act of Confederation (i.e. state 
constitutions); (b) the creation of a permanent federal supreme 
court; (c) the creation of a federal executive organization 
(Bundes- Executions Ordnung) armed with power to make the 
decrees of the diet and the judgments of the high court effective; 
(d) the facilitation of commercial intercourse within the con- 
federation in accordance with article XIX. of the Act of Con- 
federation (Beilage A. zum ersten Protokoll, Martens, iv. p. 74). 

These questions were debated in twenty-three formal confer- 
ences. On the issues raised by the first class there was practical 
unanimity. All were agreed that the state of Germany demanded 
disciplinary measures, and as the result of the deliberations it 
Was determined to lay before the federal diet definite proposals 
for (1) a uniform press censorship over all periodical publications; 
(2) a system of " curators " to supervise the education given 
in universities and schools, with disciplinary enactments against 
professors and teachers who should use their position for purposes 
of political propaganda; (3) the erection of a central commission 
at Mainz, armed with inquisitorial powers, for the purpose of 
unmasking the widespread revolutionary conspiracy, the exist- 
ence of which was assumed. 

On the questions raised under the second class there was more 
fundamental difference of opinion, and by far the greater part 
of the time of the conference was occupied in discussing the 
burning question of the due interpretation of article XIII. 
The controversy raged round the distinction between " assemblies 
of estates," as laid down in the article, and " representative 
assemblies," such as had been already established in several 
German states. Gentz, in an elaborate memorandum (Neben- 
beilage zum siebenten Protokoll, iv. p. 102), laid down that 
representation by estates was the only system compatible with 
the conservative principle, as the " outcome of a well-ordered 
civil society, in which the relations and rights of the several 
estates are due to the peculiar position of the classes and cor- 
porations on which they are based, which have been from time to 
time modified by law without detracting from the essentials of the 
sovereign power "; whereas representative assemblies are based 
on " the sovereignty of the people." In answer to this, Count 
Wintzingerode, on behalf of the king of Wurttemberg, placed 
on record (N ebenbeilage 2 zum neunten Protokoll, p. 147) a protest, 
in which he urged that to insist on the system of estates would be 
to stereotype caste distinctions foreign to the whole spirit of the 
age, would alienate public opinion from the governments, and 
— if enforced by the central power — would violate the sovereign 
independence of those states which, like Wurttemberg, had 
already established representative constitutions. 

Though the majority of the ministers present favoured the 
Austrian interpretation of article XIII. as elaborated by Gentz, 
they were as little prepared as the representative of Wurttem- 
berg to agree to any hasty measures for strengthening the 
federal government at the expense of the jealously guarded 
prerogatives of the minor sovereignties. The result was that the 
constitutional questions falling under the second class were 
reserved for further discussion at a general conference of German 
ministers to be summoned at Vienna later in the year. The 



348 



CARLSTADT 



effective Carlsbad resolutions, subsequently issued as laws by 
the federal diet, were therefore only those dealing with the 
curbing of the " revolutionary " agitation. For the results of 
their operation see Germany: History. 

The acts, piotocols and resolutions of the conference of Carlsbad 
are given in M. de Martens's Nouveau Recueil general de traites, &c, 
t. 4, pp. 8-166 (Gottingen, 1846). An interesting criticism of the 
Carlsbad Decrees is appended (p. 166), addressed by Baron Hans 
von Gagern, Luxemburg representative in the federal diet, to 
Baron von Pfcssen, Mecklenburg plenipotentiary at the conference 
of Carlsbad. (W. A. P.) 

CARLSTADT, Karlstadt or Karolostadt (1480-1541), 
German reformer, whose real name was Andreas Rudolf Boden- 
stein, was born at Carlstadt in Bohemia. He entered the 
university of Erfurt in the winter term of 1499-1500, and re- 
mained there till 1503, when he went to Cologne. In the winter 
term of 1 504-1 505 he transferred himself to the newly founded 
university of Wittenberg, where he soon established his repu- 
tation as a teacher of philosophy, and a zealous champion of 
the scholastic system of Thomas Aquinas, against the revised 
nominalism associated with the name of Occam. In 1508 he 
was made canon of the Allerheiligenstift, a collegiate church 
incorporated in the university; and in 1510 he became doctor of 
theology and archdeacon, his duties being to preach, to say mass 
once a week and to lecture before the. university; in 1513 he 
was appointed ordinary professor of theology. In 151 5 he went 
to Rome, where with a view to becoming provost of the Aller- 
heiligenstift he studied law, taking his degree as doctor juris 
utriusque. His experiences in the papal city produced upon him 
the same effect as upon Luther, and when in 1516 he returned to 
Germany it was as an ardent opponent of the Thomist philosophy 
and as a champion of the Augustinian doctrine of the impotence 
of the human will and salvation through Divine grace alone. 
The 151 theses of Carlstadt, dated the 16th of September 1516, 
discovered by Theodor Kolde (" Wittenberger Disputations- 
thesen " in Zeitschrift fiir Kirchengeschichte, xi. p. 448, &c), 
prove that, so far from owing his change of view to Luther's 
influence, he was at this time actually in advance of Luther. 
The two reformers were, in fact, never friends; though from the 
end of 1 5 16 onwards the development of each was considerably 
influenced by the other. 

In the spring of 1518, in reply to Eck's Obelisci, an attack on 
Luther's 95 theses, Carlstadt published a series of theses, main- 
taining the supremacy of the Holy Scriptures (which he regarded 
as verbally inspired) over ecclesiastical tradition and the authority 
of the fathers, and asserting the liability of general councils to 
error. Eck challenged him to a public disputation, in which 
Luther also took part, and which lasted from the 27th of June 
to the 15th of July 1519. In this dialectical warfare Carlstadt 
was no match for Eck; but the dispute only served to confirm 
him in his revolt from the dominant theology, and in three violent 
polemical treatises against Eck he proclaimed the doctrine of the 
exclusive operation of grace in the justification of believers. 

This attitude led him in 1520, by a logical development, to an 
open attack on all those ecclesiastical practices in which the 
doctrine of justification by works had become crystallized; 
e.g. indulgences and the abuse of holy water and consecrated 
salt. At the same time he appeared as the first of modern biblical 
critics, denying the Mosaic authorship of the Pentateuch and 
classing the Scriptures into three categories of different value in 
accordance with the degrees of certainty as to their traditional 
origin. He still, however, maintained the doctrine of verbal 
inspiration, and attacked Luther for rejecting the epistle of James. 
In 1520 Carlstadt's name was included in the papal bull ex- 
communicating Luther; after a momentary hesitation he decided 
to remain firm in his protestant attitude, published an appeal 
from the pope to a general council, and attacked the corruptions 
of the papacy itself in a treatise on " the holiness of the pope " 
{Von papstlicher Heiligkeit, October 17th, 1520). 

In May 1521 Carlstadt went to Denmark, on the invitation of 
King Christian II., to assist in the reform of the church; but his 
disposition was anything but conciliatory, and, though his 
influence is traceable in the royal law of the 26th of May 1521 



abolishing the celibacy of the clergy, he was forced, by the hos- 
tility of nobles and clerics alike, to leave after a few weeks' stay. 
In June he was back in Wittenberg, busy with tracts on the Holy 
Sacrament (he still believed in the corporeal presence) and against 
the celibacy of the clergy (de coelibatu). Carlstadt has been 
unjustly accused of being responsible for the riots against the 
Mass fomented by the Augustinian friars and the students; as 
a matter of fact, he did his best to keep the peace, pending a 
decision by the elector of Saxony and the authorities of the 
university, and it was not till Christmas day that he himself 
publicly communicated the laity under both species. The next 
day he announced his engagement to a young lady of noble 
family, Anna von Mochau. 

From this moment Carlstadt was accepted as the leader of 
Protestantism in Wittenberg; and, at his instance, auricular 
confession, the elevation of the Host and the rules for fasting 
were abolished. On the 19th of January he was married, in 
the presence of many of the university professors and city 
magistrates. A few days later the property of the religious 
corporations was confiscated by the city and, after pensions had 
been assigned to their former members, was handed over to 
charitable foundations. A pronouncement of Carlstadt's against 
pictures and images, supported by the town, also led to icono- 
clastic excesses. 

The return of Luther early in March, however, ended Carl- 
stadt's supremacy. The elector Frederick the Wise was stren- 
uously opposed to any alteration in the traditional services, and 
at his command Luther restored communion in one kind and 
the elevation of the Host. Carlstadt himself, though still pro- 
fessor, was deprived of all influence in practical affairs, and 
devoted himself entirely to theological speculation, which led him 
ever nearer to the position of the mystics. He now denied the 
necessity for a clerical order at all, called himself " a new layman," 
doffed his ecclesiastical dress, and lived for a while as a peasant 
with his wife's relations at Segrena. In the middle of 1523, 
however, he went to Orlamunde, a living held by him with his 
canonry, and there in the parish church reformed the services 
according to his ideas, abolishing the Mass and even preaching 
against the necessity for sacraments at all. He still continued 
occasionally to lecture at Wittenberg and to fulminate against 
Luther's policy of compromise. 

All this brought him into violent conflict with the elector, 
the university and Luther himself. His professorship and living 
were confiscated and, in September 1524, he went into exile 
with his wife and child. He was now exposed to great privations 
and hardships, but found opportunity for polemical writing, 
proclaiming for the first time his disbelief in the " Real Presence." 
He preached wherever he could gain a hearing, and visited 
Strassburg, Heidelberg, Zurich, Basel, Schweinfurth, Kitzingen 
and Nordlingen, before he found a more permanent resting-place 
at Rothenburg on the Tauber. He was here when the Peasants' 
War broke out, and was sent as a delegate to reason with the 
insurgents. His admonitions were unsuccessful, and he only 
succeeded in bringing himself under suspicion of being in part 
responsible for their excesses. When Rothenburg was taken 
by the margrave of Anspach (28th June 1525) Carlstadt had to 
fly for his life. His spirit was now broken, and from Frankfort 
he wrote to Luther humbly praying him to intercede for him 
with the elector. Luther agreed to do so, on receiving from 
Carlstadt a recantation of his heterodox views on the Lord's 
Supper, and as the result the latter was permitted to return to 
Wittenberg (1525). He was not, however, allowed to lecture, 
and he lived as a peasant, first at Segrena and afterwards at 
Bergwitz, cultivating small properties, in which he had invested 
the remnant of his fortune, with such poor success that at the 
end of 1526 he had to eke out a living as a pedlar in the little 
town of Kemberg. This was endurable; but not so the demand 
presently made upon him to take up the cudgels against Zwingli 
and Oecolampadius. Once more he revolted; to agree with 
" Dr Martin's opinions on the sacrament " was as difficult as 
flying like a bird; he appealed to the elector to allow him to 
leave Saxony; but the elector's conscience was in Luther's 



CARLYLE, A.— CARLYLE, THOMAS 



349 



keeping, and Carlstadt had to fly ignominiously in order to avoid 
imprisonment. He escaped to Holstein, where in March 1529 
he stayed with the Anabaptist Melchior Hofmann. Expelled 
by the authorities, he took refuge in East Friesland, where he 
remained till the beginning of 1530 under the protection of a 
nobleman in sympathy with the Helvetic reformers. His 
preaching gave him great influence, but towards the close of the 
year persecution again sent him on his travels. He ultimately 
reached Zurich, where the recommendations of Bucer and 
Oecolampadius secured him a friendly reception by Zwingli, who 
procured him employment. After Zwingli's death he remained 
in close intercourse with the Zurich preachers, who defended 
him against renewed attacks on Luther's part; and finally, in 
1534, on Bullinger's recommendation, he was called to Basel as 
preacher at the church of St Peter and professor at the university. 
Here he remained till his death on the 24th of December 1541. 

During these latter years Carlstadt's attitude became more 
moderate. His championship of the town council against the 
theocratic claims of Antistes Myconius and the ecclesiastical 
council, in the matter of the control of the university, was 
perhaps in consonance with his earlier views on the relations of 
clergy and laity. He was, however, also instrumental in restoring 
the abolished doctorate of theology and other degrees; and, 
despatched on a mission to Strassburg in 1536, to take part in a 
discussion on a proposed compromise in the matter of the Lord's 
Supper between the theologians of Strassburg and Wittenberg, 
he displayed a conciliatory attitude which earned him the praise 
of Bucer. Carlstadt's historical significance lies in the fact that 
he was one of the pioneers of the Reformation. But he was a 
thinker and dreamer rather than a man of affairs, and though 
he had the moral and physical courage to carry his principles 
to their logical conclusions (he was the first priest to write against 
celibacy, and the first to take a wife), he lacked the balance of 
mind and sturdy common sense that inspired Luther's policy 
of consideration for " the weaker brethren " and built up the 
Evangelical Church on a conservative basis. But though Carl- 
stadt was on friendly terms, and corresponded with Munzer and 
other Anabaptists, he did not share their antinomian views, nor 
was he responsible for their excesses. His opinion as to the 
relation of faith and " good works " was practically that ex- 
pressed in articles XL and XII. of the Church of England. 
In reply to Luther's violent onslaught on him in his Wider 
die himmlischen Propheten he issued from Rothenburg his 
Anzeig etlicher Hauptartikel christlicher Lehre, a compendious 
exposition of his views, in which he says: " Those who urge to 
good works do so, not that the conscience may be justified by 
works, but that their freedom may redound to God's glory and 
that their neighbours may be fired to praise God." 

SeeC.F. Jaeger, Andreas Bodenstein'yon Karlstadt (Stuttgart, 1 856) ; 
Hermann Barge, Andreas Bodenstein von Karlstadt, vol. i. (Leipzig, 
I905)- 

CARLYLE, ALEXANDER (1722-1805), Scottish divine, was 
born on the 26th of January 1722, in Dumfriesshire, and passed 
his youth and early manhood at Prestonpans, where he wit- 
nessed the battle of 1745. He was educated at Edinburgh 
(M.A. 1743), Glasgow and Leiden. From 1748 until his death 
on the 28th of August 1805 he was minister at Inveresk in Mid- 
lothian, and during this long career rose to high eminence 
in his church not only as leader of the moderate or " broad " 
Church section, but as moderator of the General Assembly 1770 
and dean of the Chapel Royal in 1789. His influence was 
enhanced by his personal appearance, which was so striking 
as to earn him the name of " Jupiter Carlyle "; and his auto- 
biography (published i860), though written in his closing years 
and not extending beyond the year 1770, is abundantly interesting 
as a picture of Scottish life, social and ecclesiastical, in the 18th 
century. Carlyle's memory recalled the Porteous Riots of 1736, 
and less remotely his friendship with Adam Smith, David Hume, 
and John Home, the dramatist, for witnessing the performance 
of whose tragedy Douglas he was censured in 1757. He was 
distinctly a ion vivant, but withal an upright, conscientious 
and capable minister. 



CARLYLE, JOSEPH DACRE (1750-1804), British orientalist, 
was born in 1759 at Carlisle, where his father was a physician. 
He went in 1775 to Cambridge, was elected a fellow of Queens' 
College in 1779, taking the degree of B.D. in 1793. With the 
assistance of a native of Bagdad known in England as David 
Zamio, then resident at Cambridge, he attained great proficiency 
in Arabic literature; and after succeeding Dr Paley in the 
chancellorship of Carlisle, he was appointed, in 1795, professor 
of Arabic in Cambridge University. His translation from the 
Arabic of Yusuf ibn Taghri Birdi, the Rerum Egypticarum 
Annates, appeared in 1792, and in 1796 a volume of Specimens 
of Arabic Poetry, from the earliest times to the fall of the Caliphate, 
with some account of the authors. Carlyle was appointed chap- 
lain by Lord Elgin to the embassy at Constantinople in 1799, 
and prosecuted his researches in Eastern literature in a tour 
through Asia Minor, Palestine, Greece and Italy, collecting in his 
travels several valuable Greek and Syriac MSS. for a projected 
critical edition of the New Testament, collated with the Syriac 
and other versions — a work, however, which he did not live to 
complete. On his return to England in 1801 he was presented 
by the bishop of Carlisle to the living of Newcastle-on-Tyne, 
where he died on the 12th of April 1804. After his death there 
appeared a volume of poems descriptive of the scenes of his 
travels, with prefaces extracted from his journal. Among 
other works which he left unfinished was an edition of the Bible 
in Arabic, completed by H. Ford and published in 1 8 1 1 . 

CARLYLE, THOMAS (1795-1881), British essayist, historian 
and philosopher,born on the 4th of December 1 795 at Ecclefechan, 
in Annandale, was the eldest of the nine children of James 
Carlyle by his second wife, Janet Aitken. The father was by 
trade a mason, and afterwards a small farmer. He had joined 
a sect of seceders from the kirk, and had all the characteristics 
of the typical Scottish Calvinist. He was respected for his 
integrity and independence, and a stern outside covered warm 
affections. The family tie between all the Carlyles was unusually 
strong, and Thomas regarded his father with a reverence which 
found forcible expression in his Reminiscences. He always 
showed the tenderest love for his mother, and was the best of 
brothers. The narrow means of his parents were made sufficient 
by strict frugality. He was sent to the parish school when 
seven, and to Annan grammar-school when ten years old. 
His pugnacity brought him into troubles with his fellows at 
Annan; but he soon showed an appetite for learning which 
induced his father to educate him for the ministry. He walked 
to Edinburgh in November 1809, and entered the university. 
He cared little for any of the professors, except Sir John Leslie, 
from whom he learned some mathematics. He acquired a little 
classical knowledge, but the most valuable influence was that of 
his contemporaries. A few lads in positions similar to his own 
began to look up to him as an intellectual leader, and their 
correspondence with him shows remarkable interest in literary 
matters. In 1814 Carlyle, still looking forward to the career 
of a minister, obtained the mathematical mastership at Annan. 
The salary of £60 or £70 a year enabled him to save a little money. 
He went to Edinburgh once or twice, to deliver the discourses 
required from students of divinity. He does not seem, however, 
to have taken to his profession very earnestly. He was too shy 
and proud to see many of the Annan people, and found his chief 
solace in reading such books as he could get. In 1816 he was 
appointed, through the recommendation of Leslie, to a school 
at Kirkcaldy, where Edward Irving, Carlyle's senior by three 
years, was also master of a school. Irving's severity as a teacher 
had offended some of the parents, who set up Carlyle to be his 
rival. A previous meeting with Irving, also a native of Annan, 
had led to a little passage of arms, but Irving now welcomed 
Carlyle with a generosity which entirely won his heart, and the 
rivals soon became the closest of friends. The intimacy, affection- 
ately commemorated in the Reminiscences, was of great im- 
portance to Carlyle's whole career. " But for Irving," he says, 
" I had never known what the communion of man with man 
means." Irving had a library, in which Carlyle devoured Gibbon 
and much French literature, and they made various excursions 



35° 



CARLYLE, THOMAS 



together. Carlyle did his duties as a schoolmaster punctiliously, 
but found the life thoroughly uncongenial. No man was less 
fitted by temperament for the necessary drudgery and worry. 
A passing admiration for a Miss Gordon is supposed to have 
suggested the " Blumine " of Sartor Resarlus; but he made 
no new friendships, and when Irving left at the end of 1818 
Carlyle also resigned his post. 

He had by this time resolved to give up the ministry. He has 
given no details of the intellectual change which alienated him 
from the church. He had, however, been led, by whatever 
process, to abandon the dogmatic system of his forefathers, 
though he was and always remained in profound sympathy 
with the spirit of their teaching. A period of severe struggle 
followed. He studied law for a time, but liked it no better than 
schoolmastering. He took a pupil or two, and wrote articles 
for the Edinburgh Encyclopaedia under the editorship of Brewster. 
He occasionally visited his family, and their unfailing confidence 
helped to keep up his courage. Meanwhile he was going through 
a spiritual crisis. Atheism seemed for a time to be the only 
alternative to his old creed. It was, however, profoundly 
repugnant to him. At last, one day in June 1821, after three 
weeks' total sleeplessness, he went through the crisis afterwards 
described quite " literally " in Sartor Resartus. He cast out 
the spirit of negation, and henceforth the temper of his misery 
was changed to one, not of " whining," but of " indignation 
and grim fire-eyed defiance." That, he says, was his spiritual 
new-birth, though certainly not into a life of serenity. The 
conversion was coincident with Carlyle's submission to a new 
and very potent influence. In 1819 he had begun to study 
German, with which he soon acquired a very remarkable familiar- 
ity. Many of his contemporaries were awakening to the im- 
portance of German thought, and Carlyle's knowledge enabled 
him before long to take a conspicuous part in diffusing the new 
intellectual light. The chief object of his reverence was Goethe. 
In many most important respects no two men could be more 
unlike; but, for the present, Carlyle seems to have seen in Goethe 
a proof that it was possible to reject outworn dogmas without 
sinking into materialism. Goethe, by singularly different 
methods, had emerged from a merely negative position into 
a lofty and coherent conception of the universe. Meanwhile, 
Carlyle's various anxieties were beginning to be complicated 
by physical derangement. A rat, he declared, was gnawing 
at the pit of his stomach. He was already suffering from the 
ailments, whatever their precise nature, from which he never 
escaped. He gave vent to his irritability by lamentations so 
grotesquely exaggerated as to make it difficult to estimate the 
real extent of the evil. 

Irving's friendship now became serviceable. Carlyle's con- 
fession of the radical difference of religious opinion had not 
alienated his friend, who was settling in London, and used his 
opportunities for promoting Carlyle's interest. In January 
1822 Carlyle, through Irving's recommendation, became 
tutor to Charles and Arthur Buller, who were to be students 
at Edinburgh. Carlyle's salary was £200 a year, and this, with 
the proceeds of some literary work, enabled him at once to help 
his brother John to study medicine and his brother Alexander 
to take up a farm. Carlyle spent some time with the elder 
Bullers, but found a life of dependence upon fashionable people 
humiliating and unsatisfactory. He employed himself at inter- 
vals upon a life of Schiller and a translation of Wilhelm Meisler. 
He received £50 for a translation of Legendre's Geometry; and 
an introduction, explaining the theory of proportion, is said by 
De Morgan to show that he could have gained distinction as an 
expounder of mathematical principles. He finally gave up his 
tutorship in July 1824, and for a time tried to find employment 
in London. The impressions made upon him by London men 
of letters were most unfavourable. Carlyle felt by this time 
conscious of having a message to deliver to mankind, and his 
comrades, he thought, were making literature a trade instead of 
a vocation, and prostituting their talents to frivolous journalism. 
He went once to see Coleridge, who was then delivering his 
oracular utterances at Highgate, and the only result was the 



singularly vivid portrait given in a famous chapter in his life of 
Sterling. Coleridge seemed to him to be ineffectual as a philoso- 
pher, and personally to be a melancholy instance of genius running 
to waste. Carlyle, conscious of great, abilities, and impressed 
by such instances of the deleterious effects of the social atmo- 
sphere of London, resolved to settle in his native district. There 
he could live frugally and achieve some real work. He could, 
for one thing, be the interpreter of Germany to England. A 
friendly letter from Goethe, acknowledging the translation of 
Wilhelm Meisler, reached him at the end of 1824 and greatly 
encouraged him. Goethe afterwards spoke warmly of the life 
of Schiller, and desired it to be translated into German. Letters 
occasionally passed between them in later years, which were 
edited by Professor Charles Eliot Norton in 1887. Goethe 
received Carlyle's homage with kind complacency. The gift 
of a seal to Goethe on his birthday in 183 1 " from fifteen English 
friends," including Scott and Wordsworth, was suggested and 
carried out by Carlyle. The interest in German, which 
Carlyle did so much to promote, suggested to him other 
translations and reviews during the next few years, and 
he made some preparations for a history of German literature. 
British curiosity, however, about such matters seems to 
have been soon satisfied, and the demand for such work 
slackened. 

Carlyle was meanwhile passing through the most important 
crisis of his personal history. Jane Baillie Welsh, born 1801, 
was the only child of Dr Welsh of Haddington, She had shown 
precocious talent, and was sent to the school at Haddington 
where Edward Irving (q.v.) was a master. After her father's 
death in 1819 she lived with her mother, and her wit and beauty 
attracted many admirers. Her old tutor, Irving, was now 
at Kirkcaldy, where he became engaged to a Miss Martin. He 
visited Haddington occasionally in the following years, and a 
strong mutual regard arose between him and Miss Welsh. They 
contemplated a marriage, and Irving endeavoured to obtain a 
release from his previous engagement. The Martin family 
held him to his word, and he took a final leave of Miss Welsh 
in 1822. Meanwhile he had brought Carlyle from Edinburgh 
and introduced him to the Welshes. Carlyle was attracted by 
the brilliant abilities of the young lady, procured books for her 
and wrote letters to her as an intellectual guide. The two were 
to perform a new variation upon the theme of Abelard and 
Helo'ise. [A good deal of uncertainty long covered the precise 
character of their relations. Until 1909, when Mr. Alexander 
Carlyle published his edition of the " love-letters," the full 
material was not accessible; they had been read by Carlyle's 
biographer, Froude, and also by Professor Charles Norton, and 
Norton (in his edition of Carlyle's Early Letters, 1886) declared 
that Froude had distorted the significance of this corre- 
spondence in a sense injurious to the writers. The publica- 
tion of the letters certainly seems to justify Norton's view.] 
Miss Welsh's previous affair with Irving had far less im- 
portance than Froude ascribes to it; and she soon came to 
regard her past love as a childish fancy. She recognized 
Carlyle's vast intellectual superiority, and the respect gradually 
deepened into genuine love. The process, however, took some 
time. Her father had bequeathed to her his whole property 
(£200 to £300 a year). In 1823 she made it over to her mother, 
but left the whole to Carlyle in the event of her own and her 
mother's death. She still declared that she did not love him 
well enough to become his wife. In 1824 she gradually relented 
so far as to say that she would marry if he could achieve inde- 
pendence. She had been brought up in a station superior to 
that of the Carlyles, and could not accept the life of hardship 
which would be necessary in his present circumstances. Carlyle, 
accustomed to his father's household, was less frightened by the 
prospect of poverty. He was determined not to abandon his 
vocation as a man of genius by following the lower though more 
profitable paths to literary success, and expected that his wife 
should partake the necessary sacrifice of comfort. The natural 
result of such discussions followed. The attraction became 
stronger on both sides, in spite of occasional spasms of doubt. 



CARLYLE, THOMAS 



35i 



An odd incident precipitated the result. A friend of Irving's, 
Mrs Basil Montague, wrote to Miss Welsh, to exhort her to sup- 
press her love for Irving, who had married Miss Martin in 1823. 
Miss Welsh replied by announcing her intention to marry Carlyle ; 
and then told him the whole story, of which he had previously 
been ignorant. He properly begged her not to yield to the 
impulse without due consideration. She answered by coming 
at once to his father's house, where he was staying; and the 
marriage was finally settled. It took place on the 17th of 
October 1826. 

Carlyle had now to arrange the mode of life which should 
enable him to fulfil his aspiration. His wife had made over her 
income to her mother, but he had saved a small sum upon which 
to begin housekeeping. A passing suggestion from Mrs Carlyle 
that they might live with her mother was judiciously abandoned. 
Carlyle had thought of occupying Craigenputtock, a remote and 
dreary farm belonging to Mrs Welsh. His wife objected his 
utter incapacity as a farmer; and they finally took a small 
house at Comely Bank, Edinburgh, where they could live on a 
humble scale. The brilliant conversation of both attracted 
some notice in the literary society of Edinburgh. The most 
important connexion was with Francis, Lord Jeffrey, still editor 
of the Edinburgh Review. Though Jeffrey had no intellectual 
sympathy with Carlyle, he accepted some articles for the Review 
and became warmly attached to Mrs Carlyle. Carlyle began to 
be known as leader of a new " mystic " school, and his earnings 
enabled him to send his brother John to study in Germany. 
The public appetite, however, for " mysticism " was not keen. 
In spite of support from Jeffrey and other friends, Carlyle failed 
in a candidature for a professorship at St Andrews. His brother, 
Alexander, had now taken the farm at Craigenputtock, and the 
Carlyles decided to settle at the separate dwelling-house there, 
which would bring them nearer to Mrs Welsh. They went there 
in 1828, and began a hard struggle. Carlyle, indomitably 
determined to make no concessions for immediate profit, wrote 
slowly and carefully, and turned out some of his most finished 
work. He laboured " passionately " at Sartor Resartus, and 
made articles out of fragments originally intended for the history 
of German literature. The money difficulty soon became more 
pressing. John, whom he was still helping, was trying unsuccess- 
fully to set up as a doctor in London; and Alexander's farming 
failed. In spite of such drawbacks, Carlyle in later years looked 
back upon the life at Craigenputtock as on the whole a compara- 
tively healthy and even happy period, as it was certainly one 
of most strenuous and courageous endeavour. Though often 
absorbed in his work and made both gloomy and irritable by his 
anxieties, he found relief in rides with his wife, and occasionally 
visiting their relations. Their letters during temporary separa- 
tions are most affectionate. The bleak climate, however, the 
solitude, and the necessity of managing a household with a single 
servant, were excessively trying to a delicate woman, though 
Mrs Carlyle concealed from her husband the extent of her 
sacrifices. The position was gradually becoming untenable. 
In the autumn of 1831 Carlyle was forced to accept a loan of £50 
from Jeffrey, and went in search of work to London, whither his 
wife followed him. He made some engagements with publishers, 
though no one would take Sartor Resartus, and returned to 
Craigenputtock in the spring of 1832. Jeffrey, stimulated per- 
haps by his sympathy for Mrs Carlyle, was characteristically 
generous. Besides pressing loans upon both Thomas and John 
Carlyle, he offered to settle an annuity of £100 upon Thomas, 
and finally enabled John to support himself by recommending 
him to a medical position. 1 Carlyle's proud spirit of independence 
made him reject Jeffrey's help as long as possible; and even 
his acknowledgment of the generosity (in the Reminiscences) is 
tinged with something disagreeably like resentment. In 1834 he 
applied to Jeffrey for a post at the Edinburgh Observatory. 
1 John Aitken Carlyle (1801-1879) finally settled near the Carlyles 
in Chelsea. He began an English prose version of Dante's Divine 
Comedy — which has earned him the name of " Dante Carlyle " — 
but only completed the translation of the Inferno (1849). The 
work included a critical edition of the text and a valuable intro- 
duction and notes. 



Jeffrey naturally declined to appoint a man who, in spite of 
some mathematical knowledge, had no special qualification, and 
administered a general lecture upon Carlyle's arrogance and 
eccentricity which left a permanent sense of injury. 

In the beginning of 1833 the Carlyles made another trial of 
Edinburgh. There Carlyle. found materials in the Advocates' 
Library for the article on the Diamond Necklace, one of his most 
perfect writings, which led him to study the history of the French 
Revolution. Sartor Resartus was at last appearing in Fraser's 
Magazine, though the rate of payment was cut down, and the 
publisher reported that it was received with " unqualified 
dissatisfaction." Edinburgh society did not attract him, and he 
retreated once more to Craigenputtock. After another winter 
the necessity of some change became obvious. The Carlyles 
resolved to " burn their ships." They went to London in the 
summer of 1834, and took a house at 5 (now 24) Cheyne Row, 
Chelsea, which Carlyle inhabited till his death; the house has 
since been bought for the public. Irving, who had welcomed 
him on former occasions, was just dying, — a victim, as Carlyle 
thought, to fashionable cajoleries. A few young men were 
beginning to show appreciation. J. S. Mill had made Carlyle's 
acquaintance in the previous visit to London, and had corre- 
sponded with him. Mill had introduced Ralph Waldo Emerson, 
who visited Craigenputtock in 1833. Carlyle was charmed with 
Emerson, and their letters published by Professor Norton show 
that his regard never cooled. Emerson's interest showed that 
Carlyle's fame was already spreading in America. Carlyle's 
connexion with Charles Buller, a zealous utilitarian, introduced 
him to the circle of " philosophical radicals." 

Carlyle called himself in some sense a radical; and J. S. Mill, 
though not an intellectual disciple, was a very warm admirer of his 
friend's genius. Carlyle had some expectation of the editorship of 
the London Review, started by Sir W. Molesworth at this time as 
an organ of philosophical radicalism. The combination would 
clearly have been explosive. Meanwhile Mill, who had collected 
many books upon the French Revolution, was eager to help 
Carlyle in the history which he was now beginning. He set to 
work at once and finished the first volume in five months. The 
manuscript, while entrusted to Mill for annotation, was burnt by 
an accident. Mill induced Carlyle to accept in compensation 
£100, which was urgently needed. Carlyle took up the task again 
and finished the whole on the 12th of January 1837. " I can tell 
the world," he said to his wife, " you have not had for a hundred 
years any book that comes more direct and flamingly from the 
heart of a living man. Do what you like with it, you " 

The publication, six months later, of the French Revolution 
marks the turning-point of Carlyle's career. Many readers hold 
it to be the best, as it is certainly the most characteristic, of 
Carlyle's books. The failure of Sartor Resartus to attract 
average readers is quite intelligible. It contains, indeed, some 
of the most impressive expositions of his philosophical position, 
and some of his most beautiful and perfectly written passages. 
But there is something forced and clumsy, in spite of the flashes 
of grim humour, in the machinery of the Clothes Philosophy. 
The mannerism, which has been attributed to an imitation of Jean 
Paul, appeared to Carlyle himself to be derived rather from the 
phrases current in his father's house, and in any case gave an 
appropriate dialect for the expression of his peculiar idiosyncrasy. 
But it could not be appreciated by readers who would not take 
the trouble to learn a new language. In the French Revolution 
Carlyle had discovered his real strength. He was always at his 
best when his imagination was set to work upon a solid frame- 
work of fact. The book shows a unique combination: on the 
one hand is the singularly shrewd insight into character and 
the vivid realization of the picturesque; on the other is the 
"mysticism" or poetical philosophy which relieves the events 
against a background of mystery. The contrast is marked by 
the humour which seems to combine a cynical view of human 
folly with a deeply pathetic sense of the sadness and suffering of 
life. The convictions, whatever their value, came, as he said, 
" flamingly from the heart." It was, of course, impossible for 
Carlyle to satisfy modern requirements of matter-of-fact accuracy. 



352 



CARLYLE, THOMAS 



He could not in the time have assimilated all the materials even 
then extant, and later accumulations would necessitate a 
complete revision. Considered as a " prose epic," or a vivid 
utterance of the thought of the period, it has a permanent and 
unique value. 

The book was speedily successful. It was reviewed by Mill 
in the Westminster and by Thackeray in The Times, and Carlyle, 
after a heroic struggle, was at last touching land. In each of 
the years 1837 to 1840 he gave a course of lectures, of which 
the last only (upon " Hero Worship ") was published; they 
materially helped his finances. By Emerson's management he 
also received something during the same period from American 
publishers. At the age of forty-five he had thus become inde- 
pendent. He had also established a position among the chief 
writers of the day. Young disciples, among whom John Sterling 
was the most accepted, were gathering round him, and he became 
an object of social curiosity. Monckton Milnes (Lord Houghton) , 
who won universal popularity by the most genuine kindliness 
of nature, became a cordial friend. Another important intimacy 
was with the Barings, afterwards Lord and Lady Ashburton. 
Carlyle's conversational powers were extraordinary; though, as 
he won greater recognition as a prophet, he indulged too freely 
in didactic monologue. In his prophetic capacity he published 
two remarkable books: Chartism (1829), enlarged from an article 
which Lockhart, though personally approving, was afraid to take 
for the Quarterly; and Past and Present (1843), in which the 
recently published Mediaeval Chronicle was taken as a text 
for the exposure of modern evils. They may be regarded as 
expositions of the doctrine implicitly set forth in the French 
Revolution. Carlyle was a " radical " as sharing the sentiments 
of the class in which he was born. He had been profoundly 
moved by the widely-spread distresses in his earlier years. When 
the yeomanry were called out to suppress riots after the Peace, 
his sympathies were with the people rather than with the 
authorities. So far he was in harmony with Mill and the " philo- 
sophical radicals." A fundamental divergence of principle, 
however, existed and was soon indicated by his speedy separation 
from the party and alienation from Mill himself. The Revolu- 
tion, according to him, meant the sweeping away of effete beliefs 
and institutions, but implied also the necessity of a reconstructive 
process. Chartism begins with a fierce attack upon the laissez 
faire theory, which showed blindness to this necessity. The 
prevalent political economy, in which that theory was embodied, 
made a principle of neglecting the very evils which it should be 
the great function of government to remedy. Carlyle's doctrines, 
entirely opposed to the ordinary opinions of Whigs and Radicals, 
found afterwards an expositor in his ardent disciple Ruskin, and 
have obvious affinities with more recent socialism. At the time 
he was as one crying in the wilderness to little practical purpose. 
Liberals were scandalized by his apparent identification of 
" right " with " might," implied in the demand for a strong 
government; and though he often declared the true inter- 
pretation to be that the right would ultimately become might, 
his desire for strong government seemed too often to sanction 
the inverse view. He came into collision with philanthropists, 
and was supposed to approve of despotism for its own sake. 

His religious position was equally unintelligible to the average 
mind. While unequivocally rejecting the accepted creeds, and 
so scandalizing even liberal theologians, he was still more hostile 
to simply sceptical and materialist tendencies. He was, as he 
called himself, a " mystic "; and his creed was too vague to be 
put into any formula beyond a condemnation of atheism. One 
corollary was the famous doctrine of " hero worship " first ex- 
pounded in his lectures. Any philosophy of history which 
emphasized the importance of general causes seemed to him 
to imply a simply mechanical doctrine and to deny the efficacy 
of the great spiritual forces. He met it by making biography 
the essence of history, or attributing all great events to the 
" heroes," who are the successive embodiments of divine 
revelations. This belief was implied in his next great work, the 
Life and Letters of Oliver Cromwell, published in 1845. The great 
Puritan hero was a man after his own heart, and the portrait 



drawn by so sympathetic a writer is not only intensely vivid, but 
a very effective rehabilitation of misrepresented character. The 
" biographical " view of history, however, implies the weakness, 
not only of unqualified approval of all Cromwell's actions, but of 
omitting any attempt to estimate the Protector's real relation 
to the social and political development of the time. The ques- 
tion, what was Cromwell's real and permanent achievement, is 
not answered nor distinctly considered. The effect maybe partly 
due to the peculiar form of the book as a detached series of docu- 
ments and comments. The composition introduced Carlyle to 
the " Dryasdust " rubbish heaps of which he here and ever after- 
wards bitterly complained. A conscientious desire to unearth 
the facts, and the effort of extracting from the dullest records 
the materials for graphic pictures, made the process of production 
excessively painful. For some years after Cromwell Carlyle 
wrote little. His growing acceptance by publishers, and the 
inheritance of her property by Mrs Carlyle on her mother's death 
in 1842, finally removed the stimulus of money pressure. He 
visited Ireland in 1846 and again in 1849, when he made a long 
tour in company with Sir C. Gavan Duffy, then a young member 
of the Nationalist party (see Sir C. G. Duffy's Conversations with 
Carlyle, 1892, for an interesting narrative). Carlyle's strong 
convictions as to the misery and misgovernment of Ireland re- 
commended him to men who had taken part in the rising of 1848. 
Although the remedies acceptable to a eulogist of Cromwell 
could not be to their taste, they admired his moral teaching; 
and he received their attentions, as Sir C. G. Duffy testifies, with 
conspicuous courtesy. His aversion from the ordinary radical- 
ism led to an article upon slavery in 1849, to which Mill replied, 
and which caused their final alienation. It was followed in 1850 
by the Latterday Pamphlets, containing "sulphurous" denun- 
ciations of the do-nothing principle. They gave general offence, 
and the disapproval, according to Froude, stopped the sale for 
years. The Life of Sterling (d. 1844), which appeared in 1851, 
was intended to correct the life by Julius Hare, which had given 
too much prominence to theological questions. The subject 
roused Carlyle's tenderest mood, and the Life is one of the most 
perfect in the language. 

Carlyle meanwhile was suffering domestic troubles, unfor- 
tunately not exceptional in their nature, though the exceptional 
intellect and characters of the persons concerned have given 
them unusual prominence. Carlyle's constitutional irritability 
made him intensely sensitive to petty annoyances. He suffered 
the torments of dyspepsia; he was often sleepless, and the 
crowing of " demon-fowls " in neighbours' yards drove him 
wild. Composition meant for him intense absorption in his 
work; solitude and quiet were essential; and he resented inter- 
ruptions by grotesque explosions of humorously exaggerated 
wrath. Mrs Carlyle had to pass many hours alone, and the 
management of the household and of devices intended to shield 
him from annoyances was left entirely to her. House-cleanings 
and struggles with builders during the construction of a " sound- 
proof room " taxed her energy, while Carlyle was hiding himself 
with his family in Scotland or staying at English country houses. 
Nothing could be more affectionate than his behaviour to his 
wife on serious occasions, such as the death of her mother, and 
he could be considerate when his attention was called to the 
facts. But he was often oblivious to the strain upon her energies, 
and had little command of his temper. An unfortunate aggra- 
vation of the difficulty arose from his intimacy with the Ash- 
burtons. Lady Ashburton, a woman of singular social charm 
and great ability, appreciated the author, but apparently ac- 
cepted the company of the author's wife rather as a necessity 
than as an additional charm. Mrs Carlyle was hurt by the fine 
lady's condescension and her husband's accessibility to aristo- 
cratic blandishments. Carlyle, as a wise man, should have 
yielded to his wife's wishes; unluckily, he was content to point 
out that her jealousy was unreasonable, and, upon that very 
insufficient ground, to disregard it and to continue his intimacy 
with the Ashburtons on the old terms. Mrs Carlyle bitterly 
resented his conduct. She had been wiling to renounce any 
aspirations of her own and to sink herself in his glory, but she 



CARLYLE, THOMAS 



353 



naturally expected him to recognize her devotion and to value 
her society beyond all others. She had just cause of complaint, 
and a remarkable power, as her letters prove, of seeing things 
plainly and despising sentimental consolations. She was child- 
less, and had time to brood over her wrongs. She formed a little 
circle of friends, attached to her rather than to her husband; 
and to one of them, Giuseppe Mazzini, she confided her troubles 
in 1846. He gave her admirable advice; and the alienation 
from her husband, though it continued still to smoulder, led to 
no further results. A journal written at the same time gives 
a painful record of her sufferings, and after her death made 
Carlyle conscious for the first time of their full extent. The 
death of Lady Ashburton in 1857 removed this cause of jealousy; 
and Lord Ashburton married a second wife in 1858, who became 
a warm friend of both Carlyles. The cloud which had separated 
them was thus at last dispersed. Meanwhile Carlyle had become 
absorbed in his best and most laborious work. Soon after the 
completion of the Cromwell he had thought of Frederick for his 
next hero, and had in 1845 contemplated a visit to Germany 
to collect materials. He did not, however, settle down finally 
to the work till 185 1. He shut himself up in his study to wrestle 
with the Prussian Dryasdusts, whom he discovered to be as 
wearisome as their Puritan predecessors and more voluminous. 
He went to Scotland to see his mother, to whom he had always 
shown the tenderest affection, on her deathbed at the end of 
1853. He returned to shut himself up in the " sound-proof 
room." He twice visited Germany (1852 and 1858) to see 
Frederick's battlefields and obtain materials; and he occasion- 
ally went to the Ashburtons and his relations in Scotland. The 
first two volumes of Frederick the Great appeared in 1858, and 
succeeding volumes in 1862, 1864 and 1865. The success was 
great from the first, though it did little to clear up Carlyle's 
gloom. The book is in some respects his masterpiece, and its 
merits are beyond question. Carlyle had spared no pains in 
research. The descriptions of the campaigns are admirably 
vivid, and show his singular eye for scenery. These narratives 
are said to be used by military students in Germany, and at least 
convince the non-military student that he can understand the 
story. The book was declared by Emerson to be the wittiest 
ever written. Many episodes, describing the society at the 
Prussian court and the relations of Frederick to Voltaire, are 
unsurpassable as humorous portraiture. The effort to fuse 
the masses of raw material into a well-proportioned whole is 
perhaps not quite successful; and Carlyle had not the full 
sympathy with Frederick which had given interest to the 
Cromwell. A hero-worshipper with half-concealed doubts as 
to his hero is in an awkward position. Carlyle's general con- 
ception of history made him comparatively blind to aspects of 
the subject which would, to writers of other schools, have a 
great importance. The extraordinary power of the book is 
undeniable, though it does not show the fire which animated 
the French Revolution. A certain depression and weariness of 
•spirit darken the general tone. 
. During the later labours Mrs Carlyle's health had been break- 
ing. Carlyle, now that happier relations had been restored, 
did his best to give her the needed comforts; and in spite of his 
immersion in Frederick, showed her all possible attention in later 
years. She had apparently recovered from an almost hopeless 
illness, when at the end of 1865 he was elected to the rectorship 
of the university of Edinburgh. He delivered an address there 
on the 2nd of April 1866, unusually mild in tone, and received 
with general applause. He was still detained in Scotland when 
Mrs Carlyle died suddenly while driving in her carriage. The 
immediate cause was the shock of an accident to her dog. She 
had once hurt her mother's feelings by refusing to use some wax 
candles. She had preserved them ever since, and by her direction 
they were now lighted in the chamber of death. Carlyle was 
overpowered by her loss. His life thenceforward became more 
and more secluded, and he gradually became incapable of work. 
He went to Mentone in the winter of 1866 and began the Reminis- 
cences. He afterwards annotated the letters from his wife, 
published (1883) as Letters and Memorials. He was, as Froude 
v. 12 



says, impressed by the story of Johnson's "penance" at 
Uttoxeter, and desired to make a posthumous confession of his 
shortcomings in his relations to his wife. A few later utterances 
made known his opinions of current affairs. He joined the com- 
mittee for the defence of Governor Eyre in 1867; he also wrote 
in 1867 an article upon " shooting Niagara," that is, upon the 
tendency of the Reform Bill of that year; and in 1870 he wrote 
a letter defending the German case against France. The worth 
of his Frederick was acknowledged by the Prussian Order of 
Merit in 1874. In the same year Disraeli offered him the Grand 
Cross of the Bath and a pension. He declined very courteously, 
and felt some regret for previous remarks upon the minister. 
The length of his literary career was now softening old antipathies, 
and he was the object of general respect. His infirmities enforced 
a very retired life, but he was constantly visited by Froude, and 
occasionally by his disciple Ruskin. A small number of other 
friends paid him constant attention. His conversation was still 
interesting, especially when it turned upon his recollections, 
and though his judgments were sometimes severe enough, he 
never condescended to the scandalous. His views of the future 
were gloomy. The world seemed to be going from bad to worse, 
with little heed to his warnings. He would sometimes regret that 
it was no longer permissible to leave it in the old Roman fashion. 
He sank gradually, and died on the 4th of February 1 88 1 . A place 
in Westminster Abbey was offered, but he was buried, according 
to his own desire, by the side of his parents at Ecclefechan. 
He left Craigenputtock, which had become his own property, to 
found bursaries at the university of Edinburgh. He gave his 
books to Harvard College. 

Carlyle's appearance has been made familiar by many portraits, 
none of them, according to Froude, satisfactory. The statue by 
Boehm on the Chelsea Embankment, however, is characteristic; 
and there is a fine painting by Watts in the National Portrait 
Gallery. J. McNeill Whistler's portrait of him is in the possession 
of the Glasgow corporation. 

During Carlyle's later years the antagonism roused by his 
attacks upon popular opinions had subsided; and upon his 
death general expression was given to the emotions natural upon 
the loss of a remarkable man of genius. The rapid publication of 
the Reminiscences by Froude produced a sudden revulsion of 
feeling. Carlyle became the object of general condemnation. 
Froude's biography, and the Memorials of Mrs Carlyle, published 
soon afterwards, strengthened the hostile feeling. Carlyle had 
appended to the Reminiscences an injunction to his friends not to 
publish them as they stood, and added that no part could ever 
be published without the strictest editing. Afterwards, when 
he had almost forgotten what he had written, he verbally em- 
powered Froude to use his own judgment: Froude accordingly 
published the book at once, without any editing, and with many 
inaccuracies. Omissions of a few passages written from memory 
at a time of profound nervous depression would have altered the 
whole character of the book. Froude in this and the later 
publications held that he was giving effect to Carlyle's wish to 
imitate Johnson's " penance." No one, said Boswell, should 
persuade him to make his lion into a cat. Froude intended, in 
the same spirit, to give the shades as well as the lights in the 
portrait of his hero. His admiration for Carlyle probably led him 
to assume too early that his readers would approach the story 
from the same point of view, that is, with an admiration too 
warm to be repelled by the admissions. Moreover, Froude's 
characteristic desire for picturesque effect, unchecked by any 
painstaking accuracy, led to his reading preconceived impressions 
into his documents. The result was that Carlyle was too often 
judged by his defects, and regarded as a selfish and eccentric 
misanthrope with flashes of genius, rather than as a man with 
many of the highest qualities of mind and character clouded by 
constitutional infirmities. Yet it would be difficult to speak too 
strongly of the great qualities which underlay the superficial 
defects. Through long years of poverty and obscurity Carlyle 
showed unsurpassed fidelity to his vocation and superiority to 
the lower temptations which have ruined so many literary careers, 
His ambition might be interpreted as selfishness, but certainly 



354 



CARMAGNOLA— CARMAGNOLE 



showed no coldness of heart. His unstinted generosity to his 
brothers during his worst times is only one proof of the singular 
strength of his family affections. No one was more devoted to 
such congenial friends as Irving and Sterling. He is not the only 
man whom absorption in work and infirmity of temper have 
made into a provoking husband, though few wives have had 
Mrs Carlyle's capacity for expressing the sense of injustice. The 
knowledge that the deepest devotion underlies misunderstandings 
is often a very imperfect consolation; but such devotion clearly 
existed all through, and proves the defect to have been relatively 
superficial. 

The harsh judgments of individuals in the Reminiscences had 
no parallel in his own writings. He scarcely ever mentions a 
contemporary, and was never involved in a personal controversy. 
But the harshness certainly reflects a characteristic attitude of 
mind. Carlyle was throughout a pessimist or a prophet denoun- 
cing a backsliding world. His most popular contemporaries 
seemed to him to be false guides, and charlatans had ousted the 
heroes. The general condemnation of " shams " and cant had, 
of course, particular applications, though he left them to be 
inferred by his readers. Carlyle was the exponent of many of 
the deepest convictions of his time. Nobody could be more in 
sympathy with aspirations for a spiritual religion and for a lofty 
idealism in political and social life. To most minds, however, 
which cherish such aspirations the gentler optimism of men like 
Emerson was more congenial. They believed in the progress of 
the race and the triumph of the nobler elements. Though 
Carlyle, especially in his earlier years, could deliver an invigorat- 
ing and encouraging, if not a sanguine doctrine, his utterances 
were more generally couched in the key of denunciation, and 
betrayed a growing despondency. Materialism and low moral 
principles seemed to him to be gaining the upper hand; and the 
hope that religion might survive the " old clothes " in which it 
had been draped seemed to grow fainter. The ordinary mind 
complained that he had no specific remedy to propose for the 
growing evils of the time; and the more cultivated idealist was 
alienated by the gloom and the tendency to despair. To a later 
generation it will probably appear that, whatever the exaggera- 
tions and the misconceptions to which he was led, his vehement 
attacks at least called attention to rather grave limitations and 
defects in the current beliefs and social tendencies of the time. 
The mannerisms and grotesque exaggerations of his writings 
annoyed persons of refinement, and suggest Matthew Arnold's 
advice to flee " Carlylese " as you would flee the devil. Yet the 
shrewd common-sense, the biting humour, the power of graphic 
description and the imaginative " mysticism " give them a 
unique attraction for many even who do not fully sympathize 
with the implied philosophy or with the Puritanical code of 
ethics. The letters and autobiographical writings, whether they 
attract or repel sympathy, are at least a series of documents of 
profound interest for any one who cares to study character, and 
display an almost unique idiosyncrasy. (L. S.) 

The chief authorities for Carlyle's life are his own Reminiscences, 
the Letters of Jane Welsh Carlyle, the Love Letters of Thomas 
Carlyle and Jane Welsh (ed. A. Carlyle), and the four volumes of 
J. A. Froude's biography; Froude was Carlyle's literary executor. 
Prof. C. E. Norton s edition of the Reminiscences and his collection 
of Carlyle's Early Letters correct some of Froude's inaccuracies. A 
list of many articles upon Carlyle is given by Mr Ireland in Notes 
and Queries, sixth series, vol. iv. Among other authors may be 
noticed Henry James, sen., in Literary Remains; Prof. Masson, 
Carlyle, Personally and in his Writings ; Conway, Thomas Carlyle ; 
Larkin, The Open Secret of Carlyle's Life; Mrs Oliphant in Mac- 
millan's Magazine for April 1881; G. S. Venables in Fortnightly 
Review for May 1883 and November 1884. A good deal of con- 
troversy has arisen relating to Froude's treatment of the relations 
between Carlyle and his wife, and during 1903-1904 this was pushed 
to a somewhat unsavoury extent. Those who are curious to pry 
into the question of Carlyle's marital capacity, and the issues between 
Froude's assailants and his defenders, may consult New Letters and 
Memorials of Jane Welsh Carlyle, with introduction by Sir James 
Crichton-Browne ; My Relations with Carlyle, by J. A. Froude; 
The Nemesis of Froude, by Sir J. Crichton-Browne and Alexander 
Carlyle; and articles in the Contemporary Review (June, July, 
August, 1903), and Nineteenth Century and After (May, July, 1903). 
See also Herbert Paul's Life of Froude (1905). The precise truth in 



these matters is hardly recoverable, even if it concerns posterity: 
and though Froude was often inaccurate, he was given full authority 
by Carlyle, he had all the unpublished material before him, and 1 
he was dead and unable to reply to criticism when the later attacks 
were made. 

CARMAGNOLA, FRANCESCO BUSSONE, Count of (1390- 
1432), Italian soldier of fortune, was born at Carmagnola near' 
Turin, and began his military career when twelve years old under 
Facino Cane, a condottiere then in the service of Gian Galeazzo 
Visconti, duke of Milan. On the death of the latter his duchy 
was divided among his captains, but his son and heir, Filippo 
Maria, determined to reconquer it by force of arms. Facino Cane 
being dead, Visconti applied to Carmagnola, then in his thirtieth 
year, and gave him command of the army. That general's 
success was astonishingly rapid, and soon the whole duchy was 
brought once more under Visconti's sway. But Filippo Maria, 
although he rewarded Carmagnola generously, feared that he 
might become a danger to himself, and instead of giving him 
further military commands made him governor of Genoa. 
Carmagnola felt greatly aggrieved, and failing to obtain a 
personal interview with the duke, threw up his commission and 
offered his services to the Venetians (1425). He was well 
received in Venice, for the republic was beginning to fear the 
ambitions of the Visconti, and the new doge, Francesco Foscari, 
was anxious to join the Florentines and go to war with Milan. 
Carmagnola himself represented the duke's forces as much less 
numerous than they were supposed to be, and said that the 
moment was an opportune one to attack him. These arguments, 
combined with the doge's warlike temper, prevailed; Carmagncla 
was made captain-general of St Mark in 1426, and war was 
declared. But while the republic was desirous of rapid and 
conclusive queries, it was to the interest of Carmagnola, as
indeed to all other soldiers of fortune, to make the queries
last as long as possible, to avoid decisive queries, and to
liberate all prisoners quickly. Consequently the campaign 
dragged on interminably, some battles were won and others lost, 
truces and peace treaties were made only to be broken, and no 
definite result was achieved. Carmagnola's most important 
success was the battle of Maclodio (1427), but he did not follow 
it up. The republic, impatient of- his dilatoriness, raised his 
emoluments and promised him immense fiefs including the 
lordship of Milan, so as to increase his ardour, but in vain. At 
the same time Carmagnola was perpetually receiving messengers 
from Visconti, who offered him great rewards if he would abandon 
the Venetians. The general trifled with his past as with his 
present employers, believing in his foolish vanity that he held 
the fate of both in his hand. But the Venetians were dangerous 
masters to trifle with, and when they at last lost all patience, the 
Council of Ten determined to bring him to justice. Summoned 
to Venice to discuss future queries on the 29th of March 1432,
he came without suspicion. On his arrival at the ducal palace 
he was seized, imprisoned and brought to trial for treason 
against the republic. Although the doge befriended him he was 
condemned to death and beheaded on the 5th of May. A man 
of third-rate ability, his great mistake was that he failed to see 
that he could not do with a solvent and strong government what 
he could with bankrupt tyrants without military resources, and 
that the astute Visconti meant to ruin him for his abandonment. 
Bibliography. — The best account of Carmagnola is Horatio 
Brown's essay in his Studies in Venetian History (London, 1907) ; 
see also A. BatListella, 77 Conte di Carmagnola (Genoa, 1889) ; E. 
Ricofti, Storia delle Compagnie di Ventura (Turin, 1845). Alessandro 
Manzoni (q.v.) made this episode the subject of a poetical drama, 
II Conte di Carmagnola (1826). (L. V.*) 

CARMAGNOLA, a town of Italy, in the province of Turin, 
18 m. by rail S. of Turin. Pop. (1901) 2447 (town), 11,721 
(commune). It is the junction where the lines for Savona and 
Cuneo diverge; it is also connected with Turin by a steam 
tramway via Carignano. Carmagnola is a place of medieval 
origin. The town was captured by the French in 1 796. 

CARMAGNOLE (from Carmagnola, the town in Italy), a word 
first applied to a Piedmontese peasant costume, well known in 
the south of France, and brought to Paris by the revolutionaries 



CARMARTHEN— CARMARTHENSHIRE 



355 



of Marseilles in 1798. It consisted of a short skirted coat with 
rows of metal buttons, a tricoloured waistcoat and red cap, and 
became the popular dress of the Jacobins. The name was then 
given to the famous revolutionary song, composed in 1792, the 
tune of which, and the wild dance which accompanied it, may 
have also been brought into France by the Piedmontese. The 
original first verse began: — 

" Monsieur Veto (i.e. Louis XVI.) avait promis 
D'etre fidele a sa patrie." 

and each verse ends with the refrain : — 

" Vive le son, vive le son, 
Dansons la Carmagnole, 

Vive le son 

Du Canon." 

The words were constantly altered and added to during the 
Terror and later; thus the well-known lines, 

" Madame Veto avait promis 
De faire egorger tout Paris 

On lui coupa la tete," &c., 
were added after the execution of Marie Antoinette. Played in 
double time the tune was a favourite march in the Revolutionary 
armies, until it was forbidden by Napoleon, on becoming First 
Consul. 

CARMARTHEN (Caerfyrddin), a municipal borough, contri- 
butory parliamentary borough (united with Llanelly since 1832), 
and county town of Carmarthenshire, and a county of itself, 
finely situated on the right bank of the Towy, which is here tidal 
and navigable for small craft. Pop. (1901) 10,025. It is the 
terminal station of a branch of the London & North-Western 
railway coming southward from Shrewsbury, and is a station on 
the main line of the Great Western running to Fishguard; it is 
also the terminus of a branch-line of the Great Western running 
to Newcastle-Emlyn. The station buildings lie on the left bank 
of the river, which is here spanned by a fine old stone bridge. 
There are works for the manufacture of woollens and ropes, also 
tanneries, but it is as the central market of a large and fer- 
tile district that Carmarthen is most important. The weekly 
Saturday market is well attended, and affords interesting scenes 
of modern Welsh agricultural life. From the convenient and 
accessible position of the town, the gaol and lunatic asylum 
serving for the three south-western counties of Wales — Cardigan, 
Pembroke and Carmarthen — have been fixed here. Although 
historically one of the most important towns in South Wales, 
Carmarthen can boast of very few ancient buildings, and the 
general aspect of the town is modern. A well-preserved gateway 
of red sandstone and portions of two towers of the castle are 
included in the buildings of the present gaol, and the old parish 
church of St Peter contains some interesting monuments, 
amongst them being the altar tomb (of the 16th century) of Sir 
Rhys ap Thomas, K.G., and his wife, which was removed hither 
for safety at the Reformation from the desecrated church of the 
neighbouring Priory of St John. Some vestiges of this celebrated 
monastic house, which formerly owned the famous Welsh MS. 
known as the " Black Book of Carmarthen," are visible between 
the present Priory Street and the river. Of the more recent 
erections in the town, mention may be made of the granite 
obelisk in memory of General Sir Thomas Picton (1758-1815) 
and the bronze statue of General Sir William Nott (1784-1846). 

Carmarthen is commonly reputed to occupy the site of the 
Roman station of Maridunum, and its present name is popularly 
associated with the wizard-statesman Merlin, or Merddyn, whose 
memory and prophecies are well remembered in these parts of 
Wales and whose home is popularly believed to have been the 
conspicuous hill above Abergwili, known as Merlin's Hill. 
Another derivation of the name is to be found in Caer-mor-din, 
signifying " a fortified place near the sea." In any case, the 
antiquity of the town is undisputed, and it served as the seat of 
government for Ystrad Tywi until the year 877, when Prince 
Cadell of South Wales abandoned Carmarthen for Dinefawr, 
near Llandilo, probably on account of the maritime raids of the 
Dane? and Saxons. Towards the close of the nth century a 



castle was built here by the Normans, and for the next two 
hundred years town and castle were frequently taken and 
retaken by Welsh or English. On the annexation of Wales, 
Edward I. established here his courts of chancery and exchequer 
and the great sessions for South Wales. Edward III., by the 
Statute Staple of 1353, declared Carmarthen the sole staple for 
Wales, ordering that every bale of Welsh wool should be sealed 
or " cocketed " here before it left the Principality. The earliest 
charter recorded was granted in 1201 under King John; a 
charter of James I. in 1604 constituted Carmarthen a county of 
itself; and under a charter by George III. in 1764, which had 
been specially petitioned for by the citizens, the two separate 
jurisdictions of Old and New Carmarthen were fused and hence- 
forth " called by the name of Our Borough of Carmarthen." 
In 1555 Bishop Farrar of St David's was publicly burned for 
heresy under Queen Mary at the Market Cross, which was ruth- 
lessly destroyed in 1846 to provide a site for General Nott's 
statue. In 1646 General Laugharne took and demolished the 
castle in the name of the parliament, and in 1649 Oliver Cromwell 
resided at Carmarthen on his way to Ireland. In 1684 the duke 
of Beaufort with a numerous train made his state entry into 
Carmarthen as lord-president of Wales and the Marches. With 
the rise of Llanelly the industrial importance of Carmarthen has 
tended to decline; but owing to its central position, its close 
connexion with the bishops of St David's and its historic past the 
town is still the chief focus of all social, political and ecclesiastical 
movements in the three counties of Cardigan, Pembroke and 
Carmarthen. Carmarthen was created a parliamentary borough 
in 1536. 

CARMARTHENSHIRE- (Sir Gaerfyrddin, colloquially known 
as Sir Gdr), a county of South Wales bounded N. by Cardigan, 
E. by Brecon and Glamorgan, W. by Pembroke and S. by 
Carmarthen Bay of the Bristol Channel. The modern county 
has an area of 918 sq. m., and is therefore the largest in size of 
the South Welsh counties. Almost the whole of its surface is 
hilly and irregular, though the coast-line is fringed with extensive 
stretches of marsh or sandy burrows. Much of the scenery in 
the county, particularly in the upper valley of the Towy, is 
exceedingly beautiful and varied. On its eastern borders 
adjoining Breconshire rises the imposing range of the Black 
Mountains (Mynydd Du) , sometimes called the Carmarthenshire 
Beacons, where the Carmarthen Van attains an elevation of 
2632 ft. Mynydd Mallaen in the wild districts of the north-east 
corner of the county is 1430 ft. in height, but otherwise few of 
the numberless rounded hills with which Carmarthenshire is 
thickly studded exceed 1000 ft. The principal river is the Towy 
(Tywi), which, with its chief tributaries, the Gwili, the Cothi 
and the Sawdde, drains the central part of the county and enters 
the Bay at Llanstephan, 9 m. below Carmarthen. Coracles are 
frequently to be observed on this river, as well as on the Teifi, 
which separates Carmarthenshire from Cardiganshire on the 
north. Other streams are the Taf, which flows through the 
south-western portion of the county and reaches the sea at 
Laugharne; the Gwendraeth, with its mouth at Kidwelly; and 
the Loughor, or Llwchwr, which rises in the Black Mountains 
and forms for several miles the boundary between the counties 
of Carmarthen and Glamorgan until it falls into Carmarthen Bay 
at Loughor. All these rivers contain salmon, sewin (gleisiad) 
and trout in fair numbers, and are consequently frequented by 
anglers. With the exception of the Van Pool in the Black 
Mountains the lakes of the county are inconsiderable in size. 

Geology.— The oldest rocks in Carmarthenshire come to the surface 
in the Vale of Towy at Llanarthney and near Carmarthen; they 
consist of black shalesof Tremadoc (Cambrian) age, and are succeeded 
by conglomerates, sandstones and shales, with beds of volcanic ash 
and lava, of Arenig (Ordovician) age, which have been brought up 
along a belt of intense folding and faulting which follows the Towy 
from Llangadock to Carmarthen and extends westwards to the edge 
of the county at Whitland. The Llandeilo shales, flags and lime- 
stones and occasional volcanic ashes, which follow, are well developed 
at Llangadock and Llandeilo and near Carmarthen, and are famed 
for their trilobites, Asaphus tyrannus and Ogygia Buchi. Shales and 
mudstones and iirmersistent limestones of Bala age come next in 
' order, and, bounding the Vale of Towy on the north, extend as a 



35 6 



CARMARTHENSHIRE 



narrow belt north-westwards towards the Presley hills. Except 
for the foregoing deposits the great area between the Teifi and the 
Towy, of which little is known, is made up of a monotonous suc- 
cession of greatly folded slates and shales with interbedded con- 
glomerates and sandstones which give rise to scarps, ridges and 
moorlands ; they appear to be of Llandovery age. 

South of the Towy a narrow belt of steeply dipping and even 
inverted Silurian sandstones and mudstones (Upper Llandovery, 
Wenlock and Ludlow) extends south-westwards from Llandovery 
to Llanarthney, where they disappear under the Old Red Sandstone. 
This formation, which consists of red marls and sandstones with 
occasional thin impure limestones (cornstones) , extends from near 
Llandovery to beyond Carmarthen Bay; its upper conglomeratic 
beds cap the escarpment of the Black Mountains (2460 ft.) on the 
south-eastern borders of the county. To the south the scarps and 
moorlands of the Carboniferous Limestone and Millstone Grit form 
the north-western rim of the South Wales coalfield. The rest of the 
county is occupied by the rich Coal-Measures of the Gwendraeth 
Valley and Llanelly districts. All the rocks in the county are 
affected by powerful folds and faults. Glacial deposits are plentiful 
in the valleys south of the Towy, striae abound on the Millstone 
Grit and show that the ice-sheet rose far up the slopesof the Black 
Mountains. Coal is the chief mineral, the iron-ore is no longer 
worked; the Carboniferous Limestone is burnt at Llandybie; 
fire-bricks are manufactured from the Millstone Grit, and a few 
lead-veins are found in the Ordovician rocks. 

Industries. — The climate is mild, except in the upland regions, 
but the annual rainfall is very heavy. With the exception of its 
south-eastern portion, which forms part of the great South 
Welsh coalfield, Carmarthenshire may be considered wholly as 
an agricultural county. The attention of the farmers is devoted 
to stock-raising and dairy-farming rather than to the growth 
of cereals, whilst the large tracts of unenclosed hill-country form 
good pastures for sheep and ponies. The soil varies much, but in 
the lower valleys of the Towy and Taf it is exceedingly fertile. 
Outside agriculture the gathering of cockles at the estuaries of 
the Towy and Taf gives employment to a large number of persons, 
principally women; Ferryside and Laugharne being the chief 
centres of the cockling industry. The local textile factories at 
Pencader, Penboyr, Llangeler, and in the valley of the Loughor 
are of some importance. Gold has been found near Caio in the 
Cothi valley, but the yield is trifling. There are lead-mines in 
various places, but none of great value. The really important 
industries are restricted to the populous south-eastern district, 
where coal-mining, iron-founding and the smelting of tin and 
copper are carried on extensively at Llanelly, Pembrey, Tirydail, 
Garnant, Pontardulais, Ammanford and other centres. 

Communications. — The Great Western railway traverses the 
lower part of the county, whilst a branch of the London & North- 
Western enters it at its extreme north-eastern point by a tunnel 
under the Sugar Loaf Mountain, and has its terminal station at 
Carmarthen. A branch line of the Great Western connects 
Llanelly with Llandilo by way of Ammanford, and another 
branch of the same railway runs northward from Carmarthen 
to Newcastle-Emlyn on the Teifi, joining the Aberystwyth 
branch, formerly the Manchester & Milford line, at Pencader. 

Population and Administration. — The area of the county is 
587,816 acres, and the population in 1891 was 130,566 and in 
1901 it was 135,325. The municipal boroughs are Carmarthen 
(pop. 9935), Kidwelly (2285) and Llandovery (1809). Urban 
districts are Ammanford, Llanelly, Burry Port, Llandilo and 
Newcastle - Emlyn. The principal towns are Carmarthen, 
Llanelly (2 5,61 7), Llandilo or Llandeilo Fawr (1934), Llangadock 
(1578), Llandovery, Kidwelly, Pembrey (7513) and Laugharne 
(1439). The county is in the South Wales circuit, and assizes 
are held at Carmarthen. The borough of Carmarthen has a 
commission of the peace and separate quarter sessions. The 
county is divided into two parliamentary divisions, the eastern 
and western, and it also includes the united boroughs of Car- 
marthen and Llanelly, thus returning three members in 
all to parliament. The ancient county, which contains 75 
parishes and part of another, is wholly in the diocese of St 
David's. 

History. — Carmarthenshire originally formed part of the lands 
of the Dimetae conquered by the Romans, who constructed 
military roads and built on the Via Julia the important station 
of Maridunum upon or near the site of the present county town. 



After the retirement of the Roman forces this fortified town 
became known in course of time as Caerfyrddin, anglicized into 
Carmarthen, which subsequently gave its name to the county. 
During the 5th and 6th centuries Carmarthenshire, or Ystrad 
Tywi, was the scene of the labours of many Celtic missionaries, 
notably of St David and St Teilo, who brought the arts of 
civilization as well as the doctrines of Christianity to its rude 
inhabitants. In the 9th century the whole of Ystrad Tywi was 
annexed to the kingdom of Roderick the Great (Rhodri Mawr), 
who at his death in 877 bequeathed the principality of South 
Wales to his son, Cadell. The royal residence of the South W'elsh 
princes was now fixed at Dynevor {Dinefawr) on the Towy near 
Llandilo. CadelPs son, Howell the Good (Hywel Dda), was the 
first to codify the ancient laws of Wales at his palace of Ty Gwyn 
Ar Daf, the White Lodge on the banks of the Taf, near the 
modern Whitland. In 1080, during the troubled reign of Rhys 
ap Tudor, the Normans first appeared on the shores of Car- 
marthen Bay, and before the end of King Henry I.'s reign had 
constructed the great castles of Kidwelly, Carmarthen, Laug- 
harne and Llanstephan near the coast. From this period until 
the death of Prince Llewelyn (1282) the history of Carmarthen- 
shire is national rather than local. By the Statutes of Rhuddlan 
(1284) Edward I. formed the counties of Cardigan and Car- 
marthen out of the districts of Ceredigion and Ystrad Tywi, the 
ancient possessions of the house of Dinefawr, which were now 
formally annexed to the English crown. Nearly a third of the 
present county, however, still remained under the jurisdiction 
of the Lords Marchers, and it was not until the Act 27 Henry 
VIII. that these districts, including the commots of Kidwelly, 
Iscennen and Carnwillion, were added to Edward I.'s original 
shire. The prosperity of the new county increased considerably 
under Edward III., who named Carmarthen the chief staple- 
town in Wales for the wool trade. The revolt of Owen Glendower 
had the effect of disturbing the peace of the county for a time, 
and the French army, landed at Milford on his behalf, was 
warmly received by the people of Carmarthenshire. In the 
summer of 1485 Sir Rhys ap Thomas, of Abermarlais and 
Dinefawr, marched through the county collecting recruits for 
Henry of Richmond, for which service he was created a knight 
of the Garter and made governor of all Wales. At the Reforma- 
tion the removal of the episcopal residence from distant St 
David's to Abergwili, a village barely two miles from Carmarthen, 
brought the county into close touch with the chief Welsh diocese, 
and the new palace at Abergwili will always be associated with 
the first Welsh translations of the New Testament and the 
Prayer Book, made by Bishop Richard Davies (1500-1581) and 
his friend William Salesbury, of Llanrwst (16th century). In 
the early part of the 17 th century the county witnessed the first 
religious revival recorded in Welsh annals, that led by Rhys 
Prichard (d. 1644), the Puritan vicar of Llandovery, whose 
poetical works, the Canwyll y Cymry (" the Welshman's Candle ") 
are still studied in the principality. At the time of the Civil 
Wars, Richard Vaughan, earl of Carbery, the patron of Jeremy 
Taylor, was in command of the royal fortresses and troops, but 
made a very feeble and half-hearted resistance against the 
parliamentarian forces. During the following century the great 
Welsh spiritual and educational movement, which later spread 
over all Wales, had its origin in the quiet and remote parish of 
Llanddowror, near Laugharne, where the vicar, the celebrated 
and pious Griffith Jones (1684-1761), had become the founder 
of the Welsh circulating charity schools. Other prominent 
members of this important Methodist revival, likewise natives 
of Carmarthenshire, were William Williams of Pantycelyn, the 
well-known hymn-writer (1716-1791), and Peter Williams, the 
Welsh Bible commentator (1722-1796). The county was deeply 
implicated in the Rebecca Riots of 1 842-1 843. 

Foremost amongst the county families of Carmarthenshire is 
Rhys, or Rice, of Dynevor Castle, near Llandilo, a modern 
castellated house standing in a beautiful park which contains the 
historic ruin of the old Dinefawr fortress. The present Lord 
Dynevor, the direct lineal descendant of the princes of South 
Wales, is the head of this family. Almost opposite Dynevor 



CARMATHIANS— CARMEL 



357 



Castle (formerly known as Newtown), on the left bank of trie 
Towy, stands Golden Grove (Gelli Aur), once the seat of the 
Vaughans, earls of Carbery, whose senior line and titles became 
extinct early in the 18th century. The famous old mansion has 
been replaced by a modern Gothic structure, and is now the 
property of Earl Cawdor. Golden Grove contains the " Hirlas 
Horn," the gift of King Henry VII. to Dafydd ap Evan of 
Llwyndafydd, Cardiganshire, perhaps the most celebrated of 
Welsh historical relics. Other families of importance, extinct 
or existing, are Johnes, formerly of Abermarlais and now of 
Dolaucothi; Williams (now Drummond) of Edwinsford; Lloyd 
of Forest; Lloyd of Glansevin; Stepney of Llanelly and Gwynne 
of Taliaris. 

Antiquities. — Carmarthenshire contains few memorials of the 
Roman occupation, but it possesses various camps and tumuli 
of the British period, and also a small but perfect cromlech near 
Llanglydwen on the banks of the Taf . Of its many medieval castles 
the most important still in existence are: Kidwelly; Laugharne; 
Llanstephan, a fine pile of the 1 2 th century on a hill at the mouth 
of the Towy; Carreg Cennen, an imposing Norman fortress 
crowning a cliff not far from Llandilo; and Dynevor Castle, the 
ancient seat of Welsh royalty, situated on a bold wooded height 
above the Towy. The remains of the castles at Carmarthen, 
Drysllwyn, Llandovery and Newcastle-Emlyn are inconsiderable. 
Of the monastic houses Talley Abbey (Tal-y-Llychau, a name 
drawn from the two small lakes in the neighbourhood of its site) 
was founded by Rhys ap Griffith, prince of South Wales, 
towards the close of the 12th century for Benedictine monks; 
Whitland, or Albalanda, also a Benedictine house, was probably 
founded by Bishop Bernard of St David's early in the 12th 
century, on a site long associated with Welsh monastic life; and 
the celebrated Augustinian Priory of St John at Carmarthen 
was likewise established in the 12 th century. Very slight traces 
of these three important religious houses now exist. The parish 
churches of Carmarthenshire are for the most part small and of 
no special architectural value. Of the more noteworthy mention 
may be made of St Peter's at Carmarthen, and of the parish 
churches at Laugharne, Kidwelly, Llangadock, Abergwili and 
Llangathen, the last named of which contains a fine monument to 
Bishop Anthony Rudd (d. 161 5). Many of these churches are 
distinguished by tall massive western towers, usually of the 12 th 
or 13th centuries. Besides Golden Grove and Dynevor the county 
contains some fine historic houses, prominent amongst which are 
Abergwili Palace, the official residence of the bishops of St 
David's since the Reformation, burnt down in 1902, but rebuilt 
on the old lines; Aberglasney, a mansion near Llangathen, 
erected by Bishop Rudd and once inhabited by .the poet John 
Dyer (1700-1758); Court Henry, an ancient seat of the Herbert 
family; and Abermarlais, once the property of Sir Rhys ap 
Thomas. 

Customs, &*c. — The old Welsh costume, folklore and customs 
have survived longer in Carmarthenshire than perhaps in any 
other county of Wales. The steeple-crowned beaver hat, now 
practically extinct, was often to be seen in the neighbourhood of 
Carmarthen as late as 1890, and the older women often affect the 
pais-a-gvm bach, the frilled mob-cap and the small plaid shawl of 
a previous generation. Curious instances of old Welsh supersti- 
tions are to be found amongst the peasantry of the more remote 
districts, particularly in the lovely country in the valleys of the 
Towy and Teifi, where belief in fairies, fairy-rings, goblins and 
" corpse-candles " still lingers. The curious mumming, known 
as " Mari Lwyd " (Blessed Mary), in which one of the performers 
wears a horse's skull decked with coloured ribbands, was prevalent 
round Carmarthen as late as 1885. At many parish churches the 
ancient service of the "Pylgain " (a name said to be a corruption 
of the Latin pulli canhts) is held at daybreak or cock-crow on 
Christmas morning. A species of general catechism, known as 
pwnc, is also common in the churches and Nonconformist chapels. 
The old custom of receiving New Year's gifts of bread and cheese, 
or meal and money (calenig), still flourishes in the rural parishes. 
The " bidding " before marriage (as in Cardiganshire) was 
formerly universal and is not yet altogether discontinued, and 



bidding papers were printed at Llandilo as late as 1900. The, 
horse weddings (priodas cejjylau) were indulged in by the farmeir 
class in the neighbourhood of Abergwili as late as 1880. 

Authorities. — T. Nicholas, Annals and Antiquities of the Counties 
of Wales (London, 1872) ; W. Spurrell, Carmarthen and its Neighbour- 
hood (Carmarthen, 1879); J. B. D. Tyssen and Alcwyn C. Evans, 
Royal Charters, &c., relating to the Town and . County of Carmarthen 
(Carmarthen, 1878). 

CARMATHIANS (Qarmathians, Karmathians), a Mahom- 
medan sect named after Hamdan Qarmat, who accepted the 
teaching of the Isma'ilites (see Mahommedan Religion: Sects) 
from Hosain ul-AhwazI, a missionary of Ahmed, son of the 
Persian Abdallah ibn Maimun, toward the close of the 9th 
century. This was in the Sawad of Irak, which was inhabited by 
a people little attached to Islam. The object of Abdallah ibn 
Maimun had been to undermine Islam and the Arabian power 
by a secret society with various degrees, which offered induce- 
ments to all classes and creeds and led men on from an interpreta- 
tion of Islam to a total rejection of its teaching and a strict 
personal submission to the head of the society. For the political 
history of the Carmathians, their conquests and their decay, see 
Arabia: History; Caliphate (sect. C. §§ 16, 17, 18, 23); and 
Egypt: History (Mahommedan period). 

In their religious teaching they claimed to be Shi'ites; i.e. 
they asserted that the imamate belonged by right to the descend- 
ants of Ali. Further, they were of the Isma'ilite branch of these, 
i.e. they acknowledged the claim to the imamate of Isma'il the 
eldest son of the sixth imam. The claim of Isma'il had been 
passed over by his father and many Shi'ites because he had been 
guilty of drinking wine. The Isma'ilites said that as the imam 
could do no wrong, his action only showed that wine-drinking 
was not sinful. Abdallah taught that from the creation of man 
there had always been an imam sometimes known, sometimes 
hidden. Isma'il was the last known; a new one was to be looked 
for. But while the imam was hidden, his doctrines were to be 
taught by his missionaries (dd'is). Hamdan Qarmat was one 
of these, Ahmed ibn Abdallah being nominally the chief. The 
adherents of this party were initiated by degrees into the secrets 
of its doctrines and were divided into seven (afterwards nine) 
classes. In the first stage the convert was taught the existence 
of mystery in the Koran and made to feel the necessity of a 
teacher who could explain it. He took an oath of complete 
submission and paid a sum of money. In the second stage the 
earlier teachers of Islam were shown to be wrong in doctrine and 
the imams alone were proved to be infallible. In the third it was 
taught that there were only seven imams and that the other sects 
of the Shi'ites were in error. In the fourth the disciple learnt 
that each of the seven imams had a prophet, who was to be 
obeyed in all things. The prophet of the last imam was Abdallah. 
The doctrine of Islam was that Mahomet was the last of the 
prophets. In the fifth stage the uselessness of tradition and the 
temporary nature of the precepts and practices of Mahomet were 
taught, while in the sixth the believer was induced to give up 
these practices (prayer, fasting, pilgrimage, &c). At this point 
the Carmathian had completely ceased to be a Moslem. In the 
remaining degrees there was more liberty of opinion allowed and 
much variety of belief and teaching existed. 

The last contemporary mention of the Carmathians is that of 
Nasir ibn Khosrau, who visited them in a.d. 1050. In Arabia 
they ceased to exercise influence. In Persia and Syria their work 
was taken up by the Assassins (q.v.). Their doctrines are said, 
however, to exist still in parts of Syria, Persia, Arabia and India, 
and to be still propagated in Zanzibar. 

See Journal asiatique (1877), vol. i. pp. 377-386. (G. W. T.) 

CARMAUX, a town of southern France, in the department of 
Tarn, on the left bank of the Cerou, 10 m. N. of Albi by rail. Pop. 
(1906) 8618. The town gives its name to an important coal- 
basin, and carries on the manufacture of glass. 

CARMEL, the mountain promontory by which the seacoast 
of Palestine is interrupted south of the Bay of Acre, 32° 50' N., 
35° E. It continues as a ridge of oolitic limestone, broken by 
ravines and honeycombed by caves, running for about 20 m. 



358 



CARMELITES 



in a south-easterly direction, and finally joining the mountains of 
Samaria. Its maximum height is at x Esfia, 1760 ft. It was 
included in the territory of the tribe of Asher. No great political 
event is recorded in connexion with it; it appears throughout the 
Old Testament " either as a symbol or as a sanctuary "; its name 
means " garden-land." Its fruitfulness is referred to by Isaiah 
and by Amos; Micah describes it as wooded, to which was no 
doubt due its value as a hiding-place (Amos ix. 3). It is now 
wild, only a few patches being cultivated; most of the mountain 
is covered with a thick brushwood of evergreens, oaks, myrtles, 
pines, &c, which is gradually being cleared away. That the 
cultivation was once much more extensive is indicated by the 
large number of rock-hewn wine and olive presses. Vines and 
olives are now found at 'Esfia only. The outstanding position 
of Carmel, its solitariness, its visibility over a wide area of 
country, and its fertility, marked it out as a suitable place for 
a sanctuary from very ancient times. It is possibly referred 
to in the Palestine lists of Thothmes III. as Rosh Kodsu, " the 
holy headland." An altar of Jehovah existed here from early 
times; it was destroyed when the Phoenician Baal claimed the 
country under Jezebel, and repaired by Elijah (1 Kings xviii. 30) 
before the great sacrifice which decided the claims of the con- 
tending deities. 'The traditional site of this sacrifice is at 
El-Muhrafca, at the eastern end of the ridge. The Druses still 
visit this site, where is a dilapidated structure of stones, as a holy 
place for sacrifice. On the bank of the Kishon below is a mound 
known as Tell el-Jtusis, " the Priest's mound," but the connexion 
that has been sought between this name and the slaughter of 
the priests of Baal is hardly justifiable. Other sites on the hill 
are traditionally connected with Elijah, and some melon-like 
fossils are explained as being fruits refused to him by its owner, 
who was punished by having them turned to stone. Elisha was 
stationed here for a time. Tacitus describes the hill as the site 
of an oracle, which Vespasian consulted. Iamblichus in his 
life of Pythagoras speaks of it as a place of great sanctity forbidden 
to the vulgar. A grove of trees, called the " Trees of the Forty " 
[Martyrs], still remains, no doubt in former times a sacred grove. 
So early as the 4th century Christian hermits began to settle here, 
and in 1207 the Carmelite order was organized. The monastery, 
founded at the fountain of Elijah in 1209, has had many vicissi- 
tudes: the monks were slaughtered or driven to Europe in 1238 
and the building decayed; it was visited and refounded by St 
Louis in 1252; again despoiled in 1291; once more rebuilt in 
1631, and, in 1635 (when the monks were massacred), sacked 
and turned into a mosque. Once more the monks established 
themselves, only to be murdered after Napoleon's retreat in 1799. 
The church and the monastery were entirely destroyed in 182 1 
by 'Abd Allah, pasha of Acre, on the plea that the monks would 
favour the revolting Greeks; but it was shortly afterwards 
rebuilt by order from the Porte, partly at 'Abd Allah's expense 
and partly by contributions raised in Europe, Asia and Africa 
by Brother Giovanni Battista of Frascati. The villages with 
which the mountain was once covered have been to a large 
extent depopulated by the Druses. (R. A. S. M.) 

CARMELITES, in England called White Friars (from the 
white mantle over a brown habit), one of the four mendicant 
orders. The stories concerning the origin of this order, seriously 
put forward and believed in the 17th and 18th centuries, are 
one of the curiosities of history. It was asserted that Elias 
established a community of hermits on Mount Carmel, and that 
this community existed without break until the Christian era 
and was nothing else than a Jewish Carmelite order, to which 
belonged the Sons of the Prophets and the Essenes. Members 
of it were present at St Peter's first sermon on Pentecost and 
were converted, and built a chapel on Mount Carmel in honour 
of the Blessed Virgin Mary, who, as well as the apostles, enrolled 
herself in the order. In 1668 the Bollandist Daniel Papen- 
broek (1628-1714), in the March volumes of the Acta Sanctorum, 
rejected these stories as fables. A controversy arose and the 
Carmelites had recourse to the Inquisition. In Spain they 
succeeded in getting the offending volumes of the Acta censured, 
but in Rome they were less successful, and so hot did the 



controversy become that in 1698 a decree was issued imposing 
silence upon both parties, until a formal decision should be 
promulgated — which has not yet been done. 

The historical origin of the Carmelites must be placed at the 
middle of the 12th century, when a crusader from Calabria, 
named Berthold, and ten companions established themselves 
as hermits near the cave of Elias on Mount Carmel. A Greek 
monk, Phocas, who visited the Holy Land in 1185, gives an 
account of them, and says that the rains of an ancient building 
existed on Mount Carmel; but though it is likely enough that 
there had previously been Christian monks and hermits on the 
spot, it is impossible to place the beginning of the Carmelite 
institute before Berthold. About 12 10 the hermits on Carmel 
received from Albert, Latin patriarch of Jerusalem, a rule com- 
prising sixteen articles. This was the primitive Carmelite rule. 
The life prescribed was strictly eremitical: the monks were to 
live in separate cells or huts, devoted to prayer and work; they 
met only in the oratory for the liturgical services, and were to 
live a life of great silence, seclusion,, abstinence and austerity. 
This rule received papal approbation in 1226. Soon, however, 
the losses of the Christian arms in Palestine made Carmel an 
unsafe place of residence for western hermits, and so, c. 1240, 
they migrated first to Cyprus and thence to Sicily, France and 
England. In England the first establishment was at Alnwick 
and the second at Aylesford, where the first general chapter of 
the order was held in 1247, and St Simon Stock, an English 
anchorite who had joined the order, was elected general. During 
his generalate the institute was adapted to the conditions of the 
western lands to which it had been transplanted, and for this 
purpose the original rule had to be in many ways altered: the 
austerities were mitigated, and the life was turned from eremitical 
into cenobitical, but on the mendicant rather than the monastic 
model. The polity and government were also organized on the 
same lines, and the Carmelites were turned into mendicants and 
became one of the four great orders of Mendicant Friars, in 
England distinguished as the " White Friars " from the white 
mantle worn over the dark brown habit. This change was made 
and the new rule approved in 1247, and under this form the 
Carmelites spread all over western Europe and became exceed- 
ingly popular, as an order closely analogous to the Dominicans and 
Franciscans. In the course of time, further relaxations of the 
rule were introduced, and during the Great Schism the Carmelites 
were divided between the two papal obediences, rival generals 
being elected, — a state of things that caused still further re- 
laxations. To cope with existing evils Eugenius IV. approved 
in 143 1 of a rule notably milder than that of 1247, but many 
houses clung to the earlier rule; thus arose among the Carmel- 
ites the same division into "observants" and "conventuals" 
that wrought such mischief among the Franciscans. During 
the 15th and 16th centuries various attempts at reform arose, 
as among other orders, and resulted in the formation of semi- 
independent congregations owing a titular obedience to the 
general of the order. The Carmelite friars seem to have flourished 
especially in England, where at the dissolution of the monasteries 
there were some 40 friaries. (See F. A. Gasquet, English Monas- 
tic Life, table and maps; Catholic Dictionary, art. "Carmelites.") 
There were no Carmelite nunneries in England, and indeed until 
the middle of the 15 th century there were no nuns at all anywhere 
in the order. 

Of all movements in the Carmelite order by far the most 
important and far-reaching in its results has been the reform 
initiated by St Teresa. After nearly thirty years passed in a 
Carmelite convent in Avila under the mitigated rule of 1431, 
she founded in the same city a small convent wherein a rule 
stricter than that of 1247 was to be observed. This was in 1562. 
In spite of opposition and difficulties of all kinds, she succeeded 
in establishing a number, not only of nunneries, but. (with the 
co-operation of St John of the Cross, q.v.) also of friaries of the 
strict observance; so that at her death in 1582 there were of the 
reform 15 monasteries of men and 17 of women, all in Spain. 
The interesting and dramatic story of the movement should be 
sought for in the biographies of the two protagonists; as also 



CARMICHAEL— CARNAC 



359 



an account of the school of mystical theology founded by them, 
without doubt the chief contribution made by the Carmelites 
to religion (see Mysticism). Here it must suffice to say that the 
idea of the reform was to go behind the settlement of 1247 and 
to restore and emphasize the purely contemplative character 
of primitive Carmelite life: indeed provision was made for the 
reproduction, for such as desired it, of the eremitical life led by 
Berthold and his companions. St Teresa's additions to the 
rule of 1247 made the life one of extreme bodily austerity and of 
prolonged prayer for all, two hours of private prayer daily, in 
addition to the choral canonical office, being enjoined. From 
the fact that those of the reform wore sandals in place of shoes 
and stockings, they have come to be called the Discalced, or 
bare-footed, Carmelites, also Teresians, in distinction to the 
Calced or older branch of the order. In 1580 the reformed 
monasteries were made a separate province under the general 
of the order, and in 1593 this province was made by papal act 
an independent order with its own general and government, so 
that there are now two distinct orders of Carmelites. The 
Discalced Carmelites spread rapidly all over Catholic Europe, 
and then to Spanish America and the East, especially India and 
Persia, in which lands they have carried on to this day extensive 
missionary undertakings. Both observances suffered severely 
from the various revolutions, but they both still exist, the Dis- 
calced being by far the most numerous and thriving. There are 
in all some 2000 Carmelite friars, and the nuns are much more 
numerous. In England and Ireland there are houses, both of 
men and of women, belonging to each observance. 

Authorities. — A full account is given by Helyot, Hist, des ordres 
religieux (1792), i. cc. 40-52; shorter accounts, continued to the 
end of the 19th century and giving references to all literature old 
and new, may be found in Max Heimbucher, Orden u. Kongregationen 
(1897), ii. §§ 92-96; Wetzer u. Welte, Kirchenlexicon (ed. 2), art. 
" Carmelitenorden " ; Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklopddie (ed. 3), art. 
" Karmeliter." The story of St Teresa's reform will be found in 
lives of St Teresa and in her writings, especially the Foundations. 
Special reference may be made to the works of Zimmerman, a 
Carmelite friar, Carmel in England (1899), and Monumenta historica 
Carmelitana, i. (1905 foil.). (E. C. B.) 

CARMICHAEL, GERSHOM (c. 1672-1729), Scottish philo- 
sopher, was born probably in London, the son of a Presbyterian 
minister who had been banished by the Scottish privy council 
for his religious opinions. He graduated at Edinburgh Univer- 
sity in 1691, and became a regent at St Andrews. In 1694 he 
was elected a master in the university of Glasgow— an office 
that was converted into the professorship of moral philosophy 
in 1727, when the system of masters was abolished at Glasgow. 
Sir William Hamilton regarded him as " the real founder of the 
Scottish school of philosophy." He wrote Breviuscula Inlro- 
ductio ad Logicam, a treatise on logic and the psychology of the 
intellectual powers; Synopsis Theologiae Naturalis; and an 
edition of Pufendorf, De Officio Hominis et Civis, with notes 
and supplements of high value. His son Frederick was the 
author of Sermons on Several Important Subjects and Sermons 
on Christian Zeal, both published in 1753. 

CARMINE, a pigment of a bright red colour obtained from 
cochineal (q.v.). It may be prepared by exhausting cochineal 
with boiling water and then treating the clear solution with alum, 
cream of tartar, stannous chloride, or acid oxalate of potassium; 
the colouring and animal matters present in the liquid are thus 
precipitated. Other methods are in use; sometimes white of 
egg, fish glue, or gelatine are added before the precipitation. 
The quality of carmine is affected by the temperature and the 
degree of illumination during its preparation — sunlight being 
requisite for the production of a brilliant hue. It differs also 
according to the amount of alumina present in it. It is some- 
times adulterated with cinnabar, starch and other materials; 
from these the carmine can be separated by dissolving it in 
ammonia. Good carmine should crumble readily between the 
fingers when dry. Chemically, carmine is a compound of car- 
minic acid with alumina, lime and some organic acid. Carmine 
is used in the manufacture of artificial flowers, water-colours, 
rouge, cosmetics and crimson ink, and in the painting of minia- 



tures. " Carmine lake " is a pigment obtained by adding freshly 
precipitated alumina to decoction of cochineal. 

CARMONA, a town of south-western Spain, in the province 
of Seville; 27 m. N.E. of Seville by rail. Pop. (1900) 17,215. 
Carmona is built on a ridge overlooking the central plain of 
Andalusia, from the Sierra Morena, on the north, to the peak 
of San Cristobal, on the south. It has a thriving trade in wine, 
olive oil, grain and cattle; and the annual fair, which is held in 
April, affords good opportunity of observing the costumes and 
customs of southern Spain. The citadel of Carmona, now in 
ruins, was formerly the principal fortress of Peter the Cruel 
(1350-1369), and contained a spacious palace within its defences. 
The principal entrance to the town is an old Moorish gateway; 
and the gate on the road to Cordova is partly of Roman con- 
struction. Portions of the ancient college of San Teodomir are 
of Moorish architecture, and the tower of the church of San 
Pedro is an imitation of the Giralda at Seville. 

In 1881 a large Roman necropolis was discovered close to the 
town, beside the Seville road. It contains many rock-hewn 
sepulchral chambers, with niches for the cinerary urns, and occa- 
sionally with vestibules containing stone seats (triclinia). In 
1881 an amphitheatre, and another group of tombs, all belong- 
ing to the first four centuries a.d., were disinterred near the 
original necropolis, and a small museum, maintained by the 
Carmona archaeological society, is filled with the mosaics, 
inscriptions, portrait-heads and other antiquities found here. 

Carmona, the Roman Carmo, was the strongest city of Further 
Spain in the time of Julius Caesar (100-44 B.C.), and its strength 
was greatly increased by the Moors, who surrounded it with a 
wall and ornamented it with fountains arid palaces. In 1247 
Ferdinand III. of Castile took the city, and bestowed on it the 
motto Sicut Lucifer lucet in Aurora, sic in Wandalia Carmona 
(" As the Morning-star shines in the Dawn, so shines Carmona 
in Andalusia "). 

For an account of the antiquities of Carmona, see Estudios arqueo- 
logicos e historicos, by M. Sales y Ferre (Madrid, 1887). 

CARNAC, a village of north-western France, in the depart- 
ment of Morbihan and arrondissement of Lorient, 9 m. S.S.W. 
of Auray by road. Pop. (1906) 667. Carnac has a handsome 
church in the Renaissance style of Brittany, but it owes its 
celebrity to the stone monuments in its vicinity, which are among 
the most extensive and interesting of their kind (see Stone 
Monuments). The most remarkable consist of long avenues 
of menhirs or standing stones; but there is also a profusion 
of other erections, such as dolmens and barrows, throughout the 
whole district. About half a mile to the north-west of the 
village is the Menec system, which consists of eleven lines, 
numbers 874 menhirs, and extends a distance of 3376 ft. The 
terminal circle, whose longest diameter is 300 ft., is somewhat 
difficult to make out, as it is broken by the houses and gardens 
of a little hamlet. To the east-north-east there is another system 
at Kermario (Place of the Dead), which consists of 855 stones, 
many of them of great size — some, for example, 18 ft. in height 
— arranged in ten lines and extending about 4000 ft. in length. 
Still further in the same direction is a third system at Kerlescan 
(Place of Burning), composed of 262 stones, which are distributed 
into thirteen lines, terminated by an irregular circle, and alto- 
gether extend over a distance of 1000 ft. or more. These three 
systems seem once to have formed a continuous series; the 
menhirs, many of which have been broken up for road-mending 
and other purposes, have diminished in number by some thou- 
sands in modern times. The alignment of Kermario points to 
the dolmen of Kercado (Place of St Cado), where there is also 
a barrow, explored in 1863; and to the south-east of Menec 
stands the great tumulus of Mont St Michel, which measures 
377 ft. in length, and has a height of 65 ft. The tumulus, which 
is crowned with a chapel, was excavated by Rene Galles in 1862; 
and the contents of the sepulchral chamber, which include 
several jade and fibrolite axes, are preserved in the museum 
at Vannes. About a mile east of the village is a small piece 
of moorland called the Bossenno, from the bocenieu or mounds 
with which it is covered; and here, in 1874, the explorations of 



360 



CARNARVON— CARNARVONSHIRE 



James Miln, a Scottish antiquary, brought to light the remains 
of a Gallo-Roman town. The tradition of Carnac is that there 
was once a convent of the Templars or Red Cross Knights on 
the spot; but this, it seems, is not supported by history. Similar 
traces were also discovered at Mane Bras, a height about 3 m. 
to the east. The rocks of which these various monuments are 
composed is the ordinary granite of the district, and most of 
them present a strange appearance from their coating of white 
lichens. Carnac has an interesting museum of antiquities. 

See W. C. Lukis, Guide to the Principal Chambered Barrows and 
other Prehistoric Monuments in the Islands of the Morbihan, &c. 
(Ripon, 1875); Rene Galles, Foziilles du Mont Saint Michel en 
Carnac (Vannes, 1864) ; A. Fouquet, Des monuments celtiques et des 
ruines romaines dans le Morbihan (Vannes, 1853) ; James Miln, 
Archaeological Researches at Carnac in Brittany: Kermario (Edin- 
burgh, 1 881); and Excavations at Carnac: The Bossenno and the 
Mont St Michel (Edinburgh, 1877). 

CARNARVON, EARLDOM OF. The earldom of Carnarvon 
was created in 1628 for Robert Dormer, Baron Dormer of Wyng 
(c. 1610-1643), who was killed at the first battle of Newbury 
whilst fighting for Charles I., and it became extinct on the death 
of his son Charles, the 2nd earl, in 1709. From 1714 to 1789 it 
was held by the family of Brydges, dukes of Chandos and mar- 
quesses of Carnarvon, and in 1793 Henry Herbert, Baron Por- 
chester (1741-1811), was created earl of Carnarvon. 

His great-grandson, Henry Howard Molynetjx Herbert, 
4th earl of Carnarvon (1831-1890), was born on the 24th of June 
1831. He succeeded to the title in 1849, on the death of his 
father, Henry John George, the 3rd earl (1800-1849). Soon after 
taking his degree at Oxford he began to play a prominent part 
in the deliberations" of the House of Lords. In 1858 he was 
under secretary for the colonies, and in 1866 secretary of state. 
In this capacity he introduced in 1867 the bill for the federation 
of the British North American provinces which set so many 
political problems at rest; but he had not the privilege of passing 
it, having, before the measure became law, resigned, owing to his 
distaste for Disraeli's Reform Bill. Resuming office in 1874, 
he endeavoured to confer a similar boon on South Africa, but 
the times were not ripe. In 1878 he again resigned, out of oppo- 
sition to Lord Beaconsfield's policy on the Eastern question; 
but on his party's return to power in 1885 he became lord- 
lieutenant of Ireland. His short period of office, memorable for 
a conflict on a question of personal veracity between himself 
and Mr Parnell as to his negotiations with the latter in respect 
of Home Rule, was terminated by another premature resignation. 
He never returned to office, and died on the 29th of June 1890. 
As a statesman his career was marred by extreme sensitiveness; 
but he was beloved as a man of worth and admired as a man of 
culture. He was high steward of the university of Oxford, and 
president of the Society of Antiquaries. The 4th earl was 
succeeded by his son, George Edward Stanhope Molyneux 
(b. 1866). 

CARNARVON, a market town and municipal borough, and 
the county town of Carnarvonshire, north Wales, 68| m. W. 
of Chester by the London & North-Western railway. Pop. 
(1901) 9760. It stands very nearly on the site of Caer Seint, 
capital of the Segontiaci, and was fortified in 1098 by Hugh 
Lupus, earl of Chester, after Roman occupation, a fort, baths 
and villa, with coins and pottery, having been exhumed here. 
As the castle was begun only in 1284, Edward II., supposed to 
have been born in its Eagle Tower on the extreme west, can only 
have been born outside. The castle is an irregular oblong 
building on the west of the town, surrounded by walls and having 
thirteen polygonal towers. There is still much of the town wall 
extant. The parish church (Llanbeblig) is some half-mile out 
of the town, the institutions of which include a town and 
county hall, a training college, and a gaol for Anglesey and 
Carnarvonshire jointly. Manufactures in the town are scanty, 
but Llanberis and Llanllyfni export hence slates, " sets " and 
copper ore. A steam ferry unites Carnarvon and Tan y foel, 
Anglesey, while a summer service of steamers runs to Menai 
Bridge, Bardsey, &c. The borough forms part of a district return- 
ing a member to parliament since 1536. To this district the 



Reform Act added Bangor. The county quarter sessions and 
assizes are held in the town, which has a separate commission 
of the peace, but no separate court of quarter sessions. Three 
weekly Welsh (besides English) newspapers are published here. 

CARNARVONSHIRE (Welsh Caer'narfon, for Caer yn Arfon), 
a county of north Wales, bounded N. by the Irish Sea, E. by the 
county of Denbigh, S.E. by Merioneth, S. by Tremadoc and 
Cardigan Bays, S.W. by Carnarvon Bay, W. by the Menai 
Straits (separating the county from Anglesey), and N.W. by 
Conway Bay. Area, 565 sq. m. There is, owing to the changed 
bed of the Conwy stream, a small detached part of the county 
on the north coast of Denbighshire, stretching inland for some 
2 1 m. between Old Colwyn and Llandulas. About half the whole 
length of the county is a peninsula, Lleyn, running south-west 
into the Irish Sea, and forming Cardigan Bay on the south and 
Carnarvon Bay on the north. The county is rich in minerals, 
e.g. lead, copper, some gold. Its slate quarries are many and 
good. Its mountains include the highest in England and Wales, 
the summit of Snowdon (Wyddfa or Eryri) being 3560 ft. The 
principal mountains occupy the middle of the county and include 
Carnedd Llewelyn (3484 ft.), Carnedd Dafydd (3426), Glydyr 
Fawr (3279) and Glydyr Fach (3262), Elidr Fawr (3029), Moel 
Siabod (2860), Moel Hebog or Hebawg (2566). The valleys vary 
from the wildness of Pont Aberglaslyn gorge to .the quiet of 
Nant Gwynnant. Those of Beddgelert and Llanberis — at the 
south and north base of Snowdon respectively — are famous, 
while that of the Conwy, from Llanrwst to Conway (Conwy), is 
well set off by the background of Snowdonia. 

The largest stream is the Conwy, tidal and navigable for some 
12 m. from Deganwy; this rises in Llyn Conwy, in the south- 
east, divides Carnarvon from Denbigh (running nearly due 
north) for some 30 m., and falls into the sea at Deganwy. The 
Seint (wrongly spelled Seiont) is a small stream rising in Snowdon 
and falling into the sea at Carnarvon, to which it gave its old 
name Segontium (Kaer Seint yn Arvon in the Mabinogion). 
The Swallow Falls are near Nant Ffrancon (the stream of the 
Beaver or Afanc, a mythological animal). Nant Ffrancon leads 
north-west from near Capel Curig and Bettws y coed and past 
Bethesda, reaching the sea in Beaumaris Bay. The lakes, 
numerous and occasionally large, include: Llyn Peris and Llyn 
Padarn at Llanberis, north of Snowdon; Llyn Ogwen, north of 
Glydyr Fawr; Llyn Cowlyd and Llyn Eigiau, both north of 
Capel Curig; Llyn Llydaw, on Snowdon; Llyn Cwellyn, west 
of .Snowdon; Llyn Gwynnant, east of Snowdon; Llyniau (Nant 
y lief or) Nantlle, near Llanllyfni; Llyn Conway. 

The greater part of the county, including the mountainous Snow- 
don district and nearly all the eastern portion of the promontory of 
Lleyn, is occupied by rocks of Ordovician age, the Arenig, Bala and 
Llandeilo series. These are dark slates and thin-bedded grits with 
enormous masses of interbedded igneous rocks, lavas and ashes, the 
product of contemporaneous volcanoes. At the base of Snowdon 
are Bala grits and slates, above them lie three beds of felspathic 
porphyry, which are in turn succeeded by a great mass of calcareous 
and sandy volcanic ashes, while upon the summit are the remnants 
of a lava sheet. The whole mountain is part of a syncline, the beds 
dipping into it from the north-west and south-east. 

Next to the Ordovician, the Cambrian rocks are the most im- 
portant; they are found in three separate areas; the largest is in 
the north-west, and extends from Bangor to Bethesda, through Llyn 
Cwellyn and Llanwada to the coast near Clynnogfawr. The second 
area lies west of Tremadoc, which has given its name to the upper 
division of the Cambrian system. The third forms the promontory 
south of Llanenga. Cambrian slates are extensively quarried at 
Penrhyn, Llanberis and Dinorwic. Pre-Cambrian schists and igneous 
rocks occupy a strip, from 2 to 3 m. wide, along the coast from Neirn 
to Bardsey Island. A very small area of the Denbighshire Silurian 
enters this county near Conway near the eastern border; it com- 
prises Tarannon shale and Wenlock beds with graptolites. 

The striking headland of the Great Orme as well as Little Orme's 
Head is composed of carboniferous limestone, containing corals 
and large Productus shells. A narrow strip of the same formation 
runs along the Menai Straits for several miles south of the tubular 
bridge. At the southern extremity of the limestone a small patch of 
coal measures is found. 

Glacial drift — gravel, boulders and clay — is abundant along the 
northern coast, and in the neighbourhood of Snowdon it is an im- 
portant feature in the landscape ; massive moraines, perched blocks, 
striated stones and other evidences of ice action are common. On 



CARNATIC 



361 



Moel Trygarn and on the western flanks of Snowdon marine shells 
have been found in the drift up to an elevation of 1400 ft. above 
sea-level. Blown sand occurs along the coast near Conway, south- 
west of Carnarvon and on the south coast. Several hollows and 
pipes in the carboniferous limestone about Orme's Head contain 
clays and sands of mixed origin, including Upper Carboniferous, 
Triassic and drift materials. The igneous rocks, especially those 
cf volcanic origin, constitute one of the most striking geological 
features of the county; they comprise felsites, rhyolites, quartz 
porphyries, enstatite diabases, andesite tuffs, diabases and granite. 

The climate is cold and damp in winter, except in the peninsula, 
Lleyn, and on the mild coast. Arable land, but a small propor- 
tion of the surface, is mostly in the Conwy valley or near the sea. 
Principal crops are oats, barley and potatoes, with some little 
wheat. The valley soil (alluvial) is often fertile, chiefly as 
meadow and enclosed pasture. Dairy and sheep-farming occupy 
most farmers. The small mountain ponies, especially of Llanbedr 
(Conwy Vale), are famous, and Welsh ponies were known for 
staying power even to Arrian (Cynegetics) . Agriculture still too 
much follows the old routine, besides losing by the influx of 
labour into the towns or to the mining industry and "set 
works "(stone). 

The county is served by the London & North-Western railway; 
its terminus is Afon Wen, within 4 m. of Pwllheli. Between 
these stations plies the Cambrian, which runs along the Cardigan 
Bay coast and terminates at Pwllheli. The North Wales Narrow 
Gauge line runs from Dinas, south of Carnarvon, to Snowdon 
Ranger, 4 m. from Beddgelert. The main line of the London 
& North- Western runs along the northern coast, with branches 
from Llandudno junction to Blaenau Festiniog, along the 
Denbighshire side of the Conwy stream; from Menai Bridge to 
Carnarvon (thence continuing to Llanberis, or, by another line, 
to Afon Wen). The chief ports are Portmadoc, Pwllheli, Car- 
narvon, Port Dinorwic and Bangor. Near Portmadoc is 
Criccieth, with a castle resorted to by visitors; Pwllheli is also 
a summer resort, and a tramway runs thence to within a short 
distance of Abeisoch, another favourite watering-place. Nefyn 
(some 6 m. from Pwllheli) , still unserved by rail or tram, was the 
scene of a royal tournament in the 15th century, and is another 
bathing resort; near are Carreg Llam and Pistyll farm (see 
Bardsey). 

The area of the ancient county is 361,156 acres, with a popula- 
tion in 1901 of 126,883. The area of the administrative county 
is 365,986 acres. The inhabitants practically all speak Welsh 
(slightly differing, especially in Lleyn, from that of Anglesey). 
Over 80 is the percentage in Carnarvonshire, as against over 
90 for Anglesey. The county is divided into two parliamentary 
divisions, south (Eifion) and north (Arfon). 

The Carnarvon district of boroughs is formed of Bangor city, 
Carnarvon, Conway, Criccieth, Nefyn and Pwllheli. There are 
four municipal boroughs: Bangor (pop. 11,269), Carnarvon 
(9760), Conway (4681) and Pwllheli (3675). Other urban 
districts are: Bethesda (5281), Bettws y coed '1070), Criccieth 
(1406), Llandudno (9279), Llanfairfechan (2769), Penmaenmawr 
(3503) and Ynyscynhaiarn (4883). Carnarvon, where assizes 
are held, is in the north Wales circuit. Except a few parishes 
(in and near Llandudno) in St Asaph diocese, Carnarvonshire 
is in the diocese of Bangor, and contains sixty-one ecclesiastical 
parishes or districts, with parts of four others. Bangor, Carnar- 
von, Pwllheli and Llandudno are the principal towns, with 
Criccieth, Nefyn, Portmadoc and Tremadoc. 

Carnarvonshire was occupied by the Segontiaci, with difficulty 
subdued by Ostorius Scapula and C. Suetonius Paulinus (Paul- 
linus). From here Agricola crossed to conquer Anglesey. Relics 
of British forts and camps have been discovered. Caerhun (Caer 
Rhun) and Carnarvon (Caer Seint) are respectively the old 
Conovium and Segontium of Britannia Secunda. The county 
was part of Gwynedd kingdom, until Edward I. in 1 277 restricted 
that to Snowdon proper. The early fortresses at Deganwy, 
Dinorwic, Dinas Dinlle, &c, and the later castles of Conwy 
(Conway), Carnarvon, Criccieth and Dolbadarn, bear witness 
to the warlike character of its inhabitants. 

See Edw. Breese, Kalendar of Gwynedd (London, 1874). 



CARNATIC, or Karnatak (Kannada, Karnata, Karnataka- 
desa), a name given by Europeans to a region of southern India, 
between the Eastern Ghats and the Coromandel coast, in the 
presidency of Madras. It is ultimately derived, according to 
Bishop Caldwell {Grammar of the Dravidian Languages), from 
kar, " black," and nadu x " country," i.e. " the black country," 
" a term very suitable to designate the 'black cotton soil,' as it 
is called, of the plateau of the Southern Deccan." Properly the 
name is, in fact, applicable only to the country of the Kanarese 
extending between the Eastern and Western Ghats, over an 
irregular area narrowing northwards, from Palghat in the south 
to Bidar in the north, and including Mysore. The extension of 
the name to the country south of the Karnata was probably due 
to the Mahommedan conquerors who in the 16th century over- 
threw the kingdom of Vijayanagar, and who extended the name 
which they found used of the country north of the Ghats to that 
south of them. After this period the plain country of the south 
came to be called Karnata Payanghat, or " lowlands," as 
distinguished from Karnata Balaghat, or " highlands." The 
misapplication of the name Carnatic was carried by the British 
a step further than by the Mahommedans, it being confined by 
them to the country below the Ghats, Mysore not being included. 
Officially, however, this name is no longer applied, " the 
Carnatic " having become a mere geographical term. Adminis- 
tratively the name Carnatic (or rather Karnatak) is now applied 
only to the Bombay portion of the original Karnata, viz. the 
districts of Belgaum, Dharwar and Bijapur, part of North 
Kanara, and the native states of the Southern Mahratta agency 
and Kolhapur. 

The region generally known to Europeans as the Carnatic, 
though no longer a political or administrative division, is of 
great historical importance. It extended along the eastern 
coast about 600 m. in length, and from 50 to 100 m. in breadth. 
It was bounded on the north by the Guntur circar, and thence it 
stretched southward to Cape Comorin. It was divided into the 
Southern, Central and Northern Carnatic. The region south 
of the river Coleroon, which passes the town of Trichinopoly, 
was called the Southern Carnatic. The principal towns of this 
division were Tanjore, Trichinopoly, Madura, Tranquebar, 
Negapatam and Tinnevelly. The Central Carnatic extended 
from the Coleroon river to the river Pennar; its chief towns 
were Madras, Pondicherry, Arcot, Vellore, Cuddalore, Pulicat, 
Nellore, &c. The Northern Carnatic extended from the river 
Pennar to the northern limit of the country; and the chief town 
was Ongole. 1 The Carnatic, as above defined, comprehended 
within its limits the maritime provinces of Nellore, Chingleput, 
South Arcot, Tanjore, Madura and Tinnevelly, besides the 
inland districts of North Arcot and Trichinopoly. The popula- 
tion of this region consists chiefly of Brahmanical Hindus, the 
Mahommedans being but thinly scattered over the country. 
The Brahmans rent a great proportion of the land, and also 
fill different offices in the collection of the revenue and the 
administration of justice. Throughout the country they 
appropriate to themselves a particular quarter in every town, 
generally the strongest part of it. Large temples and other 
public monuments of civilization abound. The temples are 
commonly built in the middle of a square area, and enclosed by a 
wall 15 or 20 ft. high, which conceals them completely from the 
public view, as they are never raised above it. 

At the earliest period of which any records exist, the country 
known as the Carnatic was divided between the Pandya and 
Chola kingdoms, which with that of Chera or Kerala formed the 
three Tamil kingdoms of southern India. The Pandya kingdom 
practically coincided in extent with the districts of Madura and 
Tinnevelly; that of the Cholas extended along the Coromandel 
coast from Nellore to Pudukottai, being bounded on the north 
by the Pennar river and on the south by the Southern Vellaru. 
The government of the country was shared for centuries with 
these dynasties by numerous independent or semi-independent 
chiefs, evidence of whose perennial internecine conflicts is 

1 As a geographical term, Carnatic is not now applied to the 
district north of Pennar. 



362 



CARNATION 



preserved in the multitudes of forts and fortresses the deserted 
ruins of which crown almost all the elevated points. In spite, 
however, of this passion of the military classes for war the Tamil 
civilization developed in the country was of a high type. This 
was largely due to the wealth of the country, famous in the 
earliest times as now for its pearl fisheries. Of this fishery 
Korkai (the Greek KoXxci), now a village on the Tambraparni 
river in Tinnevelly, but once the Pandya capital, was the centre 
long before the Christian era. In Pliny's day, owing to the 
silting up of the harbour, its glory had already decayed and the 
Pandya capital had been removed to Madura (Hist. Nat. vi. cap. 
xxiii. 26), famous later as a centre of Tamil literature. The 
Chola kingdom, which four centuries before Christ had been 
recognized as independent by the great Maurya king Asoka, 
had for its chief port Kaviripaddinam at the mouth of the 
Cauvery, every vestige of which is now buried in sand. For 
the first two centuries after Christ a large sea-borne trade was 
carried on between the Roman empire and the Tamil kingdoms ; 
but after Caracalla's massacre at Alexandria in a.d. 215 this 
ceased, and with it all intercourse with Europe for centuries. 
Henceforward, until the 9th century, the history of the country 
is illustrated only by occasional and broken lights. The 4th 
century saw the rise of the Pallava power, 1 which for some 400 
years encroached on, without extinguishing, the Tamil kingdoms. 
When in a.d. 640 the Chinese traveller Hsiian Tsang visited 
Kanchi (Conjevaram), the capital of the Pallava king, he learned 
that the kingdom of Chola (Chu-li-ya) embraced but a small 
territory, wild, and inhabited by a scanty and fierce population; 
in the Pandya kingdom (Malakuta), which was under Pallava 
suzerainty, literature was dead, Buddhism all but extinct, while 
Hinduism and the naked Jain saints divided the religious 
allegiance of the people, and the pearl fisheries continued to 
flourish. The power of the Pallava kings was shaken by the 
victory of Vikramaditya Chalukya in a.d. 740, and shattered by 
Aditya Chola at the close of the 9th century. From this time 
onward the inscriptional records are abundant. The Chola 
kingdom, which in the 9th century had been weak, now revived, 
its power culminating in the victories of Rajaraja the Great, who 
defeated the Chalukyas after a four years' war, and, about a.d. 
994, forced the Pandya kings to become his tributaries. A 
magnificent temple at Tanjore, once his capital, preserves the 
records of his victories engraved upon its walls. His career of 
conquest was continued by his son Rajendra Choladeva I., 
self-styled Gangaikonda owing to his victorious advance to the 
Ganges, who succeeded to the throne in a.d. 1018. The ruins 
of the new capital which he built, called Gangaikonda Chola- 
puram, still stand in a desolate region of the Trichinopoly 
district. His successors continued the eternal wars with the 
Chalukyas and other dynasties, and the Chola power continued 
in the ascendant until the death of Kulottunga Chola III. in 
1278, when a disputed succession caused its downfall and gave 
the Pandyas the opportunity of gaining for a few years the 
upper hand in the south. In 13 10, however, the Mahommedan 
invasion under Malik Kafur overwhelmed the Hindu states of 
southern India in a common ruin. Though crushed, however, 
they were not extinguished; a period of anarchy followed, 
the struggle between the Chola kings and the Mussulmans 
issuing in the establishment at Kanchi of a usurping Hindu 
dynasty which ruled till the end of the 14th century, while in 
1365 a branch of the Pandyas succeeded in re-establishing itself 
in part of the kingdom of Madura, where it survived till 1623. 
At the beginning of the 15th century the whole country had come 
under the rule of the kings of Vijayanagar; but in the anarchy 

1 The Pallavas are supposed by some authorities to be identical 
with the Pahlavas (Parthians of Persia), who, with the Sakas and 
Yavanas, settled in western India about a.d. 100. Mr Vincent 
Smith, however, who in the 1st edition (1904) of his Early History 
of India maintained this view, says in the 2nd edition (1908, p. 423) 
that "recent research does not support this hypothesis," and that 
" it seems more likely that the Pallavas were a tribe, clan or caste 
which was formed in the northern part of the existing Madras 
Presidency." The evidence points to their having been a race 
distinct fronrthe Tamils. 



that followed the overthrow of the Vijayanagar empire by the 
Mussulmans in the 16th century, the Hindu viceroys (nayakkas) 
established in Madura, Tanjore and Kanchi made themselves 
independent, only in their turn to become tributary to the 
kings of Golconda and Bijapur, who divided the Carnatic 
between them. Towards the close of the 17th century the 
country was reduced by the armies of Aurangzeb, who in 1692 
appointed Zulfikar Ali nawab of the Carnatic, with his seat at 
Arcot. Meanwhile, the Mahratta power had begun to develop; 
in 1677 Sivaji had suppressed the last remnants of the Vija- 
yanagar power in Vellore, Gingee and Kurnool, while his brother 
Ekoji, who in 1674 had overthrown the Nayakkas of Tanjore, 
established in that city a dynasty which lasted for a century. 
The collapse of the Delhi power after the death of Aurangzeb 
produced further changes. The nawab Saadet-allah of Arcot 
(1710-1732) established his independence ; his successor Dost Ali 
(1732-1740) conquered and annexed Madura in 1736, and his 
successors were confirmed in their position as nawabs of the 
Carnatic by the nizam of Hyderabad after that potentate had 
established his power in southern India. After the death of the 
nawab Mahommed Anwar-ud-din (1 744-1 749), the succession 
was disputed between Mahommed Ali and Husein Dost. In 
this quarrel the French and English, then competing for influence 
in the Carnatic, took opposite sides. The victory of the British 
established Mahommed Ali in power over part of the Carnatic 
till his death in 1795. Meanwhile, however, the country had 
been exposed to other troubles. In 1741 Madura, which the 
nawab Dost Ali (1732-1740) had added to his dominions in 
1736, was conquered by the Mahrattas; and in 1743 Hyder Ali 
of Mysore overran and ravaged the central Carnatic. The 
latter was reconquered by the British, to whom Madura had 
fallen in 1758; and, finally, in 1801 all the possessions of the 
nawab of the Carnatic were transferred to them by a treaty 
which stipulated that an annual revenue of several lakhs of 
pagodas should be reserved to the nawab, and that the British 
should undertake to support a sufficient civil and military force 
for the protection of the country and the collection of the revenue. 
On the death of the nawab in 1853 it was determined to put an 
end to the nominal sovereignty, a liberal establishment being 
provided for the family. 

The southern Carnatic, when it came into the possession of 
the British, was occupied by military chieftains called poligars, 
who ruled over the country, and held lands by doubtful tenures. 
They were unquestionably a disorderly race; and the country, 
by their incessant feuds and plunderings, was one continued 
scene of strife and violence. Under British rule they were 
reduced to order, and their forts and military establishments 
were destroyed. 

See India: History. For the various applications of the name 
Carnatic see the Imperial Gazetteer of India (Oxford, 1908), s.v. ; for 
the results of the latest researches in the early history of the country 
see V. A. Smith, Early History of India (2nd ed., Oxford, 1908), and 
Robert Sewell, A Forgotten Empire (Vijayanagar), (London, 1900). 

CARNATION (Dianthus Caryophyllus, natural order Caryo- 
phyllaceae), a garden flower, a native of southern Europe, but 
occasionally found in an apparently wild state in England. 
It has long been held in high estimation for the beauty and the 
delightful fragrance of its blossoms. The varieties are numerous, 
and are ranged under three groups, called bizarres, flakes and 
picotees. The last, from their distinctness of character, are now 
generally looked upon as if they were a different plant, whereas 
they are, in truth, but a seminal development from the carnation 
itself, their number and variety being entirely owing to the 
assiduous endeavours of the modern florist to vary and to 
improve them. 

The true carnations, as distinguished from picotees, are those 
which have the colours arranged in longitudinal stripes or bars 
of variable width on each petal, the ground colour being white. 
The bizarres are those in which stripes of two distinct colours 
occur on the white ground, and it is on the purity of the white 
ground and the clearness and evenness of the striping that the 
technical merit of each variety rests. There are scarlet bizarres 



CARNEA— CARNEADES 



363 



marked with scarlet and maroon, crimson bizarres marked with 
crimson and purple, and pink and purple bizarres marked with 
those two colours. The flakes have stripes of only one colour 
on the white ground; purple flakes are striped with purple, 
scarlet flakes with scarlet, and rose flakes with rose colour. The 
selfs, those showing one colour only, as white, yellow, crimson, 
purple, &c, are commonly called cloves. 

The picotee has the petals laced instead of striped with a 
distinct colour; the subgroups are red-edged, purple-edged, 
rose-edged and scarlet-edged, all having white grounds; each 
group divides into two sections, the heavy-edged and the light- 
edged. In the heavy-edged the colour appears to be laid on in 
little touches, passing from the edge inwards, but so closely that 
they coalesce into one line of colour from ^ t0 iV °i an mcn broad, 
and more or less feathered on the inner edge, the less feathered 
the better; the light-edged display only a fine edge, or " wire " 
edge, of colour on the white ground. Yellow picotees are a 
group of great beauty, but deficient in correct marking. 

During the decade 1898-1908 a new American race of carna- 
tions became very popular with British growers. As the plants 
flower chiefly during the winter — from October till the end of 
March — they are known as " winter flowering " or " perpetual "; 
they are remarkable for the charming delicacy and colouring 
of the blossoms and for the length of the flower-stalks. This 
enables them to be used with great effect during the dullest 
months of the year for all kinds of floral decorations. These 
varieties are propagated by layers or cuttings or " pipings." 

" Marguerite " carnations are lovely annuals remarkable for 
their beautifully fringed blossoms. They are easily raised from 
seeds every year, and should be treated like half-hardy annuals. 

What trade growers call " jacks " are seedling carnations with 
single flowers of no great value or beauty. Thousands of these 
are raised every year for supplying " grass " (as the foliage is 
called) to put with choicer varieties. Costermongers take 
advantage of the ordinary householders' ignorance of plants 
by selling " jacks " as choice varieties at a high price. 

Carnations are usually propagated by " layering " the non- 
flowering shoots about the second or third week in July, in the 
open air; but almost at any period when proper shoots can be 
obtained under glass. Cuttings or " pipings " are also inserted 
in rich but very gritty soil in cold frames, or in beds with gentle 
bottom heat in greenhouses. The rooted layers may be removed 
and potted or planted out towards the end of September, or 
early in October, the choice sorts being potted in rather small 
pots and kept in a cold frame during winter, when damp is 
dangerous. 

New varieties can only be obtained from carefully saved seeds, 
or when a " sport " is produced — i.e. when a shoot with a flower 
differing entirely in colour from that of the parent plant appears 
unexpectedly. " Malmaison " carnations arose in this way, and 
are largely cultivated in greenhouses. 

The soil for carnations and picotees should be a good turfy 
loam, free from wireworm, and as fibry as it can be obtained; 
to four parts of this add one part of rotten manure and one of 
leaf-mould, with sufficient sharp sand to keep it loose. A 
moderate addition of old lime rubbish will also be an advantage. 
This should be laid up in a dry place, and frequently turned over 
so as to be in a free friable condition for use towards the end of 
February or early in March. 

Carnations are subject to several diseases, the worst being the 
"rust" (Uromyces Caryophilinus) , " leaf -spot " and maggot. 
The first two are checked or prevented by spraying the plants 
with sulphide of potassium (1 oz. to 10 gallons of water), taking 
care to avoid the painted woodwork; while the only way to 
deal with the carnation maggot is to pierce the centre of 
attacked plants with a needle, and to destroy the eggs whenever 
they are observed. 

Descriptive lists of the best varieties may be had from all the 
leading nurserymen. 

CARNEA, one of the great national festivals of Sparta, held in 
honour of Apollo Carneus. Whether Carneus (or Carnus) was 
originally an old Peloponnesian divinity subsequently identified 



with Apollo, or merely an " emanation " from him, is uncertain; 
but there seems no reason to doubt that Carneus means " the 
god of flocks and herds " (Hesychius, s.v. Kapvos), in a wider 
sense, of the harvest and the vintage. The chief centre of his 
worship was Sparta, where the Carnea took place every year 
from the 7th to the 15th of the month Carneus ( = Metageitnion, 
August). During this period all military queries were sus-
pended. The Carnea appears to have been at once agrarian, 
military and piacular in character. In the last aspect it is 
supposed to commemorate the death of Carnus, an Acarnanian 
seer and favourite of Apollo, who, being suspected of espionage, 
was slain by one of the Heraclidae during the passage of the 
Dorians from Naupactus to Peloponnesus. By way of punish- 
ment, Apollo visited the army with a pestilence, which only 
ceased after the institution of the Carnea. The tradition is prob- 
ably intended to explain the sacrifice of an animal (perhaps a later 
substitute for a human being) as the representative of the god. 

The agrarian and military sides of the festival are clearly 
distinguished. (1) Five unmarried youths (Kapvearai) were 
chosen by lot from each [tribe] for four years, to superintend the 
proceedings, the officiating priest being called ayrjTrjS (" leader "). 
A man decked with garlands (possibly the priest himself) started 
running, pursued by a band of young men called aTO.(j)v\ohpbiJOL 
(" running with bunches of grapes in their hands ") ; if he was 
caught, it was a guarantee of good fortune to the city; if not, 
the reverse. (2) In the second part of the festival nine tents 
were set up in the country, in each of which nine citizens, repre- 
senting the phra tries (or obae), feasted together in honour of the 
god (for huts or booths extemporized as shelters compare the 
Jewish feast of Tabernacles; and see W. Warde Fowler in 
Classical Review, March 1908, on the country festival in Tibullus 
ii. 1). According to Demetrius of Scepsis (in Athenaeus iv. 141), 
the Carnea was an imitation of life in camp, and everything 
was done in accordance with the command of a herald. In regard 
to the sacrifice, which doubtless formed part of the ceremonial, 
all that is known is that a ram was sacrificed at Thurii. Other 
indications point to the festival having assumed a military char- 
acter at an early date, as might have been expected among the 
warlike Dorians, although some scholars deny this. The general 
meaning of the agrarian ceremony is clear, and has numerous 
parallels in north European harvest-customs, in which an animal 
(or man disguised as an animal) was pursued by the reapers, the 
animal if caught being usually killed; in any case, both the man 
and the animal represent the vegetation spirit. E. H. Binney 
in Classical Review (March 1905) suggests that the story of 
Alcestis was performed at the Carnea (to which it may have 
become attached with the name of Apollo) as a vegetation 
drama, and " embodied a Death and Resurrection ceremony." 

The great importance attached to the festival and its month 
is shown in several instances. It was responsible for the delay 
which prevented the Spartans from assisting the Athenians at 
the battle of Marathon (Herodotus vi. 106), and for the despatch 
of a small advance guard under Leonidas to hold Thermopylae 
instead of the main army (Herodotus vii. 206). Again, when 
Epidaurus was attacked in 419 by Argos, the movements of the 
Spartans under Agis against the latter were interrupted until 
the end of the month, while the Argives (on whom, as Dorians, 
the custom was equally binding), by manipulating the calendar, 
avoided the necessity of suspending queries (see Grote, Hist,
of Greece, ch. 56; Thucydides v. 54). 

See S. Wide, Lakonische Kulte (1893), an d article " Karneios " in 
Roscher's Lexikon ; L. Couve in Daremberg and Saglio's Dictionnaire 
des antiquites; W. Mannhardt, Mythologische Forschungen (1883), 
p. 170, and Wald- und Feldkulte (2nd ed., 1905), ii. 254; L. R. 
Farnell, Cults of the Greek States, iv. (1907) ; G. Schomann, Griechische 
Altertiimer (ed. J. H. Lipsius, 1902); J. G. Frazer on Pausanias, 
iii. 13, 3; H. Usener in Rheinisches Museum, liii. (1898), p. 377; 
J. Vtirtheim in Mnemosyne, xxxi. (1903), p. 234. 

CARNEADES (214-129 B.C.), Greek philosopher, founder of 
the Third or New Academy, was born at Cyrene. Little is 
known of his life. He learned dialectics under Diogenes the 
Stoic, and under Hegesinus, the third leader, of the Academy in 
descent from Arcesilaus. The chief objects of his study, however, 



364 



CARNEGIE, A. 



were the works of Chrysippus, opposition to whose views is the 
mainspring of his philosophy. " If Chrysippus had not been," 
he is reported to have said, " I had not been either." In 155, 
together with Diogenes the Stoic and Critolaus the Peripatetic, 
he was sent on an embassy to Rome to justify certain depreda- 
tions committed by the Athenians in the territory of Oropus. 
On this occasion he delivered two speeches on successive days, 
one in favour of justice, the other against it. His powerful 
reasoning excited among the Roman youth an enthusiasm for 
philosophical speculations, and the elder Cato insisted on 
Carneades and his companions being dismissed from the city. 

Carneades, practically a 5th-century sophist, is the most 
important of the ancient sceptics. Negatively, his philosophy 
is a polemic against the Stoic theory of knowledge in all its 
aspects. All our sensations are relative, and acquaint us, not 
with things as they are, but only with the impressions that 
things produce upon us. Experience, he says, clearly shows 
that there is no true impression. There is no notion that may 
not deceive us; it is impossible to distinguish between false and 
true impressions; therefore the Stoic <t>avTacria KaTaXtirmK-q 
(see Stoics) must be given up. There is no criterion of truth. 
Carneades also assailed Stoic theology and physics. In answer 
to the doctrine of final cause, of design in nature, he points to 
those things which cause destruction and danger to man, to the 
evil committed by men endowed with reason, to the miserable 
condition of humanity, and to the misfortunes that assail the 
good man. There is, he concludes, no evidence for the doctrine 
of a divine superintending providence. Even if there were 
orderly connexion of parts in the universe, this may have resulted 
quite naturally. No proof can be advanced to show that this 
world is anything but the product of natural forces. Carneades 
further attacked the very idea of God. He points out the contra- 
diction between the attributes of infinity and individuality. 
Like Aristotle, he insists that virtue, being relative, cannot be 
ascribed to God. Not even intelligence can be an attribute of 
the divine Being. Nor can he be conceived of as corporeal or 
incorporeal. If corporeal, he must be simple or compound; if 
a simple and elementary substance, he is incapable of life and 
thought; if compound, he contains in himself the elements of 
dissolution. If incorporeal, he can neither act nor feel. In fact, 
nothing whatever can be asserted with certainty in regard to 
God. The general line of argument followed by Carneades 
anticipates much in modern thought. 

The positive side of his teaching resembles in all essentials 
that of Arcesilaus (q.v.). Knowledge being impossible, a wise 
man should practise ewoxv (suspension of judgment). He will 
not even be sure that he can be sure of nothing. Ideas or notions 
are never true, but only probable; nevertheless, there are 
degrees of probability, and hence degrees of belief, leading to 
action. According to Carneades, an impression may be probable 
in itself; probable and uncontradicted (airepiffTraaros, lit. " not 
pulled aside," not distracted by synchronous sensations, but 
shown to be in harmony with them) when compared with others ; 
probable, uncontradicted, and thoroughly investigated and con- 
firmed. In the first degree there is a strong persuasion of the 
propriety of the impression made; the second and third degrees 
are produced by comparisons of the impression with others 
associated with it, and an analysis of itself. His views on the 
summum bonum are not clearly known even to his disciple and 
successor Clitomachus. He seems to have held that virtue 
consisted in the direction of activity towards the satisfaction of 
the natural impulses. Carneades left no written works; his 
opinions seem to have been systematized by Clitomachus. 

See A. Geffers, De Arcesilae Successoribus (1845); C. Gouraud, 
De Carneadis Vita et Placitis (1848); V. Brochard, Les Sceptigues 
grecs (1887); C. Martha, " Le Philosophe Carneade a Rome," in 
Revue des deux mondes, xxix. (1878), and the histories of philosophy ; 
also Academy, Greek. 

CARNEGIE, ANDREW (1837- ), American "captain of 
industry " and benefactor, was born in humble circumstances 
in Dunfermline, Scotland, on the 25th of November 1837. In 
1848 his father, who had been a Chartist, emigrated to America, 
settling in Allegheny City, Pennsylvania. The raw Scots lad 



started work at an early age as a bobbin-boy in a cotton factory, 
and a few years later was engaged as a telegraph clerk and 
operator. His capacity was perceived by Mr T. A. Scott of 
the Pennsylvania railway, who employed him as a secretary; 
and in 1859, when Scott became vice-president of the company, 
he made Carnegie superintendent of the western division of the 
line. In this post he was responsible for several improvements 
in the service; and when the Civil War opened he accompanied 
Scott, then assistant secretary of war, to the front. The first 
sources of the enormous wealth he subsequently attained 
were his introduction of sleeping-cars for railways, and his 
purchase (1864) of Storey Farm on Oil Creek, where a large 
profit was secured from the oil-wells. But this was only a 
preliminary to the success attending his development of the 
iron and steel industries at Pittsburg. Foreseeing the extent to 
which the demand would grow in America for iron and steel, 
he started the Keystone Bridge works, built the Edgar Thomson 
steel-rail mill, bought out the rival Homestead steel works, and 
by 1888 had under his control an extensive plant served by 
tributary coal and iron fields, a railway 425 m. long, and a line 
of lake steamships. As years went by, the various Carnegie 
companies represented in this industry prospered to such an 
extent that in 1901, when they were incorporated in the United 
States Steel Corporation, a trust organized by Mr J. Pierpont 
Morgan, and Mr Carnegie himself retired from business, he was 
bought out at a figure equivalent to a capital of approximately 
£100,000,000. 

From this time forward public attention was turned from the 
shrewd business_ capacity which had enabled him to accumulate 
such a fortune to the public-spirited way in which he devoted 
himself to utilizing it on philanthropic objects. His views on 
social subjects, and the responsibilities which great wealth 
involved, were already known in a book entitled Triumphant 
Democracy, published in 1886, and in his Gospel of Wealth 
(1900). He acquired Skibo Castle, in Sutherlandshire, Scotland, 
and made his home partly there and partly in New York; and 
he devoted his life to the work of providing the capital for 
purposes of public interest, and social and educational advance- 
ment. Among these the provision of public libraries in the 
United States and United Kingdom (and similarly in other 
English-speaking countries) was especially prominent, and 
" Carnegie libraries " gradually sprang up on all sides, his 
method being to build and equip, but only on condition that 
the local authority provided site and maintenance, and thus to 
secure local interest and responsibility. By the end of 1908 he 
had distributed over £10,000,000 for founding libraries alone. 
He gave £2,000,000 in 1901 to start the Carnegie Institute at 
Pittsburg, and the same amount (1902) to found the Carnegie 
Institution at Washington, and in both of these, and other, 
cases he added later to the original endowment. In Scotland 
he gave £2,000,000 in 1901 to establish a trust for providing funds 
for assisting education at the Scottish universities, a benefaction 
which resulted in his being elected lord rector of St Andrews 
University. He was a large benefactor of the Tuskegee Institute 
under Booker Washington for negro education. He also 
established large pension funds — in 1901 for his former employes 
at Homestead, and in 1905 for American college professors. 
His benefactions in the shape of buildings and endowments 
for education and research are too numerous for detailed enumera- 
tion, and are noted in this work under the headings of the various 
localities. But mention must also be made of his founding of 
Carnegie Hero Fund commissions, in America (1904) and in the 
United Kingdom (1908), for the recognition of deeds of heroism; 
his contribution of £500,000 in 1903 for the erection of a Temple 
of Peace at The Hague, and of £150,000 for a Pan-American 
Palace in Washington as a home for the International Bureau 
of American republics. In all his ideas he was dominated by 
an intense belief in the future and influence of the English- 
speaking people, in their democratic government and alliance for 
the purpose of peace and the abolition of war, and in the progress 
of education on unsectarian lines. He was a powerful supporter 
of the movement for spelling reform, as a means of promoting 



CARNEGIE— CARNIOLA 



365 



the spread of the English language. Mr Carnegie married in 
1887 and had one daughter. Among other publications by him 
were An American Four-in-hand in Britain (1883), Round the 
World (1884), The Empire of Business (1902), a Life of James 
Watt (1905) and Problems of To-day (1908). 

CARNEGIE, a borough of Allegheny county, Pennsylvania, 
U.S.A., 6 m. S.W. of Pittsburg. Pop. (1900) 7330 (1816 being 
foreign-born); (1910) 10,009. It is served by the Pittsburg, Cin- 
cinnati, Chicago & St Louis, the Pittsburg, Chartiers & Youg- 
hiogheny, and the Wabash Pittsburg Terminal railways, and the 
Pittsburg street railway. Carnegie is situated in the beautiful 
valley of Chartiers Creek, and is in one of the coal and natural 
gas districts of the state. In the borough are a Carnegie library 
and St Paul's orphan asylum. Among the borough's manu- 
factures are steel, lead, glass, ploughs and enamel- and tin-ware. 
There are alkaline and lithia mineral springs here. In 1894 
Carnegie, named in honour of Andrew Carnegie, was formed by 
the union of the boroughs Chartiers and Mansfield. 

CARNELIAN, a red variety of chalcedony, much used as an 
ornamental stone, especially for seals. The old name was 
cornelian, said to have been given in reference either to the 
horny appearance of the stone (Lat. cornu, " horn ") or to its 
resemblance in colour to the berry of the cornel; but the original 
word was corrupted to carnelian, probably in allusion to its 
reddish colour (carneus, " flesh-coloured "). Some carnelian, 
however, is brown, yellow or even white. Certain kinds of 
brown and bright red chalcedony, much resembling carnelian, 
pass under the name of sard (q.v.). The Hebrew odem was 
probably a red stone, either carnelian, sard or jasper. All 
carnelian is translucent and is thus distinguished from jasper 
of similar colour, which is always opaque. The red colour of 
typical carnelian is due to the presence of ferric oxide. This is 
often developed artificially by exposure to sunshine, or to 
artificial heat, whereby any ferric hydrate in the stone becomes 
more or less dehydrated; or the stone is treated with a solution 
of an iron salt, like ferrous sulphate, and then heated, when 
ferric oxide is formed in the pores of the stone. An opaque 
white surface is sometimes produced artificially on a red 
carnelian: this is said to be done by coating the stone with 
carbonate of soda and then placing it on a red-hot iron; or by 
using a mixture of potash, white lead and certain vegetable 
juices, and heating it on charcoal. Inscriptions and figures in 
white on red carnelian (" burnt carnelian ") are well known from 
the East. Much carnelian comes from India, being mostly 
derived from agate-gravels, resulting from the disintegration of 
the Deccan traps, in the neighbourhood of Ratanpur, near 
Broach. A good deal of the carnelian now sold, however, is 
Brazilian agate, artificially stained. (See Agate.) 

CARNESECCHI, PIETRO (1508-1567), Italian humanist, was 
the son of a Florentine merchant, who under the patronage of 
the Medici, and especially of Giovanni de' Medici as Pope 
Clement VII., rapidly rose to high office at the papal court. He 
came into touch with the new learning at the house of his 
maternal uncle, Cardinal Bernardo Dovizzi, in Rome. At the 
age of twenty-five he held several rich livings, had been notary 
and protonotary to the Curia, and was first secretary to the 
pope, in which capacity he conducted the correspondence with 
the nuncios (among them Pier Paolo Bergerio in Germany) and a 
host of other duties. By his conduct at the conference with 
Francis I. at Marseilles he won the favour of Catherine de' 
Medici and other influential personages at the French court, who 
in later days befriended him. He made the acquaintance of 
the Spanish reformer Juan de Valdes at Rome, and got to know 
him as a theologian at Naples, being especially drawn to him 
through the appreciation expressed by Bernardino Ochino, and 
through their mutual friendship with the Lady Julia Gonzaga, 
whose spiritual adviser he became after the death of Valdes. 
He became a leading spirit in the literary and religious circle 
that gathered round Valdes in Naples, and that aimed at effecting 
from within the spiritual reformation of the church. Under 
Valdes' influence he whole-heartedly accepted Luther's doctrine 
of justification by faith, though he repudiated a policy of schism. 



When the movement of suppression began, Carnesecchi was impli- 
cated. For a time he found shelter with his friends in Paris, and 
from 1552 he was in Venice leading the party of reform in that 
city. In 1557 he was cited (for the second time) before the 
tribunal in Rome, but refused to appear. The death of Paul IV. 
and the accession of Pius IV. in 1559 made his position easier, 
and he came to live in Rome. With the accession of Pius V. 
(Michael Ghislieri) in 1565 the Inquisition renewed its activities 
with fiercer zeal than ever. Carnesecchi was in Venice when the 
news reached him, and betook himself to Florence, where, think- 
ing himself safe, he was betrayed by Cosimo, the duke, who wished 
to curry favour with the pope. From July 1566 he lay in prison 
over a year. On the 21st of September 1567 sentence of degrada- 
tion and death was passed on him and sixteen others, ambassadors 
from Florence vainly kneeling to the pope for some mitigation, 
and on the 1st of October he was publicly beheaded and then 
burned. 

CARNIOLA (Ger. Krain), a duchy and crown-land of Austria, 
bounded N. by Carinthia, N.E. by Styria, S.E. and S. by 
Croatia, and W. by Gorz and Gradisca, Trieste and Istria. It 
has an area of 3856 sq. m. Carniola is for the most part a moun- 
tainous region, occupied in the N. by the Alps, and in the S. by 
the Karst (q.v.) or Carso Mountains. It is traversed by the 
Julian Alps, the Karawankas and the Steiner Alps, which 
belong all to the southern zone of the Eastern Alps. The highest 
point in the Julian Alps is formed by the three sugar-loaf peaks of 
the Triglav or Terglou (9394 ft.), which offers one of the finest 
views in the whole of the Alps, and which bears on its northern 
declivity the only glacier in the province. The Triglav is the 
dividing range between the Alps and the Karst Mountains, and 
its huge mass also forms the barrier between three races: the 
German, the Slavonic and the Italian. Other high peaks are the 
Mangart (8784 ft.) and the Jaluz (8708 ft.). The Karawankas, 
which form the boundary between Carinthia and Carniola, have 
as their highest peak the Stou or Stuhlberg (7344 ft.), and are 
traversed by the Loibl Pass (4492 ft.). They are continued by 
the Steiner or Santhaler Alps, which have as their highest peak 
the Grintouz or Grintovc (8393 ft.). This peak is situated on the 
threefold boundary of Carinthia, Carniola and Styria, and affords 
a magnificent view of the whole Alpine neighbouring region. 
The southern part of Carniola is occupied by the following 
divisions of the northern ramifications of the Karst Mountains: 
the Birnbaumer Wald with the highest peak, the Nanos (4275 ft.), 
and the Krainer Schneeberg (5890 ft.) ; the Hornwald with the 
highest peak, the Hornbuchl (3608 ft.), and the Uskokengebirge 
(3874 ft.). The portion of Carniola belonging to the Karst 
region presents a great number of caves, subterranean streams, 
funnels and similar phenomena. Amongst the best-known are 
the grottos of Adelsberg, the larger ones of, Planina and the 
Kreuzberghohle near Laas. 

With the exception of the Idria and the Wippach, which as 
tributaries of the Isonzo belong to the basin of the Adriatic, 
Carniola belongs to the watershed of the Save. The Save or Sau 
rises within the duchy, and is formed by the junction at Rad- 
mannsdorf of its two head-streams the Wurzener Save and the 
Wocheiner Save. Its principal affluents are the Kanker and the 
Steiner Feistritz on the left, and the Zeyer or Sora, the Laibach 
and the Gurk on the right. The most remarkable of these rivers 
is the Laibach, which rises in the Karst region under the name of 
Poik, takes afterwards a subterranean course and traverses the 
Adelsberg grotto, and appears again on the surface near Planina 
under the name of Unz. Shortly after this it takes for the 
second time a subterranean course, to appear finally on the 
surface near Oberlaibach. The small torrent of Rothwein, which 
flows into the Wurzener Save, forms near Veldes the splendid 
series of cascades known as the Rothwein Fall. Amongst the 
principal lakes are the Wochein, the Weissenfels, the Veldes, 
and the seven small lakes of the Triglav; while in the Karst 
region lies the famous periodical lake of Zirknitz, known to the 
Romans as Locus Lugens or Lugea Palus. 

The climate is rather severe, and the southern part is exposed 
to the cold north-eastern wind, known as the Bora. The mean 



366 



CARNIVAL— CARNIVORA 



annual temperature at Laibach is 48-4° F., and the rainfall 
amounts to 72 ins. Of the total area only 14-8% is under 
cultivation, and the crops do not suffice for the needs of the 
province; forests occupy 44-4%, 17-2% are meadows, 15-7% 
are pastures, and 1-17% of the soil is covered by vineyards. 
Large quantities of flax are grown, while the timber trade is of 
considerable importance. Fish and game are plentiful, and the 
silkworm is bred in the warmer districts. The principal mining 
product is mercury, extracted at Idria, while iron and copper 
ore, zinc and coal are also found. The industry is not well 
developed, but the weaving of linen and lace is pursued as a 
household industry. 

Carniola had in 1900 a population of 508,348, which corre- 
sponds to 132 inhabitants per sq. m. Nearly 95% were Slovenes 
and 5 % Germans, while 99 % of the population belonged to the 
Roman Catholic Church. The local diet, of which the bishop of 
Laibach is a member ex officio, is composed of thirty-seven 
members, and Carniola sends eleven deputies to the Reichsrat at 
Vienna. For administrative purposes the province is divided 
into eleven districts and one autonomous municipality, Laibach 
(pop. 36,547), the capital. Other important places are Oberlai- 
bach (5882), Idria (5772), Gurkfeld (5294), Zirknitz (5266), 
Adelsberg (3636), Neurnarktl (2626), Krainburg (2484) and 
Gottschee (2421). 

Carniola derives its modern name from the Slavonic word 
Krajina (frontier). During the Roman Empire it formed part of 
Noricum and Pannonia. The Slavonic population settled here 
during the end of the 6th and the beginning of the 7 th century. 
Conquered by Charlemagne, the most of the district was bestowed 
on the duke of Friuli; but in the 10th century the title of 
margrave of Carniola began to be borne by a family resident in 
the castle of Kieselberg near Krainburg. Various parts of the 
present territory were, however, held by other lords, such as the 
duke of Carinthia and the bishop of Freising. Towards the close 
of the 14th century all the separate portions ha4 come by in- 
heritance or bequest into the hands of Rudolph IV. of Austria, 
who took the title of duke of Carniola; and since then the duchy 
has remained a part of the Austrian possessions, except during 
the short period from 1809 to 1813, when it was incorporated 
with the French Illyrian Provinces. In 1849 it became a separate 
crown-land. 

See Dimitz, GeschicMe Krains von der altesten Zeit bis 1813 
(4 vols., Laibach, 1874-1876). 

CARNIVAL (Med. Lat. carnelevarium, from caro, carnis, 
flesh, and levare, to lighten or put aside; the derivation from 
valere, to say farewell, is unsupported), the last three days pre- 
ceding Lent, which in Roman Catholic countries are given up to 
feasting and merry-making. Anciently the carnival was held 
to begin on twelfth night (6th January) and last till midnight 
of Shrove Tuesday. There is little doubt that this period of 
licence represents a compromise which the church always inclined 
to make with the pagan festivals and that the carnival really 
represents the Roman Saturnalia. Rome has ever been the 
headquarters of carnival, and though some popes, notably 
Clement IX. and XL and Benedict XIIL, made efforts to stem 
the tide of Bacchanalian revelry, many of the popes were great 
patrons and promoters of carnival keeping. Paul II. was notable 
in this respect. In his time the Jews of Rome were compelled 
to pay yearly a sum of 1 130 golden florins (the thirty being added 
as a special memorial of Judas and the thirty pieces of silver), 
which was expended on the carnival. A decree of Paul II., 
minutely providing for the diversions, orders that four rings of 
silver gilt should be provided, two in the Piazza Navona and two 
at the Monte Testaccio — one at each place for the burghers and 
the other for the retainers of the nobles to practise riding at the 
ring. The pope also orders a great variety of races, the expenses 
of which are to be paid from the papal exchequer — one to be 
run by the Jews, another for Christian children, another for 
Christian young men, another for sexagenarians, a fifth for 
asses, and a sixth for buffaloes. Under Julius III. we have long 
accounts of bull-hunts— or rather bull-baits — in the Forum, 
with gorgeous descriptions of the magnificence of the dresses, 



and enormous suppers in the palace of the Conservatori in the 
capitol, where seven cardinals, together with the duke Orazio 
Farnese, supped at one table, and all the ladies by themselves 
at another. After the supper the whole party went into the 
courtyard of the palace, which was turned into the semblance of 
a theatre, " to see a most charming comedy which was admir- 
ably played, and lasted so long that it was not over till ten 
o'clock!" Even the austere and rigid Paul IV. (ob. 1559) 
used to keep carnival by inviting all the Sacred College to dine 
with him. Sixtus V., who was elected in 1585, set himself to the 
keeping of carnival after a different fashion. Determined to 
repress the lawlessness and crime incident to the period, he set 
up gibbets in conspicuous places, as well as whipping-posts, 
the former as a hint to robbers and cut-throats, the latter ip 
store for minor offenders. We find, further, from the provisions 
made at the time, that Sixtus reformed the evil custom of throw- 
ing dirt and dust and flour at passengers, permitting only flowers 
or sweetmeats to be thrown. 

The later popes for the most part restricted the public festivi- 
ties of the carnival to the last six or seven days immediately 
preceding Ash Wednesday. The municipal authorities of the 
city, on whom the regulation of such matters now depends, allow 
ten days. The carnival sports at Rome anciently consisted of 
three divisions: (1) the races in the Corso (formerly called the 
Via Lata, and taking its present name from them), which appear 
to have been from time immemorial a part of the festivity; (2) the 
spectacular pageant of the Agona; (3) that of the Testaccio. 

Of other Italian cities, Venice used in old times to be the 
principal home, after Rome, of carnival. To-day Turin, Milan, 
Florence, Naples, all put forth competing programmes. In 
old times Florence was conspicuous for the licentiousness of its 
carnival; and the Canti Camascialeschi, or carnival songs, of 
Lorenzo de' Medici show to what extent the licence was carried. 
The carnival in Spain lasts four days, including Ash Wednesday. 
In France the merry-making is restricted almost entirely to 
Shrove Tuesday, or mardi gras. In Russia, where no Ash 
Wednesday is observed, carnival gaieties last a week from Svnday 
to Sunday. 

CARNIVORA, the zoological order typified by the la^er 
carnivorous placental land mammals of the present day, such 
as lions, tigers and wolves, but also including species like bears 
whose diet is largely vegetable, as well as a number of smaller 
flesh-eating species, together with the seals and their relatives, 
and an extinct Tertiary group. Apart from this distinct group 
(see Creodonta) , the Carnivora are characterized by the follow- 
ing features. They are unguiculate, or clawed mammals, with 
never less than four toes to each foot, of which the first is never 
opposable to the rest; the claws, or nails, being more or less 
pointed although occasionally rudimentary. The teeth com- 
prise a deciduous and a permanent series, all being rooted, and the 
latter divisible into the usual four series. In front there is a series 
of small pointed incisors, usually three in number, on each side 
of both jaws, of which the first is always the smallest and the- 
third the largest, the difference being most marked in the upper 
jaw; these are followed by strong conical, pointed, recurved 
canines; the premolars and molars are variable, but generally, 
especially in the anterior part of the series, more or less com- 
pressed, pointed and trenchant; if the crowns are fiat and 
tuberculated, they are never complex or divided into lobes by 
deep inflexions of enamel. The condyle of the lower jaw is a 
transversely placed half-cylinder working in a deep glenoid 
fossa of corresponding form. The brain varies much in size 
and form, but the hemispheres are never destitute of convo- 
lutions. The stomach is always simple and pyriform; the 
caecum is either absent or short and simple; and the colon is 
not sacculated or much wider than the small intestine. Vesiculae 
seminales are never developed, but Cowper's glands may be 
present or absent. The uterus is two-horned, and the teats are 
abdominal and variable in number; while the placenta is 
deciduate, and almost always zonary. The clavicle is often 
absent, and when present never complete. The radius and ulna 
are distinct; the scaphoid and lunar of the tarsus are united - 



CARNIVORA 



367 



there is never an os centrale in the adult; and the fibula is 
distinct. 

The large majority of the species subsist chiefly on animal 
food, though many are omnivorous, and a few chiefly vegetable- 
eaters. The more typical forms live altogether on recently- 
killed warm-blooded animals, and their whole organization is 
thoroughly adapted to a predaceous mode of life. In conformity 
with this manner of obtaining their subsistence, they are gener- 
ally bold and savage in disposition, though some are capable 
of being domesticated, and when placed under favourable cir- 
cumstances exhibit a high degree of intelligence. 

I. FlSSIPEDIA 

The typical section of the group, the Carnivora Vera.Fissipedia 
or Carnassidentia, includes all the existing terrestrial members 
of the order, together with the otters and sea-otters. In this 
section the fore-limbs never have the first digit, or the hind- 
limbs the first and fifth digits, longer than the others; and the 
incisors are § on each side, with very rare exceptions. The 
cerebral hemispheres are more or less elongated; always with 
three or four convolutions on the outer surface forming arches 
above each other, the lowest surrounding the Sylvian fissure. 
In the cheek-series there is one specially modified tooth in each 
jaw, to which the name of " sectorial " or " carnassial " is 
applied. The teeth in front of this are more or less sharp- 
pointed and compressed; the teeth behind broad and tuber- 
culated. The characters of the sectorial teeth deserve special 
attention, as, though fundamentally the same throughout the 
group, they are greatly modified in different genera. The upper 
sectorial is the most posterior of the teeth which have pre- 
decessors, and is therefore reckoned as the last premolar { p. 4 of 
the typical dentition). It consists of a more or less compressed 
blade supported on two roots and an inner lobe supported by 
a distinct root (see fig. 1). The blade when fully developed 
has three -cusps (1, 2 and 3), but the anterior is always small, 
and often absent. The middle cusp is conical, high and pointed; 






Fig. 1. — Left upper sectorial or carnassial teeth of Carnivora. 
I, Felis; II, Canis; III, Ursus. 1, anterior, 2, middle, and 3, 
posterior cusp of blade ; 4, inner cusp supported on distinct root ; 
5, inner cusp, posterior in position, and without distinct root, 
characteristic of the Ursidae. 

and the posterior cusp has a compressed, straight, knife-like edge. 
The inner cusp. (4) varies in extent, but is generally placed near 
the anterior end of the blade, though sometimes median in 
position. In the Ursidae alone both the inner cusp and its root 
are wanting, and there is often a small internal and posterior 
cusp (5) without root. In this family also the sectorial is rela- 
tively to the other teeth much smaller than in other Carnivora. 
The lower sectorial (fig. 2) is the most anterior of the teeth 
without predecessors in the milk-series, and is therefore reckoned 
the first molar. It has two roots supporting a crown, consisting 
when fully developed of a compressed bilobed blade (1 and 2), 
a heel (4), and an inner tubercle (3). The cusps of the blade, 
of which the hinder (2) is the larger, are separated by a notch, 
generally prolonged into a linear fissure. In the specialized 
Felidae (I) the blade alone is developed, both heel and inner 



tubercle being absent or rudimentary. In Metes (V) and Ursus 
(VI) the heel is greatly developed, broad and tuberculated. 
The blade in these cases is generally placed obliquely, its flat 
or convex (outer) side looking forwards, so that the two lobes 
or cusps are almost side by side, instead of anterior and posterior. 
The inner tubercle (3) is generally a conical pointed cusp, placed 
to the inner side of the hinder lobe of the blade. The special 
characters of these teeth are more disguised in the sea-otter 
than in any other species, but even here they can be traced. 




Fig. 2. — Left lower sectorial or carnassial teeth of Carnivora, 
I, Felis; II, Canis; III, Herpestes; IV, Lutra; V, Meles; VI, 
Ursus. 1, Anterior cusp of blade; 2, posterior cusp of blade; 
3, inner tubercle; 4, heel. It will be seen that the relative size of 
the two roots varies according to the development of the portion of 
the crown they respectively support. 

The toes are nearly always armed with large, strong, curved 
and sharp claws, ensheathing the terminal phalanges and held • 
firmly in place by broad plates of bone reflected over their 
attached ends from the bases of the phalanges. In the Felidae 
these claws are "retractile"; the terminal phalange with the 
claw attached, folding back in the fore-foot into a sheath by the 
outer or ulnar side of the middle phalange of the digit, and 
retained in this position when at rest by a strong elastic ligament. 
In the hind-foot the terminal joint or phalange is retracted 
on to the top, and not the side of the middle phalange. By the 
action of the deep flexor muscles the terminal phalanges are 
straightened, the claws protruded from their sheath, and the 
soft " velvety " paw becomes suddenly converted into a formid- 
able weapon of offence. The habitual retraction of the claws 
preserves their points from wear. 

The land Carnivora are best divided into two subgroups or 
sections — (A) the Aeluroidea, or Herpestoidea, and (B) the 
Arctoidea; the recognition of a third section, Cynoidea, being 
rendered untenable by the evidence of extinct forms. 

(A) Aeluroidea. — In this section, which comprises the cats 
{Felidae), civets (Viverridae). and hyenas (Hyaenidae), the 
tympanic bone is more or less ring-like, and forms only a part 
of the outer wall of the tympanic cavity; an inflated alisphenoid 
bulla is developed; and the external auditory meatus is short. 
In the nasal chamber the maxillo-turbinal is small and doubly 
folded, and does not cut off the naso-turbinal and adjacent 
bones from the nasal aperture. The carotid canal in the skull 
is short or absent. Cowper's glands are present, as is a prostate 
gland and a caecum, as well as a duodenal-jejunal flexure in 
the intestine, but an os penis is either wanting or small. 

The members of the cat tribe, or Felidae, are collectively character- 
ized by the following features. An alisphenoid is lacking on the 
lower aspect of the skull. In existing forms the usual cat tribe 
dental formula is i. J, c. \, p. |, m. \ ; the upper molar 
being rudimentary and placed on the inner side of the carnassial, 
but the first premolar may be absent, while, as an abnormality, there 
may be a small second lower molar, which is constantly present in 



368 



CARNIVORA 



some of the extinct forms. The auditory bulla and .the tympanic 
are divided by an internal partition. The paroccipital process is 
separate from, or only extends to a slight degree upon the auditory 
bulla. The thoracic vertebrae number 13; the feet are digitigrade, 
with five front and four hind toes, of which the claws are retractile ; 
and the metatarsus is haired all round. Anal glands are present. 

As regards the teeth, when considered in more detail, the incisors 
are small, and the canines large, strong, slightly recurved, with 
trenchant edges and sharp points, and placed wide apart. The pre- 
molars are compressed and sharp-pointed; the most posterior in 
the upper jaw (the sectorial) being a large tooth, consisting of a 
compressed blade, divided into three unequal cusps supported by 
two roots, with a small inner lobeplaced near the front and supported 
by a distinct root (fig. I, I). The upper molar is a small tubercular 
tooth placed more or less transversely at the inner side of the hinder 
end of the last. In the lower jaw the molar (sectorial) is reduced to 
the blade, which is large, trenchant, compressed and divided into 
two subequal lobes (fig. 2, I). Occasionally it has a rudimentary 
heel, but never an inner tubercle. The skull generally is short and 
rounded, though proportionally more elongated in the larger forms; 
with the facial portion short and broad, and the zygomatic arches 
wide and strong. The auditory bullae are large, rounded and smooth. 
Vertebrae: C. 7, D. 13, L. 7, S. 3, Ca. 13-29. Clavicles better 
developed than in other Carnivora, but not articulating with either 
the shoulder-bones or sternum. Of the five front toes, the third and 
fourth are nearly equal and longest, the second slightly, and the 
fifth considerably shorter. The first is still shorter, not reaching the 
metacarpophalangeal articulation of the second. In the hind-feet 
the third and fourth toes are the longest, the second and fifth some- 
what shorter and nearly equal, while the first is represented only by 
the rudimentary metatarsal bone. The claws are large, strongly 
curved, compressed, very sharp, and exhibit the retractile condition 
in the highest degree. The tail varies greatly in length, being in 
some species a mere stump, in others neariy as long as the body. 
The ears are of moderate size, more or less triangular and pointed ; 
and the eyes rather large, with the iris mobile, and with a pupillary 
aperture which contracts under the influence of light in some species 
to a narrow vertical slit, in others to an oval, and in some to a circular 
aperture. The tongue is thickly covered with sharp, pointed, re- 
curved horny papillae ; and the caecum is small and simple. 

As in structure so in habits, the cat may be considered the most 
specialized of all Carnivora, although they exhibit many features 
connecting them with extinct types. All the members of the group 
feed almost exclusively on warm-blooded animals which they have 
themselves killed, but one Indian species, Felis viverrina, is said to 
prey on fish, and even fresh-water molluscs. Unlike dogs, they 
never associate in packs, and rarely hunt their prey on open ground, 
but from some place of concealment wait until the unsuspecting 
victim comes within reach, or with noiseless and stealthy tread, 
crouching close to the ground for concealment, approach near enough 
to make the fatal spring. In this manner they frequently attack 
and kill animals considerably exceeding their own size. They are 
mostly nocturnal, and the greater number, especially the smaller 
species, more or less arboreal. None are aquatic, and all take to 
the water with reluctance, though some may habitually haunt the 
banks of rivers or pools, because they more easily obtain their prey 
in such situations. The numerous species are widely diffused over 
the greater part of the habitable world, though most abundant in 
the warm latitudes of both hemispheres. None are, however, found 
in the Australian region, or in Madagascar. Although the Old 
World and New World cats (except perhaps the northern lynx) are 
all specifically distinct, no common structural character has been 
pointed out by which the former can be separated from the latter. 
On the contrary, most of the groups into_ which the family may be 
divided have representatives in both hemispheres. 

Notwithstanding the considerable diversity in external appearance 
and size between different members of this extensive family, the 
structural differences are but slight. The principal differences are 
to be found in the form of the cranium, especially of the nasal and 
adjoining bones, the completeness of the bony orbit posteriorly, 
the development of the first upper premolar and of the inner lobe 
of the upper sectorial, the length of the tail, the form of the pupil, 
and the condition and coloration of the fur, especially the presence 
or absence of tufts or pencils of hair on the external ears. 

In the typical genus Felis, which includes the great majority of 
the species, and has a distribution coextensive with that of the 
family, the upper sectorial tooth has a distinct inner cusp, the claws 
are completely contractile, the tail is long or moderate, and the ears 
do not carry distinct tufts of hair. As regards the larger species, the 
lion (F. leo), tiger (F. tigris), leopard (F. pardus), ounce or snow- 
leopard (F. undo) and clouded leopard (F. nebulosa) are described 
in separate articles. Of other Old World species it must suffice to 
mention that the Tibetan Fontanier's cat (F. tristis), and the Indian 
marbled cat (F. marmorata), an ally of the above-mentioned clouded 
leopard, appear to be the Asiatic representatives of the American 
ocelots. The Tibetan Pallas's cat (F. man-id) has been made the 
type of a distinct genus, Trichaelurus , in allusion to its long coat. 
One of the largest of the smaller species is the African serval, q.v. 
(F. serval), which is yellow with solid black spots, has long limbs, 
and a relatively short tail. Numerous " tiger-cats " and " leopard- 



cats," such as the spotted F. bengalensis and the uniformly chestnut 
F. badia, inhabit tropical Asia; while representative species occur 
in Africa. The jungle-cat (F. chaus), which in its slightly tufted 
ears and shorter tail foreshadows the lynxes, is common to both 
continents. Another African species (F. ocreata) appears to have 
been the chief progenitor ot the European domestic cat, which has, 
however, apparently been crossed to some extent with the ordinary 
wild cat (F. catus). Of the New World species, F. concolor, the puma 
or couguar, commonly called " panther " in the United States, 
is about the size of a leopard, but of a uniform brown colour, spotted 
only when young, and is extensively distributed in both North and 
South America, ranging between the parallels of 60 ° N. and 50 S., 
where it is represented by numerous local races, varying in size and 
colour. F. onca, the jaguar, is a. larger and more powerful animal 
than the last, and more resembles the leopard in its colours; it is 
also found in both North and South America, although with a less 
extensive range, reaching northwards only as far as Texas, and 
southwards nearly to Patagonia (see Jaguar). F. pardalis and 
several allied smaller, elegantly-spotted species inhabiting the 
intratropical regions of America, are commonly confounded under 
the name of ocelot or tiger-cat. F. yaguarondi, rather larger than 
the domestic cat, with an elongated head and body, and of a uniform 
brownish-grey colour, ranges from northern Mexico to Paraguay; 
while the allied F. eyra is a small cat, weasel-like in form, having an 
elongated head, body and tail, and short limbs, and is of a uniform light 
reddish-brown colour. It is a native of South America and Mexico. 
F. pajeros is the Pampas cat. 

The typical lynxes, as represented by Lynx borealis (L, lynx), the 
southern L. pardina, and the American L. rufa, are a northern group 
common to both hemispheres, and characterized by their tufted 
ears, short tail, and the presence of a rudimentary heel to the lower 
carnassial tooth. As a rule, they are more or less spotted in winter, 
but tend to become uniformly-coloured in summer. They are con- 
nected with the more typical cats by the long-tailed and uniformly 
red caracal, Lynx {Caracal) caracal, of India, Persia and Africa, and 
the propriety of separating them from Felis may be open to doubt 
(see Lynx and Caracal). 

However this may be, there can be no doubt of the right of the 
hunting-leopard or chita (cheeta), as, in common with the leopard, 
it is called in India, to distinction from all the other cats as a distinct 
genus, under the name of Cynaelurus jubatus. From all the other 
Felidae this animal, which is common to Asia and Africa, is dis- 
tinguished by the inner lobe of the upper sectorial tooth, though 
supported by a distinct root, having no salient cusp upon it, by the 
tubercular molar being more in a line with the other teeth, and by 
the claws being smaller, less curved and less completely retractile, 
owing to the feebler development of the elastic ligaments. The 
skull is short and high, with the frontal region broad and elevated 
in consequence of the large development of air-sinuses. The head is 
small and round, the body light, the limbs and tail long, and the colour 
pale yellowish-brown with small solid black spots (see Cheeta). 

The family Viverridae, which includes the civet-cats, genets and 
mongooses, is nearly allied to the Felidae, but its members have 
a fuller dentition, and exhibit certain other structural //-««, 
differences from the cats, to the largest of which they ( '' vettrlbe . 
make no approach in the matter of bodily size. As a rule, 

there is an alisphenoid canal ; the cheek-dentition is p. 3 or 4 

3 or 4 
1 or 2 
m " -> ' ^ e bulla is small and the tympanic large, with a low 

division between them; and the paroccipital process is leaf-like 
and spread over the bulla. The number of dorsal vertebrae, except 
in the aberrant Proteles, is 13 or 14; the claws may be either 
completely or partially retractile or non-retractile; generally 
each foot has five toes, but there may be four in front and five 
behind, the reverse of this, or only four on each foot ; the gait may 
be either digitigrade or partially plantigrade; and the metatarsus 
may be either hairy or naked inferiorly. Anal, and in some cases 
also perineal, glands are developed. The family is limited to the 
warmer parts of the Old World. 

Considerable difference of opinion prevails with regard to the 
serial position of the fossa, or foussa (Cryptoprocta ferox) , of Mada- 
gascar, some writers considering that its affinities are so close to the 
Felidae that it ought not to be included in the present family at 
all. Others, on the contrary, see no reason to separate it from the 
Viverrinae or more typical representatives of the civet-tribe. As a 
medium course, it may be regarded as the sole representative of a 
special subfamily — Cryptoproctinae — of the Viverridae. The sub- 
family and genus are characterized by possessing a total of 36 
teeth, arranged as i. f , c. \, p. f , m. \. The teeth generally closely 
resemble those of the Felidae, the first premolar of both jaws being 
very minute and early deciduous; the upper sectorial has a small 
inner lobe, quite at the anterior part ; the molar is small and placed 
transversely; and the lower sectorial has a large trenchant bilobed 
blade, and a minute heel, but no inner tubercle. The skull is gener- 
ally like that of Felis, but proportionally longer and narrower, with 
the orbit widely open behind. Vertebrae: C. 7, D. 13, L. 7, S. 3, 
Ca. 29. Body elongated. Limbs moderate in size. Feet sub- 
plantigrade, with five well-developed toes on each, carrying 
sharp, compressed, retractile claws. Ears moderate. Tail long and 



CARNIVORA 



369 



cylindrical. The foussa is a sandy-coloured animal with an exceed- 
ingly long tail (see Foussa). 

The more typical members of the group, constituting the subfamily 
Viverrinae, are characterized by their sharp, curved and largely 
retractile claws, the presence of five toes to each foot, and of perineal 
and one pair of anal glands, and a tympanic bone which retains to a 
great extent the primitive ring-like form, so that the external auditory 
meatus has scarcely any inferior lip, its orifice being close to the 
tympanic ring. The first representatives of the subfamily are the 
civet-cats, or civets (Viverra and Viverricula) , and the genets 
(Genetta), in all of which the dentition is i. §, c. \, p. J, m. f ; total 40. 
The skull is elongated, with the facial portion small and compressed, 
and the orbits well-defined but incomplete behind. Vertebrae: 
C. 7, D. 13, L. 7 (or D. 14, L. 6), S. 3, Ca. 22-30. Body elongated 
and compressed. Head pointed in front; ears rather small. Ex- 
tremities short. Feet small and rounded. Toes short, the first on 
fore and hind feet much shorter than the others. Palms and soles 
covered with hair, except the pads of the feet and toes, and in some 
species a narrow central line on the under side of the sole, extending 
backwards nearly to the heel. Tail moderate or lone. The pair 
of large glands situated on the perineum (in both sexes) secretes an 
oily substance of a peculiarly penetrating odour. In the true civets, 
which include the largest members of the group, the teeth are stouter 
and less compressed than in the other genera; the second upper 
molar being especially large, and the auditory bulla smaller and 
more pointed in front; the body is shorter and stouter; the limbs 
are longer; the tail shorter and tapering. The under side of the 
tarsus is completely covered with hair, and the claws are longer and 
less retractile. Fur rather long and loose, and in the middle line of 
the neck and back especially elongated so as to form a sort of crest 
or mane. Pupil circular when contracted. Perineal glands greatly 
developed. These characters apply especially to V. civetta, the 
African civet, or civet-cat, as it is commonly called, an animal 
rather larger than a fox, and an inhabitant of intratropical Africa. 
V. zibetta, the Indian civet, of about equal size, approaches in many 
respects, especially in the characters of the teeth and feet and 
absence of the crest of elongated hair on the back, to the next section. 
It inhabits Bengal, China, the Malay Peninsula and adjoining 
islands. V. tangalunga is a smaller but nearly allied animal from 
the same part of the world. From these three species and the next 
the civet of commerce, once so much admired as a perfume in 
England, and still largely used in the East, is obtained. The 
animals are kept in cages, and the odoriferous secretion collected by 
scraping the interior of the perineal follicles with a spoon or spatula. 
The single representative of the genus Viverricula resembles in many 
respects the genets, but agrees with the civets in having the whole 
of the under side of the tarsus hairy; the alisphenoid canal is gener- 
ally absent. V. malaccensis, the rasse, inhabiting India, China, 
Java and Sumatra, is an elegant little animal which affords a 
favourite perfume to the Javanese. The genets (Genetta) are smaller 
animals, with more elongated and slender bodies, and shorter limbs 
than the civets. The skull is elongated and narrow; and the 
auditory bulla large, elongated and rounded at both ends. The 
teeth are compressed and sharp-pointed, with a lobe on the inner 
side of the third, upper premolar not present in the previous genera. 
Pupil contracting to a linear aperture. Tail long, slender, ringed. 
Fur short and soft, spotted or cloudy. Under side of the metatarsus 
with a narrow longitudinal bald streak. Genetta vulgaris, or G. 
genetta, the common genet, is found in France south of the river 
Loire, Spain, south-western Asia and North Africa. G. felina, 
senegalensis , tigrina, victoriae and partialis are other named species, 
all African in habitat. 

The Malagasy fossane (Fossa daubentoni), which has but little 
markings on the fur of the adult, differs by the absence of a scent- 
pouch and the presence of a couple of bare spots on the under surface 
of the metatarsus. The beautiful linsangs (Linsanga or Prionodon), 
ranging from the eastern Himalaya to Java and Borneo, are repre- 
sented by two or three species, easily recognizable by the broad 
transverse bands of blackish brown and yellow with which the body 
and tail are marked. They are specially distinguished by having 
only one pair of upper molars, thereby resembling the cats, with 
which, in correlation with their arboreal habits, they agree in their 
highly retractile claws, and the hairy surface of the under side of the 
metatarsus. About 15 in. is the length of the type species. In 
West Africa the linsangs are represented by Poiana richardsoni, a 
small species with a spotted genet-like coat, and also with a narrow 
naked stripe on the under surface of the metatarsus, as in genets. 

Here may be placed the two African spotted palm-civets of the 
genus Nandinia, namely N. binotata from the west and N. gerrardi 
from the east forest-region. In common with the true palm-civets, 
they ha-^e a dentition numerically identical with that of Viverra 
and Genetta, but the cusps of the hinder premolars and molars are 
much less sharp and pointed. They are peculiar in that the wall of 
the inner chamber of the auditory bulla never ossifies, while the 
paroccipital process is not flattened out and spread over the bulla. 
In this respect they resemble the Miocene European genus Amphictis, 
as they do in the form of their teeth, so that they may be regarded as 
nearly related to the ancestral Viverridae, and forming in some 
degree a connecting link between the present and the next sub- 
family. Nandinia is also peculiar in possessing a kind of rudimentary 



marsupial pouch. Apparently Eupleres goudoti, of Madagascar, 
which has been generally classed in the Herpestinae, is a nearly 
related animal, characterized by the reduction of its dentition, due 
to insectivorous habits (fig. 3) ; the canines being small, the anterior 
premolars canine-like, and the hinder premolars molariform. It is 
a uniformly-coloured creature of medium size. 

The palm-civets, or paradoxures, constituting the Asiatic genus 
Paradoxurus, have, as already stated, the following dental formula, 
viz. i. I, c. \, p. f, m. I, total 40; the cusps of the molars being 
low and blunted, and these teeth in the upper jaw much broader 
than in the civets. The head is pointed in front, with small rounded 
ears; the limbs are of medium length, with the soles of the feet 
almost completely naked, and fully retractile claws; while the long 
tail is not prehensile and clothed with hair of moderate length. 




Fig. 3. — Skull of Eupleres goudoti. 

Spots are the chief type of marking. The vertebrae number C. 7, 
D. 13, L. 7, S. 3, Ca. 29-36. Numerous relatively large species 
ranging from India to Borneo, Sumatra and Celebes, with one in 
Tibet, • represent the genus. Nearly allied are Arctogale leucotis, 
with a wide distribution, and A . trivirgata, of Java, both longitudin- 
ally striped species, with small and slightly separated molars, and a 
prolonged bony palate (see Palm-Civet). 

The binturong (Arctictis binturong) has typically the same dental 
formula as the last, but the posterior upper molar and the first lower 
premolar are often absent. Molars small and rounded, with a dis- 
tinct interval between every two, but formed generally on the same 
pattern as Paradoxurus. Vertebrae: C 7, D. 14, L. 5, S. 3, Ca. 34. 
Body elongated ; head broad behind, with a small pointed face, 
long and numerous whiskers, and small ears, rounded, but clothed 
with a pencil of long hairs. Eyes small. Limbs short, with the 
soles of the feet broad and entirely naked. Tail very long and 
prehensile. Fur long and harsh. Caecum extremely small. The 
binturong inhabits southern Asia from Nepal through the Malay 
Peninsula to the islands of Sumatra and Java. Although structu- 
rally agreeing closely with the paradoxures, its tufted ears, long, 
coarse and dark hair, and prehensile tail give it a very different 
external appearance. It is slow and cautious in its movements, 
chiefly if not entirely arboreal, and appears to feed on vegetables as 
well as animal substances (see Binturong). 

Hemigale is another modification of the paradoxure type, repre- 
sented by H. hardwickei of Borneo, an elegant-looking animal, 
smaller and more slender than the paradoxures, of light grey colour, 
with transverse broad dark bands across the back and loins. 

Cynogale also contains one Bornean species, C. bennetti, a curious 
otter-like modification of the viverrine type, having semi-aquatic 
habits, both swimming in the water and climbing trees, living upon 
fish, crustaceans, small mammals, birds and fruits. The number 
and general arrangement of the teeth are as in Paradoxurus, but the 
premolars are peculiarly elongated, compressed, pointed and re- 
curved, though the molars are tuberculated. The head is elongated, 
with the muzzle broad and depressed, the whiskers are very long 
and abundant, and the ears small and rounded. Toes short and 
slightly webbed at the base. Tail short, cylindrical, covered with 
short hair. Fur very dense and soft, of a dark-brown colour, mixed 
with black and grey. 

In the mongoose group, or Herpestinae, the tympanic or anterior 
portion of the auditory bulla is produced into an ossified external 
auditory meatus of considerable length; while the paroccipital 
process never projects below the bulla, on the hinder surface of 
which, in adult animals, it is spread out and completely lost. The 
toes are straight, with long, unsheathed, non-retractile claws. 

In the typical mongooses or ichneumons, Herpestes, the dental 

formula is i. f , c. \, p. j- ;? , m. |; total 40 or 36; the molars 

having generally strongly-developed, sharply-pointed cusps. The 
skull is elongated and constricted behind the orbits. The face is 
short and compressed, with the frontal region broad and arched. 
Post-orbital processes of frontal and jugal bones well developed, 
generally meeting so as to complete the circle of the orbit behind. 
Vertebrae: C. 7, D. 13, L. 7, S. 3, Ca. 21-26. Head pointed in front. 
Ears short and rounded. Body long and slender. Extremities 
short. Five toes on each foot, the first, especially that on the hind- 
foot, very short. Toes free, or but slightly palmated. Soles of 
fore-feet and terminal portion of those of hind-pair naked; under 
surface of metatarsus clothed with hair. Tail long or moderate, 
generally thick at the base, and sometimes covered with more or 
less elongated hair. The longer hairs covering the body and tail 
almost always ringed. The genus is common to the warmer parts of 



37° 



CARNIVORA 



Asia and Africa, and while many of the species, like the Egyptian 
H. ichneumon and the ordinary Indian mongoose, H. mungo, are 
pepper-and-salt coloured, the large African H. albicauda has the 
terminal two-thirds of the tail clothed with long white hairs (see 
Ichneumon). 

The following distinct African and Malagasy generic representa- 
tives of the subfamily are recognized, viz. Helogale, with § premolars, 
and containing the small South African H. parvula and a variety of 
the same. Bdeogale crassicauda and two allied tropical African 
species differ from Herpestes in having only four toes on each foot. 
The orbit is nearly complete, and the tail of moderate length and 
rather bushy. In Cynictis, which has the orbit completely closed, 
there are five front and four hind toes; and the skull is shorter and 
broader than in Herpestes, rather contracted behind the orbits, the 
face short, and the anterior chamber of the auditory bulla very 
large. The front claws are elongated. Includes only C. penicillata 
from South Africa. 

All the foregoing herpestines have the nose short, with its under 
surface flat, bald, and with a median longitudinal groove. The 
remaining forms have the nose more or less produced, with its 
under side convex, and a space between the nostrils and the upper 
lip covered with closely pressed hairs, and without any median 
groove. The South African Rhynchogale muelleri, a reddish animal 
with five toes to each foot and 1 (abnormally f ) premolars, alone 
represents the first genus. The cusimanses (Crossarchus), which 
differ by having only | premolars, and thus a total of 36 teeth, 
include, on the other hand, several species. The muzzle is elongated, 
the claws on the fore-feet are long and curved, the first front toe is 
very short; the under surface of the metatarsus naked; and the 
tail shorter than the body, tapering. Fur harsh. Includes C. ob- 
scurus, the cusimanse, a small burrowing animal from West Africa, 
of uniform dark-brown colour, C. fasciatus, C. zebra, C. gambianus 
and others. Lastly, we have Suricata, a more distinct genus than 
any of the above. The dental formula is as in the last, but the teeth 
of the molar series are remarkably short in the antero-posterior 
direction, corresponding with the shortness of thj skull generally. 
Orbits complete behind. Vertebrae: C. 7, D. 15, L. 6, S. 3, Ca. 20. 
Though the head is short and broad, the nose is pointed and rather 
produced and movable, while the ears are very short. Body shorter 
and limbs longer than in Herpestes. Toes 4-4. Claws on fore-feet 
very long and narrow, arched, pointed and subequal. Hind-feet 
with shorter claws, soles hairy. Tail rather shorter than the body. 
One species only is known, the meerkat or suricate, 5. tetradactyla, 
a small grey-brown animal, with dark transverse stripes on the 
hinder part of the back, from South Africa. 

The names Galidictis, Galidia and Hemigalidia indicate three 
generic modifications of the Herpestinae, all inhabitants of Mada- 
gascar. The best-known, Galidia elegans, is a lively squirrel-like 
little animal with soft fur and a long bushy tail, which climbs and 
jumps with agility. It is of a chestnut-brown colour, the tail being 
ringed with darker brown. Galidictis vittata and G. striata chiefly 
differ from the ichneumons in their coloration, being grey with 
parallel longitudinal stripes of dark brown. 

Considerable diversity of opinion prevails with regard to the 
serial position of the aard-wolf, or maned jackal (Proteles cristatus), 
of southern and eastern Africa, some authorities making it the 
representative of a family by itself, others referring it to the 
Hyaenidae, while others again regard it as a modified member of the 
Viverridae. After all, the distinction either way cannot be very 
great, since the two families just named are intimately connected 
by marks of the extinct Ictitherium. With the Viverridae it agrees 
in having the auditory bulla divided, while in the number of dorsal 
vertebrae it is hyena-like. The cheek-teeth are small, far apart, 
and almost rudimentary in character (see fig. 4), and the canines 

long and rather slender. The dental formula is i.%, c.\, p.m. ■ 



3 or 4' 

total 30 or 32. Vertebrae :_ C. 7, D. 15, L. 5, S. 2, Ca. 24. The 
fore-feet with five toes; the first, though short, with a distinct claw. 
The hind-feet with four subequal toes; all, like those of the fore-foot, 
furnished with strong, blunt, non-retractile claws (see Aard-Wolf). 
The hyenas or hyaenas {Hyaenidae) differ from the preceding 
family (Viverridae) in the absence of a distinct vertical partition 
Hyena between the two halves of the auditory bulla; and are 

tribe. further characterized by the absence of an alisphenoid 

canal, the reduction of the molars to \ , and the presence 
of 15 dorsal vertebrae. The dental formula in the existing forms 
(to which alone all these remarks apply) is i. f, c. \, p. f, m.\; 
total 34; the teeth, especially the canines and premolars, being very 
large, strong and conical. Upper sectorial with a large, distinctly 
trilobed blade and a moderately developed inner lobe placed at the 
anterior extremity of the blade. Molar very small, and placed trans- 
versely close to the hinder edge of the last, as in the Felidae. Lower 
sectorial consisting of little more than the bilobed blade. Zygomatic 
arches of skull very wide and strong; and sagittal crest high, giving 
attachment to very powerful biting muscles. Orbits incomplete 
behind. Vertebrae: C. 7, D. 15, L. 5, S. 4, Ca. 19. Limbs rather 
long, especially the anterior pair, digitigrade, four subequal toes on 
each, with stout non-retractile claws, the first toes being represented 
by rudimentary metacarpal and metatarsal bones. Tail rather 



short. A large post-anal median glandular pouch, into which the 
largely developed anal scent glands pour their secretion. 

The three well-characterized species of Hyaena are divisible into 
two sections, to which some zoologists assign generic rank. In the 
typical species the upper molar is moderately developed and three- 
rooted; and an inner tubercle and heel more or less developed 
on the lower molar. Ears large and pointed. Hair long, forming a 
mane on the back and shoulders. Represented firstly by H. striata, 




I Fig. 4. — Skull and Dentition of Aard-Wolf (Proteles cristatus). 

the striped hyena of northern and eastern Africa and southern 
Asia ; and H. brunnea of South Africa, in some respects intermediate 
between this and the next section. In the second section, forming the 
subgenus Crocuta, the upper molar is extremely small, two- or one- 
rooted, often deciduous; the lower molar without trace of inner 
tubercle, and with an extremely small heel. Ears moderate, rounded. 
Hair not elongated to form a mane. The spotted hyena, Hyaena 
(Crocuta) crocuta, of which, like the striped species, there are several 
local races, represents this group, and ranges all over Africa south 
of the Sahara. In dental characters the first section inclines more 
to the Viverridae, the second to the Felidae; or the second may be 
considered as the more specialized form, as it certainly is in its 
visceral anatomy, especially in that of the reproductive organs of 
the female. (See Hyena.) 

(B) Arctoidea. — So far as the auditory region of the skull 
is concerned, the existing representatives of the dog tribe or 
Canidae are to a great extent intermediate between the cat and 
civet group (AeluroiJea) on the one hand, and the typical 
representatives of the bear and weasel group on the other. 
They were consequently at one time classed in an intermediate 
group — the Cynoidea; but fossil forms show such a complete 
transition from dogs to bears as to demonstrate the artificial 
character of such a division. Consequently, the dogs are in- 
cluded in the bear-group. In this wider sense the Arctoidea 
will be characterized by the tympanic bone being disk-shaped 
and forming the whole of the outer wall of the tympanic cavity; 
the large size of the external auditory meatus or tube; and the 
large and branching maxillo-turbinal bone, which cuts off the 
naso-turbinal and two adjacent bones from the anterior nasal 
chamber. The tympanic bulla has no internal partition. There 
is a large carotid canal. Cowper's glands are lacking; and there 
is a large penial bone. 

From all the other members of the group the Canidae are broadly 
distinguished (in the case of existing forms) by the large and well- 
developed tympanic bulla, with which the paroccipital Don tribe 
process is in contact. An alisphenoid canal is present. 
The feet are digitigrade, usually with five (in one instance four) 
front and always four hind-toes. The molars — generally J— 
have tall cusps, and the sectorials are large and powerful (figs. I 
and 2). The intestine has both a duodeno-jejunal flexure and a 
caecum. A prostate gland is present; but there are no glands in 
the vasa deferentia; the penial bone is grooved; and anal glands 
are generally developed. The distribution of the family is cosmo- 
politan. The normal dentition is i. |, c. {, p. |, m. f; total 42; 
thus differing from the typical series only by the loss of the last pair 
of upper molars (present in certain extinct forms). In the characters 
of the teeth the group is the most primitive of all Carnivora. Typi- 
cally the upper sectorial (fig. I, II) consists of a stout blade, of which 
the anterior cusp is almost obsolete, the middle cusp large, conical 
and pointed backwards, and the posterior cusp in the form of a 
compressed ridge; the inner lobe is very small, and placed at the 
fore part of the tooth. The first molar is more than half the antero- 
posterior length of the sectorial, and considerably wider than long; 
its crown consists of two prominent conical cusps, of which the 
anterior is the larger, and a low, broad inward prolongation, support- 
ing two more or less distinct cusps and a raised inner border. The 
second molar resembles the first in general form, but is considerably 
smaller. The lower sectorial (fig. 2, II) is a large tooth, with a 
strong compressed bilobed blade, the hinder lobe being considerably 
the larger and more pointed, a small but distinct inner tubercle 



CARNIVORA 



37i 



placed at the hinder margin of the posterior lobe of the blade, and 
a broad, low, tuberculated heel, occupying about one-third of the 
whole length of the tooth. The second molar is less than half the 
length of the first, with a pair of cusps placed side by side anteriorly, 
and a less distinct posterior pair. The third is an extremely small 
and simple tooth with a subcircular tuberculated crown and single 
root. 

Views differ in regard to the best classification of the Canidae, 
some writers adopting a number of generic groups, while others con- 
sider that very few meet the needs of the case. In retaining the old 
genus Canis in the wide sense, that is to say, inclusive of the foxes, 
Professor Max Weber is followed. The best cranial character by 
which the different members of the family may be distinguished is 
that in dogs, wolves and jackals the post-orbital process of the 
frontal bone is regularly smooth and convex above, with its extremity 
bent downwards, whereas in foxes the process is hollowed above, 
with its outer margin (particularly of the anterior border) somewhat 
raised. This modification coincides in the main with the division 
of the group into two parallel series, the Thooids or Lupine forms 
and Alopecoids or Vulpine forms, characterized by the presence 
of frontal air-sinuses in the former, which not only affects the 
external form but to a still greater degree the shape of the anterior 
part of the cranial cavity, and the absence of such sinuses in the 
latter. The pupil of the eye when contracted is round in most 
members of the first group, and vertically elliptical in the others, 
but more observations are required before this character can be 
absolutely relied upon. The form and length of the tail is often used 
for the purposes of classification, but its characters do not coincide 




Fig. 5. — The African Hunting-Dog (Lycaon pictus). 

with those of the cranium, as many of the South American Canidae 
have the long bushy tails of foxes and the skulls of wolves. 

The most aberrant representative of the thooid series is the 
African hunting-dog {Lycaon pictus, fig. 5), which differs from the 
other members of this series by the teeth being rather more massive 
and rounded, the skull shorter and broader, and the presence of 
but four toes on each limb, as in Hyena. The hunting-dog, from 
south and east Africa, is very distinct externally from all other 
Canidae; being nearly as large as a mastiff, with large, broadly 
ovate erect ears and a singular colouring, often consisting of un- 
symmetrical large spots of white, yellow and black. It presents 
some curious superficial resemblances to Hyena crocuta, perhaps a 
case of mimetic analogy, and hunts its prey in large packs. Several 
local races, one of which comes from Somaliland, differing in size 
and colour, are recognized (see Hunting-Dog). Nearly related to 
the hunting-dog are the dholes or wild dogs of Asia, as represented 
by the Central Asian Cyon primaevus and the Indo-Malay C. 
javanicus. They have, however, five front-toes, but lack the last 
lower molar; while they agree with Lycaon and Speothos in that 
the heel of the lower sectorial tooth has only a single compressed 
cutting cusp, in place of a large outer and a smaller inner cusp as in 
Canis. Dholes are whole-coloured animals, with short heads; 
and hunt in packs. The bush-dog (Speothos, or Icticyon venations) 
of Guiana is a small, short-legged, short-tailed and short-haired 



species characterized by the molars being only : 



-; the carnassial 



having no inner cusp. The long-haired raccoon-dog (Nyctereutes 
procyonoides) of Japan and China agrees essentially in everything 
but general appearance (which is strangely raccoon-like) with Canis. 
The typical group of the latter includes some of the largest members 
of the family, such as the true wolves of the northern parts of both 
Old and New Worlds (C. lupus, &c), and the various breeds of the 
domestic dog (C '. famtiiaris) , the origin of which is still involved in 



obscurity. Some naturalists believe it to be a distinct species, 
descended from one that no longer exists in a wild state; others 
have sought to find its progenitors in some one of the wild or half- 
wild races, either of true dogs, wolves or jackals ; while others again 
believe that it is derived from the mingling of two or more wild 
species or races. It is probably the earliest animal domesticated 
by man, and few if any other species have undergone such an extra- 
ordinary amount of variation in size, form and proportion of limbs, 
ears and tail, variations which have been perpetuated and increased 
by careful selective breeding (see Dog). The dingo or Australian 
dog is met with wild, and also as the domestic companion of the 
aboriginal race of the country, by whom it appears to have been 
originally introduced. It is nearly related to a half-wild dog in- 
habiting Java, and also to the pariah dogs of India and other eastern 
countries. Dogs were also in the possession of the natives of New 
Zealand and other islands of the Pacific, where no placental mammals 
exist naturally, on their discovery by Europeans in the 18th century. 
The slender-jawed C. simensis of Abyssinia and the South American 
C. jubatus and C. antarcticus are also generally placed in this group. 
On the other hand, the North American coyote (C. latrans), with its 
numerous subspecies, and the Old World jackals, such as the Indo- 
European C. aureus, the Indian C. pallipes, and the African C. 
lupaster, C. anthus, C. adustus, C. variegatus and C. mesomelas (the 
black-backed jackal), although closely related to the wolves, have 
been placed in a separate group under the name of Lupulus. Again, 
Thous (or Lycalopex) , is a group proposed for certain South American 
Canidae, locally known as foxes, and distinguished from all the 
foregoing by their fox-like aspect and longer tails, although with 
skulls of the thooid type. Among these are the bright-coloured 
colpeo, C. magellanicus, the darker C. thous, C. azarae, C. griseus, 
C. cancrivorus and C. brasiliensis. Some of these, such as C. azarae 
and C griseus, show a further approximation to the fox in that the 
pupil of the eye forms a vertical slit. More distinct from all the pre- 
ceding are the members of the alopecoid or vulpine section, which are 
unknown in South America. The characteristic feature of the skull 
has been already mentioned. In addition to this, reference may be 
made to the elliptical (in place of circular) pupil of the eye, and the 
general presence of ten (rarely eight) teats instead of a smaller 
number. The typical groups constituting the subgenus (or genus) 
Vulpes, is represented by numerous species and races spread over 
the Old World and North America. Foremost among these is the 
European fox (C. vulpes — otherwise Vulpes alopex, or V. vulpes), 
represented in the Himalaya by the variety C. v. montanus and in 
North Africa by C. v. niloticus, while the North American C. pennsyl- 
vanicus or fulvus, can scarcely be regarded as more than a local race. 
On the other hand, the Asiatic C. bengalensis and C. corsac, and the 
North American C. velox (kit-fox) are smaller and perfectly distinct 
species. From all these the North American C. cinereo-argenlatus 
(grey fox) and C. littoralis are distinguished by having a fringe of 
stiff hairs in the tail, whence they are separated as Urocyon. Again, 
the Arctic fox (C. lagopus), of which there is a blue and a white phase, 
has the tail very full and bushy and the soles of the feet thickly 
haired, and has hence been distinguished as Leucocyon. Lastly, we 
have the elegant little African foxes known as fennecs (Fennecus), 
such as C. zerda and C. famelicus of the north, and the southern 
C. chama, all pale-coloured animals, with enormously long ears, 
and correspondingly inflated auditory bullae to the skull (see Wolf, 
Jackal, Fox). 

Whatever differences of opinion may obtain among naturalists 
as to the propriety of separating generically the foxes from the 
wolves and dogs, there can be none as to the claim of the long-eared 
fox {Otocyon megalotis) of south and east Africa to represent a 
genus by itself. In this animal the dental formula is i. \, c. \, p. %, 

m. , 1 total 46 or 48. The molar teeth being in excess of almost 

all other placental mammals with a differentiated series of teeth. 
They have the same general characters as in Canis, with very pointed 
cusps. The lower sectorial shows little of the typical character, 
having five cusps on the crown-surface; these can, however, be 
identified as the inner tubercle, the two greatly reduced and obliquely 
placed lobes of the blade, and two cusps on the heel. The skull 
generally resembles that of the smaller foxes, particularly the fennecs. 
The auditory bullae are very large. The hinder edge of the lower 
jaw has a peculiar form, owing to the great development of an ex- 
panded, compressed and somewhat inverted subangular process. 
Vertebrae: C. 7, D. 13, L. 7, S. 3, Ca. 22. Ears very large. Limbs 
rather long, with the normal number of toes. The two parietal 
ridges on the skull remain widely separated, so that no sagittal 
crest is formed. The animal is somewhat smaller than an ordinary 
fox. In the year 1880 Professor Huxley suggested that in the long- 
eared fox we have an animal nearly representing the stock from 
which have been evolved all the other representatives of the dog 
and fox tribe. One of the main grounds for arriving at this conclusion 
was the fact that this animal has very generally four true molars in 
each jaw, and always that number in the lower jaw ; whereas three 
is the maximum number of these teeth to be met with in nearly 
all placental mammals, other than whales, manatis, armadillos 
and certain others. The additional molars in Otocyon were regarded 
as survivals from a primitive type when a larger number was the 



372 



CARNIVORA 



rule. Palaeontology has, however, made great strides since 1880, 
and the idea that the earlier mammals had more teeth than their 
descendants has riot only received no confirmation, but has been 
practically disproved. Consequently Miss Albertina Carlsson had a 
comparatively easy task (in a paper published in the Zoologisches 
Jahrbuch for 1905) in demonstrating that the long-eared fox is a 
specialized, and to some extent degraded, form rather than a 
primitive type. This, however, is not all, for the lady points outs 
that, as was suggested years previously by the present writer, the 
creature is really the descendant of the fossil Cants curvipalatus of 
northern India. This is a circumstance of considerable interest from 
a distributional point of view, as affording one more instance of the 
intimate relationship between the Tertiary mammalian fauna of 
India and the existing mammals of Africa 

In regard to the members of the dog-tribe as a whole, it may be 
stated that they are generally sociable animals, hunting their prey 
in packs. Many species burrow in the ground; none habitually 
climb trees. Though mostly carnivorous, feeding chiefly on animals 
they have chased and killed themselves, many, especially among the 
smaller species, eat garbage, carrion, insects, and also fruit, berries 
and other vegetable substances. The upper surface of the tail 
of the fox has a gland covered with coarse straight hair. This 
gland, which emits an aromatic odour, is found in all Canidae, with 
possibly the exception of Lycaon pictus. Although the bases of the 
hair covering the gland are usually almost white, the tips are always 
black; this colour being generally extended to the surrounding 
hairs, and often forming dark bars on the buttocks. The dark spot 
on the back of the tail is particularly conspicuous, notably in such 
widely separated species as the wolves, Azara's dog and the fennec. 

Although its existing representatives ate very different, the bear- 
family or Ursidae, as will be more fully mentioned in the sequel, 
was in past times intimately connected with the Canidae. 
Bear tribe. \ n common with the next two families, the modern 
Ursidae are characterized by the very small tympanic bulla, 
and the broad paroccipital process, which is, however, inde- 
pendent of the bulla. The feet are more or less completely planti- 
grade and five-toed. The intestine has neither duodeno jejunal 
flexure nor a caecum; the prostate gland is rudimentary; but 
glands occur in the vasa deferentia; and the penial bone is cylin- 
drical. As distinctive characteristics of the Ursidae, may be men- 
tioned the presence of an alisphenoid canal on the base of the skull ; 
the general absence of a perforation on the inner side of the lower 
end of the humerus ; the presence of two pairs of upper and three of 
lower molars, which are mostly elongated and low-cusped ; and the 
non-cutting character and fore-and-aft shortening of the upper 
sectorial, which has no inner root and one inner cusp (fig. 1, III.). 
Anal glands are apparently wanting. The short tail, bulky build, 
completely plantigrade feet and clumsy gait are features eminently 
characteristic of the bears. 

The great majority of existing bears may be included in the 
typical genus Ursus, of which, in this wide sense, the leading char- 
acteristics will be as follows. The dentition is i. $, c. {, p. f , m. § «= 42 ; 
but the three anterior premolars, above and below, are one-rooted, 
rudimentary and frequently wanting. Usually the first (placed 
close to the canine) is present, and after a considerable interval the 
third, which is situated close to the other teeth of the cheek-series. 
The fourth (upper sectorial) differs essentially from the corresponding 
tooth of other Carnivora in that the inner lobe is not supported by a 
distinct root; its sectorial characters being very slightly marked. 
The crowns of both true molars are longer than broad, with flattened, 
tuberculated, grinding surfaces; the second having a large backward 
prolongation or heel. The lower sectorial has a small and indistinct 
blade and greatly developed tubercular heel ; the second molar is of 
about the same length, but with a broader and more flattened 
tubercular crown; while the third is smaller. The milk-teeth are 
comparatively small, and shed at an early age. The skull is more 
or less elongated, with the orbits small and incomplete behind, and 
the palate prolonged considerably behind the last molar. Vertebrae : 
C. 7, D. 14, L. 6, S. 5, Ca. 8-10. Body heavy. Feet broad, com- 
pletely plantigrade; the five toes on each well developed, and 
armed with long compressed and moderately curved, non-retractile 
claws, the soles being generally naked. Tail very short. Ears 
moderate, erect, rounded, hairy. Fur generally long, soft and 
shaggy. 

Bears are animals of considerable bulk, and include among them 
the largest members of the order. Though the species are not 
numerous, they are widely spread over the earth, although absent 
from Africa south of the Sahara and Australasia. As a rule, they 
are omnivorous, or vegetable feeders, even the polar bear, which 
subsists for most of the year on flesh and fish, eating grass in summer. 
On the other hand, many of the brown bears live largely on salmon 
in summer. Among the various species the white polar bear of the 
Arctic regions, Ursus (Thalassarctus) maritimus, differs from the 
rest by its small and low head, small, narrow and simple molars, 
and the presence of a certain amount of hair on the soles of the feet. 
The typical group of the genus is represented by the brown bear 
(U. arctus) of Europe and Asia, of which there are many local races, 
such as the Syrian V. a. syriacus, the Himalayan U. a. isabellinus, 
the North Asiatic U. a. collaris, and the nearly allied Kamchadale 
race, which is of great size. In Alaska the group is represented by 



huge bears, which ean scarcely claim specific distinctness from 
U. arctus ; and if these are ranked only as races, it is practically 
impossible to regard the Rocky Mountain grizzly bear (U.horribilis) 
as of higher rank, although it naturally differs more from the Asiatic 
animal. On the other hand, the small and light-coloured U. pruinosus 
of Tibet may be allowed specific rank. More distinct is the North 
American black bear U. americanus, and its white relative U. 
kermodei of British Columbia; and perhaps we should affiliate to 
this group the Himalayan and Japanese black bears (U. torguatus 
and u. japonicus). Very distinct is the small Malay sun-bear U. 
(Helarctus) malayanus, characterized by its short, smooth fur, 
extensile tongue, short and wide head, and broad molars. Finally, 
the spectacled bear of the Andes, U. (Tremarctus) ornatus, which is 
also a broad-skulled black species, differs from all the rest in having 
a perforation, or foramen, on the inner side of the lower end of the 
humerus. A second genus, Melursus, represented by the Indian 
sloth-bear (M. ursinus), differs from the preceding in having only 
two pairs of upper incisors, the small size of the cheek-teeth, and the 
extensile lips. Ants, white-ants, ifruits and honey form the chief 
food of this shaggy black species,-— a diet which accounts for its 
feeble dentition (see Bear). 

The parti-coloured bear or giant panda (Aeluropus melanoleucus, 
fig, 6) of eastern Tibet and north-west China forms in some degree 
a connecting link between the bears and the true panda, although 
placed by Professor E. R. Lankester in the same family 'as the latter. 
In the number of the teeth, and to some extent in the character of 
the molars, as well as in the abbreviated tail, Aeluropus resembles 
the bears, but in the structure of the sectorial tooth, the presence 
of an extra radial carpal bone, and the osteology generally, it is 
more like the panda. In the absence of an alisphenoid canal to the 




Fig. 6. — The Parti-coloured Bear, or Giant Panda 

(Aeluropus melanoleucus). 

skull it differs both from the latte» and the bears, and thereby 
resembles the raccoons; while in having a perforation at the lower 
end of the humerus, it agrees with the spectacled bear, the panda 
and raccoons. The dentition is i. f, c. \, p. f, m. f ; total 40; 
premolars increasing in size from first to last, and two-rooted except 
the first; the first upper molar with quadrate crown, broader that 
long; and the second larger than the first. Skull with the zygo- 
matic arches and sagittal crest immensely developed, ascending 
branch of lower jaw veryhigh, giving great space for attachment of 
temporal muscle, and facial portion short. Bony palate not extend- 
ing behind the last molar. No alisphenoid canal. Feet bear-like, 
but soles more hairy, and perhaps less completely plantigrade. 
Fur long and thick; and tail extremely short. Humerus with a 
perforation on the inner side of the lower end; a very large extra 
radial carpal bone. The colour of this strange animal is black and 
white (fig. 6). 

With the panda (Aelurus fulgens) we reach an undoubted repre- 
sentative of the Procyonidae, or raccoon tribe, differing, however, 
from all the rest except the doubtful Aeluropus, in its Asiatic habitat. 
If the latter be included, the family may be defined as follows. 
Molars 1, except in Aeluropus, with blunt or sharp cusps; no ali- 
sphenoid canal, except in Aelurus; humerus generally with a 
foramen; feet plantigrade; tail, except in Aeluropus, long and 
generally ringed. 

In the panda the dentition is i. f , c. \, p. f, m. |; total 38; the 
first lower molar being minute and deciduous, and the upper molars 
broad with numerous and complicated cusps. Vertebrae: C. 7, 
D. 14, L. 6, S. 3, Ca. 18. Skull high and compressed, with an ali- 
sphenoid canal, a short facial portion, and the ascending bran-h 
of the lower jaw, as in Aeluropus, very tall. Face cat-like, with 
moderate, erect, pointed ears. Claws blunt. Tail cylindrical and 



CA-RNIVORA 



ringed. Fur long and thick. Extra radial carpal bone moderate. 
The panda is a bright golden red animal, with black under-parts, 
ranging from the eastern Himalaya to north-western China, where 
it is represented by a distinct race. Fossil species occur in the later 
Tertiary deposits of Europe (see Panda). 

The raccoons (Procyon) are the first and typical representatives 
of the American section of the family, in which an alisphenoid canal 
is always wanting. In this genus the dentition is i. %, c. \, p. J, m. § ; 
total 40 ; the upper molars being broad and tuberculated ; the upper 
sectorial (like that of Aeluropus and Aelurus) having three outer 
cusps and a broad bicuspid inner lobe, giving an almost quadrate 
form to the crown. First upper molar with a large tuberculated 
crown, rather broader than long; second considerably smaller, 
with transversely oblong crown. Lower sectorial (first molar) with 
an extremely small and ill-defined blade, placed transversely in 
front, and a large inner tubercle and heel ; second molar as long as 
the first, but narrower behind, with five obtuse cusps. Vertebrae: 
C. 7, D. 14, L. 6, S. 3, Ca. 16-20. Body stout. Head broad behind, 
but with a pointed muzzle. In walking the entire sole not applied 
to the ground, as it is when the animal is standing. Toes, especially 
of the fore-foot, very free, and capable of being spread wide apart ; 
claws compressed, curved and pointed. Tail moderately long, 
cylindrical, thickly covered with hair, ringed, non-prehensile. Fur 
long, thick and soft. The common raccoon {Procyon lolor) of North 
America is the type of this genus; it is replaced in South America 
by P. cancrivorus (see Raccoon). The cacomistles (Bassariscus) 
are nearly allied to Procyon, but of more slender and elegant propor- 
tions, with sharper nose, longer tail, and more digitigrade feet, and 
teeth smaller and more sharply cusped. The typical B. astuta is 
from the southern parts of the United States and Mexico, while B. 
(Wagneria) annulata is Mexican and Central American. 

The name Bassaricyon has been given to a distinct modification of 
the procyonine type of which at present two species are known, 
one from Costa Rica and the other from Ecuador respectively, 
named B. gabbi and B. atteni. They much resemble the kinkajou 
in external appearance, but the skull and teeth are more like those 
of Procyon and Nasua. In the coatis, Nasua, the dentition is as in 
Procyon, but the upper canines are larger and more strongly com- 
pressed, and the molars smaller; while the facial portion of the 
skull is more elongated and harrow. Vertebrae: C. 7, D. 14, L. 6, 
S. 3, Ca. 22-23. Body elongated and rather compressed. Nose 
prolonged into a somewhat upturned, obliquely-truncated, mobile 
snout. Tail long, non-prehensile, tapering and ringed. Coatis, or 
coati-mundis, live in small troops of eight to twenty, are chiefly 
arboreal, and feed on fruits, young birds, eggs, insects, &c. The 
two best-known species are JV. narica of Mexico and Central America, 
and N. rufa of South America from Surinam to Paraguay (see Coati). 
In the kinkajou (q.v.), an animal long known as Cercoleptes caudi- 
volvulus, but whose designation it has been proposed to change to 
the unclassical Potos flavus, the dentition is i. f, c. \, p. f, m. 1=36. 
Molars with low flat crowns, very obscurely tuberculated. Skull 
short and rounded, with flat upper surface. Vertebrae: C. 7, D. 14, 
L. 6, S. 3, Ca. 26-28. Clavicles present, but in a very rudimentary 
condition. Head broad and round. Ears short. Body long and 
musteline. Limbs short. Tail long, tapering and prehensile. Fur 
short and soft. Tongue long and very extensile. 

The last existing family of the land Carnivora is that typified 
by the martens and weasels, and hence known as the Mustelidae. 
Weasel ■ The group is characterized by the absence of an alisphenoid 
tribe. canal in the skull, the reduction of the molars to § or even 

i , the medium size of the sectorial tooth in each jaw, the 
absence or presence of a perforation in the humerus, and the presence 
of anal glands. The family is cosmopolitan in distribution, with the 
exception of Australasia and Madagascar. 

The first section of the family, forming the subfamily Mustclinae, 
is typically characterized by the short and partially webbed toes, 
furnished with short, compressed, sharp, curved and often partially 
retractile claws. The upper molar is always of moderate size and 
elongated in the transverse direction. In the martens and sables 
(Mustela) the dentition is i. jj, c. \, p. f, m. \; total 38; the upper 
sectorial having its inner lobe close to the anterior edge of the 
tooth; and the upper molar being nearly as large as the sectorial. 
Lower sectorial with small inner tubercle. Vertebrae: C. 7, D. 14, 
L. 6, S. 3, Ca. 18-23. Body long and slender. Limbs short, partially 
digitigrade, with the feet rounded and the toes short, with com- 
pressed, acute, semi-retractile claws. Tail moderate or long, more 
or less bushy. One species, M. martes, the pine-marten, is British ; 
the remainder inhabit the northern regions of Europe, Asia and 
America. Many of the species, as the sable (M. zibellina), yield fur 
of great value (see Marten). 

The dentition of Putorius differs from that of Mustela chiefly in 
the absence of the anterior premolars of both jaws. The teeth are 
more sharply cusped, and the lower sectorial wants the inner tubercle. 
External characters generally similar to those of the martens, but 
the body longer and more slender, and the limbs even shorter. All 
the species are small animals, of active, bloodthirsty and courageous 
disposition, living chiefly on birds and^small mammals, and rather 
terrestrial than arboreal, dwelling among rocks, stones and out- 
buildings. Some of the species, as the stoat or ermine {P. ermineus), 
inhabiting cold climates, undergo a seasonal change of colour, being 



373 

brown in summer and white in winter, though the change does 
not affect the whole of the fur, the end of the tail remaining 
black in all seasons. This is a large genus, having a very extensive 
geographical range throughout the Old and New Worlds, and 
includes the animals commonly known as weasels, polecats, ferrets 
and minks (q.v,). 

In the glutton (Gulo luscus) the dentition is i. f, c. \, p: f, m. §'; 
total 38 ; the crowns of the teeth being stout, and the upper molar 
much smaller than the sectorial. Lower sectorial large, with small 
heel and no inner tubercle. The dentition, though really but a 
modification of that of the weasels, presents a general resemblance 
to that of hyena. Vertebrae: C. 7, D. 15, L. 5, S. 3, Ca. 15. Body 
and limbs stoutly made; feet large and powerful, subplantigrade, 
with large, compressed, much-curved and sharp-pointed claws. 
Soles of the feet (except the pads of the toes) covered with thick 
bristly hairs. Ears very small, nearly concealed by the fur. Eyes 
small. Tail short, thick and bushy. Fur full, long and rather 
coarse. The one species, the wolverine or glutton, is an inhabitant 
of the forest regions of northern Europe/Asia and America, and much 
resembles a small bear in appearance. If is a very powerful animal 
for its size, climbs trees and lives on squirrels, hares, beavers, 
reindeer, and is said to attack even horses and cows. 

The South American grison and tayra represent the genus Galictis, 
in which the dentition is i. f, c. \, p. \, rri. §; total 34; the molars 
being small but stout, and the upper sectorial with the inner lobe 
near the middle of the inner border. Lower sectorial with heel 
small, and inner tubercle small or absent. Bodv long; limbs short, 
with non-retractile claws and naked soles.' Head broad and 
depressed. Tail of moderate length. ■ The species include the 
grison (G. vittata), G. allamandi, and' the tayra (G. barbara) ; the 
last, which extends northward into Central America, being sub- 
generically separated as Galera. Nearly allied to these is the smaller 
and more weasel-like Lyncodon patagonicus. All the foregoing 
South American carnivores display a marked tendency to being 
darker on the lower than on the upper surface. The same feature 
obtains in the African and Indian ratels, or honey-badgers, con- 
stituting the genus Mellivora, distinguished from all the other 
members of the family by having only a single pair of lower molars, 
the dentition being i. §, c. \, p. f , m. \ ; total 32 ; the upper sectorial 
is large, with its inner cusp at the anterior end of the blade, the molar 
much smaller and transversely extended, having a small outer and 
a larger rounded inner lobe. Heel of lower sectorial very small, 
scarcely one-fourth of the whole length of the tooth, with but one 
cusp. Vertebrae: C. 7, D. 14, L. 4, S. 4, Ca. 15. Body stout, 
depressed; limbs short, strong; head depressed; nose rather 
pointed; ears rudimentary. Tail short. M. indica, from India, 
and M. ratel, from south and west Africa, have nearly the same 
general appearance and size, being rather larger than a common 
badger, and may be only races of the same species. Their coloration 
is peculiar, all the upper surface of the body, head and tail being 
ash-grey, while the lower parts, separated by a distinct longitudinal 
boundary line, are black. They live chiefly on the ground, into 
which they burrow, but can also climb trees. They feed on small 
mammals, birds, reptiles and insects, and are partial to honey. 

In the Indo-Malay ferret-badger, Helictis, the dentition is i. \,c.\, 
p. i, m. \; total 38. Upper sectorial with a large bicusped inner 
lobe, molar smaller, wider transversely than in the ahtero-posterior 
direction. Lower sectorial with heel about one-third the length of 
the tooth. Skull elongated, rather narrow and depressed; facial 
portion especially narrow; infraorbital foramen very large. Head 
rather small and produced in front, with an elongated, obliquely 
truncated, naked snout and small ears. Body elongated, limbs 
short. Tail short or moderate, bushy. Several species are described, 
such as H, orientalis, moschata,, nipalensis, and subaurantiaca, from 
eastern Asia, all small animals, climbing trees with agility and living 
on fruits and berries as well as on small mammals and birds. 

The African striped zorilles, or Muis-honds {Ictonyx), have a 
dental formula of i. f, c. }, p. f, m, \; total 34; the teeth much 
resembling those of the polecats, and the upper molar being smaller 
than the sectorial, and narrow from before backwards. Lower 
sectorial with a small narrow heel and distinct inner tubercle. 
General form of body musteline. Limbs short, fore-feet large and 
broad, with five stout, nearly straight, blunt and non-retractile 
claws, of which the first and fifth are considerably shorter than the 
others. Tail moderate, with longer hairs towards the end, giving it 
a bushy appearance. Hair generally long and loose. The best- 
known species of this- genus, the Cape polecat, Ictonyx capensis 
(or Zorilla zorilla), is about the size of a polecat, but conspicuous 
by its broad, longitudinal bands of dark-brown, alternating with 
white. Its odour is said to be as offensive as that of the American 
skunks. From the Cape of Good Hope it ranges as far north as 
Senegal. Another species, J. lybicus, from Sennaar, has been described. 
The small striped polecat of southern Africa, Poecilogale albinucha, 
represents a genus by itself, and is a shorter-haired animal. 

The skunks of America are very similar to the two genera last 
mentioned in their colouring, and with the latter serve to form a 
connecting link with the more typical Mustelinae, and the badger 
group, or Melinae, in which the feet are elongated, with straight toes 
and non-retractile, slightly curved, subcom pressed, blunt claws, 
especially large on the forefoot. In all cases the upper molar is 



374 



CARNIVORA 



larger than the sectorial, and in the more typical genera is much 
longer than broad. 

In the North American skunks of the genus Mephitis the dentition 
is i. |, c. }, p. §, m. i; total 34. Upper molar larger than the 
sectorial, subquadrate, rather broader than long; lower sectorial 
with heel less than half the length of the whole tooth. Bony 
palate terminating posteriorly opposite the hinder border of the 
last molar. Facial portion of skull short and somewhat truncated 
in front. Vertebrae: C. 7, D. 16, L. 6, S. 2, Ca. 21. Head small. 
Body elongated. Limbs moderate, subplantigrade. Ears short and 
rounded. Tail long, abundantly clothed with long fine hair. Anal 
glands largely developed; their secretion, which can be discharged 
at the will of the animal, has an intolerably offensive odour and has 
rendered skunks proverbial. The South American species, which 
have only two upper premolars, and differ in some other characters, 
are generically separated under the name of Conepatus; while the 
small North American arboreal skunks are distinguished as Spilogale 
(see Skunk). 

Passing on to the more typical members of the badger group, we 
have first the genus Arctonyx, with the dentition i. jj, c. {, p. i, m. I ; 
Badger total 38. The incisor line is curved, the outer teeth being 
Mbe? placed posteriorly to the others : lower incisors inclined 
forwards. First premolars often rudimentary or absent ; 
upper molar much larger than the sectorial, longer in the antero- 
posterior direction than broad; lower sectorial with a very large, 
low, tuberculated heel. Skull elongated and depressed; face long, 
narrow and concave above; bony palate extending as far back- 
wards as the level of the glenoid fossa; and palatal bones dilated. 
Suborbital foramina very large. Vertebrae: C. 7, D. 16, L. 4, S. 4, 
Ca. 20. Snout long, naked, mobile and truncated, with large 
terminal nostrils, much like those of a pig. Eyes small; ears very 
small and rounded. Body compressed, rather than depressed. 
Limbs of moderate length, and partially digitigrade in walking. 
Tail moderate, tapering. A full soft under-fur, with longer bristly 
hairs interspersed. The longest-known species is A. collaris, 
the bhalu-soor (bear-pig) or bali-soor (sand-pig) of the natives of the 
mountains of north-eastern India, Burma and Borneo. It is rather 
larger than the badger, higher on its legs, and very pig-like in general 
aspect, of a light grey colour, with flesh-coloured snout and feet; 
nocturnal and omnivorous. Other species or local varieties have been 
described from north China and Burma. 

In the genus Mydaus the dentition is as the last, but the cusps of 
the teeth are more acutely pointed. Skull elongated, face narrow 
and produced. Suborbital foramen small, and the palate, as in all 
the succeeding genera of this group, produced backwards about 
midway between the last molar and the glenoid fossa. Vertebrae: 
C. 7, D. 14-15, L. 6-5, S. 3, Ca. 12. Head pointed in front; snout 
produced, mobile, obliquely truncated, the nostrils being inferior. 
Limbs rather short and stout. Tail extremely short, but clothed 
with rather long bushy hair. Anal glands largely developed, and 
emitting an odour like that of the skunks. One species, M. meliceps, 
the teledu, a small burrowing animal from the mountains of Java, 
at an elevation of 7000 or more ft. above the sea-level; and a second 
(M. marchei) from the Philippines. 

In the true badger of the genus Melts the dentition is i. \, c. {, 
p. I, w. J; total 38. The first premolar in both jaws is extremely 
minute and often deciduous; while the upper molar is much larger 
than the sectorial, subquadrate, and as broad as long. Lower 
sectorial with a broad, low, tuberculated heel, more than half the 
length of the whole tooth. The postglenoid process of the skull so 
strongly developed, and the glenoid fossa so deep, that the condyle of 
the lower jaw is firmly held in place after the soft parts are removed. 
Vertebrae: C. 7, D. 15, L. 5, S, 3, Ca. 18. Muzzle pointed. Ears 
very short. Body stout, broad. Limbs short, strong, subplanti- 
grade. Tail short. Typified by the common badger (M. taxus or 
M. meles)ol Europe and northern Asia, still found in many parts of 
England, where it lives in woods, is nocturnal, burrowing and very 
omnivorous, feeding on mice, reptiles, insects, fruit, acorns and 
roots. Other nearly allied species, M. leucurus and M. chinensis, 
are found in continental Asia, and M . anakuma in Japan. 

In the nearly-allied genus Taxidea the dental formula is as in 
Meles, except that the rudimentary anterior premolars appear to be 
always wanting in the upper, jaw. The upper sectorial is much larger 
in proportion to the other teeth; and the upper molar about the 
same size as the sectorial, triangular, with the apex turned back- 
wards. Heel of lower sectorial less than half the length of the tooth. 
Skull very wide in the occipital region ; the lambdoidal crest greatly 
developed, and the sagittal but slightly, contrary to what obtains in 
Meles. Vertebrae: C. 7. D. 15. L. 5, S. 3, Ca. (?). Body stoutly 
built and depressed. Tail short. The animals of this genus are 
peculiar to North America, where they represent the badgers of the 
Old World, resembling them much in appearance and habits. T. 
americana is the common American badger of the United States, 
T. berlandieri, the Mexican badger, being a local variety. 

The third and last subfamily is that of the otters, or Lutrinae, 
in which the feet (with the exception of the hind pair in the sea-otter) 
Qtter are short and rounded, with the toes webbed, and the 

<rttff- claws small, curved and blunt. The head is broad and 

much depressed. The upper posterior cheek-teeth are 
large and quadrate. The kidneys are conglomerate. Habits aquatic. 



In the true otter of the genus Lutra the dentition is i. f , c. \, 
p. J, m. i; total 36. Upper sectorial with a trenchant tricusped 
blade, and a very large inner lobe, hollowed on the free surface, 
with a raised sharp edge, extending along two-thirds or more of the 
length of the blade. Upper molar large, with a quadricuspidate 
crown, broader than long. Skull broad and depressed, contracted 
immediately behind the orbits ; with the facial portion very short and 
the brain-case large. Vertebrae : C.7, D. 14.-15, L. 6-5, S. 3, Ca. 20-26. 
Body very long. Ears short and rounded. Limbs short. Feetcom- 
. pletely webbed, with well-developed claws on all the toes. Tail long, 
thick at the base and tapering, rather depressed. Fur short and close. 

Otters are more or less aquatic, living on the margins of rivers, 
lakes, and in some cases the sea; are expert divers and swimmers, 
and feed chiefly on fish. They have an extensive geographical range, 
and so much resemble each other in outward appearance, especially 
in the nearly uniform brown colouring, that in some cases the species 
are by no means well-defined. The Brazilian otter (L. brasiliensis) 
is a very large species from Brazil, Demerara and Surinam, with 
a prominent ridge along each lateral margin of the tail. In two 
small species the feet are only slightly webbed; claws exceedingly 
small or altogether wanting on some of the toes; the first upper 
premolar very small, sometimes wanting; and the molars very 
broad and massive. The species in question are L. inunguis of 
South Africa, and L. leptonyx or cinerea of India, Java and Sumatra, 
and have been separated as a distinct genus, Aonyx. 

The sea-otter, Latax (or Enhydra) lutra, with a dentition of i. §, c. \, 
p. i, m. I, total 32, differs from other Carnivora in having but two 
incisors on each side of the lower jaw, the one corresponding to the 
first (very small in the true otters) being absent. Though the molar 
teeth generally resemble those of Lutra in their proportions, they 
differ in the exceeding roundness and massiveness of their crowns 
and bluntness of their cusps. Feet webbed; fore-feet short, with 
five subequal toes, with short compressed claws; hind-feet very 
large, depressed and fin-like, their phalanges flattened as in seals. 
The fifth toe the longest and stoutest, the rest gradually diminishing 
in size to the first, all with moderate claws. Tail moderate, cylindrical 
(see Otter). / 

II. PlNNIPEDIA 

The second suborder is formed by the seals, walruses and 
eared seals, which differ from the rest of the Carnivora mainly 
in the limbs being modified for aquatic progression; the two 
upper segments being very short and partially enveloped in 
the general integument of the body, while the third, especially 
in the hind extremities, is elongated, expanded and webbed. 
There are always five well-developed digits on each limb. In 
the hind-limb the two marginal digits (first and fifth) are stouter 
and generally larger than the others. The teeth also differ from 
those of the more typical Carnivora. The incisors are always 
fewer than $. The chsek series consists generally of four pre- 
molars and one molar of uniform characters, with never more 
than two roots, and with conical, more or less compressed, 
pointed crowns, which may have accessory cusps, placed before 
or behind the principal one, but are never broad and tuber- 
culated. The milk-teeth are small, simple and shed or absorbed 
at an early age, usually either before or within a few days after 
birth. The brain is relatively large, the cerebral hemispheres 
broad in proportion to their length, and with numerous and 
complex convolutions. There is a very short caecum; the 
kidneys are divided into numerous distinct lobules. There 
are no Cowper's glands. Teats two or four, abdominal. No 
clavicles. Tail always short. Eyes large and exposed, with 
flat cornea. The nostrils close by the elasticity of their walls, 
and are opened at will by muscular action. 

The members of this group are aquatic, spending the greater 
part of their time in the water, swimming and diving with great 
facility, feeding mainly on fish, crustaceans and other marine 
animals, and progressing on land with difficulty, but always 
coming on shore for the purpose of bringing forth their young. 
They are generally marine, but occasionally ascend large rivers, 
and some inhabit inland seas and lakes, as the Caspian and 
Baikal. Though not numerous in species, they are widely 
distributed over the world, but occur most abundantly on the 
coasts of lands situated in cold and temperate zones. 

As mentioned in the article CREODONTA,thetrUeseals(PAocJrfae) , 
together with the walruses, may be directly descended from the 
primitive Creodont Carnivora. The eared seals, on the other 
hand, show signs of affinity with the bears; but as they are 
of earlier geological age than the latter, they cannot be derived 
from that group. 



CARNIVORA 



375 



The true seals (family Phocidae) are the most completely adapted 
for aquatic life of all the Pinnipedia. When on land the hind-limbs 
are extended backwards and take no part in progression, 
Seals. which is effected by a series of jumping movements 

produced by the muscles of the trunk, in some species aided by the 
fore-limbs. The soles of the feet are hairy. There is no pinna to 
the ear, and no scrotum, the testes being abdominal. The upper 
incisors have simple, pointed crowns, and vary in number in the 
different groups. All have well developed canines and g teeth of the 
cheek series. In those species of which the milk-dentition is known, 
there are three milk molars, which precede the second, third, and 
fourth permanent molars; the dentition is therefore p. \, m. \, 
the first premolar having as usual no milk predecessor. The skull 
has no post-orbital process and no alisphenoid canal. The fur is 
stiff and adpressed, without woolly under-fur. 

In the typical group, or subfamily Phocinae, the incisors are 3. 
All the feet have five well-developed claws with the toes on the hind- 
feet subequal, the first and fifth not greatly exceeding the others 
in length, the interdigital membrane not extending beyond them. 
In the genus Halichoerus the dentition is i. f , c. {, p. % , m. \ ; total 34. 
Molars with large, simple, conical, recurved, slightly compressed 
crowns, having sharp anterior and posterior edges, but without 
accessory cusps, except sometimes the two hinder ones of the lower 
jaw. With the exception of the last one or two in the upper jaw 
and the last in the lower jaw, all are single-rooted. Vertebrae: 

C. 7, D. 15, L. 5, S. 4, Ca. 14. Includes only one species H. grypus, 
the grey seal of the coasts or Scandinavia and the British Isles. 

In Phoca the dental formula is as in the last, but the teeth are 
smaller and more pointed. Molars with two roots (except the first 
in each jaw). Crowns with accessory cusps. Vertebrae: C. 7, D. 14- 
15, L. 5, S. 4, Ca. 11-14. Head round and short. Fore-feet short 
with five strong, subcompressed, slightly curved, subequal, rather 
sharp claws. On the hind-feet the claws much narrower and less 
curved. The species of this genus are widely distributed throughout 
the northern hemisphere, and include P. barbata, the bearded seal ; 
P. groenlandica, the Greenland seal; P. vitulina, the common seal; 
P. hispida, the ringed seal of the north Atlantic; P. caspica, from 
the Caspian and Aral Seas; and P. sibirica, from Lake Baikal. (See 
Seal). 

The members of the second subfamily, Monachinae,' have incisors 
I ; and the molars two-rooted, except the first. On the hind-feet 
the first and fifth toes greatly exceeding the others in length, with 
nails rudimentary or absent. In the genus Monachus, the dentition 
is i. I, c. \, p. \, m. \ ; total 32. Crowns of molars strong, conical, 
compressed, hollowed on the inner side, with a strongly-marked 
lobed cingulum, especially on the inner side, and slightly developed 
accessory cusps before and behind. The first and last upper and 
the first lower molar smaller than the others. Vertebrae: C. 7, 

D. 15, L. 5, S. 2, Ca. 11. All the nails of both fore and hind feet 
very small and rudimentary. Represented by M. albiventer, the 
monk-seal of the Mediterranean and adjacent parts of the Atlantic, 
and the West Indian M. tropicalis. , 

The other genera of this section have the same dental formula, 
but are distinguished by the characters, of the cheek-teeth and the 
feet. They are all inhabitants of the shores of the southern 
hemisphere. 

In Ogmorhinus all the teeth of the cheek-series have three distinct 
pointed cusps, deeply separated from each other, of which the 
middle or principal cusp is largest and slightly recurved ; the other 
two are nearly equal in size, and have their tips directed towards the 
middle one. Skull much elongated. One species, 0-< leptonyce, the 
sea-leopard, widely distributed in the Antarctic and southern 
temperate seas. In Lobodon the molars have compressed elongated 
crowns, with a principal recurved cusp, rounded and somewhat 
bulbous at the apex, and one anterior, and one, two or three posterior 
distinct accessory cusps. One species, L. carcinophagus, the crab- 
eating seal. In the third genus, Leptonychoies, represented by 
'L. weddelli, the molars are small, with ■ simple, subcompressed, 
conical crowns, and a broad cingulum, but no distinct accessory 
cusps. Finally in the white seal (Onimatophoca rossi) all the teeth 
are very small, those of the cheek-series with pointed, recurved 
crowns, and small posterior and still less developed anterior accessory 
cusps. Orbits very large. Nails rudimentary on front and absent 
on hind-feet. The skull bears a considerable resemblance to that 
of the next subfamily. > 

The presence of two pairs of upper and one pair of lower incisors 
is characteristic of the members of the subfamily Cystophorinae, 
in which the teeth of the cheek-series are generally one-rooted. The 
nose of the males has an appendage capable of being inflated. First 
and fifth toes of hind-feet greatly exceeding the others in length, 
with prolonged cutaneous lobes, and rudimentary or no nails. In 
the typical genus Cystophora the dentition is i. '{, c. \,~p. \, m. \; 
total 30 ; the last molar having generally two distinct roots. Beneath 
(he skin over the face of the male, and connected with the nostrils, 
is a sac capable of inflation, when it forms a kind. of hood covering 
the upper part of the head. Nails present, thpugh small on the 
hind-feet. Represented by C. cristata, the hooded or bladder-nosed 
seal of the Polar Seas. In Macrorhinus the dentition is numerically 
the same as in the last, but the molars are of simpler character and 
all one-rooted. All the teeth, except the canines, very small rela- 



tively to the size of the animal. Hind-feet without nails. Vertebrae: 
C. 7, D. 15, L. 5, S. 4, Ca. 11. Nose of adult male produced into a 
short tubular proboscis, ordinarily flaccid, but capable of dilatation 
and elongation under excitement. One species, M. leoninus, the 
elephant-seal, or " sea elephant " of the whalers, the largest of the 
whole family, attaining the length of nearly 20 ft. Formerly 
abundant in the Antarctic Seas, and also found on the coast of 
California. 

The next family is that of the walruses, or Odobaenidae, the single 
generic representative of which is in some respects intermediate 
between the Phocidae and Otariidae, but has a completely 
aberrant dentition. Walruses have no external ears, as Walrus. 
in the Phocidae; but when on land the hind-feet are turned forwards 
and used in progression, though less completely than in the Otariidae. 
The upper canines are developed into immense tusks, which descend 
a long distance below the lower jaw. All the other teeth, including 
the lower canines, are much alike, small, simple and one-rooted, 
the molars with flat crowns. The skull is without post-orbital 
process, but has an alisphenoid canal. In the young the dentition is 
*'• li c. I, p. ^nd m. I, but many of these teeth are, however, lost early 
or remain through life in a rudimentary state, concealed by the gums. 
The teeth which are usually developed functionally are *. J, c. {, 
p. |, m. i; total 18. Vertebrae: C. 7, D. 14, L. 6, S. 4, Ca. 9. 
Head round. Eyes rather small. Muzzle short and broad, with a 
group of long, very stiff, bristly whiskers on each side. The remainder 
of the hair-covering very short and closely pressed. Tail rudi- 
mentary. Fore-feet with subequal toes, carrying five minute 
flattened nails. Hind-feet with subequal toes, the fifth slightly the 
largest, with cutaneous lobes projecting beyond the ends as in 
Otaria; first and fifth with minute flattened nails; second, third 
and fourth with large, elongated, subcompressed pointed nails. 
The two species are Odobaenus rosmarus, of the Atlantic, and the 
closely allied 0. obesus, of the Pacific. (See Walrus.) 

The third and last family of the Pinnipedia, and thus of existing 
Carnivora, is the Otariidae, which includes the eared seals, or sea- 
lions and sea-bears. In all these animals, when on land, 
the hind-feet are turned forwards under the body, and *«"*«'*■ 
aid in supporting and moving the trunk as in ordinary quadrupeds. 
There are small external ears. Testes suspended in a distinct 
external scrotum. Skull with post-orbital processes and alisphenoid 
canal. Soles of feet naked. By many naturalists these seals are 
arranged in a number of generic groups, but as the differences 
between them are not very great, they may all be included in the 

typical genus Otaria. The dental formula is i. \,c. }, p. |, m. * or2 ; 

total 34 or 36. The first and second upper incisors are small, with 
the summits of their crowns divided by deep transverse grooves 
into an anterior and a posterior cusp of nearly equal height; the 
third large and canine-like. Canines large, conical, pointed, recurved. 
Molars and premolars usually f, of which the second, third and 
fourth are preceded by milk-teeth shed a few days after birth; 
sometimes (as in fig. 7) a sixth upper molar (occasionally developed 




Fig. 7. — Skull and dentition of Australian Sea-Bear 
(Otaria forsteri) . 

on one side and not the other) ; all with similar characters, generally 
single-rooted; crown moderate, compressed, pointed, with a single 
principal cusp, and sometimes a cingulum, and more or less developed 
anterior and posterior accessory cusps. Vertebrae: C. 7, D. 15, 
L. 5, S. 4, Ca. 9-10. Head rounded. Eyes large; ears small, 
narrow and pointed. Neck long. Skin of the feet extended far 
beyond the nails and ends of the digits, with a deeply-lobed margin. 
The nails small and often quite rudimentary, especially those of 
the first and fifth toes of both feet; the best-developed and most 
constant being the three middle claws of the hind-foot, which are 
elongated, compressed and curved. 

Sea-bears and sea-lions are widely distributed, especially in the 
temperate regions of both hemispheres, though absent from the 
coasts of the North Atlantic. They spend more of their time on 
shore, and range inland to greater distances than the true seals, 
especially at the breeding-time, though they are obliged to return 
to the water to seek their food. They are gregarious and poly- 
gamous, and the males usually much larger than the females. Some 
possess, in addition to the stiff, close, hairy covering common to the 
group, a fine, dense, woolly under-fur. The skins of these, when 



37 6 



CARNOT, L. H— CARNOT, L. K. M. 



dressed and deprived of the longer harsh outer hairs, constitute the 
" sealskin " of commerce. The species include O. stelleri, the 
northern sea-lion, the largest of the genus, from the North Pacific; 
about 10 ft. in length; O. jubata, the southern sea-lion, from the 
Falkland Islands and Patagonia; O. calif orniana, from California; 
O. ursina, the sea-bear or fur-seal of the North Pacific, the skins of 
which are imported in immense numbers from the Pribiloff Islands; 
O. antarctica or pusitta, from the Cape of Good Hope ; ! and O- 
forsteri, from Australia and various islands in the southern hemisphere. 
(See Seal-Fisheries.) 

Little is known as to the past history of the sea-lions and sea- 
bears, but a skull has been obtained from the Miocene strata of 
Oregon, which Mr F. W. True states to be considerably larger than 
any existing sea-lion skull; its basal length when entire being 
probably about 20 in. The name Pontoleon magnus has been pro- 
posed for this fossil sea-lion, as the character of the skull and teeth 
do not agree precisely with those of any living member of the group. 
If, however, all the modern eared seals are included in the genus 
Otaria, there is apparently no reason to exclude the fossil species. 

Extinct Carnivora 

Modern Carnivora are undoubtedly the descendants of the 
Creodonta (q.v.), an extinct early Tertiary suborder. It has been 
observed that as the Miocene is approached, some of these Carnivora 
Creodonta, or Primitiva, begin to assume more and more of the 
characteristics of the Carnivora Vera, till at last it is difficult to 
determine where the one group ends and the other commences. 
The creodont genera Stypolophus and Proviverra show some of these 
modern characters; but it is not till we reach the European Oligo- 
cene genus Amphictis, with the dental formula i. f, c. |, p. J, m. f, 
that we meet a type in which the fourth upper premolar and the first 
lower molar assume the truly sectorial character of the Carnivora 
Vera, while the teeth behind them are proportionally reduced in 
size. From the Amphictidae are probably descended the Viverridae, 
the connecting genus being the African Nandinia, which, as already 
mentioned, retains the imperfectly ossified bulla of the ancestral 
forms. In another direction, Amphictis, through the Old World 
Lower Pliocene genus Ictitherium, has given rise to the Hyaenidde. 
The Felidae have apparently an ancestral type in the creodont 
Palaeonictis, which has been regarded as the direct ancestor of 
the sabre-toothed cats, or Machaerodontinae (see Machaerodus) ; 
but it is possible that Palaeonictis may be off the direct line, and 
that the Felidae are sprung from Amphictis. Be this as it may, 
from another group of creodonts, represented by Vulpavus (Miacis), 
Viverravus (Didymictis), and Uintacyan, is probably derived the 
Oligocene Cynodictis, with a dental formula like that of Canis or 
Cyon, a perforation to the humerus, and an apparently undivided 
auditory bulla; and from Cynodictis the transition is easy to the 
Canidae. It should be mentioned, however, that there is a group 
of North American Oligocene dog-like animals, such as Dapheenus, 
Protemnocyon, and Temnocyon, which agree with Cyon in the short- 
ness of the jaws, and with that genus and Speothos in the cutting-heel 
of the lower sectorial. Possibly these genera may be nearly related 
to Cyon. Other dog-like North American types are (Migohinis, 
Enhydrocyon and Hyaenocyon. 

By means of the Amphicyonidae, as represented by the Middle 
Tertiary genera Proamphicyon, Pseudampkicym, and A'mphicyon, 
in which there were three upper molars, we have a transition from 
the Cynodictis-type to the bear-group ; one of the later intermediate 
forms being the Lower Pliocene Old World Hyaenarctus, in which 
the two upper molars are squared and foreshadow those of Ursus 
itself. In some unknown manner Hyaenarctus appears to be related 
to Aeluropus. An allied type is found in Arctotherium of the South 
American Pleistocene, 

By the loss of the third lower molar and certain modifications, of 
the other teeth and skull, the Miocene genus Plesictis may be derived 

from Cynodictis, its dental formula being i. |, c. \, p. \, m* — 

Now Plesictis is nothing more than a generalized representative of 
the Mmtelidm. We have thus traced three out of tb* four modern 
aretoid families to the Cynodictis-type. The Procytmiiae, or fourth 
family (apart from the Asiatic A elurus and Aelumpms) arecdnnected 
with the last-named genus through the North American Oligocene 
Phlaeocyon, which is stated to be in alwast every respect inter- 
mediate bet^-e^a Procyon and Cynodietiisi while the living Bas- 
sariscus fe stated to show closer sjjgas; of affinity with Cynodictis 
than, w.hyli Phlaeocyon. 

To deal with fossil representatives of living genera, or extinct 
genera nearly related to groups still existing, would here be im- 
practicable. It may bej stated, however, that aberrant groups like 
ihe otters are linked. \&p with more normal types by means of extinct 
forms (in this particular instance by the Miocene Potamotherium) , 
so that the gajrj^ in the phylogeny of the Caratvora are comparatively 
few. 

Vffl%$ATURE. — The above article fe based on that by Sir W. H. 
^bowep- in the 94b. edition of this Encyclopaedia. The principal 
wofk* on Carnivora are the following: W. H. Flower, " On the 
Value of the Base of the Cranium in the Classification of the- Carhi- 
vora," Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1869; T. H. Huxley, "Cranial and 



Dental Characters of the CanidaSe," Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1880; 
St G. Mivart, " On the Classification and Distribution of the Aelu- 
roidea ... and Arctoidea," Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1882 and 
1885; E. R. Lankester, "On the Affinities of Aeluropus," Trans. 
Linn. Soc. London, vol. "viii. part iv.) 1901; Miss A. Carlssort, 
" t)ber die systematische SteHung vort Nandinia," Zool. Jahrb. Syst., 
vol, , xiii. , 1900, and " 1st Otbcyon die Ausgangsform des Hunde- 
geschlechts oder nicht?" op. cit: vol. xxii., 1905; }. L. Wortman 
and W. D. Matthew, "The Ancestry of Certain Members of the 
Canidae, Viverridae, and Procyonidae," Bull. Amer. Mus., vol. xii., 
1899. (R. L.*> 

CARNOT, LAZARE HIPPOLYTE (1801-1888), French states- 
man, the second son of L. N. M. Carnot (q.v.), was born at Saint- 
Omer on the 6th of October 1801. Hippolyte Carnot lived at 
first in exile with his father, returning to France only in 1823. 
Unable then to enter active political life, he turned to literature 
and philosophy, publishing in 1828 a collection of Chants helie- 
niques translated from the German of W. Miiller, and in 1830 an 
Expose" de la' doctrine. Saint-Simonienne, and collaborating in 
the Sain t-Simoniah journal Le Productew. He also paid several 
visits to England and travelled in other countries of Europe. 
In March 1839, after the dissolution of the chamber by Louis 
Philippe, he was elected deputy for Paris (re-elected in 1842 
and in 1846), and sat/ in the group, of the Radical Left, being 
one of the leaders of the party hostile to Louis Philippe. On the 
24th of February 1848 he pronounced in favour of the republic. 
Lamartine chbse him as minister of education in the provisional 
government, Carnot set to work to organize the primary school 
systems, proposing a law for obligatory and free primary in- 
struction, and another for the secondary education of girls. 
But he declared himself against purely secular schools, holding 
that " the minister . and the schoolmaster are the two columns 
on which rests the edifice of the republic." By this attitude he 
alienated both* the Right and the Republicans of the Extreme 
Left, and was forced to resign on the 5th of July 1848. He was 
one of those who protested against the coup d'etat of the 2nd of 
December 185 1, but was not proscribed by Louis Napoleon. 
He refused to sit in the Corps Ugislatif until 1864, in order not 
to have to take the oath to the emperor. From 1864 to 1869 
he was in the republican opposition, taking a very active part. 
He was defeated at the election 0I1869. Oil the 8th of February 
187 1 he was named deputy for the Seine et Oise, and participated 
in the drawing 1 up'of th^CbitstitutionalLaws of 1875. On the 
16th of December ^87 5; he was named by the National Assembly 
senator for life. He died on the 16th of March 1888, three 
months after the election of his elder son, M. F. S. Carnot (q.v.), 
to the presidency of the republic. He had published Le Minist'ere 
de V instruction puhtique el des cultes du 24'jemier au ^juillel 1848, 
(1849), Mimoires sur Laz&eCarnot (2 vols., 1 861- 1864), M emoires 
&e> Bartnt (with David Angers, 4 vols ._, 1842-1843). His second 
son,' Marie Adolphe Carnot (b. 1839), became a distinguished 
mining-engineer arid director of the Ecole des Mines (1899), 
his studies in analytical chemistry placing him in the front rank 
of French scientists. He was made a member of the Academy 
of Sciences in 1895. 

See Vermorel, Les Hommes de 1848 (3rd ed., 1869); E. Spuller, 
Histoire parlementaire de la Seconde Republique (1891); P. de. la 
Gorce, Histoire du Second Empire (1894 et seq.). 

CAEtfOf, LA2ARE NICOLAS MARGUERITE (1753-1823), 
French general, was born at Nolay in Burgundy in' -1.7,53. He 
received his training as an engineer at Mezieres, becoming an 
officer of the. Corps de G6nie in 1773 and a captain ten years 
later. He had' then just published his first work, an Essai sur les 
mctpnines en general. In 1784 he wrote an essay. on balloons, and 
his JEloge of Vauban, read by him publicly, won him the com- 
mendation of Prince Henry of Prussia. But as the result of a 
controversy with. Montalembert, Carnot abandoned the official, 
or Vauban,',theories ;of the art of fortification, and went over to 
the "perpendicular " school of Montalembert. He was conse- 
qutently imprisoned, on the pretext of having fought a duel, 
and only released when selected to accompany Prince Henry 
of Prussia in a: visit to Vauban's fortifications. In 1791 he 
married. The Revolution drew him into political life, and he 
wbs- elected & deputy for the ! Pas de Calais. In the Assembly he 



CARNOT, M. F. S. 



377 



took a prominent part in debates connected with the army. 
Carnot was a stern and sincere republican, and voted for the 
execution of the king. In the campaigns- of 1792 and 1793 he 
was continually employed as a commissioner in military matters, 
his greatest service being in April 1793 on the north-eastern 
frontier, where the disastrous battle of Neerwinden: and the 
subsequent defection of Dumouriez had thrown everything into 
confusion. After doing what was possible to infuse energy into 
the queries of the French forces, he returned, to Paris and
was made a member of the Committee of Public Safety. He was 
charged with duties corresponding to those of the modern chief 
of the general staff and adjutant-general. As a member of the 
committee he signed its decrees and was thus at least technically 
responsible for the acts of the Reign of Terror. His energies 
were, however, directed to the organization, not yet of victory,; 
but of defence. His labours were incessant; practically every 
military document in the archives of the committee was Carnot's 
own work, and he was repeatedly in the field with the armies. 
His part in Jourdan's great victory at Wattignies was so im- 
portant that the credit of the day has often been assigned to 
Carnot. The winter of 1 793-1 794 was spent in new preparations, 
in instituting a severe discipline in the new and ill-trained troops 
of the republic, and in improvising means and jr\aterial of wan 
He continued to visit the armies at the front, and to inspire them 
with energy. He acquiesced in the fall of Robespierre in 1794, 
but later defended Barere and others among his colleagues, 
declaring that he himself had constantly signed papers without 
reading them, as it was physically impossible to do, so in the 
press of business. When Carnot's arrest was demanded in May 
1795, a deputy cried " Will you dare to lay hands on the man 
who has organized victory?"' Carnot had just accepted pro- 
motion to the rank of major in the engineers. Throughout 1793, 
when he had been the soul of the national defence, and 1794, in 
which year he had " organized victory " in fourteen armies, he 
was a simple captain. 

Carnot was elected one of the five Directors in November 1795, 
and continued to direct the war department during the campaign 
of 1796! Late in 1796 he was made a member (rst class) of the 
Institute, which he had helped to establish. He was for two 
periods president of the Directory, but on the coup d'Hat of the 
18th Fructidor (1797) was fbrced to take refuge abroad. He 
returned to France after the 18th Brumaire (1799) and was 
re-elected to the Institute in 1800. Early in 1800 he became 
minister of war, and he accompanied Moreau in the early part 
of the Rhine campaign. His chief work was, however, in reducing 
the expenses of the armies. Contrary to the usual, custom he 
refused to receive presents from contractors, and he effected 
much-needed reforms in every part of the military administra- 
tion. He tendered his resignation later in the year, but it was 
long before the First Consul would accept it. From 1801 he 
lived in retirement with his family, employing himself chiefly 
iii scientific pursuits. As a senator he consistently opposed the 
increasing monarchism of Napoleon, who, however, gave him 
in 1809 a pension and commissioned him to write a work on 
fortification for the school of Metz. In these years he had 
published De la correlation des figures de geomUrie (1801), Geo- 
n^trie de position (1803), and Principesfondamentauxdel'equilibre 
et du mouvement (1803), all of which were translated into German. 
His great work on fortification appeared at Paris in 1810 {De la 
defense de places fortes) , and was translated for the use of almost 
every army in Europe. He took Montalembert as his ground- 
work. Without sharing Montalembert's antipathy to the bas- 
tioned trace, and his predilection for high masonry caponiers, 
he followed out the principle of retarding the development of 
the attack, and provided for the most active defence. To 
facilitate sorties in great force he did away with a counterscarp 
wall, providing instead a long gentle slope from the bottom Of 
the ditch to the crest of the glacis. This, he imagined, would 
compel an assailant to maintain large forces in the advanced 
trenches, which he proposed to attack by vertical fire from 
mortars. Along the front of his fortress was ibujilt a heavy 
detached wall, loop-holed for fire, and sufficiently! high' to be ft 



most formidable obstacle. This " Carnot wall," and, in general, 
Carnot's principle of active defence, played a great part in the 
rise of modern fortification. 

He did not seek employment in the field in the aggressive wars 
of Napoleon, remaining a sincere republican, but in 1814, when 
France itself was once more in danger, Carnot at once offered 
his services. He was made a general of division, and Napoleon 
sent him to the important fortress of Antwerp as governor. 
His defenee of that place was one of the most brilliant episodes 
of the campaign of 1814. On his return to Paris he addressed 
a political memoir to the restored king of France, which aroused 
much attention both in France and abroad. He joined Napoleon 
during the Hundred Days and was made minister of the interior, 
the office carrying with it the dignity of count, and on the 2nd of 
June he was made a peer of France. On the second Restoration 
he' was proscribed. He lived thenceforward in Magdeburg, 
occupying himself still with science. But his health rapidly 
declined, and he died at Magdeburg on the 2nd of August 1823. 
His remains were solemnly removed to the Pantheon in 1889. 
Long before this, in 1836, Antwerp had erected a statue to its 
defender of 1814. In 1837 Arago pronounced his eloge before 
the Academie des Sciences. The sincerity of his patriotism and 
his political convictions was proved in 1801-1804 and in 1814. 
The memory of his military career is preserved in the title, given 
to him in the Assembly, of " The organizer of victory." His 
sons, Sadi and L. Hippolyte, are separately noticed. 

Authorities. — Baron de B . . ., Vie privee, politique, et morale 
de L. N. M. Carnot (Paris, 1816) ; Serieys, Carnot, sa vie politique et 
privee (Paris, 1816) ; Mandar, Notice biographique sur le general 
Carnot, &c. (Paris, 1818); W. Korte, Das Leben L. N. M. Carnots 
(Leipzig, 1820) ; P. F. Tissot, Memoires historiques et militaires sur 
Carnot (Paris, 1824); Arago, Biographie de Carnot (Paris, 1850); 
Hippolyte Carnot, Memoires sur Carnot (Paris, 1863); C. Remond, 
Notice biographique sur le grand Carnot (Dijon 1880) ; A. Picaud, 
Carnot, I'organisateur de la victoire (Paris, 1885 and 1887); A. 
Burdeau, Une Famille de patriotes (Paris, 1888) ; L. Hennet, Lazare 
Carnot (Paris, 1888); G. Hubbard, Une Famille republicaine (Paris, 
1888); M. Dreyfous, Les Trois Carnot (Paris, 1888); M. Bonnal, 
Carnot, d'apres les archives, &c. (Paris, 1888) ; and memoir by 
E. Charavaray in La Grande Encyclopedia. 

CARNOT, MARIE FRANCOIS SADI (1837-1894), fourth 
president of the third French Republic, son of L. Hippolyte 
Carnot, was born at Limoges on the nth of August 1837. He 
; was educated as a civil engineer, and after having highly dis- 
tinguished himself at the Ecole Polytechnique and the Ecole 
des Ponts et Chaussees, obtained an appointment in the public 
service. His hereditary republicanism recommended him to the 
government of national defence, by which he was entrusted in 
1870 with the task of organizing resistance in the departments 
of the Eure, Calvados and Seine Inferieure, and made prefect 
of the last named in January 1871. In the following month 
he was elected to the National Assembly by the department 
Cote d'Or. In August 1878 he was appointed secretary to the 
minister of public works. In September 1 880 he became minister, 
and again in April 1885, passing almost immediately to the 
ministry of finance, which he held under both the Ferry and 
the Freycinet administrations until December 1886. When the 
Wilson scandals occasioned the downfall of Grevy in December 
1887, Carnot's high character for integrity marked him out as 
a candidate for the presidency, and he obtained the support of 
Clemenceau and of all those who objected to the candidatures 
of men who have been more active in the political arena, so that 
he was elected by 616 votes out of 827. He assumed office at a 
critical period, when the republic was all but openly attacked 
by General Boulanger. President Carnot's ostensible part during 
this agitation was mainly confined to augmenting his popularity 
by well-timed appearances on public occasions, which gained 
credit for the presidency and the republic. When early in 1889, 
Boulanger was finally driven into exile, it fell to President 
Carnot's lot to appear at the head of the state on two occasions 
of especial interest, the celebration of the centenary of 1789 
and the opening of the Paris Exhibition of that year. The 
perfect success of both was regarded, not unreasonably, as a 
popular ratification of the republic, and though continually 



378 



CARNOT, S. N. L.— CARO, A. 



harassed by the formation and dissolution of ephemeral ministries, 
by socialist outbreaks, and the beginnings of anti-Semitism, 
Carnot had but one serious crisis to surmount, the Panama 
scandals of 1892, which, if they greatly damaged the prestige 
of the state, increased the respect felt for its head, against whose 
integrity none could breathe a word. Carnot seemed to be 
arriving at the zenith of popularity, when on the 24th of June 
1894, after delivering at a public banquet at Lyons a speech 
in which he appeared to imply that he nevertheless would not 
seek re-election, he was stabbed by an Italian anarchist named 
Caserio and expired almost immediately. The horror and grief 
excited by this tragedy were boundless, and the president was 
honoured with a splendid funeral in the Pantheon, Paris. 

His son, Francois Carnot, was first elected deputy for the 
Cote d'Or in 1902. 

See E. Zevort, Histoire de la Troisieme Republique, tome iv., " La 
Presidence de Carnot " (Paris, 1901). 

CARNOT, SADI NICOLAS LEONHARD (1796-183 2), French 
physicist, elder son of L. N. M. Carnot, was born at Paris on the 
1st of June 1796. He was admitted to the Ecole Polytechnique 
in 1812, and late in 1814 he left with a commission in the 
Engineers and with prospects of rapid advancement in his 
profession. But Waterloo and the Restoration led to a second 
and final proscription of his father ; and though not himself 
cashiered, Sadi was purposely told off for the merest drudgeries 
of his service. Disgusted with an employment which afforded 
him neither leisure for original work nor opportunities for acquir- 
ing scientific instruction, he presented himself in 1819 at the 
examination for admission to the staff corps (etat-major) and 
obtained a lieutenancy. He then devoted himself with astonish- 
ing ardour to mathematics, chemistry, natural history, tech- 
nology and even political economy. He was an enthusiast in 
music and other fine arts; and he habitually practised as an 
amusement, while deeply studying in theory, all sorts of athletic 
sports, including swimming and fencing. He became captain 
in the Engineers in 1827, but left the service altogether in the 
following year. His naturally feeble constitution, further 
weakened by excessive study, broke down finally in 1832. An 
attack of scarlatina led to brain fever, and he had scarcely 
recovered when he fell a victim to cholera, of which he died in 
Paris on the 24th of August 1832. He was one of the most 
original and profound thinkers who have ever devoted them- 
selves to science. The only work he published was his Reflexions 
sur la puissance motrice du feu et sur les machines propres a 
developper celte puissance (Paris, 1824). This contains but a 
fragment of his scientific discoveries, but it is sufficient to put. 
him in the very foremost rank, though its full value Was not 
recognized until pointed out by Lord Kelvin in 1848 and 1849. 
Fortunately his manuscripts had been preserved, and extracts 
were appended to a reprint of his Puissance motrice by his brother, 
L. H. Carnot, in 1878. These show that he had not only realized 
for himself the true nature of heat, but had noted down for trial 
many of the best modern methods of finding its mechanical 
equivalent, such as those of J. P. Joule with the perforated 
piston and with the friction of water and mercury. Lord Kelvin's 
experiment with a current of gas forced through a porous plug 
is also given. " Carnot's principle " is fundamental in the theory 
of thermodynamics (q.v.). 

CARNOUSTIE, a police burgh and watering-place of Forfar- 
shire, Scotland. Pop. (1901) 5204. It lies on the North Sea, 
io| m. E.N.E. of Dundee by the North British railway. Bathing 
and golfing are good. Barry Links, a triangular sandy track 
occupying the south-eastern corner of the shire, are used as a 
camping and manoeuvring ground for the artillery and infantry 
forces of the district, and occasionally of Scotland. Its most 
extreme point is called Buddon Ness, off which are the dangerous 
shoals locally known as the Roaring Lion, in consequence of 
the deep boom of the waves. On the Ness two lighthouses have 
been built at different levels, the lights of which are visible at 
13 and 16 m. 

CARNUNTUM (Kapvovs in Ptolemy), an important Roman 
fortress, originally belonging to Noricum, but after the 1st 



century a.d. to Pannonia. It was a Celtic town, the name, 
which is nearly always found with K on monuments, being 
derived from Kar, Karn (" rock," " cairn "). Its extensive 
ruins may still be seen near Hainburg, between Deutsch-Alten- 
burg and Petronell, in lower Austria. Its name first occurs in 
history during the reign of Augustus (a.d. 6), when Tiberius 
made it his base of queries in the campaigns against Maro-
boduus (Marbod). A few years later it became the centre of the 
Roman f brtifica tions along the Danube from Vindobona (Vienna) 
to Brigetio (O-Szony), and (under Trajan or Hadrian) the 
permanent quarters of the XIV legion. It was also a very old 
mart for the amber brought to Italy from the north. It was 
created a municipium by Hadrian (Aelium Carnuntum). 
Marcus Aurelius resided there for three years (172-175) during 
the war against the Marcomanni, and wrote part of his Medita- 
tions. Septimius Severus, at the time governor of Pannonia, 
was proclaimed emperor there by the soldiers (193)1 I n the 
4th century it was destroyed by the Germans, and, although 
partly restored by Valentinian I., it never regained its former 
importance, and Vindobona became the chief military centre. 
It was finally destroyed by the Hungarians in the middle ages. 

A special society (Carnuntumverein) exists for the exploration of 
the numerous ruins, the results of which will be found in J. W. 
Kubitschek and S. Frankfurter, Fiihrer durch Carnuntum (3rd ed., 
1894) ; see also E.' von Sacken, " Die romische Stadt Carnuntum," 
in Sitzungsberichte der k. : Akad. der Wissenschaften, ix. (Vienna, 
1852); article by Kubitschek in Pauly-Wissowa's Realencyclopddie, 
iii. part ii. (1899); Corpus Inscriptiontim Latinarum, iii., part i. 
P- 550. 

CARNUTES (Carnuti, Carnutae, Kapvovrlvot. in Plutarch), 
a Celtic people of central Gaul, between the Sequana (Seine)' 
and the Liger (Loire). Their territory corresponded to the 
dioceses of Chartres, Orleans and Blois, that is, the greater part 
of the modern departments of Eure-et-Loir, Loiret, Loir-et-Cher. 
It was regarded as the political and religious centre of the Gallic 
nation. The chief towns were Cenabum (not Genabum; Orleans) 
and Autricum (Chartres). According to Livy (v. 34) the Carnutes 
were one of the tribes which accompanied Bellovesus in his 
invasion of Italy during the reign of Tarquinius Priscus. In 
the time of Caesar they were dependents of the Remi, who on one 
occasion interceded for them. In 52 they joined in the rebellion 
of Vercingetorix. As a punishment for the treacherous murder 
of some Roman merchants and one of Caesar's commissariat 
officers at Cenabum, the town was burnt and the inhabitants 
put to the sword or sold as slaves. During the war they sent 
12,000 men to relieve Alesia, but shared in the defeat of the 
Gallic army. Having attacked the Bituriges Cubi, who appealed 
to Caesar for assistance, they were forced to submit. Under 
Augustus, the Carnutes, as one of the peoples of Lugdunensis, 
were raised to the rank of civitas soda or foederata, retaining 
their own institutions, and only bound to render military service 
to the emperor. Up to the 3rd century Autricum (later Carnutes, 
whence Chartres) was the capital, but in 275 Aurelian changed 
Cenabum from a vicus into a civitas and named it Aurelianum 
or Aurelianensis urbs (whence Orleans). 

See Caesar, Bell. Gall. v. 25, 29, vii. 8, n, 75, viii. 5, 31 ; Strabo 
iv. pp. 191-193; R. Boutrays, Urbis gentisque Carnutum historia 
(1624); A. Desjardins, Geographic historique de la Gaule, ii. (1876— 
1893); article and bibliography in La Grande Encyclopedie ; T. R. 
Holmes, Caesar's Conquest of Gaul (1899), p. 402, on Cenabum. 

CARO, ANNIBALE (1507-1566), Italian poet, was born at 
Civita Nuova, in Ancona, in 1507/ He became tutor in the 
family of Lodovico Gaddi, a rich Florentine, and then secretary 
to his brother Giovanni, by whom he was presented to a valuable 
ecclesiastical preferment at Rome. At Gaddi's death, he entered 
the service of the Farnese family, and became confidential 
secretary in succession to Pietro Lodovico, duke of Parma, and 
to his sons, duke Ottavio and cardinals Ranuccio and Alexander. 
Caro's most important work was his translation of the Aeneid 
(Venice, 158a; Paris, 1760). He is also the author of Rime, 
Canzoni, and sonnets, a comedy named Gli Straccioni, and two 
clever jeux d' esprit, one in praise of figs, La Ficheide, and another 
in eulogy of the big nose of Leoni Ancona, president of the 
Academia della- 'Vertfi. Caro's poetry is distinguished by very 



CARO, E, M.— CAROL 



379 



considerable ability, and particularly by the freedom and grace 
of its versification; indeed he may be said to have brought the 
verso sciolto to the highest development it has reached in Italy. 
His prose works consist of translations from Aristotle, Cyprian 
and Gregory Nazianzen; and of letters, written in his own name 
and in those of the cardinals Farnese, which are remarkable 
both for the baseness they display and for their euphemistic 
polish and elegance. His fame has been greatly damaged by the 
virulence with which he attacked Lodovico Castelvetro in one 
of his canzoni, and by his meanness in denouncing him to the 
Holy Office as translator of some of the writings of Melanchthon. 
He died at Rome about 1566. 

CARO, ELME MARIE (1826-1887), French philosopher, was 
born on the 4th of March 1826 at Poitiers. His father, a pro- 
fessor of philosophy, gave him an excellent education at the 
Stanislas College and the Ecole Normale, where he graduated in 
1848. After being professor of philosophy at several provincial 
universities, he received the degree of doctor, and came to Paris 
in 1858 as master of conferences at the ficole Normale. In 1861 
he became inspector of the Academy of Paris, in 1864 professor 
of philosophy to the Faculty of Letters, and in 1874 a member 
of the French Academy. He married Pauline Cassin, the 
authoress of the PechS de Madeleine and other well-known novels. 
He died in Paris on the 13th of July 1887. In his philosophy he 
was mainly concerned to defend Christianity against modern 
Positivism. The philosophy of Cousin influenced him strongly, 
but his strength lay in exposition and criticism rather than in 
original thought. Besides important contributions to La France 
and the Revue des deux mondes, he wrote Le Mysticisme au 
X VHP siecle (1852-1854), L'Idee de Dieu{ 1 864) , LeMaterialisme 
et la science (1868), Le Pessimisms au XIX' sii.de (1878), Jours 
d'ipreuves (1872), M. Littrt et le positivisme (1883), George Sand 
(1887), Milanges et portraits (1888), La Philosophic de Goethe 
(2nd ed., 1880). 

CAROL (O. Fr. carole), a hymn of praise, especially such as 
is sung at Christmas in the open air. The origin of the word is 
obscure. Diez suggests that the word is derived from chorus. 
Others ally it with corolla, a garland, circle or coronet, 1 the 
earliest sense of the word being apparently " aring " or " circle," 
" a ring dance." Stonehenge, often called the Giants' Dance, 
was also frequently known as the Carol; thus Harding, Chron. 
lxx. x., " Within (the) Giauntes Carole, that so they hight, The 
(Stone hengles) that nowe so named been." The Celtic forms, often 
cited as giving the origin of the word, are derivatives of the English 
or French. The crib set up in the churches at Christmas was the 
centre of a dance, and some of the mostfamous of Latin Christmas 
hymns were written to dance tunes. These songs were called 
Wiegenlieder in German, noils in French, and carols in English. 
They were originally modelled on the songs written to accompany 
the choric dance, which were probably the starting-point of the 
lyric poetry of the Germanic peoples. Strictly speaking, there- 
fore, the word should be applied to lyrics written to dance 
measures; in common acceptation it is applied to the songs 
written for the Christmas festival. Carolling, i.e. the combined 
exercise of dance and song, found its way from pagan ritual into 
the Christian church, and the clergy, however averse they might 
be from heathen survivals, had to content themselves in this, 
as in many other cases, with limiting the practice. The third 
council of Toledo (589) forbade dancing in the churches on the 
vigils of saints' days , and secular dances in church were forbidden 
by the council of Auxerre in the next year. Even as late as 1209 
it was necessary for the council of Avignon to forbid theatrical 
dances and secular songs in churches. Religious dances persisted 
longest on Shrove Tuesday, and a Castanet dance by the choristers 
round the lectern is permitted three times a year in the cathedral 
of Seville. The Christmas festival, which synchronized with and 

1 In architecture, the term " carol " (also wrongly spelled " carrel " 
or " carrol ") is used, in the sense of an enclosure, of a small chapel 
or oratory enclosed by screens, and also sometimes of the rails of the 
screens themselves. It is more particularly applied to the separate 
seats near the windows of a cloister (q.v.), used by the monks for the 
purposes of study, &c. The term " carol " has, by a mistake, been 
sometimes used of a scroll bearing an inscription of a text, &c. 



superseded the Latin and Teutonic feasts of the winter solstice, 
lent itself especially to gaiety. The " crib " of the Saviour was 
set up in the churches or in private houses, in the traditional 
setting of the stable, with earthen figures of the Holy Family, 
the ox and the ass; and carols were sung and danced around it. 
The " rocking of the cradle " was the occasion of dialogue 
between Joseph and Mary which was not without elements of 
comedy, and gave rise to lullabies such as the well-known 
German Dormi fili. The adoration of the shepherds and the 
visit of the Magi also provided matter for dramatic and choral 
representation. The singing of the carol has survived in places 
where the institution of the " crib," said to have been originated 
by St Francis of Assisi to inculcate the doctrine of the incarna- 
tion, has been long in disuse, but in the West Riding of Yorkshire 
the children who go round carol-singing still carry " milly- 
boxes " (My Lady boxes) containing figures which represent the 
Virgin and Child. 

That carol-singing early became a pretext for the asking of 
alms is obvious from an Anglo-Norman carol preserved in the 
British Museum (MS. Reg. 16 E. viii.), Seigneurs ore entendey 
a nus, which is little more than a drinking song. Carols were an 
important element in the mystery plays of the Nativity, and 
one of these, included in the Marguerites de la Marguerite des 
princesses, tres-illustre reine de Navarre (Lyons, 1 547) , incidentally 
gives evidence of the connexion of dancing and carol-singing, 
for the shepherds and shepherdesses open their chorus at the 
manger with "Dansons, chantons, faisons rage." There is a long 
English carol relating the chief incidents of the life of Christ, 
which is a curious example of the mixture of the sacred and pro- 
fane common in this species of composition. It begins " To- 
morrow shall be my dancing day," and has for refrain — 
" Sing, oh ! my love, oh ! my love, my love, my love; 
This have I done for my true love." 

There are extant numerous carols dating from the 1 5th century 
which have the characteristic features of folksong. The famous 
Cherry-tree Carol, " Joseph was an old man," is based on an 
old legend which is related in the Coventry mystery plays. 
" I saw three ships come sailing in," and " The Camel and the 
Crane," though of more modern date, preserve curious legends. 
Numerous entries in the household accounts of the Tudor 
sovereigns show that carol-singing was popular throughout 
the 1 6th century, and the literature of Christmas was enriched 
in the next century by poems which are often included in collec- 
tions of carols, though they were probably written to be read 
rather than sung. Milton, Crashaw, Southwell, Ben Jonson, 
George Herbert and George Wither all produced Christmas 
poems, but the richest collection by any one poet is to be found 
in the poems of Herrick, whose " Come, bring with a noise " is 
a typical carol of the jovial kind, and may well have been written 
to a dance tune. Among 18th-century religious carols perhaps 
the most famous is Charles Wesley's " Hark, how all the welkin 
rings," better known in the variant, " Hark, the herald angels 
sing." The artificial modern revival of carol-singing has pro- 
duced a quantity of new carols, the best of which are perhaps 
mostly derived from medieval Latin Christmas hymns. Among 
the many modern Christmas poems one of the most striking 
is Swinburne's " Three Damsels in the Queen's Chamber," 
which is, however, a ballad rather than a carol. 

The earliest printed collection of carols was issued by Wynkyn 
de Worde in 1521. It contained the famous Boar's Head carol, 
Caput apri defero, Reddens laudes Domino, which in a slightly 
altered form is sung at Queen's College, Oxford, on the bringing 
in of the boar's head. Modern collections of ancient carols 
are derived chiefly from three tracts belonging to the collection 
of Anthony a. Wood, preserved in the Bodleian library, from 
a 15th-century MS. (Sloane 2593), a 16th-century MS. with the 
music (Add. 5665), and other MSS. in the British Museum, 
and from oral tradition. In the 18th century T. Bloomer of 
Birmingham published a number of carols in the form of broad- 
sides. Among the numerous collections of French carols is 
Noei Borguignon de Gui Bardzai (1720), giving the words and 
the music of thirty-four noels, many of them very free in character. 



3 8o 



CAROLINE— CAROLINE ISLANDS 



The term noil passed into the English carol as a favourite refrain, 
" nowell," and seems to have been in common use in France as an 
equivalent for vivat. 

Among the more important modern collections of Christmas carols 
are: Songs and Carols (1847), edited by T. Wright for the Percy 
Society from Sloane MS. 2593 ; W. Sandys, Christmastide, its History, 
Festivities and Carols (1852); Christmas with the Poets (edited by 
V. H., 4th ed., 1872); T. Helmore and J. M. Neale, Carols for 
Christmastide (1853-1854), with music; R. R. Chope, Carols (new 
and complete edition, 1894), a tune-book for church use, with an 
introduction by S. Baring-Gould; H. R. Bramley, Christmas Carols, 
New and Old, the music by Dr Stainer; A. H. Bullen, Carols and 
Poems (1885) ; J. A. Fuller Maitland and W. S. Rockstro, Thirteen 
Carols of the Fifteenth Century, from a Trinity Coll., Cambridge, MS. 
(1891). See also Julian's Dictionary of Hymnology, s.v. " Carol "; 
E. Cortet, Essai sur les f&tes religieuses (1867). 

CAROLINE (1683-1737), wife of George II., king of Great 
Britain and Ireland, was a daughter of John Frederick, margrave 
of Brandenburg-Ansbach (d. 1686). Born at Ansbach on the 1st 
of March 1683, the princess passed her youth mainly at Dresden 
and Berlin, where she enjoyed the close friendship of Sophie 
Charlotte, wife of Frederick I. of Prussia; she married George 
Augustus, electoral prince of Hanover, in September 1705. 
The early years of her married life were spent in Hanover. She 
took a continual interest in the approaching accession of the 
Hanoverian dynasty to the British throne, was on very friendly 
terms with the old electress Sophia, and corresponded with 
Leibnitz, whose acquaintance she had made in Berlin. In 
October 17 14 Caroline followed her husband and her father-in- 
law, now King George I., to London. As princess of Wales she 
was accessible and popular, and took the first place at court, 
filling a difficult position with tact and success. When the quarrel 
between the prince of Wales and his father was attaining serious 
proportions, Caroline naturally took the part of her husband, 
and matters reached a climax in 1717. Driven from court, 
ostracized by the king, deprived even of the custody of their 
children, the prince and princess took up their residence in London 
at Leicester House, and in the country at Richmond. They 
managed, however, to surround themselves with a distinguished 
circle; Caroline had a certain taste for literature, and among 
their attendants and visitors were Lord Chesterfield, Pope, 
Gay, Lord Hervey and his wife, the beautiful Mary Lepel. 
A formal reconciliation with George I. took place in 1720. . In 
October 1727 George II. and his queen were crowned. During 
the rest of her life Queen Caroline's influence in English politics 
was very chiefly exercised in support of Sir Robert Walpole; 
she kept this minister in power, and in control of church patron- 
age. She was exceedingly tolerant, and the bishops appointed 
by her were remarkable rather for learning than for orthodoxy. 
During the king's absences from England she was regent of the 
kingdom on four occasions. On the whole, Caroline's relations 
with her husband, to whom she bore eight children, were satis- 
factory. A clever and patient woman, she was very complaisant 
towards the king, flattering his vanity and acknowledging his 
mistresses, and she retained her influence over him to the end. 
She died on the 20th of November 1737. 

Caroline appears in Scott's Heart of Midlothian; see also Lord 
Hervey, Memoirs of the Reign of George II., ed. by J.W. Croker (1884) ; 
W. H. Wilkins, Caroline the Illustrious (1904) ; and A. D. Greenwood, 
Lives of the Hanoverian Queens of England, vol. i. (1909). 

CAROLINE AMELIA AUGUSTA (1768-1821), queen of 
George IV. of Great Britain, second daughter of Charles William 
Ferdinand, duke of Brunswick- Wo'lfenbiittel, was born on the 
17th of May 1768. She was brought up with great strictness, 
and her education did not fit her well for her subsequent station 
in life. In 1795 she was married to the then prince of Wales 
(see George IV.), who disliked her and separated from her after 
the birth of a daughter in January 1796. The princess resided 
at Blackheath; and as she was thought to have been badly 
treated by her profligate husband, the sympathies of the people 
were strongly in her favour. About 1806 reports reflecting on 
her conduct were circulated so openly that it was deemed 
necessary for a commission to inquire into the circumstances. 
The princess was acquitted of any serious fault, but various 



improprieties in her conduct were pointed out and censured. 
In 1814: she left England and travelled on the continent, residing 
principally in Italy. On the accession of George in 1820, orders 
were given that the English ambassadors should prevent the 
recognition of the princess as queen at any foreign court. Her 
name also was formally omitted from the liturgy. These acts 
stirred up a Strong feeling in favour of the princess among the 
English people generally, and she at once made arrangements for 
returning to England and claiming her rights. She rejected a 
proposal that she should receive an annuity of £50,000 a year 
on condition of renouncing her title and remaining abroad. 
Further efforts at compromise proved unavailing; Caroline 
arrived in England on the 6th of June, and one month later a bill 
to dissolve her marriage with the king on the ground of adultery 
was brought into the House of Lords. The trial began on the 
17th of August 1820, and on the 10th of November the bill, after 
passing the third- reading, was abandoned. The public excite- 
ment had been intense, the boldness of the queen's counsel, 
Brougham and Denman, unparalleled, and the ministers felt 
that the smallness of their majority was Virtual defeat. The 
queen was allowed to assume her title, but she was refused admit- 
tance to Westminster Hall on the coronation day, July 19, 1821. 
Mortification at this event seems to have hastened her death, 
which took place on the 7th of August of the same year. 

See A Queen -of Indiscretions', the Tragedy of Caroline of Brunswick, 
Queen of England, translated by F? Chapman from the Italian of 
Graziano Paolo Clerici (London, 1907); with numerous portraits, &c. 
Of, contemporary authorities the Creevy Papers (1905) throw the 
most interesting sidelights on the subject,, 

CAROLINE ISLANDS,, a widely-scattered archipelago in the 
Pacific Ocean, E> of the Philippines and N. of New Guinea, 
included in Micronesia; between 5 and io° N., and 135° and 
165° ,E;,. belonging to Germany. They fall into three main 
groups, the Western, Central and Eastern Carolines, the central 
being the most numerous, while the western include the Pelew 
group. The total land area is about 380 sq. m., and out of this, 
307 sq. m. is covered by the four main islands, Ponape and 
KUsaie in the eastern group, Trukror Hogolu in the central, and 
Yap in the westernt These islands are Of considerable elevation 
(the highest point of Ponape approaches 3000 ft.), but the rest 
are generally low coral islets. The climate is equable and moist, 
but healthy; but the islands are subject to heavy storms. The 
total population is estimated at 36,000. The natives, who are 
Microhesian hybrids of finer physique than their kinsmen of the 
Pelew Islands, have acomparatively high mental standard, being 
careful agriculturists, and peculiarly clever boatbuilders and 
navigators. The Germans divide the whole archipelago into 
two administrative districts, eastern and western, having the 
seats of government at Ponape and Yap respectively. The 
principal article of export is copra. The islands were discovered 
(at least in part) by the Portuguese Diego da Rocha in 1527, 
and called by him the Sequeira Islands. In 1686 Admiral 
Francesco Lazeano, who made further explorations, renamed 
them the Carolines in honour of Charles II. of Spain. The 
islands were subsequently visited by a few travellers; but the 
natives have only in modern times been reconciled to the presence 
of foreigners; an early visit of missionaries (1731) resulted in 
one of several murderous attacks on white men which darken 
the history of the islands; and it was only in 1875 that Spain, 
claiming the group, made some attempt to assert her rights. 
These were contested by Germany, whose flag was hoisted on 
Yap, and the- matter was referred to the arbitration of Pope 
Leo XIII. in 1885. He decided in favour of Spain, but gave 
Germany free trading rights; and in 1899 Germany took over 
the administration of the islands from Spain, paying 25,000,000 
pesetas (nearly £1,000,000 sterling). 

Ancient Stone Buildings. — In Ponape and Kusaie, massive stone 
structures, similar to those which occur in several other parts 
of the Pacific Ocean, have long been known to exist. They have 
been closely explored by Herr Kubary, Mr F. J. Moss, and later 
Mr ■ F. W. Christian. None of the colossal structures hitherto 
described appears to have been erected by the present Melanesian 



OAR©UNGIANS— CARORA 



3*1 



or Polynesian peoples, white their -nidi diffusion, extending as 
far as Easter Island, within 400 m. of the ; New World, poiilts 
to the occupation of the Pacific lands by a prehistoric race which 
had made some advance in general culture. The Funafuti 
borings (1897) show almost beyond doubt that Polynesia is an 
area of comparatively recent subsidence. Hence the land con- 
nexions must have formerly been much easier and; far more 
continuous than at present. The dolmen-builders of the New 
Stone Age are now known to have long occupied both Korea 
and Japan, from which advanced Asiatic lands they may have 
found little difficulty in spreading over the Polynesian world, 
just as in the extreme west they were, able to range over Scandi- 
navia, Great Britain and Ireland. To.Neolithic man, still perhaps 
represented by some of the more light-coloured and more regular- 
featured Polynesian groups, may therefore not unreasonably 
be attributed these astonishing remains, which assume so many 
different forms according to the nature of the locality, but seem 
generally so out of proportion with the present restricted areas 
on which they stand. With the gradual subsidence of these 
areas their culture would necessarily degenerate, although echoes 
of sublime theogonies and philosophies are still heard in the oral 
traditions and folklore of many Polynesian groups./ In the islet 
of Lele, close to Kusaie, at the eastern extremity of Micronesia, 
the ruins present the appearance of a citadel with cyclopean 
ramparts built of large basaltic blocks. There are also numerous 
canals, and what look like artificial harbours constructed amid 
the shallow lagoons. 

In Poaape the remains are of a somewhat similar character, 
but on a much larger scale, and with this difference, that while 
those of Lele all stand on the land, those of Ponape are built in 
the water. The whole island is strew with natural basaltic 
prisms, some of great size: and of this material, brought by boats 
or rafts from a distance of 30 m. and put together without any 
mortar, but sustained by their own weight, are built all the 
massive walls and other structures on the east side of the island. 
The walls of the main building near the entrance of Metalanim 
harbour form a massive quadrangle 200 ft. on all sides, with 
inner courts, vault and raised, platform with walls 20 to 40 ft. 
high and from 8 to 18 ft. thick. Some of the blocks are, 2$ ft. 
long and 8 ft. in circumference, and many of them weigh from 
3 to 4 tons. There are also numerous canals from 30 to 100 ft. 
wide, while a large number of islets, mainly artificial, covering 
an area of 9 sq. m., have all been built up out of the shallow 
waters of the lagoon round about the ; entrance of the harbour, 
with high sea-walls composed of the same huge basaltic prisms. 
In some places the wails of this " Pacific Venice " are now 
submerged to some depth, as if the land had subsided since the 
construction of these extensive works. Elsewhere huge break- 
waters had been constructed, the fragments of which may still 
be seen stretching away for a distance of from 2 to 3 m. Most 
observers, such as Admiral Sir Cyprian Bridge and Mr Le Hunte, 
agree that these structures could not possibly be the work of any 
of the present Polynesian peoples, and attribute them to a now 
extinct prehistoric race, the men of the New Stone Age from the 
Asiatic mainland. .- ' 

Stone Money. — The inhabitants of Yap are noted for possessing 
the most extraordinary currency, if it can , be so called, in the 
whole world. Besides the ordinary shell money, there is a sort 
of stone coinage, consisting of huge calcite or limestone discs or 
wheels from 6 in. to 1 2 ft. in diameter, and weighing Up to nearly 
5 tons. These are all quarried in the Pelew Islands, 2po,ni.'to 
the south, and are now brought to Yap in European vessels. 
But some were in the island long before the arrival of the whites, 
and must consequently have been brought 'by native vessels or 
oh rafts. The stones, which are rather tokens than money, do 
not cirdulate, but are piled up round about the chief 's treasure- 
house, and appear to be regarded as public property, although 
it is hard to say what particular use they can serve. They appear 
to be kept rather for show and ornament than for use. 

See F. W. Christian, The Caroline Islands (London, 1899); G. 
Volkens, " (Jber die Karolinen Insel Yap," in Verhandlungen 
Gesellschaft Erdkunde Berlin., xxviii. X1901); J. S. Kubary, ; Ethno* 



graphische Beiirage . iw Keniniss des Kurolinen-Archipel (Leiden, 
1 889-1892); De Abrade, Historia del conflicts de las Carolinas, &c. 
(Madrid, 1886). 

CAROLINGIANS, the name of a family (so called from Charle- 
magne, its most illustrious member) which gained the throne of 
France a.d. 751. It appeared in history in 613, its origin being 
traced. to Arnulf (Arnoul), bishop of Metz, and Pippin, long 
called Pippin of Landen, but more correctly Pippin the Old or 
Pippin I. Albeit of illustrious descent, the genealogies which 
represent Arnulf as an Aquitanian noble, and his family as 
connected— by more or less complicated devices — with the 
saints honoured in Aquitaine, are worthless, dating from the 
time of Louis the Pious in the 9th century. Arnulf was one of 
the Austrasian nobles who appealed to Clotaire II., king of 
Neustria, against Brunhilda, and it was in reward for his services 
that he received from Clotaire the bishopric of Metz (613). 
Pippin, also an Austrasian noble, had taken a prominent part in 
the revolution of 613. These two men Clotaire took as his 
counsellors; and when he decided in 623 to confer the kingdom of 
Austrasia upon his son Dagobert, they were appointed mentors to 
the Austrasian king, Pippin with the title of mayor of the palace. 
Before receiving his bishopric, Arnulf had had a son Adalgiselus, 
afterwards called Anchis; Pippin's daughter, called Begga in later 
documents, was married to Arnulf 's son, and of this union was born 
Pippin II. Towards the end of the 7th century Pippin II., called 
incorrectly Pippin of Heristal, secured a preponderant authority 
in Austrasia, marched at the head of the Austrasians against 
Neustria, and gained a decisive victory at Tertry, near St 
Quentin (687). From that date he may be said to have been 
sole master of the Frankish kingdom, which he governed till his 
death (714). In Neustria Pippin gave the mayoralty of the palace 
to his son Grimoald, and afterwards to Grimoald's son Theode- 
bald; the mayoralty in Austrasia he gave to his son Drogo, and 
subsequently to Drogo's children, Arnulf and Hugh. Charles 
Martel, however, a son of Pippin by a concubine Chalpa'ida, 
seized the mayoralty in both kingdoms, and he it was who 
continued the Carolingian dynasty. Charles Martel governed 
from 714 to 741 , and in 751 his son Pippin III. took the title of 
king. The Carolingian dynasty reigned in France from 751 to 
987, when it was ousted by the Capetian dynasty. In Germany 
descendants of Pippin reigned till the death of Louis the Child in 
911; in Italy the Carolingians maintained their position until 
the deposition of Charles the Fat in 887. Charles, duke of Lower 
Lorraine, who was thrown into prison by Hugh Capet in 991, 
left two sons, the last male descendants of the Carolingians, Otto, 
who was also duke of Lower Lorraine and died without issue, and 
Louis, who after the year 1000 vanishes from history. 

See P. A. F. Gerard and L. A. Warnkonig, Histoire des Carolingiens 
(Brussels, 1862) ; H. E. Bonnell, Anfange des Karoling. Houses 
(Berlin, 1866) ; J. F. Bohmer and E. Miihlbacher, Regesten d. 
Kaiserreichs unter d. Karolingern (Innsbruck, 1889 seq.); E. Muhl- 
bacher, Deutsche Gesch. unter d. Karolingern (Stuttgart, 1896); 
F. Lot, Les Derniers Carolingiens (Paris, 1891). (C. Pf.) 

CAROLDS-DURAN, the name adopted by the French painter 
Charles Auguste Emile Durand (1837- ), who was born at 
Lille on the 4th of July 1837. He studied at the Lille Academy 
and then went to Paris, and in 1861 to Italy and Spain for 
further study, especially devoting himself to the pictures of 
Velasquez. His subject picture ' ' Murdered, " or " The Assassina- 
tion " (1866), was one of his first successes, and is now in the 
Lille museum, but he became best known afterwards as a portrait- 
painter, and as the head of one of the principal ateliers in Paris, 
where some of the most brilliant artists of a later generation 
were his pupils. His" Lady with the Glove "(1869), a portrait of 
his own wife, 'was bought for the Luxembourg. In 1889 he was 
made a commander of the Legion of Honour. He became a 
member of the Acad6mie des Beaux-arts in 1904, and in the next 
year was appointed director of the French academy at Rome in 
succession to Eugene Guillaume. 

CARORA, an inland town of the state of Lara, Venezuela, on 
the Carora, a branch of the Tocuyo river, about 54 m. W. by S. of 
the city of Barquisimeto, and 11 28 ft. above sea-level. Pop. 
(1908 estimate) 6000. The town is comparatively well-built 



3 82 



CARP— CARPATHIAN MOUNTAINS 



and possesses a fine parish church, and a Franciscan convent and 
hermitage. It was founded in 1754, and its colonial history 
shows considerable prosperity, its population at that time 
numbering 9000 to 10,000. The neighbouring country is devoted 
principally to raising horses, mules and cattle; and in addition 
to hides and leather, it exports rubber and other forest products. 

CARP, the typical fish of a large family (Cyprinidae) of Ostario- 
physi, as they have been called by M. Sagemehl, in which the air- 
bladder is connected with the ear by a chain of small bones (so- 
called Weberian ossicles). The mouth is usually more or less 
protractile and always toothless; the lower pharyngeal bones, 
which are large and falciform, subparallel to the branchial arches, 
are provided with teeth, often large and highly specialized, in 
one, two or three series (pharyngeal teeth), usually working 
against a horny plate attached to a vertical process of the basi- 
occipital bone produced under the anterior vertebrae, mastica- 
tion being performed in the gullet. These teeth, adapted to 
various requirements, vary according to the genus, being conical, 
hooked, spoon-shaped, molariform, &c. 

The species are extremely numerous, about 1400 being known, 
nearly entirely confined to fresh water, and feeding on vegetable 
substances or small animals. They are dispersed over the whole 
world with the exception of South America, Madagascar, Papu- 
asia, and Australasia. Remains of several of the existing 
genera have been found in Oligocene and later beds of Europe, 
Sumatra and North America. One member of the Cyprinidae is 
at present known to be viviparous, but no observations have as 
yet been made on its habits. It is a small barbel discovered in 
Natal by Max Weber, and described by him under the name 
Barbus viviparus. 

The Cyprinidae 1 are divided into four subfamilies: — Catosto- 
minae (mostly from North America, with a few species from 
China and eastern Siberia), in which the maxillary bones take a 
share in the border of the mouth, and the pharyngeal teeth are 
very numerous and form a single, comb-like series; Cyprininae, 
the great bulk of the family, more or less conforming to the type of 
the carp; Cobitinae, or loaches (Europe, Asia, Abyssinia), 
which are dealt with in a separate article (see Loach) ; and the 
Homalopterinae (China and south-eastern Asia), mountain forms 
allied to the loaches, with a quite rudimentary air-bladder. 

For descriptions of other Cyprinids than the carp, see Gold- 
fish, Barbel, Gudgeon, Rtjdd, Roach, Chub, Dace, Minnow, 
Tench, Bream, Bleak, Bitterling, Mahseer. 

The carp itself, Cyprinus carpio, has a very wide distribution, 
having spread, through the agency of man, over nearly the 
whole of Europe and a part of North America, where" it lives in 
lakes, ponds, canals, and slow-running rivers with plenty of 




The Common Carp, 
vegetation. The carp appears to be a native of temperate Asia 
and perhaps also of south-eastern Europe, and to have been 
introduced into other parts in the 12th and 13th century; it was 
first mentioned in England in 1496. The acclimatization of the 
carp in America has been a great success, especially in the 
northern waters, where, the growth continuing throughout the 
entire year, the fish soon attains a remarkable size. The presence 
of carp in Indo-China and the Malay Archipelago is probably 
also to be ascribed to human agency. In the British Isles the 

1 The name of the fishes of the genus Cyprinus is derived from the 
island of Cyprus, the ancient sanctuary of Venus; this name is 
supposed to have arisen from observations of the fecundity and 
vivacity of carp during the spawning period. 



carp seldom reached a length of 25 ft., and a weight of 20 lb, 
whilst examples of that size are quite frequent on the continent, 
and others measuring 4! ft. and weighing 60 lb or more are on 
record. The fish is characterized by its large scales (34 to 40 in 
the lateral line), its long dorsal fin, the first ray of which is stiff 
and serrated, and the presence of two small barbels on each side of 
the mouth. But it varies much in form and scaling, and some 
most aberrant varieties have been fixed by artificial selection, 
the principal being the king-carp or mirror-carp, in which the 
scales are enlarged and reduced in number, forming more or less 
regular longitudinal series on the sides, and the leather-carp, in 
which the scales have all but disappeared, the fish being covered 
with a thick, leathery skin. Deformed examples are not of rare 
occurrence. 

Although partly feeding on worms and other small forms of 
animal life, the carp is principally a vegetarian, and the great 
development of its pharyngeal apparatus renders it particularly 
adapted to a graminivorous regime. The longevity of the fish has 
probably been much exaggerated, and' the statements of carp of 
200 years living in the ponds of Pont-Chartrain and other places 
in France and elsewhere do not rest on satisfactory evidence. 

A close ally of the carp is the Crucian carp, Cyprinus carassius, 
chiefly distinguished by the absence of barbels. It inhabits 
Europe and northern and temperate Asia, and is doubtfully 
indigenous to Great Britain. It is a small fish, rarely exceeding a 
length of 8 or 9 in. It has many varieties. One of these, re- 
markable for its very short, thick head and deep body, is the so- 
called Prussian carp, C. gibelio, often imported into English 
ponds, whilst the best known is the goldfish (q.v.), C. auralus, 
first produced in China. (G. A. B.) 

CARPACCIO, VITTORIO, or Vittore (c. 1465-c. 1522), 
Italian painter, was born in Venice, cf an old Venetian family. 
The facts of his life are obscure, but his principal works were 
executed between 1490 and 1519; and he ranks as one of the 
finest precursors of the great Venetian masters. The date of 
his birth is conjectural. He is first mentioned in 1472 in a will 
of his uncle Fra Ilario, and Dr Ludwig infers from this that 
he was born c. 1455, on the ground that no one could enter into 
an inheritance under the age of fifteen; but the inference ignores 
the possibility of a testator making his will in prospect of the 
beneficiary attaining his legal age. Consideration of the youthful 
style of his earliest dated pictures (" St Ursula " series, Venice, 
1490) makes it improbable that at that time he had reached so 
mature an age as thirty-five; and the date of his birth is more 
probably to be guessed from his being about twenty-five in 1490. 
What is certain is that he was a pupil (not, as sometimes thought, 
the master) of Lazzaro Bastiani, who, like the Bellini and 
Vivarini, was the head of a large atelier in Venice, and whose 
own work is seen in such pictures as the " S. Veneranda " at 
Vienna, and the " Doge Mocenigo kneeling before the Virgin " 
and " Madonna and Child " (formerly attributed to Carpaccio) 
in the National Gallery, London. In later years Carpaccio 
appears to have' been influenced by Cima da Conegliano (e.g. 
in the " Death of the Virgin," 1508, at Ferrara). Apart from 
the " St Ursula " series, his scattered series of the " Life of the 
Virgin " and " Life of St Stephen," and a " Dead Christ " at 
Berlin, may be specially mentioned. 

For an authoritative and detailed account, see the Life and Works 
of Vittorio Carpaccio, by Pompeo Molmenti and Gustav Ludwig, 
Eng. trans,, by R. H. Cust (1907); and the criticism by Roger Fry, 
" A Genre Painter and his Critics," in the Quarterly Review (London, 
April 1908). 

CARPATHIAN MOUNTAINS 2 (Lat. Monies Sarmatici; Med. 
Lat. Monies Nivium), the, eastern wing of the great central 
mountain system of Europe. With the exception of the 
extreme southern and south-eastern ramifications, which belong 
to Rumania, the Carpathians lie entirely within Austrian and 

8 The name is derived from the Slavonic word Chrb, which means 
mountain-range. As Chrawat, it was first applied to the inhabitants 
of the region, whence it passed in the form Krapat or Karpa as the 
name of mountain system. In official Hungarian documents of 
the 13th and 14th centuries the Carpathians are named Thorchal or 
Tarczal, and also Monies Nivium. 



CARPATHIAN MOUNTAINS 



3 8 3 



Hungarian territory. They begin on the Danube near Pressburg, 
surround Hungary and Transylvania in a large semicircle, the 
'•oncavity of which is towards the south-west, and end on the 
Danube near Orsova. The total length of the Carpathians is 
over 800 m., and their width varies between 7 and 230 m., 
the greatest width of the Carpathians corresponding with its 
highest altitude. Thus the system attains its greatest breadth 
in the Transylvanian plateau, and in the meridian of the Tatra 
group. It covers an area of 72,600 sq. m., and after the Alps 
is the most extensive mountain system of Europe. The Car- 
pathians do not form an uninterrupted chain of mountains, 
but consist of several orographically and geologically distinctive 
groups; in fact they present as great a structural variety as 
the Alps; but as regards magnificence of scenery they cannot 
compare with the Alps. The Carpathians, which only in a few 
places attain an altitude of over 8000 ft., lack the bold peaks, 
the extensive snow-fields, the large glaciers, the high waterfalls 
and the numerous large lakes which are found in the Alps. 
They are nowhere covered by perpetual snow, and glaciers 
do not exist, so that the Carpathians, even in their highest 
altitude, recall the middle region of the Alps, with which, how- 
ever, they have many points in common as regards appearance, 
structure and flora. The Danube separates the Carpathians from 
the Alps, which they meet only in two points, namely, the Leitha 
Mountains at Pressburg, and the Bakony Mountains at Vacz 
(Waitzen), while the same river separates them from the Balkan 
Mountains at Orsova. The valley of the March and Oder 
separates the Carpathians from the Silesian and Moravian chains, 
which belong to the middle wing of the great central mountain 
system of Europe. The Carpathians separate Hungary and 
Transylvania from Lower Austria, Moravia, Silesia, Galicia, 
Bukovina and Rumania, while its ramifications fill the whole 
northern part of Hungary, and form the quadrangular mass 
of the Transylvanian plateau. Unlike the other wings of the 
great central system of Europe, the Carpathians, which form the 
watershed between the northern seas and the Black Sea, are sur- 
rounded on all sides by plains, namely the great Hungarian plain 
on the south-west, the plain of the Lower Danube (Rumania) 
on the south, and the Galician plain on the north-east. 

The Carpathian system can be divided into two groups: the 
Carpathians proper, and the mountains of Transylvania. The 
Carpathians proper consist of an outer wall, which forms the 
frontier between Hungary and the adjacent provinces of Austria, 
and of an inner wall which fills the whole of Upper Hungary, and 
forms the central group. The outer wall is a complex, roughly 
circular mass of about 600 m. extending from Pressburg to the 
valley of the Viso, and the Golden Bistritza, and is divided 
by the Poprad into two parts, the western Carpathians and the 
eastern or wooded Carpathians. Orographically, therefore, 
the proper Carpathians are divided into: (a) the western 
Carpathians, (b) the eastern or wooded Carpathians, and (c) 

the central groups. 

(a) The western Carpathians, which begin at the Porta Uunganca 
on the Danube, just opposite the Leitha Mountains, and extend to 
the Poprad river, are composed of four principal groups : 
Usages. ^ ^ {ttle Carpathians (also called the Pressburg group) 
with the highest peak Bradlo (2670 ft.) ; the White Carpathians or 
Miava group, with the highest peak Javornik (3325 ft.), and the 
Zemerka (3445 ft.); the Beskid proper or western Beskid group, 
which extends from a little west of the Jablunka pass to the river 
Poprad, with the highest peaks, Beskid (3115 ft.), Smrk (4395 ft.), 
Lissa Hora (4350 ft.) and Ossus (5106 ft.): and the Magura or 
Arva Magura group, which extends to the south of Beskid Mountains, 
and contains the Babia Gora (5650 ft.), the highest peak in the whole 
western Carpathians. . 

(6) The eastern or wooded Carpathians extend from the river 
Poprad to the sources of the river Viso and the Golden Bistritza, 
whence the Transylvanian Mountains begin, and form the link 
between these mountains and the central groups or High Carpathians. 
They are a monotonous sandstone range, covered with extensive 
forests, which up to the sources of the rivers Ung and San are also 
called the eastern Beskids, and are formed of small parallel ranges. 
The northern two-thirds of this range has a mean altitude of 3250 ft., 
and only in its southern portion it attains a mean altitude of 5000 ft. 
The principal peaks are Rusky Put (4264 ft.), Popadje (5690 ft.), 
Bistra (5936 ft.), Pop Ivan (6214 ft.), Tomnatik (5035 ft.), Giumaleu 
(6077 ft.) and Cserna Gora (6505 ft.), the culminating peak of the 



whole range. To the eastern Carpathians belongs also the range of 
mountains extending between the Laborcza and the Uppei 1 heiss, 
called Vihorlat, which attains in the peak of the same name an 
altitude of 3495 ft. As indicated by its name, which means burnt, 
it is of volcanic origin, and plays an important part in the folklore 
and in the superstitious legends of the Hungarian people. 

(c) The central groups or the High Carpathians extend from the 
confluence of the rivers Arva and Waag to the river Poprad, and 
include the highest group of the Carpathian system. They consist 
of the High Tatra group (see Tatra Mountains), where is found the 
Gerlsdorfer or Franz Josef peak (Hung. Gerlachfalm-Csucs), with an 
altitude of 8737 ft., the highest peak in the whole Carpathian Moun- 
tains. On its west are the Liptauer Magura, with the highest peak 
the Biela Szkala (6900 ft.), and on its east are the Zipser Magura, 
which have a mean altitude of 3000 ft. South of the central groups 
lies a widely extending mountain region, which fills the whole ot 
northern Hungary, and is known as the Hungarian highland. It is 
composed of several groups, which are intersected by the valleys of 
numerous rivers, and which descend in sloping terraces towards the 
Danube and the Hungarian plain. The principal groups are: the 
Neutra or Galgoc Mountains (4400 ft.), between the rivers Waag 
and Neutra ; the Low or Nizna Tatra, which extends to the south 
of the High Tatra, and has its highest peaks, the Djumbir (6700 ft.) 
and the Kralova Hola (6400 ft.); this group is continued towards 
the east up to the confluence of the Gollnitz with the Hernad, by the 
so-called Carpathian foot-hills, with the highest peak the Zelesznik 
(2675 ft.). West of the Low Tatra extend the Fatra group, with the 
highest peak, the Great Fatra (5825 ft.), to the south and east of 
which lie the Schemnitz group, the Ostrowsky group, and several 
other groups, all of which are also called the Hungarian Ore Moun- 
tains, on account of their richness in valuable ores. South-east of 
the Low Tatra extend the Zips — Gomor Ore Mountains, while the 
most eastern group is the Hegyalja Mountains, between the Topla, 
Tarcza and Hernad rivers, which run southward from Epenes to 
Tokaj. In their northern portion, they are also called S6var Moun- 
tains, and reach in their highest peak, Simonka, an altitude of 3350 ft., 
while their southern portion, which ends with the renowned Tokaj 
Hill (1650 ft.), is also called Tokaj Mountains. The smaller groups 
of the Hungarian highland are: on the south-west the Neograd 
Mountains (2850), whose offshoots reach the Danube; to the east 
of them extends the Matra group, with the highest peak the Sasko 
(3285 ft.). The Matra group is of volcanic origin, rising abruptly in 
the great Hungarian plain, and constitutes one of the most beautiful 
groups of the Carpathians; lastly, to its east extend the thickly- 
wooded Bukk Mountains (3100 ft.). 

Throughout the whole of the Carpathian system there are numerous 
mountain lakes, but they cannot compare with the Alpine lakes 
either in extension or beauty. The largest and most Lakes . 
numerous are found in the Tatra Mountains. These lakes 
are called by the people " eyes of the sea," through their belief that 
they are in subterranean communication with the sea. 

The western and central Carpathians are much more accessible 
than the eastern Carpathians and the Transylvanian Mountains. 
The principal passes in the western Carpathians are: Passes . 
Strany, Hrozinkau, Wlara, Lissa and the Jablunka pass 
(1970 ft.), the principal route between Silesia and Hungary, crossed 
by the Breslau-Budapest railway; and the Jordanow pass. In the 
central Carpathians are: the road from Neumarkt to Kesmark 
through the High Tatra, the Telgart pass over the Kralova Hola 
from the Poprad to the Gran, and the Tylicz pass from Bartteld to 
Tarnow. In the eastern Carpathians are: the Dukla pass, the 
Mezo-Laborcz pass crossed by the railway from Tokaj to Przemysl ; 
the Uszok pass, crossed by the road from Ungvar to Sambor; the 
Vereczke pass, crossed by the railway from Lemberg to Munkacs; ■ 
the Delatyn or K6r6smez6 pass (3300 ft.), also called the Magyar 
route, crossed by the railway from Kolomea to Debreczen; and the 
Stiol pass in Bukovina. 

The Carpathians consist of an outer zone of newer beds and an 
inner zone of older rocks. Between the two zones lies a row of 
Klippen, while towards the Hungarian plain the inner Qeology. 
zone is bordered by a fringe of volcanic eruptions of 
Tertiary age. The outer zone is continuous throughout the whole 
extent of the chain, and is remarkably uniform both in composition 
and structure. It is formed almost entirely of a succession of sand- 
stones and shales of Cretaceous and Tertiary age— the so-called 
Carpathian Sandstone — and these are thrown into a series of iso- 
clinal folds dipping constantly to the south. The folding of this zone 
took place during the Miocene period. The inner zone is not con- 
tinuous, and is much more complex in structure. It is visible only 
in the west and in the east, while in the central Carpathians, between 
the Hernad and the headwaters of the Theiss, it is lost beneath the 
modern deposits of the Hungarian plain. In the western Carpathians 
the inner zone consists of a foundation of Carboniferous and older 
rocks, which were folded and denuded before the deposition of the 
succeeding strata. In the outer portion of the zone the Permian 
and Mesozoic beds are crushed and folded against the core of ancient 
rocks; in the inner portion of the zone they rest upon the old founda- 
tion with but little subsequent disturbance. In the eastern Car- 
pathians also, the Permian and Mesozoic beds are not much folded 
except near the outer margin of the zone. The Klippen are isolated 



384 



CARPATHUS- 



-CARPENTER, L. 



Minerals. 



hills, chiefly of Jurassic limestone, rising up in the midst of the later 
and softer deposits on the inner border of the sandstone zone. 
Their relations to the surrounding beds are still obscure. They may 
be " rootless " masses brought upon the top of the later beds by 
thrustplanes. They may be the pinched-up summits of sharp 
anticlinals, which in the process of folding have been forced through 
the softer rocks which lay upon them. Or, finally, they may have 
been islands rising above the waters, in which were deposited the 
later beds which now surround them. The so-called Klippen of the 
Swiss Alps are now usually supposed to rest upon thrustplanes, but 
they are not strictly analogous, either in structure or in position, 
with those of the Carpathians. Of all the peculiar features of the 
Carpathian chain, perhaps the most remarkable is the fringe of 
volcanic rocks which lies along its inner margin. The outbursts 
began in the later part of the Eocene period, and continued into the 
Pliocene, outlasting the period of folding. They appear to be 
associated with faulting upon the inner margin of the chain. 
Trachytes, rhyolites, andesites and basalts occur, and a definite 
order of succession has' been made out in several areas; but this 
order is not the same throughout the chain. 

The Carpathians, like the Alps, form a protective wall to the 
regions south of them, which enjoy a much milder climate than those 
Climate situated to the north. The vegetation of these regions is 
Flora. ' naturally subjected to the different climateric conditions. 
P^ The mountains themselves are mostly covered with forests, 

"" ' and their vegetation presents four -zones: that of the 
beech extends to an altitude of 4000 ft.; that of the Scottish fir to 
1000 ft. higher. Above this grows a species bf pine, which becomes 
dwarfed and disappears at an altitude of about 6000 ft., beyond 
which is a zone of lichen and moss covered or almost bare rock. 
The highest parts in the High Tatra and in the Transylvanian 
Mountains have a flora similar to that of the Alps, more specially 
that of the middle region. Remarkable is the sea-shore flora, which 
is found in the numerous salt-impregnated lakes, ponds and marshes 
in Transylvania. As regards the fauna, the Carpathians still contain 
numerous bears, wolves and lynxes, as well as birds of prey. It 
presents a characteristic feature in its mollusc fauna, which contains 
many species not found in the neighbouring regions, and only found 
in the Alpine region. Cattle and sheep are pastured in great numbers 
on its slopes. 

The Carpathian system is richer in metallic ores than any other 
mountain system of Europe, and contains large quantities of gold, 
silver, copper, iron, lead, coal, petroleum, salt, zinc, &c, 
besides a great variety of useful mineral. A great number 
of mineral springs and thermal waters are found in the Carpathians, 
many of which have become frequented watering-places. 

The systematic and scientific exploration of' the Carpathians 
dates only from the beginning of the 19th century. The first ascen- 
Hlstorv s ' on °^ t ' 1 ^ Lomnitzer peak in the High Tatra was made 
by one David or Johann Frohlich in 1615. The first 
account of the Tatra Mountains was written by Georg Buchholz, a 
resident of Kesmark in 1664. The English naturalist, Robert 
Townson, explored the Tatra in 1793 and 1794, and was the first to 
make a few reliable measurements. The results of his exploration 
appeared in his book, Travels in Hungary, published in 1797. But 
the first real important work was undertaken by the Swedish 
naturalist, Georg Wahlenberg (1780-1851), who in 1813 explored the 
central Carpathians as a botanist, but afterwards also made topo- 
graphical and geological studies of the system. The results of all 
the former explorations were embodied by A. von Sydow in an 
extensive Work published in 1827. During the 19th century the 
measurements of the various parts of the Carpathians was under- 
taken by the ordnance survey of the Austrian army, which published 
their first map of the central Carpathians in 1870. A great stimulus 
to the study of this mountain system was given by the foundation 
of the Hungarian Carpathian Society in 1873, an " a great deal of 
information has been added to our knowledge since. In 1 880 
two new Carpathian societies were formed: a Galician and a 
Transylvanian. 

Authorities. — F.W. Hildebrandt, Karpatkenbilder (G\og?.u,i863); 
E. Sagorski and G. Schneider, Flora Carpatorum Centralium (2 vols., 
Leipzig, 1891); Muriel Dowie, A Girl m the Carpathians (London, 
1891) ; Orohydrographisches Tableau der Karpathen (Vienna, 1886), in 
six maps of scale 1; 750,000; V. Uhlig, " Bau und BildderKarpaten," 
in Bau und Bild Osterreichs (Vienna, 1903). (0. Br.; P. La.) 

CARPATHUS (Ital. Scarpanto), an island about 30 m. south- 
west of Rhodes, in that part of the Mediterranean which was 
called, after it, the Carpathian Sea (Carpathium Mare). It was 
both in ancient and medieval times closely connected with 
Rhodes; it was held by noble families under Venetian suzerainty, 
notably the Cornari from 1306 to 1540, when it finally passed 
into the possession of the Turks. From its remote position 
Carpathus has preserved many peculiarities of dress, customs 
and dialect, the last resembling those of Rhodes and Cyprus. 

See L. Ross, Reisen aufden gr. Inseln (Halle, 1840-1845) ; T. Bent, 
Journal of Hellenic Studies, vi. '(51885), p. 235; R. M. Dawkins, 
A nnual of British School at A then$,"\x. and x. 



CARPEAUX, JEAN BAPTISTE (1827-1875), French sculptor, 
was born at Valenciennes, France, on the nth of May 1827. 
He was the son of a mason, and passed his early life in extreme 
poverty. In 1842 he came to Paris, and after working for two 
years in a drawing-school, was admitted to the Ecole des Beaux- 
Arts on the 9th of September 1854. The Grand Prix de Rome 
was awarded to his statue of " Hector bearing in his arms his 
son Astyanax." His first work exhibited at the Salon, in 1853, 
did not show the spirit of an innovator, and was very unlike the 
work of his master Rude. At Rome he was fascinated by 
Donatello, and yet more influenced by Michelangelo, to whom 
he owes his feeling for vehement and passionate action. He 
sent from Rome a bust, " La Palombella," 1856; and a " Nea- 
politan Fisherman," 1858. This work was again exhibited in the 
Salon of 1859, and took a second-class medal; but it was not 
executed in marble till 1863. In his last year in Rome he sent 
home a dramatic group, " Ugolino and his Sons," and exhibited 
at the same time a " Bust of Princess Mathilde." This gained 
him a second-class medal and the favour of the Imperial family. 
In 1864 he executed the " Girl with a Shell," the companion 
figure to the young fisherman; and although in 1865 he did 
not exhibit at the Salon, busts of " Mme. A. E. Andre," of 
" Giraud " the painter, and of " Mile. Benedetti " showed 
that he was not idle. He was working at the same time on the 
decorations of the Pavilion de Flore, of which the pedimerft 
alone was seen at the Salon, though the bas-relief below is an 
even better example of his style. After producing a statue of 
the prince imperial, Carpeaux was made chevalier of the Legion 
of Honour in 1866. Two years later he received an important 
commission to execute one of the four groups for the facade 
of the new opera house. His group, representing " Dancing," 
1869, was greeted with indignant protests; it is nevertheless 
a sound work, full of movement, with no fault but that of ex- 
ceeding the limitations prescribed. In 1869 he exhibited a 
" Bust of M. Gamier," and followed this up with two pieces 
intended for his native city: a statue of Watteau, and a bas- 
relief, " Valenciennes repelling Invasion." During the Commune 
he came to England, and made a " Bust of Gounod " in 187-1. 
His last important work was a fountain, the " Four Quarters of 
the World," in which the globe is sustained by four female 
figures personifying Europe, Asia, Africa and America. This 
fountain is now in the Avenue de l'Observatoire in Paris. Car- 
peaux, though exhausted by illness, continued designing in- 
defatigably, till he died at the Chateau de Becon, near Courbevoie, 
on the 12th of October 1875, after being promoted to the higher 
grade of the Legion of Honour. Many of his best drawings have 
been presented by Prince Stirbey to the city of Valenciennes. 

See Ernest Chesneau, Carpeaux, sa vie et son ceuvre (Paris, 1880); 
Paul Foucart, Catalogue du Musie Carpeaux, Valenciennes (Paris, 
1882); Jules Claretie, J. Carpeaux (1882); Francois Bournand, 
/. B. Carpeaux (1893). 

CARPENTARIA, GULF OF, an extensive arm of the sea deeply 
indenting the north coast of Australia, between io° 40' and 
1 7 40' S., and 135 30' and 142 ° E. Its length is 480 m. and its 
extreme breadth (E. to W.) 420 m. It is bounded E. by Cape 
York Peninsula, and W. by the Northern Territory of South 
Australia. Near its southern extremity is situated a group bf 
islands called Wellesley; and towards the western side are the 
Sir Edward Pellew Islands, the Groote Eylandt and others. 
A large number of rivers find their way to the gulf, and some are 
of considerable size. On the eastern side there is the Mitchell 
river; at the south-east corner the Gilbert, the Norman, the 
Flinders, the Leichhardt and the Gregory; and on the west the 
Roper river. Jan Carstensz, who undertook a voyage of dis- 
covery in this part of the globe in 1623, gave the name of Carpen- 
tier to a small river near Cape Duyfhen in honour of Pieter 
Carpentier, at that time governor-general of the Dutch East 
Indies; and after the second voyage of Abel Tasman in 1644, 
the gulf, which he had successfully explored, began to appear on 
the charts under its present designation. 

CARPENTER, LANT (1780- 1840), English Unitarian nunister, 
was born at Kidderminster on the 2nd of September 1780, the 



CARPENTER, M.— CARPENTER, W. B. 



38s 



son of a carpet manufacturer. After some months at a non- 
conformist academy at Northampton, he proceeded to Glasgow 
University, and then joined the ministry. After a short time 
as assistant master at a Unitarian school near Birmingham, he 
was in 1802 appointed librarian at the Liverpool Athenaeum. 
In 1805 he became pastor of a church in Exeter, removing in 
181 7 to Bristol. At both Bristol and Exeter he was also engaged 
in school work, among his Bristol pupils being Harriet and 
James Martineau. Carpenter did much to broaden the spirit 
of English Unitarianism. The rite of baptism seemed to him a 
superstition, and he substituted for it a form of infant dedication. 
His health, undermined by his constant labours, broke down in 
1839, and he was ordered to travel. He was drowned on the 
night of the 5th of April 1840, having been washed overboard 
from the steamer in which he was travelling from Leghorn to 
Marseilles. 

CARPENTER, MATtY (1807-1877), English educational and 
social reformer, was born on the 3rd of April 1807 at Exeter, 
where her father, Dr Lant Carpenter, was Unitarian minister. 
In 1817 the family removed to Bristol, where Dr Carpenter was 
called to the ministry of Lewin's Mead Meeting. As a child 
Mary Carpenter was unusually earnest, with a deep religious vein 
and a remarkable thoroughness in everything she undertook. 
She was educated in her father's school for boys, learning Latin, 
Greek and mathematics, and other subjects at that time not 
generally taught to girls. She early showed an aptitude for 
teaching, taking a class in the Sunday school, and "afterwards 
helping her father with his pupils. When Dr Carpenter gave 
up his school in 1829, his daughters opened a school for girls 
under Mrs Carpenter's superintendence. In 1833 the raja 
Rammohun Roy visited Bristol, and inspired Miss Carpenter 
with a warm interest in India; and Dr Joseph Tuckerman of 
Boston about the same time aroused her sympathies for the con- 
dition of destitute children. Her life-work began with her taking 
part in organizing, in 1835, a "Working and Visiting Society," 
of which she was secretary for twenty years. In 1843 her interest 
in negro emancipation Was aroused by a visit fronTDr S. G. 
Howe. Her interest in general educational work was also 
growing. A bill introduced in this year "to make provision 
for the better education of children in manufacturing districts," 
as a first instalment of a scheme of national education, failed to 
pass, largely owing to Nonconformist opposition, and private 
effort became doubly necessary. So-called " Ragged Schools " 
sprang up in many places, and Miss Carpenter conceived the plan 
of starting one in Lewin's Mead. To this was added a night- 
school for adults. In spite of many difficulties this was rendered 
a success, chiefly owing to Miss Carpenter's unwearied enthusiasm 
and remarkable organizing power. In 1848 the closing 1 of their 
own private school gave Miss Carpenter more leisure for philan- 
thropic and literary work. She published a memoir of Dr 
Tuckerman, and a series of articles on ragged schools, which 
appeared in the Inquirer and were afterwards collected in book 
form. This was followed in 1851 by Reformatory Schools for 
the Children of the Perishing and Dangerous Classes, and for 
Juvenile Offenders. She sketched out three classes of schools as 
urgently needed: — (1) good free day-schools; (2) feeding 
industrial schools; (3) reformatory schools. This book drew 
public attention to her work, and from that time onwards she 
was drawn into personal intercourse with leading thinkers and 
workers. She was consulted in the drafting of educational bills, 
and invited to give evidence before House of Commons com- 
mittees. To test the practical value of her theories, she herself 
started a reformatory school at Bristol, and in 1852 she published 
Juvenile Delinquents, their Condition and Treatment, which 
largely helped on the passing of the Juvenile Offenders Act in 
1854. Now that the principle of reformatory schools was 
established, Miss Carpenter returned to her plea for free day- 
schools, contending that the ragged schools were entitled to 
pecuniary aid from the annual parliamentary grant. At the 
Oxford meeting of the British Association (i860) she read a 
paper on this subject, and, mainly owing to her instigation, 
a conference on ragged schools in relation to government grants 
v. 13 



for education was held at Birmingham (186 1). In 1866 Miss 
Carpenter was at last able to carry out a long-cherished plan of 
visiting India, where she found herself an honoured guest. She 
visited Calcutta, Madras and Bombay, inaugurated the Bengal 
Social Science Association, and drew up a memorial to the 
governor-general dealing with female education, reformatory 
schools and the state of gaols. This visit was followed by others 
in 1868 and 1869. Her attempt to found a female normal school 
was unsuccessful at the time, owing to the inadequate previous 
education of the women, but afterwards such colleges were 
founded by government. A start, however, was made with a 
model Hindu girls' school, and here she had the co-operation of 
native gentlemen. Her last visit to India took place in 1875, 
two years before her death, when she had the satisfaction of 
seeing many of her schemes successfully established. At the 
meeting of the prison congress in 1872 she ; read a paper on 
" Women's Work in the Reformation of Women Convicts." 
Her work now began to attract attention abroad. Princess 
Alice of Hesse summoned her to Darmstadt to organize a Women's 
Congress. Thence she went to Neuchatel to study the prison 
system of Dr Guillaume, and in 1873 to America, where she was 
enthusiastically received. Miss Carpenter watched with interest 
the increased activity of women during the busy 'seventies. 
She warmly supported the movement for their higher education, 
and herself signed the memorial to the university of London in 
favour of admitting them to medical degrees. She died at 
Bristol on the 14th of June 1877, having lived to see the accom- 
plishment of nearly all the reforms for which she had worked 
and hoped. (A. Z.) 

CARPENTER, WILLIAM BENJAMIN (1813-1885), English 
physiologist and naturalist, was bom at Exeter on the 29th 
of October 1813. He was the eldest son of Dr Lant Carpenter. 
He attended medical classes • at University College, London, 
and then went to Edinburgh, where he took the degree of M.D. 
in 1839. The subject of his graduation thesis, " The Physiological 
Inferences to be Deduced from the Structure of the Nervous 
System of Invertebrated Animals," indicates a line' of research 
which had fruition in his Principles of General and Comparative 
Physiology. His work in comparative neurology was recognized 
in 1844 by his election to the Royal Society, which awarded 
him a Royal medal in 1861; and Ms appointment as Fullerian 
professor of physiology in the Royal Institution in 1845 enabled 
him to exhibit his powers as a teacher and lecturer, Ms gift of 
ready speech and luminous interpretation placing him in the 
front rank of exponents, at a time when the popularization of 
science was in its infancy. His manifold labours as investigator, 
author, editor, demonstrator and lecturer knew no cessation 
through life; but in assessing the value of his work, prominence 
should be given to his researches in marine zoology, notably 
in the lower organisms, as Foraminifera and Crinoids. These 
researches gave an impetus to deep-sea exploration, an outcome 
of which was in 1868 the " Lightning/' and later the more 
famous " Challenger," expedition. He took a keen and laborious 
interest in the evidence adduced by Canadian geologists as to the 
organic nature of the so-called Eozaon Canadense, discovered 
in the Laurentian strata, and at the time of his death had 
nearly finished a monograph on the subject, defending the now 
discredited theory of its animal origin. He was an adept in the 
use of the microscope, and his popular treatise on The Microscope 
and its Revelations (1856) has stimulated a host of observers to the 
use of the " added sense " with which it has endowed man. 
In 1856 Carpenter became registrar of the university of London, 
and held the office for twenty-three years; on Ms resignation in 
1879 he was made a C.B. in recogmtion of Ms services to edu- 
cation generally. Biologist as he was, Carpenter nevertheless 
made reservations as to the extension of the doctrine of evolution 
to man's intellectual and spiritual nature. In Ms Principles of 
Mental Physiology he asserted both the freedom of the will and 
the existence of the " Ego," and one of Ms last public engage- 
ments was the reading of a paper in support of miracles. He 
died in London, from injuries occasioned by the accidental 
upsetting of a spirit-lamp, on the 19th of November 1885. 

11 



3 86 



CARPENTRAS— CARPENTRY 



CARPENTRAS, a town of south-eastern France, capital of 
an arrondissement in the department of Vaucluse 16 m. N.E. 
of Avignon by rail. Pop. (1906) town, 7775; commune, 10,721. 
The town stands on the left bank of the Auzon on an eminence, 
the summit of which is occupied by the church of St Siffrein, for- 
merly a cathedral, and the adjoining law-court. 'St Siffrein, in 
its existing state, dates from the 15th and 16th centuries and is 
Gothic in style, but it preserves remains of a previous church 
of Romanesque architecture. The rich sculpture of the southern 
portal and the relics and works of art in the interior are of some 
interest. The law-court, built in 1640 as the bishop's palace, 
contains in its courtyard a small but well-preserved triumphal 
arch of the Gallo-Roman period. Other important buildings 
are the hospital, an imposing structure of the 18th century, 
opposite which is a statue of its founder, Malachie d'Inguimbert, 
bishop of Carpentras; and the former palace of the papal 
legate, which dates from 1640. Of the old fortifications the only 
survival is the Porte d'Orange, a gateway surmounted by a fine 
machicolated tower. Their site is now occupied by wide boule- 
vards shaded by plane-trees. Water is brought to the town by 
an aqueduct of forty -eight arches, completed in 1734. 

Carpentras is the seat of a sub-prefect and of a court of assizes, 
and has a tribunal of first instance, communal college for girls 
and boys, a large library and a museum. Felt hats, confection- 
ery, preserved fruits and nails are its industrial products, and 
there are silk-works, tanneries and dye-works. There is trade 
in silk, wool, fruit, oil, &c. The irrigation-canal named after the 
town flows to the east of it (see Vaucluse). 

Carpentras is identified with Carpentoracte, a town of Gallia 
Narbonensis mentioned by Pliny, which appears to have been 
of some importance during the Roman period. Its medieval 
history is full of vicissitudes; it was captured and plundered 
by Vandal, Lombard and Saracen. In later times, as capital 
of the Comtat Venaissin, it was frequently the residence of the 
popes of Avignon, to whom that province belonged from 1228 
till the Revolution. Carpentras was the seat of a bishopric from 
the 5th century till 1805. 

CARPENTRY, the art and work of a carpenter (from Lat. 
earpentum, a carriage), a workman in wood, especially for build- 
ing purposes. The labour of the sawyer is applied to the division 
of large pieces of timber or logs into forms and sizes to suit the 
purposes of the carpenter and joiner. His working-place is 
called a sawpit, and his most important tool is a pit-saw. A 
cross-cut saw, axes, dogs, files, compasses, lines, lampblack, 
blacklead, chalk and a rule may also be regarded as necessary 
to him. But this method of sawing timber is now only used in 
remote country places, and in modern practice logs, &c, are 
converted into planks and small pieces at saw-mills, which are 
equipped with modern machinery to drive all kinds of circular 
saws by electricity, steam or gas. 

Carpentry or carpenters' work has been divided into three 
principal branches — descriptive, constructive and mechanical. 
The first shows the lines or method for forming every species of 
work by the rules of geometry; the second comprises the practice 
of reducing the timber into particular forms, and joining the 
forms so produced in such a way as to make a complete whole 
according to the intention or design; and the third displays 
the relative strength of the timbers and the strains to which 
they are subjected by their disposition. Here we have merely 
to describe the practical details of the carpenter's work in the 
queries of building. He is distinguished from the joiner by
his queries being directed to the mere carcass of a building,
to things which have reference to structure only. Almost every- 
thing the carpenter does to a building is absolutely necessary 
to its stability and efficiency, whereas the joiner does not begin 
his queries until the carcass is complete, and every article
of joiners' work might at any time be removed from a building 
without undermining it or affecting its most important qualities. 
Certainly in the practice of building a few things do occur regard- 
ing which it is difficult to determine to whose immediate province 
they belong, but the distinction is sufficiently broad for general 
purposes. 



The carpenter frames or combines separate pieces of timber 
by scarfing, notching, cogging, tenoning, pinning and wedging, 
&c. The tools he uses are the rule, axe, adze, saws, mallet, 
hammers, chisels, gouges, augers, pincers, set squares, bevel, 
compasses, gauges, level, plumb rule, jack, trying and smooth- 
ing planes, rebate and moulding planes, and gimlets and wedges 







Fig. 1. — Lapped Joint. 

^•wroudWr von plate 




dc&<^^^^^^^P"?^ 




elevation 



^h^tes^befts 



o. © 



T^r 



plan 




Figs. 3, 4 and 5. — Scarf Joints. 



The carpenter has little labour to put on to the stuff; his chief 
work consists in fixing and cutting the ends of timbers, the 
labour in preparing the timber being done by machinery. 

Joints. — The joints in carpentry are various, and each is 
designed according to the thrust or strain put upon it. Those 
principally used are the following: lap, fished, scarf, notching, 
cogging, dovetailing, housing, halving, mortice and tenon, stub 



CARPENTRY 



387 




tenon, dovetailed tenon, tusk tenon, joggle, bridle, foxtail 
wedging, mitre, birdsmouth, built-up, dowel. Illustrations are 
given of the most useful joints in general use, and these, 
together with the descriptions, will enable a good idea to be 
formed of their respective merits and methods of application. 

The lapped joint (fig. 1) is used for temporary structures in 
lengthening timbers and is secured with iron straps and bolts; 
a very common use of the lap joint is seen in scaffolding 
secured with cords and wedges. 

The fished joint (fig. 2) is used for lengthening beams and 
is constructed by butting the ends of two pieces of timber 
together with an iron plate on top and bottom, and bolting 
through the timber; these iron connecting-plates are usually 

about 3 ft. long and \ in. 
and i in. in thickness. 
This joint provides a good 
and cheap method of 
accomplishing its purpose. 
The scarf joint (figs. 3, 
4 and 5) is used for length- 
ening beams, and is made 
by cutting and notching 
the ends of timbers and 
lapping and fitting and 
bolting through. This 
method cuts into the tim- 
ber, but is very strong 
neat; in addition for 
extra strong work 
an iron fish-plate is 
used as in the fished 
joint. 

The ends of floor 
joints and rafters 
are usually notched 
(fig. 6) over plates 
to obtain a good 
bearing and bring 
them to the re- 
quired levels. Where 
one timber crosses 
another as in pur- 
lins, rafters, wood 
floor girders, plates, 
&c, both timbers 
are notched so as to fit 
over each other; this cog- 
ging (fig. 7) serves instead 
of fastenings. The timbers 
are held together with a 
spike. In this way they 
are not weakened, and the 
joint is a very good one for 
keeping them in position. 
Dovetailing 
(fig. 8) is used 
for connecting 
angles of timber 
together, such as 
lantern curbs or 
linings, and is 
the strongest 
<m ^1 ~ v \Ti^' form. When an 

^^^ end of timber is 

Fig. 9.— Housing. Fig. 10.— Halving. kt entire i y into 

another timber it is said to be housed (fig. 9). Where timbers 
cross one another and require to be flush on one or both faces, 
sinkings are cut in each so as to fit over each other (halving) ; 
these can either be square (fig. 10), bevelled (fig. 11) or dove- 
tailed sinkings (fig. 12). The end of one piece of timber cut so 
as to leave a third of the thickness forms a tenon, and the piece 
of timber which is to be joined to it has a mortice or slot cut 



Fig. 7.— Cogging. 




Fig. 8. — Dovetail. 






Fig. 11. — Bevelled Halving. Fig. 12. — Dovetailed E-'.vIng, 



1 




Fig. 13. — Mortice and Tenon. 




6 



IT* 



J* 




Fig. 15. — Dovetailed Tenon. 



Fig. 17. — -Bridle Joint. 

through it to receive the 
tenon; the two are then 
wedged or pinned with 
wood pins (fig. 13). 

A stub tenon or joggle 
(fig. 14) is used for fixing 
a post to a sill; a sinking 
is cut in the sill and a 
tenon is cut on the foot of 
the post to fit into the 
sinking to keep the post 
from sliding. 

The purpose of a dove- 
tailed tenon (fig. 15) is to 
hold two pieces of wood 
together with mortice and 
tenon so that it can be 



Fig. 14. — Stub Tenon or Joggle. 



Fig. 16. — Tusk Tenon. 






Fig. 18. — Foxtail Wedging. 




..oor 
•ill a ]>oard3 



Fig. 19. — Dowelling. 



3 88 



CARPENTRY 



taken apart when necessary. The tenon is cut dovetail shape, 
and a long mortice permits the wide part of the tenon to 
go through, and it is secured with wood wedges. Where the 
floor joists or rafters are trimmed round fires, wells, &c, the 
tusk tenon joint (fig. 16) is used for securing the trimmer joist. 
It is formed by cutting a tenon on the trimmer joist and passing 
it through the side of the trimming joist and fixing it with a wood 
key. Where large timbers are tusk tenoned together, the tenons 
do not pass right through, but are cut in about 4 in. and spiked. 
A bridle joint or birdsmouth (fig. 17) is formed by cutting one 
end of timber either V shape or segmental, and morticing the 
centre of this shaped end. Similar sinkings are cut on the 
adjoining timber to fit one into the other; these are secured with 
pins and also various other forms of fastenings. Foxtail wedging 
(fig. 18) is a method very similar to mortice and tenon. But the 
tenon does not go through the full thickness of the timber; and 
also on the end of the tenon are inserted two wedges, so that 
when the tenon is driven home the wedges split it and wedge 
tightly into the mortice. This joint is used mostly in joinery. 
The mitre is a universal joint, used for connecting angles of 
timber as in the case of picture frames. Built-up joints involve 
a system of lapping and bolting and fishing, as in the case of 
temporary structures, for large spans of centering for arches, and 
for derrick cranes. Dowels are usually 3 or 4 in. long and driven 
into a circular hole in the foot of a door frame or post; the other 

end is let into a hole 
in the sill (fig. 19). 

Centering. — Cen- 
tering is temporary 
timber or framing 
erected so as to 
carry concrete floors 
or arches of brick 
or stone, &c; when 
the work has set the 
centering is removed 
gradually. The centering for concrete floors is usually composed 
of scaffold boards resting on wood bearers (fig. 20). One wood 
bearer rests along on top of the steel joists; through this 
bearer long bolts are suspended, and to the bottom of these 
bolts a second bearer is fixed, and on the bottom bearer the 
scaffold boards rest. Another method, not much used now, is 
to fit the boards to the size of the floor and prop them up on 
legs, but among other disadvantages this process takes up 
much space and is more costly. 

Turning piece is a name given to centering required for turning 
an arch over (fig. 21); it is only 4! in. wide on the soffit or bed, 
and is generally cut out of a piece of 3 or 4 in. stuff, the top 
edge being made circular to the shape of the arch. It is kept 




Fig. 20.- 



-Method of supporting Centering for 
Concrete. 




Elevertiori 

Fig. 21. 



cJedien 



in position whilst the arch is setting with struts from ground or 
sills and is nailed to the reveals, a couple of cross traces being 
wedged between. In the case of a semicircular or elliptical arch 
with 4J in. soffit this turning piece would be constructed of 
ribs cut out of 4 in. stuff with ties and braces. Or the ribs could 
be cut out of 1 in. stuff, in which case there must be one set of 
ribs outside and one inside secured with ties and braces; each 



set of ribs when formed of thin stuff is made of two thicknesses 
nailed together so as to lap the joints. For spans up to 15 ft. 
the thin ribs would be used, and for spans above 1 5 ft. ribs out 
of 4 in. stuff and upwards. For arches with 9 in. soffit and 
upwards, whether segmental or semicircular or elliptical, the 
centres are formed with the thin ribs and laggings up to 15 ft. 
span; above 15 ft. with 4 in. ribs and upwards (fig. 22). The 




Fig. 22. — Centering for Stone Arch. 



c£cnon 



lower member of centres is called the tie, and is fixed so as to 
tie the extremities together and to keep the centre from 
spreading. Where the span is great, these ties, instead of being 
fixed straight, are given a rise so as to allow for access or traffic 
underneath. Braces are necessary to support the ribs from 
buckling in, and must be strong enough and so arranged as to 
withstand all stresses. Laggings are small pieces or strips of 
wood nailed on the ribs to form the surface on which to build 
the arch, and are spaced 1 in. apart for ordinary arches; for 
gauged arches they are nailed close together and the joints planed 
off. When centres are required to be taken down, the wedges 
upon which the centre rests are first removed so as to allow the 
arch to take its bearing gradually. Centres for brick sewers and 
vault arching are formed in the same way as previously men- 
tioned, with ribs and laggings, but the thickness of the timbers 
depends upon the weight to be carried. 

Floors. — For ordinary residential purposes floors are chiefly 
constructed of timber. Up to about the year 1895 nearly 




Fig. 23.— Single Floor. 

every modern building was constructed with wood joists, but 
because of evidence adduced by fire brigade experts and the 
serious fires that have occurred fire-resisting floors have been 
introduced. These consist of steel girders and joists, filled in 
with concrete or various patented brick materials in accordance 
with such by-laws as those passed by the London County Council 
and other authorities, The majority of the floors of public 



CARPENTRY 



389 



buildings, factories, schools, and large residential flats are now 
constructed of fire-resisting materials. There are two descrip- 
tions of flooring, single and double. 

Single flooring (fig. 23) consists of one row of wood joists 
resting on a wall or partition at each end without any inter- 
mediate support, and receiving the floor boards on the 
flo"rine- "PP er surface and the ceiling on the underside. Joists 
should never be less than 2 in. thick, or they are liable 
to split when the floor brads are driven in; the thickness varies 

^dowelled heading joint. 




Fig. 24. — Floor pugged to resist passage of sound. 



from 2 to 4 in. and the depth from 5 to 1 1 in. (see By-laws, below) ; 
the distance between each joist is usually 1 2 in. in the clear, but 
greater strength is obtained in a floor by having deep joists and 
placing them closer together. These floors are made firm and 
prevented from buckling by the use of strutting as mentioned 
hereafter. 

The efficiency of single flooring is materially affected by the 
necessity which constantly occurs in practice of trimrhing round 
fireplaces and flues, and round well holes such as lifts, staircases, 
&c. Trimming is a method of supporting the end of a joist by 
tenoning it into timber crossing it; the timber so tenoned is 
called the trimmer joist, and the timber morticed for the tenon of 
the trimmer is called the trimming joist, while the intermediate 
timbers tenoned into the trimmer are known as the trimmed 




joists. This system has to be resorted to when it is impossible to 
get a bearing on the wall. 

A trimmer requires for the most part to be carried or supported 
at one or both ends by the trimming joists, and both the trimmer 
and the trimming joists are necessarily made stouter than if they 
had to bear no more than their own share of the stress. In the 
usual practice the trimmer and trimming joists are 1 in. thicker 



than the common joists, but there are special regulations and 
by-laws set out in the various districts and boroughs (see By- 
laws, below) to which attention must be given. 

The principal objection to single flooring is that the sound 
passes through from floor to floor, so that, in some cases, conversa^ 
tion in one room can almost be understood in another. To stop 



Jfeas; 




eating 



f-^^tg^^ 


f tlfisi 


Yzz^ ?** — 










daimi w%h 


Mijfpltfto 



floor -y 



Fig. 26. 




the sound from passing through floors the remedy is to pug them 
(fig. 24). This consists in using rough boarding resting on fillets 
nailed to the sides of the joists about half-way up the depth of 
the joists, and then filling in on top of the boarding with slag 
wool usually 3 in. thick. Also to further prevent sound from 




Fig. 27. — Construction of a Medieval Floor. 

passing through floors the flooring should be tongued and the 
ceiling should have a good thick floating coat; in poor work the 
stuff on ceilings is very stinted. In days gone by, ceiling joists 
were put at right angles to the floor joists, but this took up head 
room and was costly, and the arrangement is obsolete. ' 




Fig. 28. — Herring-bone Strutting. 




Fig. 29. — Solid Strutting. 



Double flooring (fig. 25) consists of single fir joists trimmed 
into steel girders; in earlier times a double floor consisted of 
fir joists called binding, bridging and ceiling joists, 
but these are very little used now and the single fir flooring, 
joists and steel girders have taken their place. 
Steel girders span from wall to wall, and on their flanges 
are bolted wood plates to receive the ends of the single joists 
which are notched over plates and run at right angles to the 



39^ 



CARPENTRY 



girders (fig. 26). The bearings of the joists on the wall also 
rest on wall plates, so as to get a level bed, and are some- 
times notched over them. Wall plates, which are usually 
4^ in. X 3 in. and are bedded on walls in _ 
motar, take the ends of joists and distri- || 
bute the weight along the wall. The plates 
bolted on the side of girders are of sizes to 
suit the width of the flanges. 

The medieval floor (fig. 27) consisted of 
the framed floor with wood girders, binding, 
bridging and ceiling joists ; and the under- 
side of all the timbers was usually wrought, 
the girders and binders being boldly moulded 
and the other timbers either square or stop 
chamfered. 

Flooring is strengthened by the use of 
strutting, either herring-bone (fig. 28) or solid 
(fig. 29). Herring-bone strutting consists of 
two pieces of timber, usually 2 in. X 2 in., 
fixed diagonally between each joist in continuous rows, the 
rows being about 6 ft. apart. Solid strutting consists of i| in. 
boards, nearly the same depth as the joists and fitted tightly 
between the joists, and nailed in continuous rows 6 ft. apart. 
Where heavy weights are likely to be put on floors long bolts 
are passed through the centre of joists at the side of strutting; 
since this draws the strutting tightly together and does not 
produce any forcing stress on the walls, it is undoubtedly 
the best method. 

Floors are usually constructed to carry the following loads 
(including weight of floor) : — 

Residences, ii cwt. per foot super of floor space. 
Public buildings, I J cwt. per foot super of floor space. 
Factories, 2\ to 4 cwt. per foot super of floor space. 
Local By-laws. — With regard to floor joists in domestic buildings, 
the following are required in the Hornsey district, in the north of 
London. The size of every common bearing floor joist up to 3 ft. 
long in clear shall be 3 in. X 2 J in. ; from 3 ft. to 6 ft. in clear it shall 
be aJ in. X 3 in.; from 6 ft. to 8 ft., 6J in. X 2j in.; from 8 ft. to 
12 ft., 7 in.X2i in., and so on according to the clear span. The 
Hornsey by-laws with regard to trimmers are as follows: — A 
trimmer joist shall not receive more than six common joists, and 
the thickness of a trimming joist receiving a trimmer at not more 
than 3 ft. from one end and of every trimmer 
joist shall be fth of an inch greater than the 
thickness for a common joist of the same 
bearing for every common joist carried by a 
trimmer. For example, if the common joists 
are 7 in.X2§ in. and the trimmer has six joists 
trimmed into same, the size of trimmer would 
have to be 7 in.X3i in. The Hornsey council 
also requires that the floor boards shall not be 
less than f ths of an inch thick. 

There is little difference in the requirements 
of the various localities. For example, the regu- 
lations of the Croydon council require that every 
common bearing joist for lengths up to 3 ft. 
4 in. in clear shall be 3 in.X2j in.; for lengths 
between 3 ft. 4 in. and 5 ft. 4 in., 4 in. X2 in.; 
for lengths between 5 ft. 4 in. and 7 ft. 4 in., 
4 in. X3 in.; and so on according to the clear 
span. The Croydon by-laws with regard to 
trimmers are as follows: — A trimmer joist shall 
not receive more than six common joists, and the thickness of a 
trimming joist shall be i\ in. thicker than that for common joists 
of the same bearing, and the thickness of a trimmer joist shall be 
I in. thicker for every joist trimmed into same than the common 
joist. For example, if the common joists are 4 in. X3 in. the trim- 
ming joists would have to be 4 in.X4§ in., and the trimmer joist 
would have to be 4 in.X4i in. 

Partitions. — Partitions are screens used to divide large floor 
spaces into smaller rooms and are sometimes constructed to carry 
the floors above by a system of trussing. They are built of 
various materials; those in use now are common stud partitions, 
bricknogged partitions, and solid deal and hardwood partitions, 
4§ in. brick walls or bricks laid on their sides, so making a 3 in. 
partition, and various patent partitions such as coke breeze 
concrete or hollow br'.ck partitions (see Brickwork), iron 
and wire partitions, and plaster slab partitions (see Plaster- 
work). 



There are two kinds of stud or quarter partitions, common 
and trussed. 

Common partitions (fig. 30) simply act as a screen to divide 




Con\vr\or\ partition 



Fig. 30. — Common Partition, 
one room from another, and do not carry any weight. They 
weigh about 25 lb per foot superficial including Commoa 
plastering on both sides, and are composed of 4 in. X 3 partitions. 
in. head and sill and 4 in. X 2 in. upright studs; 
4 in. X 2 in, nogging pieces are fitted between the studs to 
keep them from bending in, and are placed parallel with the 
head,. usually 4 ft. apart. Where door-openings occur in these 
partitions the studs next the opening are 4 in. X 3 hi. Should 
the floor boards have been laid, the sill of the partition would 
be laid direct on them, but if the partitions are erected at the 
time of building the structure the sill should either rest directly 
over a joist, if parallel with it, or at right angles to the joists; 
should the position of the sill come between two joists, that is, 
parallel with them, then short pieces called bridging pieces of 
4 in. X 2 in. stuff are wedged between the two joists and nailed 
to carry the sill. 

Trussed partitions (fig. 31) are very similar to the last, but 
they are so built as to carry their o\*i weight and also Trussed 
to Support floors, and in addition have braces; the par titions. 
head and sill are larger, and calculated according to 
the clear bearing and the weight put upon them. There are 




trussed -parMor^ 



Fig. 31. — Trussed Partition, 
two forms of trussing, namely, queen post (fig. 32) and king 
post (fig. 33). 

Bricknogged partitions are formed in the same manner as 
the common stud partition, except that the studs are placed 
usually 18 or 27 in. apart in the clear instead of 12 in., and 
the 18 and 27 in. widths being multiples of a brick dimension, 
they are filled in with brickwork 4! in. thick and Brick- 
always built in cement. These are used to prevent nagged 
sound from passing from one room to another, and pa ons ' 
also to prevent fire from spreading, and are vermin-proof. 
Another method is to fill the space between the studs with coke 
breeze concrete instead of brickwork. 

Timber partitions have the advantages that they are light 
and cheap and substantial, and the disadvantages that they 
are not fire-resisting or sound-resisting or vermin-proof; 
they should never be erected in damp positions such as the 



CARPENTRY 



39 1 





detail aY F 



Fig. 32. — Queen Post Trussed Partition. 

lower floors of 
buildings. 

Solid wood parti- 
tions are used in 
offices and class- 
rooms of schools, 
the upper portions 
usually being 
glazed; where 
these partitions 
enclose a staircase VzA^cfeicft] C% E 





secforx 
Fig. 33. — King Post Trussed Partition. 



in a public building the London Building Act requires them 
to be of 2 in. hardwood, with only small panels of fire-resisting 
glass. 

Timber Work. — Half timber work consists of a framework 
of timber; the upper storeys of suburban and country residences 
are often thus treated, and the spaces between the timbers are 
filled in with brickwork and plastered inside, and rough cast 
outside, though sometimes tiles are hung on the outside. In some 
instances in country places there is no filling between the timbers, 
and both sides are lath and plastered, and in others the timbers 
are solid, or facing pieces are simply plugged to the walls, the 
joints being pinned with hardwood pins. Half timber work 
(fig. 34) well designed has a very pleasing, homely and rural 
effect. The best and most durable wood to use is English oak 
worked smooth on the external face and usually painted; the 
by-laws of various authorities differ considerably as to the method 
of construction and in the restrictions as to its use. Some very 
fine early examples are to be seen in England, as at Holborn 
Bars, London, in the old parts of Bristol, and at Moreton Old 
Hall, near Congleton, Cheshire (see House, Plate IV. fig. 13). 

Timber-framed permanent buildings are not used in the towns 
of England, not being allowed by the by-laws. In some English 
villages timber bungalows are allowed, plastered inside, and 
either rough cast outside, or with tiles, or with sheet iron painted. 







/fonV elevation 
Fig. 34. — Half Timber Construction. 

At the garden city of Letchworth, in Hertfordshire, there are 
a few timber-framed bungalows (erected about 1904 and 
originally intended to be used as week-end cottages), the 
outsides of which are covered with sheet iron and painted. 
Other instances of the temporary use of this kind of building 
are found in soldiers' barracks, offices and chapels. 

In America and the British colonies this class of building 
is very largely erected on the outskirts of the cities. In 
American practice in framing the walls of wooden buildings 
two distinct methods are used and are distinguished as 
" braced " and " balloon." 

The Braced (fig. 35) was the only kind in use previous to 
about the year 1850. In this method of framing the sills, 
posts, girts and plates are made of heavy timber morticed and 
pinned together and braced with 4 in. X 4 in. or 4 in. X 6 in. 
braces and common studding. To frame a building in this way 
it is necessary to cut all the pieces and make all the mortice 
holes on the ground, and then fit them together and raise a 
whole side at a time or at least one storey of it. The common 
studs are only one storey high. 

The Balloon frame (fig. 36) is composed of much smaller 
scantlings and is more rapidly erected and less expensive. 
The method is to first lay the sill, generally 4 in. X 6 in., 
halved at the angles. After the floor is laid, the corner posts, 
usually 4 in. X 6 in., are erected and temporarily secured in 
place with the aid of stays. The common studs are then set 



392 



CARPED 



up and spiked to the sill, and a temporary board nailed 
across their face on the inside. These common studs are , 
the full height from sill to roof plate, and the second tier of 
floor joists are supported by notching a ij in. X 7 m - board, 
called a false girt or ribbon, into their inside edge at the 
height to receive the floor joists. The ends of the joists are 
also placed against a stud and spiked. The tops of the studs 
are cut to a line, and a 2 in. X 4 in. plate is spiked on top, 
an additional 2 in. X 4 in. plate being placed on the top of 




Fig. 35.— Braced Frame. 

the last breaking joint. Should the studs not be long 
enough to reach the plate, then short pieces are fished on 
with pieces of wood spiked on both sides. The diagram 
shows a portion of the framework of a two-storey house 
constructed in the manner described. In the balloon frame 
the timbers are held together entirely by nails and spikes, 
thus permitting them to be put up rapidly. The studs are 
doubled where windows or openings occur. In both these 
methods dwarf brick foundations should be built, upon which 
to rest the sill. For buildings of a superior kind a combination 
of the braced and balloon frames is sometimes adopted. 

The sides of frame buildings are covered with siding, which is 
fastened to a sheathing of rough boards nailed to the studs. The 
siding may consist of matched boards placed diagonally, or of 
clapboards or weather boards — which are thin boards thicker at 
one edge than the other, and arranged horizontally with the 
thick edge downwards and overlapping the thin edge of the 
board below. Shingles or wooden tiles are also employed. 

Authorities. — The following are the principal publications on 
carpentry: T. Tredgold, Carpentry; Peter Nicholson, Carpenter and 
Joiner; J. Newlands, Carpenter's Assistant; J. Gwilt, Encyclopaedia 
of Architecture; Rivington, Building Construction (elementary and 
advanced) ; E. L. Tarbuck, Encyclopaedia of Practical Carpentry and 
Joinery; A. W. Pugin, Details of Ancient Timber Houses; Beresford 
Pite, Building Construction; J. P. Allen, Building Construction; 
H. Adams, Notes on Building; C. F. Mitchell, Building Construction 
(elementary and advanced) ; Burrell, Building Construction ; F. E. 
Kidder, Building Construction (U.S.A.) ; E. E. Viollet le Due, Dic- 
tionnaire; J. K. Krafft, V Art de la charpente. (J. Bt.) 




Fig. 36. — Balloon Frame. 

CARPET, the name given to any kind of textile covering for 
the ground or the floor, the like of which has also been in use on 
couches and seats and sometimes even for wall or tent hangings 
or curtains. In modern times, however, carpet usually means 
a patterned fabric woven with a raised surface of tufts (either 
cut or looped), and used as a floor covering. Other floor 
coverings are and have been made also without such a tufted 
surface, and of these some are simple shuttle-woven materials 
plain or enriched with needlework or printed with patterns; 
others are woyen after the manner of tapestry-weaving (see 
Tapestry) or in imitation of it, and a further class of carpets is 
made of felt (see Felt). This last material is entirely different 
from that of shuttle or tapestry weaving. Although carpet 
weaving by hand is, and for centuries has been, an Oriental 
industry, it has also been, and is still, pursued in many European 
countries. Carpet-weaving by steam-driven machinery is solely 
European in origin, and was not brought to the condition of 
meeting a widespread demand until the 19th century. 

In connexion with the word " carpet " (Lat. carpita, rug; 
O. Fr. carpite) notice may be taken of the Gr. Tcnnjs and the 
Lat. tapetium, whence also comes the Fr. tapis (the History. 
present word for " carpet ") as well as our own word 
" tapestry." This latter, though now more particularly descrip- 
tive of hangings and curtains woven in a special way, was, in 
later medieval times, indiscriminately applied to them and to 
stuffs used as floor and seat coverings. From a very early period 
classical writers make mention of them. In ancient Egypt, for 
instance, floor and seat coverings were used in temples for 
religious ceremonies by the priests of Amen Ra; later on they 



CARPET 



Plate I. 




\ linen covering over- wrought 
;t in loops of coloured wools. 

■man of the 3rd or 4th century A.D. 
Albert Museum, South Kensington.) 




Imf-J -~ *■«*:#' 



■ "*"•■»' •--"'•- 




Fig. 2. — PART OF A LINEN COVERING OVER- 
WROUGHT WITH ORNAMENT IN LOOPS OF 
DARK-BROWN WOOL. 

Egypto-Roman of the 3rd or 4th century A.r>, 
(Victoria and Albert Museum, South Kensington.) 




Fig. 3. CUT PILL TURKEY CARPET, i8m CENTURY, EXEMPLIFYING SUCH CHARACTERISTIC ANGULAR TREAT- 
MENT OF QUASI-BOTANICAL FORMS AS IS USUALLY FOUND IN CARPETS AND RUGS MADE IN ASIA MINOR. 
FROM DESIGNS OF PERSIAN OR MOSIL ORIGIN. (Victoria and Albert Museum, South Kensington.) 



Plate II. 



CARPET 




Fio. 5.— CARPET OF STOUT FLAX OR HEMP WOVEN AND THEN COMPLETELY COVERED WITH ORNAMENT 
WORKED IN CLOSE NEEDLE STITCHES IN COLOURED THREADS. 



CARPET 



393 



were used to garnish the palaces of the Pharaohs. If one may 
judge from rare remains of decorative textiles, in the museum 
at Cairo especially, dating from at least 1480 B.C., such Egyptian 
fabrics were of linen inwoven with coloured wools in a tapestry- 
weaving manner, and were not tufted or piled textures. Taken 
from the palace at Nineveh is a large marble slab carved in low 
relief with a geometrical pattern surrounded by a border of lotus 
flowers and buds, evidently a copy of an Assyrian floor cover or 
rug about 705 B.C., such as was also woven probably in the 
tapes try- weaving manner. On the other- hand, its design 
equally well suggests patchwork — a method of needlework in 
vogue with Egyptians, at least 900 years B.C., for ornamental 
purposes, as indicated by the elaborately patterned canopy 
which covered the bier of an Egyptian queen — the hiother-in- 
law of Shishak who took Jerusalem some three or four years after 
the death of Solomon — and is preserved in the museum at Cairo. 
In the Odyssey, tapetia are frequently mentioned, but these again, 
whether floor coverings or hangings, are more likely to have been 
flat-textured and not piled fabrics. On the tomb of Cyrus was 
spread a " covering of Babylonian tapestry, the carpets under- 
neath of the finest wrought purple " (Arrian vi. 29). Athenaeus 
(bk. v. ch. 27) gives from Callixenus the Rhodian (c. 280 B.C.) 
an account of a banquet given by Ptolemy Philadelphus at 
Alexandria, and describes " the purple carpets of finest wool, 
with the pattern on both sides," as well as "handsomely 
embroidered rugs very beautifully elaborated with figures "; 
these again were probably not piled fabrics but kindred td the 
hangings in the palace of Ptolemy Philadelphus decorated with' 
portraits, which were likely to have been of tapestry-weaving, 
and would be nearly the same in appearance on both sides of the 
fabric. Of corresponding tapestry woven work are Egypto- 
Roman specimens dating from the 2nd or 3rd century a.d., a 
considerable collection of which is in the Victoria and Albert' 
Museum at South Kensington. Front about the same period 
date bits of hangings or coverings woven in linen, over-wrought 
in a method of needlework with ornament of compact loops of 
worsted (Plate I. figs. 1 and 2). These are the earliest extant 
specimens of textiles presenting a tufted or piled surface very 
kindred to that of woven pile carpets of much later date. But 
the modus operandi in producing the earlier only remotely 
corresponds with that of the later — though making a surface 
of loops by means of needlework as in the Coptic or Egypto- 
Roman specimens of Plate I. figs. 1 and 2 seems to be a step in 
a progress towards the introduction at an apparently later date 
of tufts into loom weavings such as we find in 16th-century 
tufted or piled carpets. 

The simple traditional Oriental method of making these latter 
is briefly as follows: — The foundation is a warp of strong cotton 
Method of °r hempen or woollen or silk threads, the number of 
making which is regulated by the breadth of the carpet and 
piled tne fineness or coarseness to be given to its pile. 

carpe s. g nor t lengths of coloured wool or goats' or camels' 
hair or silk are knotted on to each of the warp threads so that 
the two ends of each twist or tuft of coloured yarn, of whatever 
material it is, project in front. Across the width of the warp 
and above the range of tufts a weft thread is run in; another 
line or row of tufts is then knotted, and above this another weft 
thread is run in across the warps, and so on. These rows of tufts 
and weft as made are compressed together by means of a blunt 
fork or rude comb-like instrument, and thus a compact textile 
with a pile or tufted surface is produced; the projecting tufts 
are then carefully clipped to an even surface. In the East the 
rude wooden frames in which the warp-threads are stretched 
either stand upright upon, or are level with, the ground. They 
are easily transported and put together, and the weaving in them 
is done chiefly by wandering groups of weavers. The local 
surroundings, often those of rocky arid districts, in which 
Kurdish and other families weave carpets are well illustrated 
in Oriental Rugs by J. H. Mumford. For making pile carpets 
and rugs two traditional knots are in use; the first is termed 
the Turkish or Ghiordes knot, from Ghiordes, an old city not 
far from Brusa. It is in vogue principally throughout Asia 



; Minor, as far east as Kurdistan and the Caucasus, but it is also 
used farther south-east in parts of Persia and India. The yard 
of the pile is knotted in short lengths upon the warp-threads 
so that the two outstanding ends of each knot alternate with 
every two threads of the warp. The second traditional knot is 
the Persian or Sehna knot, which, though better calculated 
to produce a close, fine, even, velvety surface, has in many 
parts of Persia been abandoned for the Ghiordes knot, which 
is a trifle more easily tied. The Persian or Sehna knot is tied 
so that from every space between the warp- threads one end of 
the knot protrudes. The number of knots to the inch tied 
according to either the Turkish or Persian method is determined 
I by the size and closeness of the warp-threads and the size and 
number of weft- threads thrown across after each row of knots. 
i The patterns of the fabrics made by country weavers are usually 
taken by them from old rugs. But in towns where weaving is 
conducted under more organized conditions new patterns are 
often devised, and are traced sometimes upon great cardboards, 
on which the stitches, or knots, are indicated by squares each 
painted in its proper colour. In some of the Persian carpets 
and rugs made at Sehna, Kirman and Tabriz, the warp 
is of silk, a material that contributes to fine compact pile 
textures. 

There is much uncertainty as to the period when cut pile 
carpets were first made in the East. Their texture is certainly 
akin to that of fustian and velvet; while that of the . o a < e0 /> 
finer Persian carpets, which were not made much original 
earlier than about the 15th century, is practically not. otle 
1 distinguishable from velvet, having long or heavy pile. textures - 
: Fustian, the English name for a cut short pile textile, is derived 
from Fostat (old Cairo), and such material is likely to have been 
made there, as soon as anywhere else, by Saracens, especially 
; during the propitious times of the Fatimite Khalifs, who for more 
than two centuries previously to the 13th century were noted 
for the encouragement they gave to all sorts of arts and manu- 
factures. It seems that velvet came into use in Europe not much 
earlier than the 14th century, and various French church inven- 
tories of the time contain entries of " tapis veins (cut pile carpets) 
d'aultre mer, & mettre par terre " (see Essai sur I'histoire des tapis- 
series et tapis, by W. Chocqueel, Paris, 1863, pp. 22-23). It is an 
open question if the making of cut pile carpets in Persia or by 
Saracens elsewhere preceded that of fustians and velvets or 
whether the developments in making the three proceeded pari 
passu. 

The making of carpets with a flat surface, however, is probably 
far older than that of cut pile carpets, and characteristic of one 
such old method is that in the making of Soumak car- 
pets (Plate II. fig. 5), the ornament of which done in °J!JtJ", 
close needle stitches with coloured threads completely surface. 
conceals the stout flax or hemp web which is the 
essential material of these carpets. Soumak is a distortion of 
Shemaka, a Caucasian town in the far east of Asia Minor. But 
so-called Soumak carpets are made in other districts, and the 
particular needlework used in them is practically of the same 
kind as that on a smaller scale used for the well-known Persian 
Nakshe or woman's trousering, and again that used on a still 
smaller scale in the ornamentation of valuable Kashmir shawls. 
Quilted and chain-stitched cotton prayer and bath rugs from 
Persia are referred to in the article on Embroidery. 

Another method of making carpets with a flat surface is that 
of tapestry- weaving (see Plate II. fig. 4), which, according to 
existing and well-authenticated specimens of considerable 
antiquity (already referred to), appears to be the oldest of any 
historic process of ornamental weaving (see Tapestry). 

Very broadly considered, the traditional designs or patterns 
of Oriental carpets fall into two classes: the one, prevailing to 
a much larger extent than the other, seems to reflect juotires la 
the austerity of the Sunni or orthodox Mahommedans traditional 
in making patterns with abstract geometric and designs in 
angular forms, stiff interlacing devices, cryptic signs 0rhn jf J 
and symbols and the like; whilst the other suggests 
the freer thought of the Shiah or unorthodox sect, in 



394 



CARPET 



designs of ingenious blossom and leafy scrolls, conventional 
arabesques, botanical and animal forms, and cartouches enclosing 
Kufic inscriptions (see the splendid example known as the 
Ardebil carpet, Plate III. fig. 7, and another in Plate IV. fig. 9). 
Types of the more austere design occur in carpets from Afghan- 
istan, Turkestan, Bokhara and Asia Minor, N.W. India and 
even Morocco, the other types of freer design being almost 
special to Persian rugs and carpets. 

Next in historic importance to Persia, Turkestan and Asia 
Minor is India, where the making of cut pile carpets— known 
as Kalin and Kalicha— was presumably introduced 
Indian by the Mahommedans during the latter part of the 
carpets. ^ centU ry. But the industry did not apparently 
attain importance until after the founding of the Mogul dynasty 
by Baber early in the 16th century. The designs mainly derived 
from those of Persian carpets of that period do not as a rule rise 
to the excellence of their prototypes. Historical centres of 
Indian carpet making are in Kashmir, the Punjab and Sind, 
and at Agra, Mirzapur, Jubbulpore, Warangal in the Deccan, 
Malabar and Masulipatam. Velvets are richly embroidered in 
gold and silver thread at Benares and Murshidabad and used as 
ceremonial carpets, and silk pile carpets are made atTanjore and 
Salem. For the most part the best of the Indian woollen pile 
carpets have been produced by workers of repute engaged by 
princes, great nobles and wealthy persons to carry on the craft 
in their dwellings and palaces. These groups of highly skilled 
workers as part of the household staff were paid fixed salaries, 
but they were also allowed to execute private orders. During 
the 19th century the carpet industry was developed in govern- 
ment gaols. Produced in great quantities the prison-made 
carpets as a rule are less well turned out, and the competition 
set up betewen them and the rugs and carpets of private factories 
has had a somewhat detrimental effect upon the industry 
generally. Older in origin than the cut pile carpets are those 
of thinner and fiat surface texture, which from almost 
immemorial times have been woven in cotton with blue and 
white or blue and red stripes in the simplest way. These are 
called daris and satranjis, and are made chiefly in Benares and 
northern India. They are also made in the south and by such 
aborigines retaining primitive habits as the Todas of the Nilgiri 
Hills, a fact which points to the age of this particular method of 
making ground or floor coverings. 

A condition that has always controlled the designs of Oriental 
carpets is their rectangular shape, more often oblong than 
square. As a rule, there is a well-schemed border, 
controlling enclosing the main portion or field over which the 
designs ot details of the pattern are symmetrically distributed. 
Oriental simpler patterns in the field of a carpet or rug consist 
carpets. ^ repe titions of the same device or of a small number 
of different devices (see Plate II. fig. 4)- Richer patterns 
display more organic pattern in the construction, of which the 
leading and continuous features are expressed as diversified 
bands, scrolls and curved stems; amongst these latter are very 
varied devices which play either predominant or subordinate 
parts in the whole effect of the design (Plate III. fig- 7)- 
Angular and simplified treatments of these elaborate designs 
are rendered in many Asia Minor or Turkey carpets (Plate I. 
fig. 3); but the typical flowing and more graceful versions are 
of Persian origin (see Plate III. fig. 7. and pla te IV. fig. 9), 
usually of the 16th century. Mingled in such intricate stem 
designs or " arabesques " are details many of which have been 
derived on the one hand from Sassanian and even from far 
earlier Mesopotamian emblematical ornament based on cheetahs 
seizing gazelles, on floral forms, blossoms and buds so well con- 
ventionalized in Assyrian decoration, and on the other hand 
from Tatar and Chinese sources. The style, strong in suggestion 
of successive historical periods, seems to have been matured 
in Mosil engraved and damascened metal work of the 12 th and 
13th centuries before its occurrence in Persian carpet designs, 
the finest of which were produced about the reign of Shah Abbas. 
A good deal earlier than this period are carpets designed chiefly 
according to the simpler taste of the Sunnites, and such as these 



appear to be mentioned by Marco Polo (1256-1323) when 
writing that " in Turcomania they weave the handsomest carpets 
in the world." He quotes Conia (Konieh in Anatolia), Savast 
(Sivas in Asia Minor), some 300 m. north-east of Konieh, and 
Cassaria (Kaisaria or Caesaraea in Anatolia) as the chief weaving 
centres. It is the carpets from such places rather than from 
Persia that appear to have been the first Oriental ones known in 
European countries. 

Entries of Oriental carpets are frequent in the inventories of 
European cathedral treasures. In England, for instance, carpets 
are said to have been first employed by Queen Eleanor Cgrpets /a 
of Castile and her suite during the latter part of the Europe , 
13th century, who had them from Spain, where their 
manufacture was apparently carried on by Saracens or Moors 
in the southern part of the country. On the other hand, 
Pierre Dupont, a master carpet-maker of the Savonnerie (see 
below), gives his opinion in 1632 that the introduction of carpet- 
making into France was due to the Saracens after their defeat 
by Charles Martel in a.d. 726. But more historically precise 
is the record in the book of crafts (Livre des metiers) by Etienne 
Boileau, provost of the merchants in Paris (1258-1268), of " the 
tapicers or makers of lapis sarrasinois, 1 who say that their craft 
is for the service only of churches or great men like kings and 
nobles." In the 13th and 14th centuries Saracen weavers of 
rich and ornamental stuffs were also employed at Venice, which 
was a chief centre for importing Oriental goods, including carpets, 
and distributing them through western Europe. Dr Bode, in 
his Vorderasiatische Knupfteppiche, instances Oriental carpets 
with patterns mainly of geometric and angular forms represented 
in frescoes and other paintings byDomenico di Bartolo (1440), 
Niccolo di Buonaccorso (1450), Lippo Memmi (1480) and others. 
Of greater interest perhaps, and especially as throwing light 
upon the trade, in, if not the making of, carpets in England 
somewhat in the method of contemporary Turkey carpets, is 
the specimen represented in Plate III. fig. 6. This may have 
been made in England, where foreign workmen, especially 
Flemings, were from early times often encouraged to settle in 
order to develop industries, amongst which pile carpet-making 
probably and tapestry-weaving certainly were included. The 
earliest record of tapestry- weaving works in England is that of 
William Sheldon's at Barcheston, Warwickshire, in 1509, and, 
besides wall hangings, carpets of tapestry-weaving were also 
possibly made there. 2 The cut pile carpet belonging to Lord 
Verulam (Plate III. fig. 6) was perhaps made at Norwich. It 
has a repeating and simply contrived continuous pattern of 
carnations and intertwining stems with a large lozenge in the 
centre bearing the royal arms of England with the letters E. R. 
(Elizabeth Regina) and the date 1570. It also has the arms of 
the borough of Ipswich and those of the family of Harbottle. 
The sequence or continuity of its border pattern fails in the 
corners at one end of the rug or carpet in a way very common 
to many Asia Minor and Spanish carpets (see Plate I. fig. 3, 
Plate II. fig. 4, and Plate IV. fig. 10) ; not, however, to the majority 
of Persian carpets (see Plate III. fig. 7, and Plate IV. fig. 8). A 
large cut pile carpet in the Victoria and Albert Museum has a 
repeating pattern of star devices, rather Moorish in style, with 
the inscription on one end of the border, " Feare God and Keep 
His Commandments, made in the yeare 1603," and in the field 
the shield of arms of Sir Edward Apsley of Thakeham, Sussex, 
impaling those of his wife, Elizabeth Elmes of Lifford, Northamp- 
tonshire. This may have been made in England. A carpet of 
very similar design, especially in its border, is to be seen in a 
painting by Marc Gheeraedts of the conference at old Somerset 
House of English and Spanish plenipotentiaries (1604), now in 
the National Portrait Gallery, London. A more important and 

1 The tapissiers sarrasinois were apparently the makers of piled 
or velvety carpets, and have always been written about in contra- 
distinction to the tapissiers de haute lisse or tapissiers nostrez, who it 
appears did not weave piled or velvety material, but made tapestry- 
woven hangings and coverings for furniture. 

2 In Hakluyt's Voyages mention is made of directions having been 
given to Morgan Hubblethorne, a dyer, to proceed (about 1579) to 
Persia to learn the arts of dyeing and of making carpets. 



CARPET 



395 



finer carpet belongs to the Girdlers' Company (Plate IV. fig. 8), 
and is of Persian design, into which are introduced the arms of 
the company, shields with eagles, and white panels with English 
letters, the monogram of Robert Bell the master in 1634, but 
this was made at Lahore x to his order. 

Before dealing with later phases of the carpet industry in 
England, mention may now be made of Spanish carpets, of 
European as distinct from Saracenic or Persian 
J£^i S , design; the making of them dates at least from the 
end of the 15th century or the beginning of the 16th 
century. It is only within recent years that specimens of them 
have been obtained for public collections, and at present little 
is known of the factories in Spain whence they came. A large 
and most interesting series is shown in the Victoria and Albert 
Museum, and a portion of one of the earlier of the Spanish cut 
pile carpets in that museum is given in Plate IV. fig. 10. The 
inner repeating pattern has suggestions of a lingering Moorish 
influence, but a superior version of it with better definition is to be 
seen in extant bits of Spanish shuttle-woven silks of the 16th 
century. The border of distorted dragon-like creatures is of a 
Renaissance style, and this style is more pronounced in other 
Spanish carpets having borders of poorly treated Italian 16th- 
century pilaster ornament. Beside cut pile, many Spanish 
carpets of the 17th and 18th centuries have looped and flat 
surfaces, and bear Spanish names and inscriptions; many too are 
of needlework in tent or cross stitch. 

Another interesting class of very fine pile carpets that has also 
become known comparatively recently to collectors is the so- 
called Polish carpets, generally made of silk pile for 
carpets. ^ e ornament, which is distinctively Oriental, and of 
gold and silver thread textile for the ground, very 
much after the manner of early 17th-century Brusa fabrics. 
Many of these carpets are in the Czartoryski collection at Cracow. 
They are discussed by Dr Bode in his treatise on Oriental carpets 
already referred to. European coats of arms of the persons for 
whom they were made are often introduced into them, sometimes 
different in workmanship from that of the carpets, though there 
are specimens in which the workmanship is the same throughout. 
The details of their designs consist for the most part of arabesques 
and long curved serrated leaves similar to such as are commonly 
used in Rhodian pottery decoration of the 16th century, though 
more typical of those so frequent in 17th-century Turkish 
ornament. Various considerations lead to the conclusion that 
these so-called Polish carpets were probably made in either 
Constantinople or Damascus (tapete Damaschini frequently 
occur in Venetian inventories of the 16th century) rather than, as 
has been thought, by the Persian workmen employed at the 
Mazarski silk factory which lasted for a short period only during 
the 1 8th century at Sleucz in Poland. 

The European carpet manufactory, of which a continuous 
history for some two hundred and fifty years is recorded with 
exceptional completeness, is that which has been 
Carpets maintained under successive regimes, royal, imperial 
"France". anc * republican, in France — at the Hotel des Gobelins 
in Paris. Seventy years before its organization under 
Colbert in 1667 as a state manufactory {Manufacture Royale des 
Meubles de la Couronne), Henry IV. had founded royal art work- 
shops for all sorts of decorative work, at the Louvre; and here in 
1604 a workroom was established for making Oriental carpets by 
the side of that which existed for making tapis flamands. In 
1610 letters patent were granted to the Sieur Fortier, who has 
been reputed to be the first inventor in France of the art of 
making in silk and wool real Turkey and other piled carpets with 
grounds of gold thread, which must have been sumptuous 
fabrics probably resembling the so-called Polish carpets of this 
date. Some ten years later it is recorded that Pierre Dupont and 
Simon Lourdet started a pile carpet (tapis veloutes) manufactory 
at Chaillot (Paris) in large premises which had been used for the 
manufacture of soap — whence the name of " Savonnerie." To 
this converted manufactory were transferred in 163 1 the carpet- 

1 The Royal Factory at Lahore was established by Akbar the Great 
in the 16th century. 



makers from the Louvre, and under the direct patronage of the 
crown it continued its queries for many years at Chaillot. It
was not until 1828 that the making of tapis de la Savonnerie 
(pile carpets of a fine velvety character) was transferred to the 
H6tel des Gobelins. Here, in contradistinction to the Savonnerie, 
carpets are made others which, like those of Beauvais (where 
a manufactory of hangings and carpets was established by 
Colbert in 1664), are tapis ras or non-piled carpets, being of 
tapestry-weaving, as also are those made by old-established 
firms at Aubusson and at Felletin, where the manufacture 
was flourishing, at the former place in 1732 and at the latter 
in 1737. 

Returning now to England, there are evidences towards the 
end of the 17 th century, if not earlier, that Walloon and Flemish 
makers of Turkey pile carpets had settled and set up works in 
different parts of the country. A protective charter, for instance, 
was granted in 1 701 by William III. to weavers in Axminster and 
Wilton. The ultimate celebrity of the pile carpet industry at 
Wilton was due mainly to the interest taken in it during the 
earlier part of the 18th century by Henry, earl of "Pembroke and 
Montgomery, who in the course of his travels abroad collected 
certain French and Walloon carpet-makers to work for him in 
Wiltshire — over them he put two Frenchmen, Antoine Dufossy 
and Pierre Jemale. More notable, however, than these is Pere 
Norbert, who naturalized himself as an Englishman, changed his 
name to Parisot, and started a manufactory of pile carpets and a 
training school in the craft at Fulham about 1751. In 1753 he 
wrote and published " An account of the new manufactory of 
Tapestry after the manner of that at the Gobelins, and of carpets 
after the manner of that at Chaillot {i.e. Savonnerie) now under- 
taken at Fulham by Mr Peter Parisot." Two refugee French 
carpet-makers from the Savonnerie had arrived in London in 
1750, and started weaving a specimen carpet in Westminster. 
Parisot, having found them out, induced the duke of Cumberland 
to furnish funds for their removal to better workrooms at 
Paddington. The carpet when finished was presented by the 
duke to the princess dowager of Wales. Parisot quarrelled with 
his two employees, enticed others to come over, and then removed 
the carpet works from Paddington to Fulham. A worker, 
J. Baptiste Grignon, writing to " Mr Parisot in Foulleme Manu- 
factory," mentions the marked preference " shown by the 
English court for velvet," and how much a "chair-back he had 
worked in the manner of the Savonnerie had been admired." 
Correspondence published in the Nouvelles Archives de I' art 
francais (1878) largely relates to the efforts of the French govern- 
ment to stop the emigration to England of workers from the 
Gobelins and the Savonnerie. Parisot's Fulham works were sold 
up ini755. He then tried to start a manufactory at Exeter, but 
apparently without success, as in 1756 his Exeter stock was sold 
in the Great Piazza auction rooms, Covent Garden. Joseph 
Baretti (Dr Johnson's friend), writing from Plymouth on the 
18th of April 1760, alludes to his having that morning visited 
the Exeter manufactory of tapisseries de Gobelins " founded by 
a distinguished anti-Jesuit — the renowned Father Nobert." 
Previously to this a Mr Passavant of Exeter 2 had received in 
1 7 58 a premium from the Society of Arts of London for making a 
carpet in " imitation of those brought from the East and called 
Turky carpets." Similar premiums had been awarded by the 
society in 1757 to a Mr Moore of Chiswell Street, Moorfields, and 
to a Mr Whitty of Axminster. In 1759 a society's premium was 
won by Mr Jeffer of Frome. In the Transactions of the Society, 
vol. i., dated 1783, it is stated that by their rewards, the manu- 
facture of " Turky carpets is now established in different parts of 
the kingdom, and brought to a degree of elegance and beauty 
which the Turky carpets never attained." Such records as 
these convey a fair notion of the sporadic attempts which im- 
mediately preceded a systematic manufacture of pile carpets in 
this country. Whilst the Wilton industry survived, that actually 

2 A wealthy serge-maker of Swiss nationality, who had been 
settled for some years in Exeter, and bought up the plant of Parisot's 
Exeter works. (See Bulletin de la societe de I'histoire de V art francais, 
p. 97, vol. 1875 to 1878.) 



39 6 



CARPET 



carried on at Axminster died towards the end of the 18th century, 
and the name of Axminster like that of Savonnerie carpets now 
perpetuates the memory of a locally deceased manufactory, 
much as in a parallel way Brussels carpets seem to owe their name 
to the renown of Brussels as an important centre in the 15th and 
16th centuries for tapestry-weaving. 

Before the existence of steam-driven carpet-making machinery 
in England, employers, following the example set by the French, 
applied the Jacquard apparatus, for regulating and 
^°*™ e/y> facilitating the weaving of patterns, to the hand 
' manufacture of carpets. This was early in the 19th 
century; a great acceleration in producing English carpets oc^ 
c.urred, severely threatening the industry as pursued (largely for 
lapis ras) at Tournai in Belgium, at Nimes, Abbeville, Aubusson, 
Beauvais, Tourcoing and Lannoy in France. The severity of 
I he competition, however, was still more increased when English 
enterprise, developing the inventions of Erastus B. Bigelow 
(1814-1870) of America and Mr William Wood of England, 
took the lead in perfecting Jacquard weaving carpet looms 
worked by steam, which resulted in the setting up of many power- 
loom carpet manufactories in the United Kingdom. It was 
not until 1880 that French pile carpet manufacturers began 
to adopt similar carpet power-looms, importing them from 
England. 

These machines for weaving pile carpets, either looped (boucli) 
as in Brussels, or cut (veloute) as in Wilton or Axminster carpets, 
were similar in all respects to such as had been in use by the 
important English manufacturers— Crossleyof Halifax, Templeton 
of Glasgow, Humphreys of Kidderminster, Southwell of Bridg- 
north, and others. A so-called tapestry carpet weaving-loom 
was invented by Richard Whytock of Edinburgh in 1832, but 
it was not brought to sufficient completeness for sustained 
manufacture until 1855. The essential feature of Mr Whytock's 
process was that the warp-threads were dyed and parti-coloured, 
in such a way that when woven the several points of colour 
formed the pattern of the whole fabric. Although the name 
" tapestry " is used, the texture of these wares has but a remote 
likeness to that of hand-made tapestry hangings and carpets 
such as those of the Gobelins and Aubusson manufactories, nor 
is it the same as the texture of Brussels carpets. Machine-made 
tapestry carpets are also called " ingrain " carpets, because the 
wool or worsted is dyed in the grain, i.e. before manufacture. 
Germany in her manufacture of carpets resorts chiefly to the 
" ingrain " process, but in common with Holland and Belgium 
she produces pile (looped and cut) carpets from power-looms. 
In the United States of America there are many similar and very 
important carpet manufactories; and Austria produces fine cut 
pile carpets (velcuUs), the designs of which are largely derived 
from those of the Aubusson tapestry- woven carpets (tapis ras). 

Lengths or pieces of felt and other substantial material are 
freqjuently made for floor and stair carpeting, and are often 
printed with patterns. These of course come into quite another 
class technically. The technological aspects of the several 
branches of carpet manufacture by machinery are treated in 
the articles on Textile-Printing and Weaving. Briefly, the 
products of carpet manufacture practically fall into three main 
divisions: (1) Pile carpets (tapis moquettes) which are either 
looped (bouM) or cut (velouti) ; (2) flat surface carpets {tapis ras) 
as in hand tapestry- Woven material; and (3) printed stuffs 
used for carpeting. 

Whilst the production of carpets by steam power predomi- 
nates in Europe and the United States of America, and at 
one time appeared to be giving the coup de grdce to 
haad-made tne cra ft °f making carpets by hand, there has been in 
carpets. recent times a revival in this latter, and many carpets 
of characteristic modern design, several of them 
made in England, are due to the influence of the late William 
Morris, who devoted much of his varied energies to tapestry 
weaving and pile carpet weaving by hand, both of which crafts 
are being fostered as cottage industries in parts of Ireland, as 
well as in England. At the same time leading English carpet 
manufactures continue to produce hand j made carpets as 



occasion requires. In France a much more systematic existence 
of tapestry weaving and pile carpet making by hand has been 
maintained and is of course attributable to the perennial activity 
of the state tapestry works in Paris (at the Gobelins workshops) 
and in Beauvais, and of corresponding works managed by private 
enterprise at Aubusson and elsewhere. 

Designing patterns for English carpet manufacture is now 
more organized than it was, and greater thought and invention 
are given to devising ornament suitable to the purpose of floor 
coverings. Before 1850 and for a few years later, rather rude 
realistic representations of animals and botanical forms (decadent 
versions of Savonnerie designs) were often wrought in rugs and 
carpets, and survivals of these are still to be met with, but the 
lessons that have been subsequently derived fromintelligent study 
of Oriental designs have resulted in the definite designing of 
conventional forms for surface patterns. The early movement 
in this direction owes much to the teaching of Owen Jones, 
and in its later and rather freer phases the Morris influence has 
been powerful. Schools of art at Glasgow, at Manchester, Bir- 
mingham and elsewhere in the United Kingdom have trained 
and continue to train designers, whose work has contributed 
toithe formation of an English style with a new note, which, as 
a French writer puts it, has created a sensation in France, in 
Germany, in fact in all Europe and America. 

France retains that facility of execution and liveliness in 
invention which have been nurtured for over three hundred 
years by systematic . governmental solicitude for education 
in decorative design and enterprise in perfecting manufacture. 
Her Aubusson arid Savonnerie carpets have maintained a style 
of design in form and colour entirely different from any that 
clearly throws back to Oriental principles, and many of the 
designs for the finer and larger of these carpets are schemed 
with large central oval panels, garlands of flowers and fantastic 
frames very much on the plan of what is frequently to be seen 
in the decoration of ceilings. At the same time the style called 
I'art nouveau has become developed. It largely grows from 
very fanciful dispositions of free-growing natural forms, as well 
as curiously curved and tenuous forms, many of which are 
bone-like and fibre-like in character, flat in treatment and rather 
thin and washy in colour, and its influence has slightly percolated 
into designs for pile carpets. This style, sometimes intermixed 
with the more robust, less fantastic and rather fuller-coloured 
English style, has found followers in England, America and 
Germany, but the bulk of the designs now used in power carpet 
looms seems to be mainly of Oriental descent. 

The more important art museums in Europe contain collections 
of Oriental carpets, and the history of many is fairly well estab- 
lished. The subject has become one of serious study, the results 
of which have been published and elucidated by means of well- 
executed coloured reproductions of carpets and rugs preserved 
in both public and private collections. 

Bibliography.-t-(i) An Account of the New Manufactory 0} 
Tapestry after the manner of that at the Gobelins; and of Carpets 
after the manner of that at ChaUlot, &c, now undertaken at Fulham, 
by Mr Peter Parisot (London, Dodsley, 1753, 8vo). This is prob- 
ably the only account of carpet-making in England during the 1 8th 
century; it is of peculiar interest in that respect, and as containing 
a statement that " the Manufacture of Chaillot is altogether of wool, 
and worked in the manner of Velvet. All sorts of Figures of Men 
and Animals may be imitated in this work; but Fruits and Flowers 
answer better; and the properest employment for this Art is to 
make Carpets and all sorts of Skreens." (2) Essai sur Vhistoire el 
la situation actuelle de Vindustrie des tapisseries et tapis, by W. 
Chocqueel (Paris, 1863). (3) Vol. xi. of Reports on the Paris Uni- 
versal Exhibition of 1867, containing " Report on Carpets, Tapestry 
and other stuffs for Furniture," by Matthew Digby Wyatt, 
F.S.A. (1868). In reviewing the modern products shown at the 
exhibition, Sir Digby Wyatt discusses at some length the aesthetics 
of carpet design. (4) British Manufacturing Industries, edited by 
G. Phillips Bevan, " Carpets," by Christopher Fresser (London, 
I 876). (5) Altorientalische Teppichmuster nach Bildern und Originalen 
des xv.-xvi. Jahrhunderts, by Julius Lessing (Berlin, 1877). Numerous 
references are made in this illustrated work to the carpet designs 
that occur in paintings by Italian and Flemish masters. (6) Eastern 
Carpets, by Vincent J. Robinson, with water-colour drawings by E. 
Julia Robinson (London, 1882, large 4to). In this publication, 



CARPET 



Plate III. 




Fig. 6.—CLT PILE WORSTED CARPET, 

BEARING ROYAL ARMS OF ENGLAND WITH 
E. R. (ELIZAISETH REGINA); DATE 15Ja 



7— VERY FINE CUT PILE PERSIAN CARPET KNOWN AS THE 
HOLY CARPET OF THE MOSQUE AT ARDED1L. 




CARPET 

IF? 




• I l ll mn i uMM 'iii imwu i n nun .n 1 <?< . .- • 'Z 



JT PILE CARPET OF PERSIAN 
RE, 16th CENTURY. 



<€**& 



■*<rJr3M 



►#-i 









lll»JiiSilL. 






*♦►**.-; 



Igplp 



Mi^ 








Fig. 8.— FINE CUT PILE LAHORE CARPET (r. 1664) 
BELONGING TO C.IRDLERS' COMPANY IN 
LONDON. OF PERSIAN DESIGN. 








VJB^>-> 



Fig. 10— CUT PILE CARPET OF SPANISH MANUFACTURE, 
EARLY 16th CENTURY. 



CARPET-BAGGER— CARPINI 



397 



which precedes by nine or ten years the more learned works by Riegl 
and Bode, there are two examples, one ascribed to the manufactory 
at Alcaraz in La Mancha, and one to the supposed manufactory of 
the 17th century at Warsaw. By the light of later and more com- 
plete investigations Mr Robinson's ascriptions are scarcely borne 
out. (7) Oriental Carpets, by Herbert Coxon (London, 1884, 8vo). 
(8) Altorientalische Teppiche, by Alois Riegl (Leipzig, 1 891); a 
useful book of reference (containing thirty-six illustrations) of 
manufacturing, archaeological and artistic interest. (9) Jahrbuch 
der kunsthistorischen Sammlungen des Allerhochsten Kaiserhauses, 
vol. xiii. (Wien, 1892). Containing an important and finely illus- 
trated article, " Altere orientalische Teppiche aus dem Besitze des 
Allerhochsten Kaiserhauses," by Alois Riegl, in the course of which 
comparisons are made between the designs in Persian MS. illustra- 
tions, in engraved metal work and those of carpets. (10) Oriental 
Carpels, published by the Austrian Commercial Museum (English 
edition by C. Purdon Clarke) (Vienna, 1 892-1 896). This contains a 
series of monographs by I. M. Stockel, Smyrna; Dr William Bode, 
Berlin; Vincent Robinson, London; M. Gerspach, Paris; T. A. 
Churchill, Tehran; Sir George Birdwood, London; C. Purdon 
Clarke, London ; and Alois Riegl, Vienna, and a preface by A. von 
Scala, Vienna. (11) Ancient Oriental Carpets, a supplement to the 
above, four parts containing twenty-five plates with text (Leipzig, 
1906, large folio). (12) Vorderasiatische Knupfteppiche aus Slterer 
Zeit, by Wilhelm Bode (Leipzig, 1901). This learned treatise gives 
inter alia suggestive notes upon the production of the so-called 
Polish carpets and of Spanish carpets. (13) Ein prientalischer 
Teppich vom Jahre 1202 und die dltesten orientalischen Teppiche, by 
Alois Riegl (Berlin, 1895). A coloured illustration is given of a pile 
curtain with a triple niche design and an Armenian inscription that 
it was made by Gorzi the Artist " to the glory of the church of 
St Hripsime — an Armenian martyr. The date 651 appears in the 
inscription, but Riegl adduces valid reasons fbr reading it as the 
equivalent of a.d. 1202. Another pile carpet of conventional garden 
design, probably not of earlier manufacture than 14th century, is 
also illustrated and carefully discussed, especially in connexion with 
the appearance in it of well-authenticated Sassanid devices — streams 
with fishes and birds, &c. (14) Report on Carpets at the Paris 
Exhibition of iqoo, by Ferdinand Leborgne (1901, 8vo). (15) 
Oriental Rugs, by John Kimberly Mumford (London, 1901), con- 
tains twenty-four colour- plate and autotype reproductions of rugs 
and eight photo-engravings of phases of the rug industry — amongst 
which latter are: "A Nomad Studio," "Kurdish Girls at the 
Loom," " Boy Weavers of Tabriz," and a " Rug Market in Iran/' 

(16) Rugs, Oriental and Occidental, by Rosa Belle Holt (Chicago, 
1901), well illustrated, with colour-plate reproductions of various 
types of rugs, including less known Chinese and Navajo specimens. 

(17) The Art Workers' Quarterly, vol. iii. No. 11, July 1904; article 
on the pile carpet belonging to the Worshipful Company of Girdlers 
of the City of London, by A. F. Kendrick, with a colour- plate of 
this remarkable carpet, made to the order of the master of the com- 
pany in 1634 at Lahore. (18) Journal of Indian Art and Industry: 
Indian Carpets and Rugs (parts 87 to 94) (London, 1905 and 
1906). Upwards of ninety-nine illustrations of many varieties of 
Indian and Persian carpets are given in this publication, a large 
number showing debased versions of fine designs/ e.g. some from the 
Punjab, Warangal, Mirzapur and Elura; those from Yarkand 
exhibit Tatar and Chinese influences. (19) A History of Oriental 
Carpets before 1800, by F. R. Martin, published by the State Printing 
Office in Vienna (Bernard Quaritch, London, 1906). This contains 
a series of excellent reproductions in colours of Oriental carpets, 
many of which, being presents to kings of Sweden by the shah 
of Persia in the 17th century, are to be seen in the castles of Stock- 
holm and Copenhagen — others are in the Imperial Museum at 
Constantinople or belong to private owners. (A. S. C.) 

CARPET-BAGGER, a political slang term for a person who 
stands as a candidate for election in a locality in which he is a 
stranger. It is particularly used of such a candidate sent down 
by the central party prganization. The term was first vised in 
the western states of America of speculative bankers who. were 
said to have started business with no other property than "what 
they could carry in a carpet-bag, and absconded when they 
failed. The term became of general use in American politics 
in the reconstruction period after the Civil War, as a term 
of contempt for the northern political adventurers in the South 
who, by the help of the negro vote, gained control of the- ad- 
ministration. 

CARPET-KNIGHT, properly one who has been knighted in 
time of peace on the carpet before the king's throne, and. not 
on the field of battle as an immediate reward for valour. It, is 
used as a term of reproach for a soldier who stays at home, 
and avoids active service and its hardships, with a particular 
reference to the carpet of a lady's chamber, in which such a 
fainiant soldier lingers. ■■'■'■''■.. • ! 



CARPI, GIROLAMO DA (1501-155(5), Italian historical and 
portrait painter, born at Ferrara, was one of Benvenuto Garo- 
falo's best pupils. Becoming infatuated with the work of Cor- 
reggio, he quitted Ferrara, and spent several years in copying 
that master's paintings at Parma, Modena and elsewhere, 
succeeding in aping his mannerisms so well as to be able to 
dispose of his own works as originals l?y Correggio. It is probable 
that not a few pictures yet attributed to the great painter are in 
reality the work of his parasite. Da Carpi's best paintings are 
a Descent of the Holy Spirit, in the chur,ch of St Francis at 
Rovigo; a Madonna, an Adoration of the Magi, and a St 
Catharine, at Bologna; and the St George and the St Jerome, 
at Ferrara. 

CARPI, UGO DA, Italian 15th-century painter, was Jong held the 
inventor of the art of printing in chiaroscuro, afterwards brought 
to such perfection by Parmigiano and by Baltasar Peruzzi of 
Siena. The researches of Michael Huber (1727-1804) and Johann 
Gottlob Immanuel Breitkopf (1710-1794) have proved, however, 
that this art was known and practised in Germany by Johann 
Ulrich Pilgrim (Wachtlin) and Nikolaus Alexander Mair (1450- 
c. 1520), at, least as early as 1499, while the date of the oldest 
of Da Carpi's prints is 1 5 1 8. Printing in chiaroscuro is performed 
by using several blocks. Da Carpi usually employed three-^- 
one for the outline and darker shadows, another for the lighter 
shadows, and a third for the half-tint. By means of them he 
printed engravings after several pictures and after some of the 
cartoons of Raphael. Of these a Sybil, a Descent from the 
Cross, and a History of Simon the Sorcerer are the most 
remarkable. 

CARPI, a Dacian tribe established upon the lower Danube 
from the 1st century B.C. They rose to considerable power 
during the 3rd century a.d., and claiming to be superior to the 
Goths accordingly demanded that their incursions into Roman 
territory likewise should be bought off by tribute. When this 
was refused they invaded in force, but were beaten back by the 
emperor Philip. After this they joined with the Goths in their 
successful inroads until both nations were defeated by Claudius 
Gothicus. Later, after repeated defeats under Diocletian and 
Galerius, they were taken under Roman protection and the 
greater part established in the provinces of Pannonia and 
Moesia; some were left beyond the Danube, and they are last 
heard of as allies of the Huns and Sciri in the time of Theodosius 
I. Ptolemy speaks of Harpii and a town Harpis. This was no 
doubt the form the name assumed in the mouths of their 
Germanic neighbours, Bastarnae and Goths. (E, H. ,M.) 

CARPI, a town and episcopal see of Emilia, Italy, in the 
province of Modena, 9 m. N.N.W. by rail from the town of 
Modena. Pop. (1905) 7118 (town), 27,135 (commune). It is 
the junction of a branch line to Reggio nell' Emilia via Correggio, 
and the centre of a fertile agricultural district. Carpi contains 
several Renaissance buildings of interest, the facade of the old 
cathedral (an early Romanesque building iii origin, with some 
early 15th-century frescoes), the new cathedral (after 15 13), 
perhaps the nave of S. Niccolo and a palace, all being by 
Baldassare Peruzzi: while the prince's palace, (with a good 
court and a chapel containing frescoes by Bernardino Loschi of 
Parma, 1480^-1540) and the colonnades opposite the theatre 
are also good. • These, and the fortifications, are all due to 
Alberto Pio of Carpi, a pupil of Aldus Manutius, expelled in 
1525 by Charles V., the principality being given to the house of 
Este. ■ 

. CARPINI, JOANNES DE PLANO, the first noteworthy Euro- 
pean explorer of the Mongol empire (in the 13th century), 
and the author of the earliest important W'estern work on 
northern and central Asia, Russian Europe, and other regions 
of the Tatar dominion. He appears to have been a native of 
Umbria, where a place formerly called Pian del Carpine, but now 
Piano della Magione, stands near Perugia, on the road to Cortona. 
He was one of the companions and disciples of 'his countryman 
St Francis of Assisi, and from sundry indications: can hardly 
have been younger than the latter, born in 1182. Joannes bore 
a high repute in the order, and took a foremost part in the 



398 



CARPINI 



propagation of its teaching in northern Europe, holding suc- 
cessively the offices of warden (custas) in Saxony, and of provincial 
(minister) of Germany, and afterwards of Spain, perhaps of 
Barbary, and of Cologne. He was in the last post at the time of 
the great Mongol invasion of eastern Europe and of the disastrous 
battle of Liegnitz (April 9, 1241), which threatened to cast 
European Christendom beneath the feet of barbarous hordes. 
The dread of the Tatars was, however, still on men's mind four 
years later, when Pope Innocent IV. despatched the first formal 
Catholic mission to the Mongols (1245), partly to protest against 
the latter's invasion of Christian lands, partly to gain trustworthy 
information regarding the hordes and their purposes; behind 
there may have lurked the beginnings of a policy much developed 
in after-time— that of opening diplomatic intercourse with a 
power whose alliance might be invaluable against Islam. 

At the head of this mission the pope placed Friar Joannes, 
at this time certainly not far from sixty-five years of age; and 
to his discretion nearly everything in the accomplishment of 
the mission seems to have been left. The legate started from 
Lyons, where the pope then resided, on'Easter day (April 16, 
1245), accompanied by another friar, one Stephen of Bohemia, 
who broke down at Kanev near Kiev, and was left behind. 
After seeking counsel of an old friend, Wenceslaus, king of 
Bohemia, Carpini was joined at Breslau by another Minorite, 
Benedict the Pole, appointed to act as interpreter. The on- 
ward journey lay by Kiev; the Tatar posts were entered at 
Kanev; and thence the route ran across the Dnieper (Neper, 
Nepere, in Carpini and Benedict) to the Don and Volga (Ethil in 
Benedict; Carpini is the first Western to give us the modern 
name). Upon the last-named stood the Ordu or camp of Batu, 
the famous conqueror of eastern Europe, and the supreme 
Mongol commander on the western frontiers of the empire, as 
well as one of the most senior princes of the house of Jenghiz. 
Here the envoys, with their presents, had to pass between two 
fires, before being presented to the prince (beginning of April 
1246). Batu ordered them to proceed onward to the court of 
the supreme khan in Mongolia; and on Easter day once more 
(April 8, 1246) they started on the second and most formidable 
part of their journey — " so ill," writes the legate, " that we could 
scarcely sit a horse; and throughout all that Lent our food had 
been nought but millet with salt and water, and with only snow 
melted in a kettle for drink." Their bodies were tightly bandaged 
to enable them to endure the excessive fatigue of this enormous 
ride, which led them across the Jaec or Ural river, and north of 
the Caspian and the Aral to the Jaxartes or Syr Daria (quidam 
fluvius magnus cujus nomen ignoramus) , and the Mahommedan 
cities which then stood on its banks; then along the shores of 
the Dzungarian lakes; and so forward, till, on the feast of St 
Mary Magdalene (July 22), they reached at last the imperial 
camp called Sir a Orda (i.e. Yellow Pavilion), near Karakorum 
and the Orkhon river — this stout-hearted old man having thus 
ridden something like 3000 m. in 106 days. 

Since the death of Okkodai the imperial authority had been 
in interregnum. Kuyuk, Okkodai's eldest son, had now been 
designated to the throne; his formal election in a great Kurultai, 
or diet of the tribes, took place while the friars were at Sira Orda, 
along with 3000 to 4000 envoys and deputies from all parts of 
Asia and eastern Europe, bearing homage, tribute and presents. 
They afterwards, on the 24th of August, witnessed the formal 
enthronement at another camp in the vicinity called the Golden 
Ordu, after which they were presented to the emperor. It was 
not till November that they got their dismissal, bearing a letter 
to the pope in Mongol, Arabic and Latin, which was little else 
than a brief imperious assertion of the khan's office as the scourge 
of God. Then commenced their long winter journey homeward; 
often they had to lie on the bare snow, or on the ground scraped 
bare of snow with the traveller's foot. They reached Kiev on the 
9th of June 1247. There, and on their further journey, the 
Slavonic Christians welcomed them as risen from the dead, with 
festive hospitality. Crossing the Rhine at Cologne, they found 
the pope still at Lyons, and there delivered their report and the 
khan's letter. 



Not long afterwards Friar Joannes was rewarded with the 
archbishopric of Antivari in Dalmatia, and was sent as legate 
to St Louis. The date of his death may be fixed, with the help 
of the Franciscan Martyr ology and other authorities, as the 1st 
of August 1252; hence it is clear that John did not long survive 
the hardships of his journey. 

He recorded the information that he had collected in a work, 
variously entitled in the MSS. Historia Mongalorum quos nos 
Tartaros appellamus, and Liber Tartarorum, or Tatarorum. This 
treatise is divided into eight ample chapters on the country, 
climate, manners, religion, character, history, policy and tactics 
of the Tatars, and on the best way of opposing them, followed by 
a single (ninth) chapter on the regions passed through. The 
book thus answers to its title. Like some other famous medieval 
itineraries it shows an entire absence of a traveller's or author's 
egotism, and contains, even in the last chapter, scarcely any 
personal narrative. Carpini was not only an old man when 
he went cheerfully upon this mission, but was, as we know 
from accidental evidence in the annals of his order, a fat and 
heavy man (vir gravis et corpulentus) , insomuch that during his 
preachings in Germany he was fain, contrary to Franciscan pre- 
cedent, to ride a donkey. Yet not a word approaching more 
nearly to complaint than those which we have quoted above 
appears in his narrative. His book, both as to personal and 
geographical detail, is inferior to that written a few years later 
by a younger brother of the same Order, Louis IX. 's most 
noteworthy envoy to the Mongols, William of Rubrouck or 
Rubruquis. But in spite of these defects, due partly to his con- 
ception of his task, and in spite of the credulity with which he 
incorporates the Oriental tales, sometimes of childish absurdity, 
from which Rubruquis is so free, Friar Joannes' Historia is in 
many ways the chief literary memorial of European overland 
expansion before Marco Polo. It first revealed the Mongol 
world to Catholic Christendom; its account of Tatar manners, 
customs and history is perhaps the best treatment of the 
subject by any Christian writer of the middle ages. We may 
especially notice, moreover, its four name-lists: — of the nations 
conquered by the Mongols; of the nations which had up to this 
time (1245-1247) successfully resisted; of the Mongol princes; 
and of the witnesses to the truth of his narrative, including 
various merchants trading in Kiev whom he had met. All these 
catalogues, unrivalled in Western medieval literature, are of the 
utmost historical value. To the accuracy of Carpini's statements 
upon Mongol life, a modern educated Mongol, Galsang Gomboyev, 
has borne detailed and interesting testimony (see MSlanges asiat. 
tiris du Bullet. Hist. Philol. de I' Acad. Imp. de St Pitersbourg, 
ii. p. 650, 1856). 

The book must have been prepared immediately after the 
return of the traveller, for the Friar Salimbeni, who met him in 
France in the year of his return (1247), gives us these interesting 
particulars: — " He was a clever and conversable man, well 
lettered, a great discourser, and full of a diversity of experience. 
... He wrote a big book about the Tattars (sic) , and about other 
marvels that he had seen, and whenever he felt weary of telling 
about the Tattars, he would cause that book of his to be read, as 
I have often heard and seen " (" Chron. Fr. Salimbeni Parmensis" 
in Monum. Histor.ad Prov. et Placent. pertinentia, Parma, 1857). 

For a long time the work was but partially known, and that 
chiefly through an abridgment in the vast compilation of Vin- 
cent of Beauvais (Speculum Historiale) made in the generation 
following the traveller's own, and printed first in 1473. Hakluyt 
(1598) and Bergeron (1634) published portions of the original 
work; but the complete and genuine text was not printed till 
1838, when it was put forth by the late M. D'Avezac, an editorial 
masterpiece, embodied (1839) in the 4th volume of the Recueil 
de voyages et de mSmoires of the Geographical Society of Paris. 

Joannes' companion, Benedictus Polonus, also left a brief 
narrative taken down from his oral relation. This was first 
published by M. D'Avezac in the work just named. 

The following four MSS. may be noticed: (1) " Corpus," i.e. 
Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, No. 181 ; (2) " Petau," i.e. 
Leiden University, 77 (formerly 104)— both these are certainly earliei 



CARPOCRATES— CARRANZA 



399 



than 1300; (3) " Colbert," i.e. Paris, National Library, Fonds Lat. 
2477, of about 1350; (4) " London-Luraley," i.e. London, British 
Museum, MSS. Reg. 13 A xiv., pf late 13th century. Three other 
MSS. certainly exist; yet six more are perhaps to be found, but 
none of these possesses the value of those given above. Besides 
the editions referred to in the body of the article, we may also men- 
tion (1) P. Girolamo Golubovich, Biblioteca bio-bibliografica della 
Terra Santa e dell' Oriente Francescano (1906), vol. i. (1215-1300), pp. 
190-213; (2) William of Rubruck . . . with . . . John of Pian de 
Carpine, edited by W. W. Rockhill, Hakluyt Society (1900), especi- 
ally pp. 1-39; (3) C. Raymond Beazley, Dawn of Modern Geography, 
ii. (1901), 279-317, 375-380; iii. 85, 544, 553; and Carpini and 
Rubruquis, Hakluyt Society (1903), especially pp. vii.-xviii. 43-144, 
249-295. (H. Y.;C. R. B.) 

CARPOCRATES, a Gnostic of the 2nd century, about whose 
life and opinions comparatively little is known. He is said to 
have been a native of Alexandria and by birth a Jew. His 
family, however, seem to have been converted to Christianity. 
With Epiphanes, his son, he was the leader of a philosophic 
school basing its theories mainly upon Platonism, and striving 
to amalgamate Plato's Republic with the Christian ideal of 
human brotherhood. The image of Jesus was crowned along 
with those of Pythagoras, Plato and Aristotle. Carpocrates 
made especial use of the doctrines of reminiscence and pre- 
existence of souls. He regarded the world as formed by inferior 
spirits who are out of harmony with the supreme unity, knowledge 
of which is the true Gnosis. The souls which remember their 
pre-existing state can attain to this contemplation of unity, 
and thereby rise superior to all the ordinary doctrines of religion 
or life. Jesus is but a man in whom this reminiscence is unusually 
strong, and who has consequently attained to unusual spiritual 
excellence and power. To the Gnostic the things of the world 
are worthless; they are to him matters of indifference. From 
this position it easily followed that actions, being merely external, 
were morally indifferent, and that the true Gnostic should 
abandon himself to every lust with perfect indifference. The 
express declaration of these antinomian principles is said to have 
been given by Epiphanes. The notorious licentiousness of the 
sect was the carrying out of their theory into practice. 

CARPZOV (Latinized Carpzovius) , the name of a family, many 
of whose members attained distinction in Saxony in the 17 th 
and 18th centuries as jurists, theologians and statesmen. The 
family traced its origin to Simon Carpzov, who was burgomaster 
of Brandenburg in the middle of the 16th century, and who left 
two sons, Joachim (d. 1628), master-general of the ordnance in 
the service of the king of Denmark, and Benedikt (1565-1624), 
an eminent jurist. 

Benedikt Carpzov was born in Brandenburg on the 22nd 
of Uctooer 1565, and after studying at Frankfort and Witten- 
berg, and visiting other German universities, was made doctor 
of laws at Wittenberg in 1590. He was admitted to the faculty 
of law in 1592, appointed professor of institutions in 1599, and 
promoted to the chair Digesti infortiati et novi in 1601. In 
1602 he was summoned by Sophia, widow of the elector 
Christian I. of Saxony, to her court at Colditz, as chancellor, and 
was at the same time appointed councillor of the court of appeal 
at Dresden. After the death of the electress in 1623 he returned 
to Wittenberg, and died there on the 26th of November 1624, 
leaving five sons. He published a collection of writings entitled 
Disputationes juridicae. 

Benedikt Carpzov (1595-1666), second of the name, was the 
second son of the preceding, and like him was a great lawyer. 
He was born at Wittenberg on the 27th of May 1595, was at first 
a professor at Leipzig, obtained an honourable post at Dresden 
in 1639, became ordinary of the faculty of jurists at Leipzig 
in 1645, and was named privy councillor at Dresden in 1653. 
Among his works which had a very extensive influence on the 
administration of justice, even beyond the limits of Saxony, are 
Definitiones forenses (1638), Practica nova Imperialis Saxonica 
rerum criminalium (16351), Opus decisionum illustrium Saxoniae 
(1646), Processus juris Saxonici (1657), and others. He did 
much, both by his writings and by his official work, to systematize 
the body of German jurisprudence which had resulted from the 
intersection of the common law of Saxony with the Roman and 



Canon laws. His last years were spent at Leipzig, and his time 
was entirely devoted to sacred studies. He read the Bible 
through fifty- three times, studying also the comments of Osiander 
and Cramer, and making voluminous notes. These have been 
allowed to remain in manuscript. He died at Leipzig on the 
30th of August 1666. 

Johann Benedikt Carpzov (1607-1657), fourth son of the first 
Benedikt, was born at Rochlitz in 1607. He became professor 
of theology at Leipzig in 1643, made himself chiefly known by 
his Isagoge in Libros Ecclesiarum Luther anarum Symbolicos (pub- 
lished in 1665), and died at Leipzig on the 22nd of October 1657, 
leaving five sons, all of whom attained some literary eminence. 

August Carpzov (1612-1683), fifth son of the first Benedikt, 
distinguished himself as a diplomatist. Born at Colditz on the 
4th of June 1612, he studied at the universities of Wittenberg, 
Leipzig and Jena, and in 1637 was appointed advocate of the 
court of justice (Hofgerichi) at Wittenberg. Entering the service 
of Frederick William II., duke of Saxe-Altenburg, he took part 
in the negotiations which led to the peace of Westphalia in 1648, 
and was appointed chancellor by the duke in 1649. From 1672 
to 1680 he was chief minister of Ernest I. and Frederick I., 
dukes of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, and died at Coburg on the 19th 
of November 1683. August, who was a man of earnest piety, 
wrote Der gekreuzigte Jesus (1679) and some treatises on 
jurisprudence. 

Johann Gottlob Carpzov (1679-1767), grandson of Johann 
Benedikt, was born at Dresden in 1679. He was educated at 
Wittenberg, Leipzig and Altdorf, became a learned theologian, 
and in 1719 was appointed professor of Oriental languages at 
Leipzig. In 1730 he was made superintendent and first pastor 
at Lubeck. His most important works were the Introductio 
in libros canonicos bibliorum Veteris Testamenti (17 21), Critica 
sacra V. T. (1728), and Apparatus Historico-criticus Antiquitatum 
V. Test. (1748). He died at Lubeck on the 7th of April 1767. 

Johann Benedikt Carpzov (1720-1803), great-grandson of 
the first Johann Benedikt, was born at Leipzig, became professor 
of philosophy there in 1747, and in the following year removed 
to Helmstadt as professor of poetry and Greek. In 1 749 he was 
named also professor of theology. He was author of various 
philological works, wrote a dissertation on Mencius, and pub- 
lished an edition of Musaeus. He died on the 28th of April 1803. 

On the family of Carpzov, see Dreyhaupt, Beschreibung des 
Saalkreises, Beilagen zu Theil 2. S. 26. 

CARRANZA, BARTOLOME' (1503-1576), Spanish theologian, 
sometimes called de Miranda or de Carranza y Miranda, younger 
son of Pedro Carranza, a man of noble family, was born at 
Miranda d'Arga, Navarre, in 1503. He studied (1515-1520) 
at Alcala, where Sancho Carranza, his uncle, was professor; 
entering (1520) the Dominican order, and then (1521-1525) 
at Salamanca and at Valladolid, where from 1527 he was teacher 
of theology. No Spaniard save Melchior Canus rivalled him in 
learning; students from all parts of Spain flocked to hear him. 
In 1 530 he was denounced to the Inquisition as limiting the papal 
power and leaning to opinions of Erasmus, but the process failed; 
he was made professor of philosophy and (1 533-1 539) regent 
in theology. In 1539, as representative to the chapter-general 
of his order he visited Rome; here he was made doctor of theo- 
logy, and while he mixed with the liberal circle associated with 
Juan de Valdes, he had also the confidence of Paul III. Return- 
ing to Valladolid, he acted as censor (cualificador) of books 
(including versions of the Bible) for the Inquisition. In 1540 
he was nominated to the sees of Canaria and of Cusco, Peru, 
but declined both. Charles V. chose him as envoy to the council 
of Trent (1546). He insisted on the imperative duty of bishops 
and clergy to reside in their benefices, publishing at Venice 
(1547) his discourse to the council De necessaria residentia 
personali, which he treated as juris divini. His Lenten sermon 
to the council, on justification, caused much remark. He was 
made provincial of his order for Castile. Charles sent him to 
England (1554) with his son Philip on occasion of the marriage 
with Mary. He became Mary's confessor, and laboured earnestly 
for the re-establishment of the old religion, especially in Oxford. 



400 



CARRARA 



In 1557 Philip appointed him to the archbishopric of Toledo; he 
accepted with reluctance, and was consecrated at Brussels on 
the 2 7 th of February 1558. He was at the deathbed of Charles V. 
(21st of September) and gave him extreme unction; then raised 
a curious controversy as to whether Charles, in his last moments, 
had been infected with Lutheranism. The same year he was 
again denounced to the Inquisition, on the ground of his Comen- 
larios sobre el Catechismo (Antwerp, i558),which in 1563, however, 
was approved by a commission of the council of Trent. He had 
evidently lost favour' with Philip, by whose order he was arrested 
at Tordelaguna (1559) and imprisoned for nearly eight years, 
and the book was placed on the Index. The process dragged on. 
Carranza appealed to Rome, was taken thither in December 1 566, 
and confined for ten years in the castle of St Angelo. The final 
judgment found no proof of heresy, but compelled him to abjure 
sixteen errors, rather extorted than extracted from his writings, 
suspended him from his see for five years, and secluded him to 
the Dominican cloister of Sta Maria sopra Minerva. Seven 
days after his abjuration he died, on the 2nd of May 1576. He 
was succeeded in his see by the inquisitor-general, Caspar 
Quiroga. Yet the Spanish people honoured him as a saint; 
Gregory XIII. placed a laudatory inscription on his tomb in 
the church of Sta Maria. His real crime was not heresy but 
reform. His Summa Conciliorum ei Pontificum (Venice, 1546) has 
been often reprinted (as late as 1821), and has permanent value. 

See P. Salazar de Miranda, Vida (1788); H. Laugwitz, Bartholo- 
mdus Carranza (1870); J. A. Llorente, Hist. Inquisition in Spain 
(English abridgment, 1826); Hefele in I. Goschler's Diet, encyclo- 
pedias de la thiol, cath. (1858). (A. Go.*) 

CARRARA, or Carraresi, a powerful family of Longobard 
origin which ruled Padua in the 14th century. They take their 
name from the village of Carrara near Padua, and the first 
recorded member of the house is Gamberto (d. before 970). 
In the wars between Guelphs and GhibeUines the Carraresi 
at first took the latter side, but they subsequently went over 
to the Guelphs. This brought them into conflict with Ezzelino 
da Romano; Jacopo da Carrara was besieged by Ezzelino in 
his castle of Agna, and while trying to escape Was drowned. 
Another Jacopo led the Paduans in 131 2 against Cangrande 
della Scala, lord of Verona, and though taken prisoner managed 
to negotiate a peace in 13 18. To put an end to the perpetual 
civil strife the Paduans elected him their lord, and he seems to 
have governed well, leaving the city at his death (1324) to his 
nephew Marsiglio. a man famed for his cunning. But Cangrande 
was bent on acquiring Padua, and Marsiglio, unable to resist, 
gave it over to him and was appointed its governor. Cangrande 
died in 13 19, being succeeded by his nephew Martino, and 
Marsiglio soon began to meditate treachery; he negotiated with 
the Venetians in 1336, and in the following year he secretly in- 
troduced Venetian troops into Padua, arrested Alberto della 
Scala, Martino 's brother, then in charge of the town, and thus 
regained the lordship. He died in 1338, and was succeeded by 
his relative Ubertino, a typical medieval tyrant, who earned an 
unenviable notoriety for his murders and acts of treachery, 
but was also a patron of the arts; he built the Palazzo dei 
Principi, the castle of Este, constructed a number of roads and 
canals, and protected commerce. He died in 1345. His distant 
kinsman Marsiglietto da Carrara succeeded to him, but was 
immediately assassinated by Jacopo da Carrara, a prince famed 
as the friend of Petrarch. In 1350 Jacopo was murdered by 
Guglielmo da Carrara, and his brother Jacopino succeeded, 
reigning together with his nephew Francesco. 

In 1355 Francesco (il Vecchio) rose against his uncle and 
imprisoned him. Francesco changed the traditional policy of 
his house by quarrelling with the Venetians, in the hope of ob- 
taining more advantages from the Visconti of Milan. When the 
former were at war with Hungary over Dalmatia in 1356 and 
asked Carrara to help them, he refused. Their resentment 
was all the more bitter when at the instance of the pope he 
mediated between them and Hungary and brought about 
peace on terms unfavourable to the republic. He received 
Feltre, Belluno and Cividale from the Hungarian king, but 



in 1369 a frontier dispute led to war between him and Venice, 
After some defeats, Venice was victorious and dictated peace; 
Carrara had to pay a huge indemnity and ask the republic's 
pardon (1373). In 1378 he joined the league against Venice 
formed by Genoa, Hungary and the Scala, and took part in the 
siege of Chioggia. But the Venetians were victorious, and by 
the peace of Turin Carrara found himself in the status quo ante, 
but he bought Treviso from Austria, to whom Venice had given it 
in the day of her trouble. In 1385 the Venetians set the Scala 
against Carrara, who thereupon allied himself with the treacher- 
ous Gian Galeazzo Visconti. The Scala were expelled from 
Verona, but Carrara and Visconti quarrelled over the division 
of the spoils. Visconti was determined to capture Padua as 
well as Verona, and made an alliance with Venice and the house 
of Este for the purpose. Francesco, seeing that the situation 
Was hopeless, surrendered to Visconti, in whose hands he remained 
a prisoner until his death in 1392. 

Francesco Novello, his son, resisted bravely, but was compelled 
to surrender owing to dissensions in Padua itself. He was forced 
to renounce his dominions, and received a castle near Asti, 
but he escaped to France, and after a series of romantic 
adventures succeeded in making peace with Venice, who was 
becoming alarmed at the restless ambition and treachery of 
Visconti; in 1390 he raised a small armed force and seized 
Padua, where he was enthusiastically welcomed by the citizens, 
and for several years reigned there in peace. But in 1399 
Visconti recommenced his wars of conquest, which were to have 
included Padua had not death cut short his schemes in 1402. 
Carrara then allied himself with Guglielmo Scala, seized Verona, 
and tried to capture Vicenza. But the Vicentini had always 
hated the Carraresi, and after a short siege gave themselves over 
to Venice. This led to a war between that republic and Padua, 
for now that Visconti was dead the Venetians had no longer 
any reason to protect Carrara. Padua and Verona were besieged ; 
the latter, defended by Novello's son Jacopo, was soon captured. 
Novello himself, besieged in his capital, although repeatedly 
offered favourable terms, held out for some months hoping for 
help from Florence and also from certain Venetian nobles with 
whom he was intriguing. Hunger, plague,- the treachery 
of his captains and internal discontent at last forced him to 
surrender (November 1405). He and his sons Francesco III. 
and Jacopo were conveyed to Venice, and at first treated with 
consideration; but when their intrigues with Venetian traitors 
for the overthrow of the republic came to light, they were tried, 
condemned, and strangled in prison (1406). Novello's other 
son Marsiglio made a desperate attempt to recover Padua in 
1435, but was discovered and killed. With him the house of 
Carrara ceased from troubling. 

Bibliography. — G. Gattaro, " Istoria Padovana," in Muratori's 
Rer. It. Script, xvii., a very full account; P. P. Vergerius, Vitae 
Carrarensium, ibid. xii.. untrustworthy; Verci, Storia della Marca 
Trivigjana (Venice, 1789); P. Litta, Le Famiglie celebri italiane, 
vol. iii. (Milan, 1831) ; W. Lenel, Studien zur Geschichte Paduas und 
Veronas im XIII. Jahrh. (Strassburg, 1893) ; G. Cittadella, Storia 
della Dominazione Carrarese in Padova (Padua, 1842) ; and Horatio 
Brown's brilliant essay on " The Carraresi " in his Studies in Venetian 
History (London, 1907). (L. V.*) 

CARRARA, a town of Tuscany, Italy, in the province of 
Massa e Carrara, 390 ft. above sea-level, 3 m. by rail N.N.E. 
of Avenza, which is 16m. E.S.E. of Spezia. Pop. (1881) 26, 325; 
(1905) town, 38,100; commune, 48,493- The cathedral (1272- 
1385) is a fine Gothic building dating from the period of Pisan 
supremacy; the other churches, and indeed all the principal 
buildings of the town, are constructed of the local marble, to 
which the place owes its importance. The Accademia di Belle 
Arti contains several Roman antiquities found in the quarries, 
and some modern works by local sculptors. A large theatre 
was inaugurated in 1892. Some of the quarries were worked in 
Roman times (see Luna), but were abandoned after the downfall 
of the western empire, until the growth of Pisan architecture 
and sculpture in the 12th and 13th centuries created a demand 
for it. The quarries now pxJend over almost the whole of the 
Apuan Alps, and some 600 of them are being worked, of whici. 



CARREL— CARRIAGE 



4-ot- 



345, with 4400 workmen, are at Carrara itself, and 50 (700 men) 
at Massa. The amount exported in 1899 was 180,000 tons. 
The quarries are served by a separate railway, with several 
branch lines. 

CARREL, JEAN BAPTISTE NICOLAS ARMAND (1800-1836), 
French publicist, was born at Rouen on the 8th of May 1800. 
His father was a merchant in good circumstances, and he received 
a liberal education at the college of Rouen, afterwards attending 
the military school at St Cyr. He had an intense admiration for 
the great generals of Napoleon, and his uncompromising spirit, 
bold uprightness and independent views marked him as a man 
to be suspected. Entering the army as sub-lieutenant he took 
a secret but active part in the unsuccessful conspiracy of Belfort. 
On the outbreak of war with Spain in 1823, Carrel, whose 
sympathies were altogether with the liberal cause, sent in his resig- 
nation, and succeeded in effecting his escape to Barcelona. He 
enrolled himself in the foreign legion and fought gallantly against 
his former comrades. Near Figuieres the legion was compelled 
to surrender, and Carrel became the prisoner of his old general, 
Damas. There was considerable difficulty about the terms 
of capitulation, and one council of war condemned Carrel to 
death. Fortunately some informality prevented the sentence 
being executed, and he was soon afterwards acquitted and set at 
liberty. His career as a soldier being then finally closed, Carrel 
resolved to devote himself to literature. He came to Paris 
and began as secretary to Augustin Thierry, the historian. His 
services were found to be of great value, and he not only obtained 
admirable training in habits of composition, but was led to in- 
vestigate for himself some of the most interesting portions of 
English history. His first work of importance (he had already 
written one or two historical abstracts) was the History of the 
Counter -Revolution in England, an exceedingly able political 
study of the events which culminated in the Revolution of 1688. 
He gradually became known as a skilful writer in various periodi- 
cals; but it was not till he formed his connexion with the 
National that he became a power in France. The National 
was at first conducted by Thiers, Mignet and Carrel in con- 
junction; but after the revolution of July, Thiers and Mignet 
assumed office, and the whole management fell into the hands of 
Carrel. Under his direction this journal became the first political 
organ in Paris. His judgment was unusually clear, his principles 
solid and well founded, his sincerity and honesty beyond question; 
and to these qualities he united an admirable style, lucid, precise 
and well balanced. As the defender of democracy he had fre- 
quently to face serious dangers. He was once in Ste Pedagie, 
and several times before the tribunal to answer for his journal. 
Nor was he in less danger from private enmities. Before his 
last fatal encounter he was twice engaged in duels with editors 
of rival papers. The dispute which led to the duel with Emile 
de Girardin was one of small moment, and might have been 
amicably arranged had it not been for some slight obstinacy on 
Carrel's part. The meeting took place on the morning of the 
22nd of July 1836. De Girardin was wounded in the thigh, 
Carrel in the groin. The wound was at once seen to be dangerous, 
a nd Carrel was conveyed to the house of a friend, where he died 
after two days' suffering. 

His works, with biographical notice by Littre, were published in 
five volumes (Paris, 1858), A fine estimate of his character will be 
found in Mill's Dissertations, vol. i. 

CARRERA, JOSE MIGUEL (1785-1821), the principal leader 
in the early fighting for the independence of Chile, was born at 
Santiago on the 15th of October 1785. Sent to Spain for a 
military career, he served in the Spanish army in the Napoleonic 
war, but returned to Chile in July 1811, where his vigorous 
character and military experience enabled him by means of a 
series of coup d'etats to place himself at the head of the nationalist 
government. Though at first he laboured patriotically to estab- 
lish a stable administration, to promote education, and to 
organize the Chilean forces, his selfish arrogant spirit produced 
dissensions between himself and other patriots, and it was his 
rivalry with Bernardo O'Higgins that led to the defeat of the 
nationalist forces at Rancagua in 1814. In the expedition of 



1817, led by Jose de San Martin and Bernardo O'Higgins, which 
resulted in the liberation of Chile, Carrera had no share, owing 
to his hostility to the leaders, but he attempted to procure in 
the United States materials for a fresh enterprise of his own. 
The Argentine government, however, suspicious of his intentions, 
would not allow him to go to Chile, and Carrera, enraged by this 
treatment and by the execution of his brothers at Mendoza by 
the San Martin party, proceeded to organize rebellion in Ai gentina, 
but was eventually captured and shot at Mendoza on the 4th of 
September 1821. 

See A. Valdes, Revolution Chilena y Campar.as de la Independencia 
(Santiago, 1888), which is practically a vindication of Carrera's 



career; also P. B. Figueroa, Diccionario biografico de Chile, 1550- 
1887 (Santiago, 1888), and J. B. Suarez, Rasgos biograficos de homores 



notables de Chile (Valparaiso, 1886), both giving biographical sketches 
of prominent, characters in Chilean history. 

CARRIAGE, a term which in its widest signification is used, 
as its derivation permits, for any form of " carrying "; thus, 
a person's " carriage " is still spoken of in the sense of the way 
he bears himself. But it is more specifically the general term 
for all vehicular structures employed for the purposes of trans- 
port of merchandise and movable goods and of human beings. 
Such vehicles are generally mounted on wheels, but the sledge 
and the litter are types of the exception to this rule. Within this 
definition a vast variety of forms is included, ranging from the 
coster's barrow and rude farm-cart up to the luxuriously ap- 
pointed sleeping-cars of railways and the state carriages of royal 
personages. A narrower application, however, limits the term 
to such vehicles as are used for the conveyance of persons 
and are drawn by horses, and it is with carriages in this restricted 
sense that we are here concerned. Tramcars, railway carriages 
and motor-cars are dealt with in other articles. 

History. — A wheeled carriage appears to have been in very 
general use in Egypt at an early period, called a car or chariot 
(q.v.); in the Bible the word is usually translated "chariot." 
The bodies of these chariots were small, usually containing only 
two persons standing upright. They were very light, and 
could be driven at great speed. They were narrow, and therefore 
suitable to Eastern cities, in which the streets were very narrow, 
and to mountainous roads, which were often only 4 ft. wide. 
From Egypt the use of chariots spread into other countries, and 
they were used in war in large numbers on the great plains of 
Asia. We read of the 900 chariots of Jabin, king of Canaan; 
how David took 700 chariots from the kings of Syria and 1000 
from the king of Zobah. Solomon had 1400 chariots, and his 
merchants supplied northern Syria and the surrounding countries 
with chariots brought out of Egypt at 600 shekels (about £50) 
apiece. From the ancient sculptures preserved from Nineveh 
and Babylon, some of which are in the British Museum, we 
observe the use of chariots continued for the purpose of hunting 
as well as for war. Homer describes the chief warriors on both 
sides at the siege of Troy as going into battle and fighting from 
their chariots. The Roman nation as it increased in power 
adopted the car, though chiefly for purposes of show and state. 
A beautiful marble model of one of these still exists at the Vatican 
in Rome: a copy of it and the horses drawing it is in the museum 
at South Kensington. The war chariots used by the Persians 
were larger; the idea seems to have been to form a sort of turret 
upon the car, from which several warriors might shoot or throw 
their spears. These chariots were provided with curved blades 
projecting from the axle-trees. Alexander the Great, king of 
Macedon, invading Asia was met upon the banks of the river 
Indus by King Porus, in whose army were a number of elephants 
and also several thousand chariots. On Alexander's return from 
India towards Persia, he travelled in a chariot drawn by eight 
horses, followed by an innumerable number of others covered 
with rich carpets and purple coverlets. After Alexander's 
death a funeral car was prepared to convey his body from Baby- 
lon to Alexandria in Egypt, and this car has perhaps never been 
excelled in the annals of coach-building. It was designed by the 
celebrated architect Hieronymus, and took two years to build. 
It was 18 ft. long and 12 ft. wide, on four massive wheels, and 
drawn by sixty-four mules, eight abreast. The car was composed 



402 



CARRIAGE 



of a platform, with a lofty roof, supported by eighteen columns, 
and was profusely adorned with drapery, gold and jewels; round 
the edge of the roof was a row of golden bells; in the centre was 
a throne, and before it the coffin; around were placed the 
weapons of war and the armour that Alexander had used. 

The Romans established the use of carriages as a private 
means of conveyance, and with them carriages attained great 
variety of form as well as richness of ornamentation. In all 
times the employment of carriages depended greatly on the 
condition of the roads over which they had to be driven, and the 
establishment of good roads, such as the Appian Way, constructed 
331 B.C., and others, greatly facilitated the development of 
carriage travelling among the Romans. In Rome itself, and 
probably also in other large towns, it was necessary to restrict 
travelling in carriages to a few persons of high rank, owing to 
the narrowness and crowded state of the streets. For the same 
reason the transport of goods along the streets was forbidden 
between sunrise and sunset. For long journeys and to convey large 
parties the reda and carruca appear to have been mostly used, 
but what their construction and arrangements"were is not known. 
During the empire the carriage which appears in representations 
of public ceremonials is the carpentum. It is very slight, with 
two wheels, sometimes covered, and generally drawn by two 
horses. If a carriage had four horses they Were yoked abreast, 
among the Greeks and Romans, not in two pairs as now. From 
the carruca are traced the modern European names, — the English 
carriage, the French carrosse and the Italian carrozza. The 
sir pea was a very ancient form of vehicle, the body of which was 
of osier basket-work. It originated with the Gauls, by whom 
it was named lenna, and by them it was employed for the con- 
veyance of persons and goods in time of peace, and baggage 
during war. With its name are connected the modern French 
banne, banneton, vannerie and panier, — all indicating basket-work. 

The ancient Britons used a car for warlike purposes which was 
evidently new to the Romans. It was open in front, instead of at 
the back as in their cars; and the pole, which went straight 
out between the horses, was broad, so that the driver could 
walk along, and if needful drive from the end. Above all, it 
possessed a seat, and was called essedum from this peculiarity. 
For war purposes this car was provided with scythes projecting 
from the ends of the axle-trees. Cicero, writing to a friend in 
Britain, remarks " that there appeared to be very little worth 
bringing away from Britain except the chariots, of which he 
wished his friend to bring him one as a pattern." 

The Roman vehicles were sometimes very splendidly orna- 
mented with gold and precious stones; and covered carriages 
seem more and more to have become appendages of Roman 
pomp and magnificence. Sumptuary laws were enacted on 
account of the public extravagance, but they were little regarded, 
and were altogether abrogated by the emperor Alexander Severus. 
Suetonius states that Nero took with him on his travels no less 
than a thousand carriages. 

On the introduction of the feudal system the use of carriages 
was for some time prohibited, as tending to render the vassals 
less fit for military service. Men of all grades and professions 
rode on horses or mules, and sometimes the monks and women 
on she-asses. Horseback was the general mode of travelling; 
and hence the members of the council, who at the diet and on 
other occasions were employed as ambassadors, were called 
Rittmeister. In this manner also great lords made their public 
entry into cities. 

Covered carriages (see Coach) were known in the beginning 
of the 15 th century, but their use was confined to ladies of the 
first rank; and as it was accounted a reproach for men to ride 
in them, the electors and princes sometimes excused their non- 
attendance at meetings of the state by the plea that their health 
would not permit them to ride on horseback. Covered carriages 
were for a long time forbidden even to women; but about the 
end of the 15th century they began to be employed by the 
emperor, kings and princes in journeys, and afterwards on state 
occasions. In 1474 the emperor Frederick III. visited Frankfort 
in a close carriage, and again in the following year in a very 



magnificent covered carriage. Shortly afterwards carriages 
began to be splendidly decorated; that, for instance, of the 
electress of Brandenburg at the tournament held at Ruppin 
in 1 509 was gilded all over, and that of the duchess of Mecklen- 
burg was hung with red satin. When Cardinal Dietrichstein 
made his entrance into Vienna in 16 n, forty carriages went to 
meet him; and in the same year the consort of the emperor 
Matthias made her public entrance on her marriage in a carriage 
covered with perfumed leather. The wedding carriage of the 
first wife of the emperor Leopold, who was a Spanish princess, 
cost, together with the harness, 38,000 florins. Those of the 
emperor are thus described: " In the imperial coaches no great 
magnificence was to be seen; they were covered over with red 
cloth and black nails. The harness was black, and m the whole 
work there was no gold. The panels were of glass, and on this 
account they were called the imperial glass coaches. On festivals 
the harness was ornamented with red silk fringes. The imperial 
coaches were distinguished only by their having leather traces; 
but the ladies in the imperial suite were obliged to be contented 
with carriages the traces of which were made of ropes." At the 
magnificent court of Duke Ernest Augustus at Hanover, in 1681, 
there were fifty gilt coaches with six horses each. The first time 
that ambassadors appeared in coaches on a public solemnity 
was at the imperial commission held at Erfurt in 16 13. Soon 
after this time coaches became common all over Germany, not- 
withstanding various orders and admonitions to deter vassals 
from using them. These vehicles appear to have been of very 
rude construction. Beckmann describes a view he had seen of 
Bremen, painted by John Landwehr in 1661, in which was 
represented a long quadrangular carriage, apparently not 
suspended by straps, and covered with a canopy supported by 
four pillars, but without curtains. In the side was a small door, 
and in front a low seat or box; the coachman sat upon the 
horses; and the dress of the persons within proved them to be 
burgomasters. At Paris in the 14th, 15 th and even 16th cen- 
turies, the French monarchs rode commonly on horses, the 
servants of the court on mules, and the princesses and principal 
ladies sometimes on asses. Persons even of the highest rank 
sometimes sat behind their equerry on the same horse. Car- 
riages, however, were used at a very early period in France; for 
there is still extant an ordinance of Philip the Fair, issued in 
1294, by which citizens' wives are prohibited from using them. 
It appears, however, that about 1550 there were only three 
carriages at Paris, — one belonging to the queen, another to 
Diana of Poitiers, and the third to Rene de Laval, a very cor- 
pulent nobleman who was unable to ride on horseback. The 
coaches used in the time of Henry IV. were not suspended by 
straps (an improvement referred to the time of Louis XIV.), 
though they were provided with a canopy supported by four 
ornamental pillars, and with curtains of stuff or leather. 
■ Occasional allusion is made to the use of some kinds of vehicles 
in England during the middle ages. In The Squyr of Low Degree, 
a poem of a period anterior to Chaucer, a description of a sump- 
tuous carriage occurs: 

" To-morrow ye shall on hunting fare 

And ride, my daughter, in a chare. 

It shall be cover'd with velvet red, 

And cloth of fine gold all about your head, 

With damask white and azure blue 

Well diaper'd with lilies new." 

Chaucer himself describes a chare as 

" With gold wrought and pierrie." 

When Richard II. of England, towards the end of the 14th 
century, was obliged to fly before his rebellious subjects, he and 
all his followers were on horseback, while his mother alone used 
a carriage. The oldest carriages used in England were known 
as chares, cars, chariots, caroches and whirlicotes; but these 
became less fashionable when Ann, the wife of Richard II., 
showed the English ladies how gracefully she could ride on the 
side-saddle, Stow, in his Survey of London, remarking, " so was 
riding in those whirlicotes and chariots forsaken except at 
coronations and such like spectacles." 



CARRIAGE 



403 



There were curious sumptuary laws enacted during the 16th 
century in various Italian cities against the excessive use of silk, 
velvet, embroidery and gilding, on the coverings of coaches 
and the trappings of horses. In 1564 Pope Pius IV. exhorted 
the cardinals and bishops not to ride in coaches, according to the 
fashion of the times, but to leave such things to women, and 
themselves ride on horseback. The use of coaches in Germany 
in the 16th century was not less common than in Italy. The 
current of trade, especially from the East, had for a long time 
poured into those two countries towards Holland, enriching all 
the cities in its progress. Macpherson, in his History of Commerce, 
says that Antwerp possessed 500 coaches in 1560. France and 
England appear to have been behind the rest of Europe at 
this period. 

The first coach in England was made in 1555 for the earl of 
Rutland by Walter Rippon, who also made a coach in 1556 for 
Queen Mary, and in 1564 a state coach for Queen Elizabeth. 
That one of the carriages used by Queen Elizabeth could be 
opened and closed at pleasure may be inferred from her causing 
at Warwick during one of her progresses — " every part and side 
of her coach to be opened that all her subjects present might 
behold her, which most gladly they desired." 

Coaches of the type now properly so-called were first known in 
England about the year 1580, and were introduced, according 
to Stow, from Germany by Henry Fitzalan, 12th earl of Arundel. 
By the beginning of the 17th century the use of coaches had 
become so prevalent in England that in 1601' the attention of 
parliament was drawn to the subject, and a bill " to restrain 
the excessive use of coaches " was introduced, which, however, 
was rejected on the second reading. Their use told severely on 
the occupation of the Thames watermen, and Taylor the poet 
and waterman complained bitterly both in prose and verse 
against the new-fangled practice: — 

" Carroaches, coaches, jades, and Flanders mares 
Doe rob us of our shares, our wares, our fares. 
Against the ground we stand and knock our heels 
Whilest all our profit runs away on wheeles." 

The sneers of wits and watermen notwithstanding, coaches 
became so common, that in the early part of the 17 th century 
they were estimated to number more than 6000 in London and 
its surrounding country. 

We now arrive gradually at the modern conception of carriage- 
building. No trace of glass windows or complete doors for 
coaches seems to have existed up to 1650. But plain and rude as 
was the first coach of Louis XIV., it was in his reign, which lasted 
till 1 715, that the most rapid progress was made. The credit for 
this is equally due to Germany, Italy, France and England. 
There is very little mention made by historians of steel springs, 
but they were first applied to wheel carriages about 1670, prior to 
which bodies were suspended by long straps from the four 
corners to pillars erected upon the under carriage. The great 
advantage of the introduction of springs was speedily recognized 
as reducing vibration, enabling carriages to be built much 
lighter and lessening the draught for the horses. In the diary of 
Samuel Pepys there are many amusing and interesting references 
to the art of coach-building, which was beginning to attract 
much attention at that period. 

In the French Encyclopedic (1772) by Diderot there are 
elaborate descriptions of the art of coach-building, the workshops 
and tools used, and plates of the different carriages in use. The 
1 8th century is remarkable for the rapid development which 
took place, more especially in the manufacture of state carriages 
of a sumptuous and ornate character, which were largely in 
demand by the various courts of Europe. One of the most 
beautiful of these is that belonging to the imperial family of 
Vienna, which was built in 1696, and is shaped with all the curves 
that are familiar to us in cabinets and furniture of the style of 
Louis XIV. The panels are beautifully painted with nymphs in 
the style of Rubens. There is an unusual quantity of plate glass 
in the panels, and on the centre of the roof is a large imperial 
crown. In 1757 was built the elaborate state coach of the city 
of London, and in 1761 the royal state coach of England, built for 



King George III. (see Coach). During the reigns of George II. 
and George III. all English manufactures had received an 
immense impulse from the energy of the men of the time, in 
which they were much encouraged by the action of the Society of 
Arts in offering money prizes for improvements; and in these 
coach-builders largely participated. 

In the year 1804 Obadiah Elliot patented his plan for hanging 
vehicles upon elliptical springs, thus dispensing with the heavy 
wood and iron perch and cross beds, invariably used in four- 
wheeled carriages up to that time. Elliot was rewarded by the 
grant of a gold medal by the Society of Arts, and extensive 
orders for the carriages of a lighter character, which he was thus 
enabled to produce. 

Of carriages much in fashion and characteristic of this period 
may be mentioned the " curricle," a cabriolet (see below) on two 
wheels, driven with a pair of horses, the balance being secured 
by an ornamental bar across the horses' backs, connected by a 
leather brace to a spring under the pole. For lack of perfect 
safety this was gradually superseded by the " gentleman's 
cabriolet," for one horse, on C springs, fitted with folding leather 
hood and platform behind, on which stood a youthful trim 
servant in top-boots, popularly termed a " tiger." To produce 
this satisfactorily, the best coach-building talent was required, 
and to work it a horse of exceptional strength and breeding was 
needful, but when complete this equipage had a distinction 
never surpassed. During this period the pair-horse " mail 
phaeton " was introduced, and has enjoyed a long period of 
popularity. As a travelling carriage with the needful appoint- 
ments the " britzska," having a straight body with ogee curves 
at front and back, with single folding hood, and hung on C springs, 
was a distinctive and popular feature among carriages of the 
period from 1824 until after 1840. Of two- wheeled vehicles the 
" stanhope " and " tilbury " gigs, the " dog cart " and " tandem 
cart," came into use during these years, and have afforded 
facilities of agreeable locomotion to many thousands of people at 
a moderate cost. But the greatest improvement of this period 
was the introduction of the " brougham." Several attempts 
had been made to arrive at a light carriage of this description, but 
it was not until 1839 that a carriage was produced to a design 
adopted by Lord Brougham, and called after him. The " vic- 
toria " was known as a carriage for public hire in continental 
cities for several years before being adopted as a fashionable 
carriage by the wealthy classes. In 1869 the prince of Wales 
brought one from Paris of the cab shape, and Baron Rothschild 
brought one from Vienna of the square shape, examples speedily 
followed. In various elegant and artistic forms, either as an 
elliptic or C spring, it has since become a most popular and 
convenient carriage. 

Public carriages for hire, or hackney (q.v.) coaches, were first 
established in London in 1625. In 1635 the number was re- 
stricted to fifty. Still they increased, notwithstanding the oppo- 
sition of the court and king, who thought they would break up 
the roads, till in 1650 there were as many as 300. In Paris 
they were introduced during the minority of Louis XIV. by 
Nicholas Sauvage, who lived in the rue St Martin at the sign 
of St Fiacre, from which circumstance hackney carriages in 
Paris have since been called fiacres. In 1694 the number in 
London had increased to 700. Many of these were old private 
coaches of the nobility and gentry, and it was not until 1790 
that coaches on a smaller scale were built specially for hackney 
purposes (see Coach). 

We are told that in 1673 there were stage coaches from London 
to York, to Chester and to Exeter, having each forty horses on 
the road, and carrying each six inside-passengers. The coach 
occupied eight days travelling to Exeter. In 1706 a coach went 
from London to York every Monday, Wednesday and Friday, 
performing the journey in four days. In the same year there was 
a coach from London to Birmingham starting on Monday and 
arriving on Wednesday. In 1754 a coach was started from 
Manchester called the flying coach, which was advertised to reach 
London in four days and a half. In 1784 coaches became 
universal at the speed of 8 m. an hour. 



4-°4 



CARRIAGE 



In the year 1786 the prince of Wales, afterwards George IV., 
began to erect the pavilion at Brighton, and this led to a great 
increase of traffic, so that in 1820 no less than 70 coaches 
daily visited and left Brighton. The number continued to 
increase, until in 1835 there were as many as 700 mail 
coaches throughout Great Britain and Ireland. The system of 
road construction introduced by Mr McAdam during this time 
was of great value in facilitating this development. 

Notwithstanding the competition of the sedan-chair (q.v.), the 
hackney-coach held its place and grew in importance, till it was 
supplanted about 1820 by the cabriolet de place, now shortened 
into " cab " (q.v.), which had previously held a most important 
place in Paris. In that city the cabriolet came into great public 
favour about the middle of the 18th century, and in the year 
1813 there were n 50 such vehicles plying in the Parisian streets. 
The original cabriolet was a kind of hooded gig, inside which the 
driver sat, besides whom there was only room left for a single 
passenger. For hackney purposes Mr Boulnois introduced a 
four-wheeled cab to carry two persons, which was followed by 
one to carry four persons, introduced by Mr Harvey, the proto- 
type of the London " four-wheeler." 

The hansom patent safety cab (1834) owes its invention to J. A. 
Hansom (q.v.), the architect of the Birmingham town-hall. This 
has passed through many stages of improvement with which the 
name of Forder of Wolverhampton is conspicuously associated. 

The prototype of the modern " omnibus " first began plying in 
the streets of Paris on the 18th of March 1662, going at fixed 
hours, at a stated fare of five sous. Soldiers, lackeys, pages and 
livery servants were forbidden to enter such conveyances, 
which were announced to be pour la plus grande commodite et 
libertt des personnes de merite. In the time of Charles X. the 
omnibus system in reality was established; for no exclusion, of 
any class or condition of person who tendered the proper fare was 
permitted in the vehicles then put on various routes, and the fact 
of the carriages being thus " at the service of all " gave rise to the 
present name. The first London omnibus was started in July 
182Q by the enterprising Mr Shillibeer. The first omnibuses 
were drawn by three horses abreast and carried twenty-two 
passengers, all inside. Though appearing unwieldy they were 
light of draught and travelled speedily. They were, however, 
too large for the convenience of street traffic, and were superseded 
by others carrying twelve passengers inside. In 1849 an outside 
seat along the centre of the roof was added. The London 
General Omnibus Company was founded in 1856; since then 
continual improvements in this system of public conveyance 
have been introduced. 

Modern Private Carriages.— At the accession of Queen Victoria 
the means of travelling by road and horse-power, in the case of 
public coaches, had reached in England its utmost limits of speed 
and convenience, and the travelling-carriages; of the nobility 
and the wealthy were equipped with the completest and most 
elaborate contrivances to secure personal comfort and safety. 
More particularly was this the case as regards continental tours, 
which had become indispensable to all who had at their command 
the means for this costly educational and pleasurable experience. 
Concurrently with this development the style and character of 
court equipages had also reached a consummate degree of 
splendour and artistic excellence. Not only was this the case 
in points of decoration, in which livery colour and heraldic 
devices were effectively employed, but also in the beauty of 
outline and skilful structural adaptation, in which respect 
carriages of that period made greater demands upon the capacity 
of the builder and the skill of the workman than do those of the 
present day. For this attainment the art of coachmaking was 
indebted to a very few leading men, whose genius has left its 
impress upon the art, and is still jealously cherished by those 
who in early life had experience of their achievements. The 
early portion of Queen Victoria's reign was an age of much 
emulation; the best-equipped carriages of that period, dis- 
tinctive of noble families and foreign embassies, with their 
graceful outline and superb appointments, and harnessed to a 
splendid breed of horses — all harmoniously blended, perfect in 



symmetry and adaptation— gave to the London season, more 
especially on drawing-room days, and at other times in Hyde 
Park, an attractiveness unequalled in any other capital. After 
the death of the prince consort, the pageantry of that period very 
much declined and, except as an appendage of royalty, full- 
dress carriages have since been comparatively few, though there 
are hopes of a revival in this direction. Meanwhile, owing to 
the rapid development of railways and the wide extension of 
commerce, the demand for carriages greatly increased. The 
larger types gave place to others of a lighter build and more 
general utility, in which in some cases an infusion of American 
ideas made its appearance. In accordance with the universal 
rule of supply meeting the demand, Mr Stenson, an ironmaster 
of Northampton, was successful in producing a mild forging 
steel, which proved for some years, until the manufacture ceased, 
very conducive to the object of securing lightness with strength. 
In the early 'seventies the eminent mechanician, Sir Joseph 
Whitworth, in the course of his scientific studies in the perfecting 
of artillery, succeeded in manufacturing a steel of great purity, 
perfectly homogeneous and possessing marvellous tenacity and 
strength, known as " fluid compressed steel." Incidentally 
carriage-building was able to participate in the results of this 
discovery. Two firms well known to Sir Joseph were asked 
to test its merits as a material applicable to this industry. In 
this test much difficulty was experienced, the nature of the steel 
not being favourable to welding, of which so much is required 
in the making of coach ironwork; but after much perseverance 
by skilful hands this was at length accomplished, and for some 
years there existed not a little rivalry in the use of this material, 
more especially in the case of carriages on the C and under- 
spring principle, which for lightness, elegance and luxurious 
riding left nothing to be desired. Many of these carriages may 
be referred to to-day as rare examples of constructive skill. 
Unfortunately, the original cost of the material, still more of the 
labour to be expended upon it, and the difficulty of educating 
men into the art of working it, were effectual barriers to its 
general adoption. The idea, however, had taken hold, and 
attention was given by other firms to the manufacture of the 
steel now in general use, admitting of easier application, with 
approximate, if not equal, results. 

From C and under-spring carriages there arose another 
application of springs which was very prominently before the 
public during this period, by means of which it was professed 
that two drawbacks recognized in the C and under-spring 
carriages were obviated, which were caused by the perch or bar 
which passes under the body holding the front and hind parts 
in rigid connexion, and yet making use of a form of spring to 
which the same terms may be applied. These objections are 
the weight of the perch, and the limitation which it causes to 
the facility of turning, which in narrow roads and crowded 
thoroughfares is an inconvenience. The objection to weight is, 
however, minimized by the introduction of steel, and as the more 
advanced builders almost always construct the perch with a 




Fig. 1. 
forked arch in front, allowing the wheels to pass under, the 
difficulty of a limited lock is in a great measure overcome (fig. 1). 
It must be noted, however (and this cannot be too emphatically 
stated), that the so-called C springs above referred to are not at 
all the same in action as the C spring proper; they are but an 
elongation of the ordinary elliptic spring in the form of the 
letter C (fig. 2), without adding anything to, but rather lessening 
their elasticity, and entirely ignoring the principle of suspension 



CARRIAGE 



405 



by leather braces over the C spring proper, by which alone the 
advantage of superior ease is to be obtained. 

Another improvement which stamps the period under review 
is the introduction of indiarubber for the tires of wheels. To 
produce a carriage as nearly as possible free from noise and 
rattle has always been the aim of high-class coachmaking. 
A structure composed of wood, iron and glass, with axle-trees, 




doors, windows, lamps and other parts, in use upon the road 
in all weathers, must from time to time require some attention 
with this object. To meet this difficulty, the introduction of 
indiarubber has been received by carriage-users as a great boon! 
It was about the year 1852 that Mr Reading, who at that time 
was known as a builder of invalid carriages, conceived the idea 
of encircling wheels with that material, but his method only 
admitted of its use on vehicles travelling slowly over good roads. 
This was improved upon at a later date by Uriah Scott, who, 
taking advantage of the tempering capacity of indiarubber by 
the chemical action of sulphur, produced an inner rim of such 
density as to hold bolts, by which it could be secured through the 
felloe, forming a base for the outer covering of soft pliable rubber. 
This system was attended with satisfactory results, and was in 
favour for some years with persons whose health needed such 
provision. Another method, originated by Mr Mulliner of Liver- 
pool in the early 'seventies, was to screw on iron flanges to the 
outer and inner sides of the felloes, having a kind of lip to press 
into the indiarubber filling the intervening space; but the cost 
of this — £36 per set — rendered its adoption prohibitive. Mean- 
while another invention by Uriah Scott, afterwards improved 
upon by an American patentee, came into use; this was known 
as the " rubber-cushioned axle," cylindrical rings being introduced 
between the axle-box and hub of the wheel, thus insulating the 
body of the carriage from the concussion of the road. This, 
however, necessitated the cutting away of so much of the timber 
of the hub as to impair its durability, and had, therefore, after a 
few years' experience, to be abandoned in favour of an invention 
by a Parisian builder, who introduced indiarubber bearings 
between the spring and axle-tree. This was thoroughly practi- 
cable, and met with general acceptance, and it is still used in 
conjunction with iron and steel tires. In 1890 the pneumatic 
tire was first applied to road carriages. Its bulky appearance 
is a great drawback, contrasting strongly with the qualities 
which distinguish a graceful equipage; and in spite of its 
practical advantages it never became popular in England or 
America. In Paris and its neighbourhood and many parts of 
France, pneumatic tires are to be seen in frequent use both on 
public and private conveyances. In another form the indiarubber 

_, , v tire has become of almost universal applica- 

\ tion. Owing to an ingenious invention of 

Mr Carment, what appeared to be an in- 
superable difficulty in rolling a grooved tire 
was overcome (fig. 3). This so simplified 
the application as to bring the cost within 
practicable limits. The grooved tire is now 



Fig. 3. 



made in several sections, in some of which the inward projection 
for securing the rubber is dispensed with, this being kept in posi- 
tion by wires running through the whole length, and electrically 
welded at the point of contact. Whatever be the method chosen 
for securing the tire, the best tires, both for durability and ease, 
are those in which the rubber provided is most resilient in its 
nature. 



For the lifting and lowering of the hoods of victorias and other 
such carriages* and the opening and closing of landaus, there 
are now many automatic contrivances, of which the simplest 
are the most to be preferred. The quarter-light or five-glass 
landau is a carriage which has been greatly improved. The 
complicated adjustments of pillars, windows and roof have been 
.replaced by one simple parallel movement. The first public 
exhibition of a finished carriage on this principle was by an 
English firm at the Paris Exhibition of 1876 (fig. 4). 

In the matter of style certain types of carriages have passed 
through marked changes. Extreme lightness was at one time 
considered by many the one desideratum both as to appearance 
and actual weight, in providing which ease of movement and 
comfortable seating of the occupants became secondary con- 
siderations—though to these extremes builders of repute were 
always opposed. Still, when at the International Exhibition of 
Paris 1889, it was seen that the Parisian builders had suddenly, 
gone in the opposite direction, the world of fashion in carriages 
was taken by surprise. From being built upon easy, flowing, 
graceful lines, it was seen, with some revulsion of feeling, that 




Fig. 4. 

these were to be displaced by the deep, full-bodied victoria, 
brougham and landau. Only by slow degrees did this character- 
istic find acceptance with English connoisseurs, and then only 
in a modified form, though eventually in a greater or less degree 
it is now the prevailing style. 

While the better types of English carriages are still pre- 
eminent in their constructive qualities, and represent the 
well-known characteristics of individual firms, some emulation 
may be excited by the elegant taste and careful workmanship 
which French builders display in points of finish, both internally 
and externally. Of the various types of carriages now in vogue, 
the victoria, in its many varieties of form, is the most popular, 
accompanied, a's of necessity, by the double victoria, sociable, 
brougham, landaulet and landau. Four-in-hand coaches for 
private use, as well as the " road " coaches, are built on a smaller 
scale than formerly; 6 ft. 8 in. may now be taken as the standard 
height of the roof from the ground. Owing to the encouragement 
given by the Four-in-hand and Coaching Clubs, the ascendancy 
of this style of driving is still preserved to Great Britain; and 
in association with it the char-a-banc, mail phaeton, wagonette, 
and four-wheel dog-cart retain their popularity. Of two- 
wheeled vehicles the polo-cart and ralli-cart are most in favour, 
to which may be added the governess-car, which is found con- 
venient for many purposes not implied by its name. For a few 
years an effort was made, but with very indifferent success, to 
bring into fashion the tandem-cart, which may again be con- 
sidered almost obsolete in England. 

: America has long held a prominent position in connexion with 
the carriage industry. In all the chief cities manufactories on a 
colossal scale are to be found, producing thousands of vehicles 
annually and equipped with the most perfect labour-saving 
machinery; and as vehicles of any particular pattern — many of 
small value — are required, not singly, but in large numbers, much 
economy is exercised in their manufacture. It is remarkable that, 
as a contrast to the popular buggy, wagon and rockaway of the 
United States, which are to be found in infinite variety, carriage 
establishments of the wealthy are not considered complete unless 
furnished with some of a European character, selected from the 



406 



CARRICKFERGUS 



most eminent firms of London or Paris, in addition to others of 
their own manufacture. In Paris preference is given to an 
excess of bulk, with elaborate scroll ornamentation and diminu- 
tive windows, forming indeed, by reason of its exaggeration, a 
distinctive class. In respect of workmanship and finish, 
carriages by the best-known American builders leave nothing to 
be desired. 

The International Exhibition of Paris 1900 brought together 
examples from various continental countries, in some of which a 
preference for curvilinear outline was displayed, but the best 
examples followed very closely the well-known English styles. 
In the French section it was interesting to find a revival of the 
once all-prevailing chariot, barouche and britzska, suspended on 
C and under-springs, with perch, but with ideas of lightness 
somewhat out of proportion to their general character. 

Coach-making, or the carriage-manufacturing industry, is a com- 
bination of crafts rarely united in one trade, embracing as it does 
work in such divers materials as wood, iron, steel, brass, cloth, 
silk, leather, oils and colours, glass, ivory, hair, indiarubber, &c. 
Many divisions of labour and numerous highly-skilled artisans are 
consequently employed in the various stages in the construction of 
a high-class carriage. The workmen include body-makers, who 
build up the parts in which persons sit; carriage-makers, who make 
and fit together all the under parts of the vehicle on which the body 
rests; wheelwrights, joiners and fitters; several classes of smiths, 
for special work connected with the strengthening of the body frame- 
work by means of long edge plates, the construction of under works, 
tiring and wheels, manufacture of springs, axle-trees, &c. Painting 
is an important part- of the business, those professing it being 
divided into body, carriage and heraldry painters. Trimmers are 
needed who fit up the upholstery of the interior, and budget 
trimmers who sew on the patent leather covering to dasher 
wings, &c. 

A very great deal in the coach-making industry depends upon the 
selection of materials. Ash is the kind of wood required in the 
framework both of body and carriage. The quality best suited for 
the body is that of full-grown mild and free nature ; for the carriage 
that which is strong and robust ; that for carriage-poles should be of 
younger growth, straight and tough in quality. An important con- 
sideration is the seasoning of this timber. Planks of various thick- 
nesses are required, varying from 1 1 in. to 6 in., the time required 
for seasoning being one year for every inch of thickness. After the 
framework is made, the body is panelled with | in. mild Honduras 
mahogany, plain and free from grain, every joint and groove care- 
fully coated with ground white lead to exclude water. The roof is 
covered with i in. wide pine boards, unless when superseded by an 
American invention, by which, in order to obtain the needful width 
frequently of 5 ft. or upwards, boards are cut from the circumference 
of the tree, instead of through its diameter; three thicknesses of 
very thin wood are then glued together under pressure, the grain of 
the centre running across the outer plies, the whole forming a solid 
covering without joints. Birch and elm of I in. thickness also enter 
into the construction in many carriages; for floor and lining boards 
pine is the material used. 

Wheel-making is a very important branch of the business, in 
which, owing to the increased lightness now required, many modern 
improvements have been introduced. The timber used in an 
ordinary carriage wheel is wych elm for the naves, heart of oak for 
the spokes, and ash for the felloes. American hickory has of late 
years been also largely used for spokes in exceptionally light wheels, 
as well as the American method of making the rim in two sections of 
straight-grained ash or hickory bent to the required circle. This 
method has much to recommend it, more especially for wheels with 
indiarubber tires, in which the wood felloes are not required to be 
nearly so deep as for steel tires. One well-known feature in light 
wheels is the " Warner nave," which is a solid iron casting with 
mortices to receive the spokes, and being of small diameter gives the 
wheel a light appearance. 

For springs the finest quality of steel is made from Swedish ore, 
but the ordinary English spring steel by the best makers leaves 
nothing to be desired. To secure the most perfect elasticity it is 
important that the tapering down of the ends of each plate should 
be done by hand labour on the anvil, and that the plates should 
not be more than \ in. in thickness. To obtain cheapness wholesale 
spring-makers adopt the method of squeezing the ends of spring 
plates between eccentric rollers, and so produce the tapered form, 
which, however, is too short and gives a lumpy and unsightly appear- 
ance to the spring when put together, so that by this they lose much 
of their pliability. 

The iron mounting of coach work requires the skill of experienced 
smiths, and gives scope for much taste and judgment in shaping 
the work, and providing strength suited to the relative strain to 
which it will be subjected. Axle-trees are not made by coach- 
builders, but by firms who make it their special business. They are 
of two kinds, the " mail," which are secured to the wheel by three 



bolts passing through the nave, and the "collinge" (invented in 
1792), the latter made secure by gun- metal cone-shaped collets and 
nuts. The axle boxes which are wedged into the nave are of three 
kinds, cast, chilled and wrought iron, in all cases case-hardened, 
the first being the cheapest and the last the most costly. Many 
attempts have been made to improve upon the collinge axle-tree, 
but none of them has got far beyond the experimental stage. 

No branch of coach-building contributes more to the elegance of 
the vehicle than that of painting. To obtain the needful perfection 
the work has to pass through several stages before reaching the 
finishing colour, which must be of the finest quality. The varnish 
used is copal, of which there are two kinds, the one for finishing the 
body, the other the carriage. In first-class work as many as eighteen 
or twenty coats will be required to complete the various stages. 
After a carriage has been in use about twelve months, it is practicable 
to revive the brilliant gloss on the panels by hand-polishing with 
the aid of rottenstone and oil, a process which requires a specially 
trained man to do successfully. 

The trimming of the interior of a carriage requires much skill and 
judgment on the part of the workmen in providing really comfortable, 
well-fitted seats and neatness of workmanship. In the middle of the 
19th century figured tabaret or satin were much used, but for many 
years past morocco has been almost universally preferred. Silk 
lutestring spring curtains, Brussels or velvet pile carpet, complete 
the interior, unless are added neat morocco covered trays with 
mirror, &c, for ladies' convenience. Electric light is now frequently 
used for the interior, and can be applied with much neatness and 
efficiency. Road lamps, door handles, polished silver or brass 
furniture, are supplied to the coach-builder by firms whose special 
business it is to make them. Lever brakes are now a very ordinary 
requirement. Much judgment is needful to make them efficient, 
and careful workmanship to prevent rattle. Indiarubber is the best 
material for blocks applied to steel tires, and cast iron for indiarubber 
tires. The " Bowden wire " recently introduced is in some cases a 
convenient and light alternative to the long bar connecting the 
handle with the hind cross levers, and has the advantage of passing 
out of sight through the interior of the body. (J. A. M'N.) 

CARRICKFERGUS, a seaport and watering-place of Co. Antrim, 
Ireland, in the east parliamentary division; on the northern 
shore of Belfast Lough, 95 m. N.E. of Belfast by the Northern 
Counties (Midland) railway. Pop. of urban district (1901) 4208. 
It stretches for about 1 m. along the shore of the Lough. The 
principal building is the castle, originally built by John de Courci 
towards the close of the 12th century, and subsequently much 
enlarged. It stands on a projecting rock above the sea, and was 
formerly a place of much strength. It is still maintained as an 
arsenal, and mounted with heavy guns. The ancient donjon or 
keep, 90 ft. in height, is still in good preservation. The town 
walls, built by Sir Henry Sidney, are still visible on the west and 
north, and the North Gate remains. The parish church of St 
Nicholas, an antiquated cruciform structure with curious 
Elizabethan work in the north transept, and monuments of the 
Chichester family, was originally a chapel or oratory dependent 
on a Franciscan monastery. The entrance to a subterranean 
passage between the two establishments is still visible under the 
communion-table of the church. The gaol, built on the site of 
the monastery above mentioned, was formerly the county of 
Antrim prison. The court-house, which adjoins the gaol, is a 
modern building. The town has some trade in domestic produce, 
and in leather and linen manufactures, there being several flax 
spinning-mills and bleach-works in the immediate neighbourhood. 
Distilling is carried on. The harbour admits vessels of 500 tons. 
The fisheries are valuable, especially the oyster fisheries. At 
Duncrue about 2 m. from the town, rock salt of remarkable 
purity and in large quantity is found in the Triassic sandstone. 
The neighbouring country is generally hilly, and Slieve True 
(1100 ft.) commands a magnificent prospect. 

In 1182, John de Courci, to whom Henry II. had granted all 
the parts of Ulster he could obtain possession of by the sword, 
fixed a colony in this district. The castle came in the 13th 
century into possession of the De Lacy family, who, being 
ejected, invited Edward Bruce to besiege it (1315)- After a 
desperate resistance the garrison surrendered. In 1386, the 
town was burned by the Scots, and in 1400 was destroyed by 
the combined Scots and Irish. Subsequently, it suffered much 
by famine and the occasional assaults of the neighbouring Irish 
chieftains, whose favour the townsmen were at length forced 
to secure by the payment of an annual tribute. In the reign of 
Charles I.many Scottish Covenanterssettledinthe neighbourhood 



CARRICKMACROSS— CARRIER 



407 



to avoid the persecution directed against them. In the civil 
wars, from 1641, Carrickfergus was one of the chief places of 
refuge for the Protestants of the county of Antrim; and on 
the 10th of June 1642, the first Presbytery held in Ireland met 
here. In that year the garrison was commanded by General 
Robert Munro, who, having afterwards relinquished the cause 
of the English parliament, was surprised and taken prisoner by 
Sir Robert Adair in 1648. At a later period Carrickfergus was 
held by the partisans of James II., but surrendered in 1689 to 
the forces under King William's general Schomberg; and in 
1690 it was visited by King William, who landed here on his 
expedition to Ireland. In 1760 it was surprised by a French 
squadron under Commodore Thurot, who landed with about 
1000 men, and, after holding the place for a few days, evacuated 
it on the approach of the English troops. Eighteen years later 
Paul Jones, in his ship the " Ranger," succeeded in capturing 
the " Drake," a British sloop-of war, in the neighbouring bay; 
but he left without molesting the town. In the reign of Queen 
Elizabeth the town obtained a charter, and this was confirmed 
by James I., who added the privilege of sending two burgesses 
to the Irish parliament. The corporation, however, was super- 
seded, under the provisions of the Municipal Reform Act of 1840, 
by a board of municipal commissioners. Carrickfergus was a 
parliamentary borough until 1885; and a county of a town till 
1898, having previously (till 1850) been the county town of 
county Antrim. But its importance was sapped by the vicinity 
of Belfast, and its historical associations are now its chief interest. 

CARRICKMACROSS, a market town of Co. Monaghan, Ireland, 
in the south parliamentary division, 68 m. N.W. of Dublin on 
a branch of the Great Northern railway. Pop. of urban district 
(1901) 1874. It has a pleasant, elevated site, a considerable 
agricultural trade, and a famous' manufacture of lace, which is 
carried on in various conventual establishments. There are 
some remains of an Elizabethan castle, a seat of the earls of 
Essex, which was destroyed during the wars of 1641; the ruins 
of the old church of St Finbar commemorate the same disastrous 
period. 

CARRICK-ON-SHANNON, a market town and the county 
town of Co. Leitrim, Ireland, in the south parliamentary division, 
beautifully situated on the left bank of the upper Shannon, 
between Loughs Allen and Boderg, close to the confluence of 
the Boyle. Pop. (1901) 1118. It is on the Sligo branch of the 
Midland Great Western railway, 90 m. W.N.W. of Dublin, 
the station being across the river in county Roscommon. Though 
having so small a population it is the largest town in the county, 
is the seat of the assizes, and has quays and some river trade. 
The surrounding country, with its waterways, loughs and woods, 
is of considerable beauty. 

CARRICK-ON-SUIR, a market town of Co. Tipperary, Ireland, 
in the east parliamentary division, on the north (left) bank of 
the Suir, 14! m. W.N.W. from Waterford by the Waterford & 
Limerick line of the Great Southern & Western railway. Pop. 
of urban district (1901) 5406. It was formerly a walled town, 
and contains some ancient buildings, such as the castle, erected 
in 1309, formerly a seat of the dukes of Ormonde, now belonging 
to the Butler family, a branch of which takes the title of earl 
from the town. On the other side of the river, connected by a 
bridge of the 14th century, and another of modern erection, stands 
the suburb of Carrickbeg, in county Waterford, where an abbey 
was founded in 1336. The woollen manufactures for which the 
town was formerly famous are extinct. A thriving export trade 
is carried on in agricultural produce, condensed milk is manu- 
factured, and slate is extensively quarried in the neighbour- 
hood, while some coal is exported from the neighbouring fields. 
Dredging has improved the navigable channel of the river, which 
is tidal to this point and is lined with quays. 

CARRIER, JEAN BAPTISTE (1756-1794), French Revolu- 
tionist and Terrorist, was born at Yolet, a village near AuriUac 
in Upper Auvergne. In 1790 he was a country attorney (coun- 
sellor for the baittiage of Aurillac) and in 1792 he was chosen 
deputy to the National Convention. He was already known 
as one of the influential members of the Cordeliers club and of 



that of the Jacobins. After the subjugation of Flanders he was 
one of the commissioners nominated in the close of 1792 by the 
Convention, and sent into that country In the following year 
he took part in establishing the Revolutionary Tribunal. He 
voted for the death of Louis XVI., was one of the first to call for 
the arrest of the duke of Orleans, and took a prominent part in 
the overthrow of the Girondists (on the 31st of May). After a 
mission into Normandy, Carrier was sent, early in October 1793, 
to Nantes, under orders from the Convention to suppress the 
revolt which was raging there, by the most severe measures. 
Nothing loth, he established a revolutionary tribunal, and 
formed a body of desperate men, called the Legion of Marat, for 
the purpose of destroying in the swiftest way the masses of 
prisoners heaped in the jails. The form of trial was soon dis- 
continued, and the victims were sent to the guillotine or shot or 
cut down in the prisons en masse. He also had large numbers 
of prisoners put on board vessels with trap doors for bottoms, 
and sunk in the Loire. This atrocious process, known as the 
Noyades of Nantes, gained for Carrier a reputation for wanton 
cruelty. Since in his mission to Normandy he had been very 
moderate, it is possible that, as he was nervous and ill when sent 
to Nantes, his mind had become unbalanced by the atrocities 
committed by the Vendean and royalist armies. Naturally, the 
stories told of him are not all true. He was recalled by the 
Committee of Public Safety on the 8th of February 1794, took 
part in the attack on Robespierre on the 9th Thermidor, but was 
himself brought before the Revolutionary Tribunal on the nth 
and guillotined on the 16th of November 1794. 

See Comte Fleury, Carrier & Nantes, 1793-1794 (Paris, 1897); 
Alfred Lallie, /. B. Carrier, representant du Cantal a. la Convention 
1756-1704 d'apres de nouveaux documents (Paris, 1901). These 
works, and the others of Lallie, are inspired by strong royalist 
sympathies and are not altogether to be accepted. 

CARRIER, a general term for any person who conveys the 
goods of another for hire, more specifically applied to the trades- 
men, now largely superseded by the railway system, who convey 
goods in carts or wagons on the public roads. In jurisprudence, 
however, the term is collectively applied to all conveyers of 
property, whether by land or water; and in this sense the changes 
and enlargements of the system of transit throughout the world 
have given additional importance to the subject. The law by 
which carriers, both by land and sea, are made responsible for 
the goods entrusted to them, is founded on the praetorian edict 
of the civil law, to which the ninth title of the fourth book of the 
Pandect is devoted. The edict itself is contained in these few 
words, " nautae, caupones, stabularii, quod cujusque salvum fore 
receperint, nisirestituent, in eos judicium dabo." The simplicity of 
the rule so announced has had a most beneficial influence on the 
commerce of the world. Throughout the great civilized region 
which took its law directly from Rome, and through the other 
less civilized countries which followed the same commercial code, 
it laid a foundation for the principle that the carrier's engagement 
to the public is a contract of indemnity. It bound him in the 
general case, to deliver what he had been entrusted with, or 
its value,— -thus sweeping away all secondary questions or dis- 
cussions as to the conditions of mere or less culpability on his 
part under which loss or damage may have occurred; and it 
left any limitations of this general responsibility to be separately 
adjusted by special contract. 

The law of England recognizes a distinction between a common 
and a private carrier. The former is one who holds himself out to 
the public as ready to carry for hire from place to place the goods 
of such persons as choose to employ him. The owner of a stage- 
coach, a railway company, the master of a general ship, a whar- 
finger carrying goods on his own lighters are common carriers; 
and it makes no difference that one of the termini of the journey 
is out of England. It has been held, however, that a person who 
carries. only passengers is not a common carrier; nor of course is 
a person who merely engages to carry the goods of particular 
individuals or to carry goods upon any particular occasion. A 
common carrier is subject at law to peculiar liabilities. He is 
bound to carry the goods of any person who offers to pay bis 



408 



CA:RRIERE*-€ ARROCCIQ / 



hire, unless there is a good reason to the contrary, as, for example, 
when his carriage is full, or the article is not such as he is in the 
habit of conveying. He ought to carry the goods in the usual 
course without unnecessary deviation or delay. To make him 
liable there must be a due delivery of the goods to him in the 
known course of his business. His charge must be reasonable; 
and he must not give undue preference to any customer or class 
of customers. The latter principle, as enforced by statute, has 
come to be of great importance in the law of railway companies. 
In respect of goods entrusted to him, the carrier's liability, unless 
limited by a special contract, is, as already stated, that of an 
insurer. There is no question of negligence as in the case of 
injury to passengers, for the warranty is simply to carry safely 
and securely. The law, however, excepts losses or injuries 
occasioned immediately "by the act of God or the king's 
enemies ' ' — words which have long had a strict technical significa- 
tion. It would appear that concealment without fraud, on the 
part of the customer, will relieve the carrier from his liability for 
negligence, but not for actual misfeasance. Fraud or deceit by 
the customer (e.g., in misrepresenting the real value of the goods) 
will relieve the carrier from his liability. The responsibility of the 
carrier ceases only with the delivery of the goods to the proper 
consignee. By the Carriers' Act 1830 the liability of carriers for 
gold, silver, &c. (in general " articles of great value in small 
compass ") is determined. Should the article or parcel exceed 
£10 in value, the carrier is not to be liable for loss unless such 
value is declared by the customer and the carrier's increased 
charge paid. Where the value is thus declared, the carrier may, 
by public notice, demand an increased charge, for which he must, 
if required, sign a receipt. Failing such receipt or notice, the 
carrier must refund the increased charge and remain liable as at 
common law. Except as above no mere notice or declaration 
shall affect a carrier's liability; but he may make special con- 
tracts with his customers. The carriage of goods by sea" is 
subject to special: regulations (see Affreightment). The 
carriage of goods by railway and canal is subject to the law of 
common carrier, except where varied by particular statutes, as 
the Railway and Canal Traffic Acts 1854 to 1804 and the Regula- 
tion of Railways Acts 1840 to 1893. The effect of these acts is to 
prevent railway companies as common carriers from limiting by 
special contract their liability to receive, forward and deliver 
goods, unless the conditions embodied in the special contract are 
reasonable, and the contract is in writing and signed by, or oh 
behalf of, the sender. A railway company must provide reason- 
able facilities for forwarding passengers' luggage; where luggage 
is taken into the carriage with a passenger, the company is 
responsible for it only in so far as loss or damage is due to the 
passenger's interference with the company's exclusive control 
of it. As carriers of passengers companies are bound, in the 
absence of any special contract, to exercise due care and diligence, 
and are responsible for personal injuries only when they have 
been occasioned by negligence or want of skill. Where there has 
been contributory negligence on the part of the passengej, i.e. 
where he might, by the exercise of ordinary care, have avoided 
the consequences of the defendants' negligence — he is not 
entitled to recover. By the act of 1846 (commonly called Lord 
Campbell's Act), when a person's death has been caused by such 
negligence as would have entitled him to an action had he 
survived, an action may be maintained against the party re- 
sponsible for the negligence on behalf of the wife, husband, 
parent or child of the deceased. Previously such cases had been 
governed by the maxim actio personalis moritur cum persona. 

CARRIERS, MORITZ (1817-1895), German philosopher arid 
historian, was born at Griedel in Hesse Darmstadt on the 5th of 
March 1817. After studying at Giessen; GOttingen and Berlin, 
he spent a few years in Italy studying the fine arts, and established 
himself in 1842 at Giessen as a teacher of philosophy. In T&$'i he 
was appointed professor at the university of Munich, where he 
lectured mainly on aesthetics. He died in Munich on the' 19th 
of January 1895. An avowed enemy of Ultramontanism, he 
contributed in no small degree to making the idea of 'German 
unity more palatable to the South Germans. Carrrere identified 



himself with the school of the younger Fichte as one who held the 
theistic view of the world which aimed at reconciling the contra- 
dictions between deism and pantheism. Although no obstinate 
adherent of antiquated forms and prejudices, he firmly upheld 
the fundamental truths of Christianity. His most important 
works are: Aesthetik (Leipzig, 1859; 3rd ed., 1885), supplemented 
by Die- Kwist im Zusammenhang der Kidturentwicklung und der 
Ideate der Menschheit (3rd ed., 187 7-1886); Die philosophische 
Weltanschauung der Reformationszeit (Stuttgart, 1847; 2 nd ed., 
Leipzig, 1886), and Die sittliche Weltordnung (Leipzig, 1877; 
2nd ed., 1891), in which he recognized both the immutability of 
the laws of nature and the freedom of the will. He described 
his view of the world and life as " real-idealism." His essay ;pn 
Cromwell (in Lebensskizzen, 1890), which may be considered his 
political confession of faith, also deserves mention. His com- 
plete works were published at Leipzig,'i4 vols., in 1886-1894. 

See S. P. V. Lind in Ziitschrift f. Philos: (cvi* 1895, pp. 93-101); 
W. Christ in Allgemeine deutsche Biographic (1903). 

CARRINGTON, CHARLES ROBERT WYNN-CARINGTON» 

1ST Earl (1843-^ ), English statesman, son of the 2nd Baron 
Carrington (d. 1868), was educated at Eton arid Trinity, 
Cambridge, and sat in the House of Commons as a Liberal for 
High Wycombe from 1865 till he succeeded to the title in 1868. 
He was governor of New South Wales 1885-1890, lord chamber- 
lain 1892-1895; and became president of the board of agriculture 
in 1905, having a seat in the cabinet in Sir H. Campbell-Banner- 
man's and Mr Asquith's ministries. He was created Earl 
Carrington and Viscount Wendover in 1895. The Carrington 
barony was conferred in 1796 on Robert Smith (1752-1838), 
M.P. for Nottingham, a member of a famous banking family, 
the title being suggested by one held from 1643 to 1706 in another 
family of Smith in no way connected. The 2nd baron married 
as his second wife one of the two daughters of Lord Willoughby 
de Eresby, and their son, through her, became in 1879 joint 
hereditary lord great chamberlain of England. The 2nd Baron 
took the surname of Carrington, afterwards altered to Carington, 
instead of Smith. 

CARRINGTON, RICHARD CHRISTOPHER (18.26-1875), 
English astronomer, son of a brewer at Brentford, was born in 
London on the 26th of May 1826. Though intended for the 
Church, his studies and tastes inclined him to astronomy, and 
with a view to gaining experience in the routine of an observatory 
he accepted the post of observer in the university of Durham. 
Finding, however, that there was little chance of obtaining 
instruments suitable for the work which he wished to undertake, 
he resigned that appointment and established in 1853 an 
observatory of his own at Redhill. Here he devoted three years 
to a survey of the zone of the heavens within 9 degrees of the 
North Pole, the results of which are contained in his Redhill 
Catalogue of 3735 Stars. But his name is chiefly perpetuated 
through his investigation of the motions of sun-spots, by which he 
determined the elements of the sun's rotation and made the 
important discovery of a systematic drift of the photosphere, 
causing the rotation-periods of spots to lengthen with increase 
of solar latitude. Hedied on the 27th of November 1875. 

For further information see Month. Notices Roy. Astr. Society, 
xiv. 13, xviii. 23, 109, xix. 140, 161, xxxvi. 137; Memoirs Roy. 
Astr. Soc., xxvii. 139; The Times, Nov. 22 and Dec. 7, 1875; 
Roy. Society's Cat.Scient. Papers, vols. i. and vii.; Introductions to 
Works. 

; CARROCCIO, a war chariot drawn by oxen, used by the 
medieval republics of Italy. It was a rectangular platform on 
which' the "standard of the city and an altar were erected; priests 
held services on the altar before the battle, and the trumpeters 
beside them encouraged the fighters to the fray. In battle the 
carroccio was surrounded by the bravest warriors in the army and 
itserved both asa r'allying-pointand&s thepalladlum of the city's 
honour; its capture by the enemy was regarded as an irretriev- 
able defeat and humiliation: It was first employed by the 
Milanese in 1038, and played a great part in the wars of the 
Lombard' league against the emperor Frederick Barbarossa. r It 
was afterwards adopted by other '"cities, and first appears on -a 



CARRODUS— CARROLL 



409 



Florentine battlefield in 1228. The Florentine carroccio was 
usually followed by a smaller car bearing the martinella, a bell to 
ring out military signals. When war was regarded as likely the 
martinella was attached to the door of the church of Santa Maria 
in the Mercato Nuovo in Florence and rung to warn both citizens 
and enemies. In times of peace the carroccio was in the keeping 
of some great family which had distinguished itself by signal 
services to the republic. 

Accounts of the carroccio will be found in most histories of the 
Italian republics; see for instance, M. Villani's Chronache, vi. 5 
(Florence, 1825-1826) ; P. •.Villari, The Two First Centuries of 
Florentine History, vol. i. (Engl, transl., London, 1894); Gino 
Capponi, Storia delta Repubblica di Firenze, vol. i. (Florence, 1875). 

CARRODUS, JOHN TIPLADY (1836-1895), English violinist, 
was born on the 20th of January 1836, at Keighley, in Yorkshire. 
He made his first appearance as a violinist at the age of nine, and 
had the advantage of studying between the ages of twelve and 
eighteen at Stuttgart, with Wilhelm Bernhard Molique. On his 
return to England in 1853 Costa got him engagements in the 
leading orchestras. He was a member of the Covent Garden 
opera orchestra from 1855, made his debut as a solo player at a 
concert given on the 22nd of April 1863 by the Musical Society 
of London, and succeeded Sainton as leader at Covent Garden 
in 1869. He died at Hampstead on the 13th of July 1895. For 
many years he had led the Philharmonic orchestra and those of 
the great provincial festivals. He published two violin solos and 
a " Morceau de salon," and was a very successful teacher. 

CARROLL, CHARLES (1737-1832), American political leader, 
of Irish ancestry, was born at Annapolis, Maryland, on the 19th 
of September 1737. He was educated abroad in French Jesuit 
colleges, studied law at Bourges, Paris and London, and in 
February 1765 returned to Maryland, where an estate known as 
" Carrollton," in Frederick county, was settled upon him; 
he always signed his name as " Charles Carroll of Carrollton," 
Before and during the War of Independence, he was a whig or 
patriot leader, and as such was naturally a member of the various 
local and provincial extra-legal bodies — committees of corre- 
spondence,committees of observation,council of safety, provincial 
convention (1774-1776) and constitutional convention (1776). 
From 1777 until 1800 he was a member of the Maryland senate. 
In April- June 1776 he, with Samuel Chase and Benjamin 
Franklin, was a member of the commission fruitlessly sent by 
the continental congress to Canada for the purpose of persuading 
the Canadians to join the thirteen revolting colonies. From 
1776 to 1779 he sat in the continental congress, rendering 
important services as a member of the board of war, and signing 
on the 2nd of August 1776 the Declaration of Independence, 
though he had not been elected until the day on which that 
document was adopted. He out-lived all of the other signers. 
He was a member of the United States Senate from 1789 to 1792. 
From 1801 until his death, at Baltimore, on the 14th of November 
1832, he lived in retirement, his last public act being the formal 
ceremony of starting the construction of the Baltimore and Ohio 
railway (July 4, 1828). In politics, after the formation of 
parties, he was a staunch Federalist. Of unusual ability, 
high character and great wealth, he exercised a powerful 
influence, particularly among his co-religionists of the Roman 
Catholic faith, and he used it to secure the independence of the 
colonies and to establish a stable central government. 

See the Life by Kate Mason Rowland (1898). 

CARROLL, JOHN (1735-1815), American Roman Catholic 
prelate, was born at Upper Marlborough, Prince George's county, 
Maryland, on the 8th of January 1735, the son of wealthy 
Catholic parents and a cousin of Charles Carroll " of Carrollton." 
He was educated at St Omer's in Flanders, becoming a novitiate 
in the Society of Jesus in 1753, and then at the Jesuit college 
in Liege, being ordained priest in 1769 and becoming professor of 
philosophy and theology. In 17 71 he became a professed father 
of the Society of Jesus and professor at Bruges. As tutor to 
the son of Lord Stourton, he travelled through Europe in 1772- 
1773. After the papal brief of the 21st of July 1773 suppressed 
the Society of Jesus, he accompanied its English members then 



in Flanders to England. In 1774 he returned to America; and 
set to work at a mission at Rock Creek, Montgomery county, 
Maryland, where his mother lived. He shared the feeling for 
independence growing among the American colonists, foreseeing 
that it would mean greater religious freedom. In 1776, at the 
request of the continental congress, he accompanied Benjamin 
Franklin, Charles Carroll and Samuel Chase on their mission 
to secure the aid or neutrality of the French-Canadians, and 
though unsuccessful it gained for him the friendship of Franklin. 
In 1783 he took a prominent part in the petition to Rome to 
take the control of the American church away from London; and 
on Franklin's recommendation, Carroll was named prefect apos- 
tolic, the American church being recognized as a distinct body in 
a decree issued by Cardinal Antonelli on the 9th of June 1 784. In 
the summer of 1785 he began his visitations; in 1786 he induced 
the general chapter to authorize a Catholic seminary (now 
Georgetown University) ; and at the same session it was voted 
that the condition of the church required a bishop, accountable 
directly to the pope (and not to the Congregation of the Pro- 
paganda) and chosen by the American clergy. Consent to this 
course was given by AJntonelli in a letter of the 12th of July 
1 788. The clergy met at Whitemarsh, Maryland, and Baltimore 
was adopted as the episcopal seat, Carroll being chosen as 
bishop; and on the 6th of November 1789 Pius VI. issued a bull 
to that effect, Carroll being consecrated at Lulworth Castle, 
England, on the 15th of August 1790. 

On his return from England the bishop saw Georgetown 
College completed (1791), thanks to moneys he had received 
from English Catholics. His first synod met on the 7th of Novem- 
ber 1791; and on the 16th he issued the " Circular on Christian 
Marriage," which attacked marriage by any save " lawful 
pastors of our church." In 1795 the Rev. Leonard Neale (1746- 
181 7) was appointed his coadjutor. In 1799, after the death 
of Washington, Bishop Carroll bade his clergy hold the 22nd 
of February 1800 as a day of mourning, and on that day delivered 
in his pro-cathedral a memorial discourse which attracted 
much attention. Already in 1802 he was pressing for the 
creation of new sees in his diocese, and the Louisiana Purchase 
of 1803 gave added weight to this request; in September 1805 
the Propaganda made him administrator apostolic of the diocese 
of New Orleans, to which he appointed John Olivier as vicar 
general; and in 1808 Pius VII. divided Carroll's great diocese 
into four sees, Boston, New York, Philadelphia and Bardstown 
(Kentucky), suffragan to the metropolitanate of Baltimore, of 
which Carroll actually became archbishop by the assumption 
of the long delayed pallium on the 18th of August 181 1, having 
consecrated three suffragans in the autumn of 1810. In 1811 
ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the Danish and Dutch West Indies 
was bestowed upon him. Carroll was now an old man, and th6 
shock of the war of 181 2, which as a staunch Federalist he had 
opposed until its actual declaration, together with the action of 
the Holy See in appointing to the sees of Philadelphia and New 
York other candidates than' those of his recommendation, 
weighed on his mind He died in Georgetown on the 3rd of 
December 1815. He may well be reckoned the greatest figure 
in the Roman Catholic Church of the United States. His position 
in the church had never been easy, partly because he had been a 
prominent member of the Society of Jesus. The great size of 
his diocese had made it unwieldy; and his struggle to secure the 
independence of the American church had been a difficult one. 
As a defender of papal and episcopal authority he had, especially 
in Philadelphia and Baltimore, to deal with churches whose 
trustees insisted that they and their parishes alone could choose 
priests, that bishop or prefect could not object to their choice. 
Akin to this difficulty was the desire of Catholics of different 
nationalities to have separate churches, a desire often created 
or encouraged by intriguing and ambitious priests. Besides 
these and other internal annoyances, Carroll had to meet the 
deep-seated distrust of his church in communities settled almost 
exclusively by Protestants. 

See John Gilmary Shea, History of the Catholic Church in the 
United States, vol. ii. (1763-1815), (Akron and New York, 1888): 



410 



CARRONADE— CARSON 



and Daniel Brent, Biographical Sketch of the Most Rev. John Carroll, 
First Archbishop of Baltimore, with Select Portions of His Writings, 
edited by John Carroll Brent (Baltimore, 1843). 

CARRONADE, a piece of ordnance invented, by the applica- 
tion of an old principle of gun construction, to serve as a ship's 
gun. The inventor was the antiquary General Robert Melville 
(1728-1809). He designed the piece in 1759, and called it the 
" smasher," but it was not adopted in the British navy till 1779, 
and was then known as the " carronade," from the Carron works 
on the Carron river in Stirlingshire, Scotland, where it was first 
cast by Mr Gascoigne. The carronade had a powder chamber 
like many of the earliest guns known, and was similar to a mortar. 
It was short, light, had a limited range, but was destructive at 
close quarters. Carronades were added to the existing arma- 
ments of guns proper or long guns. A 38-gun frigate carried 
ten carronades, and was therefore armed with 48 pieces of 
ordnance. As the official classifications were not changed, they 
were misleading guides to the real strength of British ships, 
which always carried more pieces than they were described as 
carrying. The same remark applies to French and American 
ships when the use of the carronade extended from the British 
to other navies. 

CARROT. Wild carrot, Daucus carota, a member of the 
natural order Umbelliferae, grows wild in fields and on roadsides 
and sea-shores in Britain and the north temperate Zone generally 
of the Old World. It is an annual and resembles the cultivated 
carrot, except in the root, which is thin and woody. It is the 
origin of the cultivated carrot, which can be developed from it in 
a few generations. M. Vilmorin succeeded in producing forms 
with thick fleshy roots and the biennial habit in four generations. 
In the cultivated carrot, during the first season of growth, the 
stem remains short and bears a rosette of graceful, long-stalked, 
branched leaves with deeply cut divisions and small, narrow 
ultimate segments. During this period the plant devotes its 
energies to storing food, chiefly sugar, in the so-called root, 
which consists of the upper part of the true root and the short 
portion of the stem between the root and the lowest leaves. A 
transverse section of the root shows a central core, generally 
yellow in colour, and an outer red or scarlet rind. The core 
represents the wood of an ordinary stem and the outer ring the 
soft outer tissue (bast and cortex). In the second season the 
terminal bud in the centre of the leaf-rosette grows at the 
expense of the stored nourishment and lengthens to form a 
furrowed, rather rough, branched stem, 2 or 3 ft. high, and 
bearing the flowers in a compound umbel. The umbel is char- 
acterized by the fact that the small leaves (bracts) which 
surround it, resemble the foliage leaves on a much reduced scale, 
and ultimately curve inwards, the whole inflorescence forming 
a nest-like structure. The flowers are small, the outer white, 
the central ones often pink or purplish. The fruit consists of 
two one-seeded portions, each portion bearing four rows of stiff 
spinous projections, which cause the fruits when dropped to 
cling together, and in a natural condition help to spread the 
seed by clinging to the fur of animals. On account of these 
projections the seeds cannot be sown evenly without previous 
rubbing with sand or dry ashes to separate them. As usual in 
the members of the order Umbelliferae, the wall of the. fruit is 
penetrated lengthwise by canals containing a characteristic oil. 

Carrots vary considerably in the length, shape and colour of 
their roots, and in the proportion of rind to core. The White 
Belgian, which gives the largest crops, has a very thick root 
which is white, becoming pale green above, where it projects 
above ground. For nutritive purposes it is inferior to the red 
varieties. The carrot delights in a deep sandy soil, which should 
be well drained and deeply trenched. The ground should be 
prepared and manured in autumn or winter. For the long- 
rooted sorts the soil should be at least 3 ft. deep, but the Short 
Horn varieties may be grown in about 6 in. of good compost laid 
on the top of a less suitable soil. Peat earth may be usefully 
employed in lightening the soil. Good carrots of the larger sorts 
may be grown in unfavourable soils by making large holes 18 in. 
deep with a crowbar, and filling them up with sandy compost 



in which the seeds are to be sown. The main crop is sown at the 
end of March or beginning of April. After sowing, it is only 
necessary to thin the plants, and keep them clear of weeds. 
The roots are taken up in autumn and stored during winter in 
a cool shed or cellar. 

CARRYING OVER, or Continuation, a stock exchange term 
for the operation by which the settlement of a bargain transacted 
for money or for a given account, may for a consideration (called 
either a " contango " or a " backwardation ") be postponed 
from one settling day to another. Such a continuation is 
equivalent to a sale " for the day " and a repurchase for the 
succeeding account, or to a purchase " for the day " and a resale 
for the succeeding account. The price at which such transac- 
tions are adjusted is the " making-up " price of the day. (See 
Account and Stock Exchange.) 

CARSIOLI (mod. Car soli), an ancient city of Italy, on the Via 
Valeria, 42 m. E. by N. of Rome. It was founded in the country 
of the Aequi between 302 and 298 B.C., just after the establish- 
ment of Alba Fucens, no doubt as a stronghold to guard the road 
to the latter. It is mentioned in 2 1 1 B.C. as one of the twelve out 
of thirty Latin colonies which protested their inability to furnish 
more men or money for the war against Hannibal. We find it 
used in 168 B.C. like Alba Fucens as a place of confinement for 
political prisoners. It was sacked in the Social War, but prob- 
ably became a municipium after it, though we hear but little of 
it. The modern town of Carsoli first appears in a diploma of 
a.d. 866, but the old site does not seem to have been abandoned 
until the 13 th century. It is now occupied only by vineyards, 
and lies about 2100 ft. above sea-level, in a plain surrounded by 
mountains, now called Piano del Cavaliere. The line of the city 
walls (originally in tufa, and reconstructed in limestone), built 
of rectangular blocks, can be traced, and so can the scanty 
remains of several buildings, including the podium or base, of a 
temple, and also the ancient branch road from the Via Valeria 
(which itself keeps just south-east of Carsioli), traversing the 
site from north to south. The forty-third milestone of the Via 
Valeria still lies at or near its original site; it was set up by 
Nerva in a.d. 97. One mile to the north-west of Carsioli are the 
remains of an ancient aqueduct consisting of a buttressed wall 
of concrete crossing a valley. 

See G. J. PfeifTer and T. Ashby in Supplementary Papers of the 
American School in Rome, i. (1905), 108 seq. (T. As.) 

CARSON, CHRISTOPHER ["Kit"] (1809-1868), American 
hunter and scout, was born in Madison county, Kentucky, on 
the 24th of December 1809. When he was a year old his parents 
removed to Howard county, Missouri, then a frontier settlement, 
and the boy was early trained in the hardships and requirements 
of pioneer life. He served for a while as a saddler's apprentice, 
and after 1826 devoted himself to the life of a professional guide 
and hunter. He was hunter for the garrison at Bent's Fort on 
the Arkansas river in what is now Bent county, Colorado, from 
1832 to 1840, and accompanied John C. Fremont on his exploring 
expeditions of 1842 and 1843-1844, and on his California expedi- 
tion in 1845-1846. Carson took part in the Mexican War, and, 
after the rush to the Pacific Coast began, engaged as a guide to 
convoy emigrants and drovers across the plains and mountains. 
In 1854 he became Indian agent at Taos, New Mexico, in which 
position, through his knowledge of the Indian traits and language, 
he was able to exercise for many years a restraining influence 
over the warlike Apaches and other tribes. During the Civil 
War he rendered invaluable services to the Federal cause in the 
south-west as chief scout in charge of the various bodies of 
irregular scouts and rangers participating in the constant border 
warfare that characterized the conflict in that part of the Union. 
In March 1865 he was breveted brigadier-general of volunteers 
for gallantry in the battle of Valverde (on the 21st of February 
1862) and for distinguished services in New Mexico, and after the 
war resumed his position as Indian agent, which he held until 
his death at Fort Lyon, Colorado, on the 23rd of May 1868. 
" Kit " Carson occupies in the latter period of American pioneer 
history a position somewhat similar to that held by Daniel Boone 
and David Crockett at an earlier period, as the typical frontier 



CARSON CITY— CARTAGENA 



411 



hero and Indian fighter, and his hairbreadth escapes and personal 
prowess are the subject of innumerable stories. 

See Charles Burdett, Life of Kit Carson, the Great Western Hunter 
and Guide (New York, 1859; new ed., 1877) ; and De Witt C. Peters, 
The Life and Adventures of Kit Carson, the Nestor of the Rocky 
Mountains, from Facts Narrated by Himself (New York, 1858). 

CARSON CITY, the capital of Nevada, U.S.A., and the county- 
seat of Ormsby county, about 120 m. N.E. of Sacramento, Cali- 
fornia. Pop. (1890) 3950; (1900) 2100; (1910) 2466. It is served 
by the Virginia and Truckee railway, which has repair shops here, 
and by stage to Lake Tahoe, 12 m. W. of the city. It is pictur- 
esquely situated in Eagle valley, near the east base of the 
Sierra Nevada, at an elevation of 4720 ft. above the sea. Within 
1 m. of the city are Shaws Hot Springs. The city is a distribut- 
ing point for the neighbouring mining region. Among the 
public buildings are the capitol, the United States government 
building, a United States mint, and a state orphans' home; 
in the vicinity are the state prison and a United States govern- 
ment school for Indians. The industrial interests of the city 
are principally in mining, lumbering and agriculture. It has 
an excellent supply of mountain spring water. Carson City 
(named in honour of Christopher Carson) was settled in 1851 
as a trading post, was laid out as a town in 1858, was made the 
capital of the state and the county seat of the newly erected 
county in 1861, and was chartered as a city in 1875. 

CARSTARES (or Carst airs), WILLIAM (1640-1715), Scottish 
clergyman, was born at Cathcart, near Glasgow, on the nth of 
February 1649, the son of the Rev. John Carstares, a member of 
the extreme Covenanting party of Protestors. He was educated 
at the university of Edinburgh, and then passed over to Utrecht, 
where he commenced his lifelong friendship with the prince of 
Orange, and began to take an active part in the politics of his 
country. The government disliked Carstares for several reasons. 
He was the intimate of William; he had been the bearer of 
messages between the disaffected in Scotland and Holland; 
and he was believed to be concerned with Sir James Steuart 
( I 63S-i7is) in the authorship of a pamphlet — An Account of 
Scotland's Grievances by reason of the D. of Lauderdale's Ministrie, 
humbly tendered to his Sacred Majesty. Accordingly, on his 
return to England, at the close of 1674, he was committed to the 
Tower; the following year he was transferred to Edinburgh 
Castle, and it was not till August 1679 that he was released. 
After this he visited Ireland, and then became pastor to a Non- 
conformist congregation at Cheshunt. During 1682 he was in 
Holland, but in the following year he was again in London, and 
was implicated in the Rye House Plot. On its discovery he 
was examined before the Scottish Council; though the torture 
of the thumb-screw was applied, he refused to utter a word till 
he was assured that his admissions would not be used in evidence, 
and in the disclosures he then made he displayed great discretion. 
On his return to Holland he was rewarded by William's still 
warmer friendship, and the post of court chaplain; and after 
the Revolution he continued to hold this office, under the title 
of royal chaplain for Scotland. He was the confidential adviser 
of the king, especially with regard to Scottish affairs, and 
rendered important service in promoting the Revolution Settle- 
ment. On the accession of Anne, Carstares retained his post as 
royal chaplain, but resided in Edinburgh, having been elected 
principal of the university. He was also minister of Greyfriars', 
and afterwards of St Giles', and was four times chosen moderator 
of the general assembly. He took an important part in pro- 
moting the Union, and was consulted by Harley and other lead- 
ing Englishmen concerning it. During Anne's reign, the chief 
object of his policy was to frustrate the measures which were 
planned by Lord Oxford to strengthen the Episcopalian Jacobites 
— especially a bill for extending the privileges of the Episcopalians 
and the bill for replacing in the hands of the old patrons the 
right of patronage, which by the Revolution Settlement had been 
vested in the elders and the Protestant heritors. On the ac- 
cession of George I., Carstares was appointed, with five others, 
to welcome the new dynasty in the name of the Scottish Church. 
He was received graciously, and the office of royal chaplain was 



again conferred upon him. A few months after he was struck 
with apoplexy, and died on the 28th of December 17 15. 

See State-papers and Letters addressed to William Carstares, to 
which is prefixed a Life by M'Cormick (1774); Story's Character 
and Career of William Carstares (1874) ; Andrew Lang's History of 
Scotland (1907). 

CARSTENS, ARMUS JACOB (1754-1798), German painter, 
was born in Schleswig, and in 1776 went to Copenhagen to study. 
In 1783 he went to Italy, where he was much impressed by the 
work of Giulio Romano. He then settled in Lubeck as a portrait 
painter, but was helped to visit Rome again in 1792, and gradually 
produced some fine subject and historical paintings, e.g. "Plato's 
Symposium " and the " Battle of Rossbach " — which made him 
famous. He was appointed professor at Berlin, and in 1795 a 
great exhibition of his works was held in Rome, where he died 
in 1798. Carstens ranks as the founder of the later school of 
German historical painting. 

CARSULAE, an ancient city of Umbria, on the Via Flaminia, 
19 m. N. of Narnia (mod. Narni) and 24 m. S.S.W. of Mevania 
(mod. Bevagna). It is little mentioned in ancient literature. 
The town was a municipium. The Via Flaminia is well preserved 
and enters the north gate of the town, the archway of which still 
stands. Remains of buildings may also be seen upon the site, 
and the outline of an amphitheatre is visible. The town of Cesi, 
3 m. to the south-east, has polygonal walls, and may perhaps be 
regarded as an Umbrian city which was destroyed by the Romans, 
Carsulae being constructed in its stead. The medieval city, as so 
often happened in Italy, returned to the pre-Roman site. 

See G. Gamurrini in Notizie degli Scavi (1884), 149; for the tombs, 
L. Lanzi, in Notizie degli Scavi (1902), 592. 

CART (A.S. crat, Gaelic cairt; connected with "car"), a 
general term for various kinds of vehicles (see Carriage), in 
some cases for carrying people, but more particularly for trans- 
porting goods, for agricultural or postal purposes, &c, or for 
carriers. Though constructed in various ways, the simplest type 
for goods is two- wheeled, topless and springless; but as a general 
term " cart " is used in combination with some more specific 
qualification (dog-cart, donkey-cart, road-cart, polo-cart, &c), 
when it is employed for pleasure purposes. The " dog-cart," so 
called because originally used to convey sporting dogs, is a more 
or less elevated two-wheeled carriage, generally with seats back to 
back, in front and behind; the " governess-cart " (presumably 
so called from its use for children), a very low two-wheeled pony- 
carriage, has two side seats facing inwards; the " tax-cart," a 
light two-wheeled farmer's cart, was so called because formerly 
exempted from taxation as under the value of £21. 

CARTAGENA, or Carthagena, a city, seaport, and the capital 
of the department of Bolivar, Colombia, South America, on the 
Caribbean coast, in io° 25' 48" N., 75° 34' W. Pop. (1905, 
official estimate) 14,000. The population of Cartagena is 
largely composed of blacks and mixed races, which form the 
predominant type on the lowland plains of northern Colombia. 
The well-to-do whites of Cartagena usually have country houses 
on the Turbaco hills, where the temperature is much lower than 
on the coast. The mean annual temperature in the city is 82 , 
and the port is classed as very unhealthful, especially for unac- 
climatized foreigners. The harbour, which is the best on the north 
coast of South America, is formed by an indentation of the coast- 
line shut in by two long islands lying parallel to the mainland. 
It covers an area of about 62-5 sq. m. and affords deep and 
secure anchorages and ample facilities for loading and unloading 
large vessels. The city itself has no modern quays, and large 
vessels do not approach within a mile of its landing-stages, but 
the railway pier (lengthened 120 ft. in 1898) on the mainland 
opposite permits the mooring of vessels alongside. There were 
formerly two entrances to the harbour — the Boca Grande (large 
mouth) between the low sandy island or peninsula on which the 
city stands and the island of Tierra Bomba, and the Boca Chica 
(small mouth) at the south end of the latter island. The Boca 
Grande was filled with stone after the city had been captured 
three times, because of the ease with which an enemy's ships 
could pass through it at any time, and the narrow and more 



412 



CARTAGENA 



easily defended Boca Chica, 7 m. farther south, has since been 

used. 

The city occupies a part of the upper island or peninsula facing 
the northern end of the harbour, and is separated from the main- 
land on the east by a shallow lagoon-like extension of the' bay 
which is bridged by a causeway passing through the extra-mural 
suburb of Xixirriani on another island. The old city, ^ibout 
f m. long, north and south, and § m. wide, is enclosed by a heavy 
wall, in places 40 ft. thick, and is defended by several formidable-, 
looking forts, which have long been dismantled, but are still in a 
good state of preservation. At the mainland end of the causeway 
leading from the city is the fort of San Felipe, about 100 ft. above 
sea-level, adapted as a distributing reservoir in the city's water- 
works; and behind it are verdure-covered hills rising to an 
elevation of 500 ft., forming a picturesque background to the 
grey walls and red-tiled roofs of the city. The streets ate narrow, 
irregular and roughly paved, but are lighted by electricity; 
tramway lines run between the principal points of the city and 
suburbs. The houses are built with thick walls of stone and 
brick round open courts, in the Moorish style, and their iron- 
barred doors and windows give them the appearance of being a 
part of the fortifications. Among the numerous churches, the 
largest and most imposing is the Jesuit church of San Juan de 
Dios, with its double towers and celebrated marble pulpit; an 
old monastery adjoins. Cartagena is an episcopal see, and its 
cathedral dates from colonial times. The city was once the head- 
quarters of the Inquisition in South America, and the edifice 
which it occupied, now private property, is an object of much 
interest. The water supply of the city was formerly obtained 
from rainwater tanks on the walls or by carriage from springs a 
few miles inland. But in 1906 an English company received a 
concession to bring water by pipes from springs on the Turbaco 
hills, 300 ft. above the sea. 

The commercial importance of Cartagena declined greatly 
during the period of civil disorders which followed the war for 
independence, but in later years has revived. In the reign of 
Philip II. the Spaniards had opened a canal (" El Dique ") 
through some marshes and lagoons into a small western outlet of 
the Magdalena, which gave access to that river at Calamar, about 
81 m. above the bar at its mouth; during Cartagena's decline, 
this was allowed to fill up; it was reopened in 1846 for a short 
time and then was obstructed again by river floods; but in 1881 
it was reopened for steam navigation. Towards the end of the 
19th century a railway, 65 m. long, was built between Cartagena 
and Calamar. Imports consist of cotton, linen and woollen 
fabrics, hardware, cutlery and machinery, kerosene, glass and 
earthenware; and the exports of cattle, sugar; tobacco, coffee, 
coco-nuts and fibre, dividivi and dye-woods, vegetable ivory, 
rubber, hides and skins, medicinal forest products, gold, silver 
and platinum. The aggregate value of the exports in 1906 was 
$3,788,094 U. S. gold. 

Cartagena was founded in 1 533 by Pedro de Heredia. In 1 544 
it was captured by pirates, who plundered the town; in 1585 by 
Sir Francis Drake, who exacted a large ransom; and in 1697 by 
the French, who obtained from it more than £1,000,000. In 
1741 Admiral Vernon unsuccessfully besieged the town. It was 
taken by Bolivar in 181 5, but was surrendered to the royalists in 
the same year. It was recaptured by the republicans on the 2 5th 
of September 1821, and thereafter remained in their possession. 
It figured prominently in the political agitations and revolutions 
which followed, and underwent a siege in the civil war of 1885. 
It was an important naval station under Spanish colonial rule, 
and is the principal naval station of Colombia. 

CARTAGENA, or Carthagena, a seaport of south-eastern 
Spain, in the province of Murcia; in 37 36' N. and o° 58' W., at 
the terminus of a branch railway from the city of Murcia, and 
on the Mediterranean Sea. Pop. (1900) 99,871. Cartagena is 
fortified, and possesses an arsenal and naval dockyards. To- 
gether with Ferrol and San Fernando near Cadiz, the other great 
naval stations of Spain, it is governed by an admiral with the 
title of captain-general. It has also an episcopal see. ■ 

The city stands on a hill separated by a little plain from the 



harbour; towards the north and east it communicates with a 
fertile valley; on the south and west it is hemmed in by high 
mountains. Its grey houses have a neglected, almost a dilapi 
dated appearance, from the friable stone of which they are 
constructed; and there are no buildings of antiquarian interest 
or striking architectural beauty, except, perhaps, the ruined 
citadel and the remnants of the town walls. The wide streets 
are traversed by a system of tramways, which pass through 
modern suburbs to the raining district about two leagues inland, 
and on the west a canal enables small vessels to enter the town 
without using the port. The harbour, the largest in Spain after 
that of Vigo, and the finest on the east coast, is a spacious bay, 
deep, except near its centre, where there is a ledge of rock barely 
S ft., under water. It is dominated, on the seaward side, by four 
hills, and approached by a narrow entrance, with forts on either 
hand; a breakwater affords shelter on the east, and on the west 
is the : Arsenal Basin, often regarded,as the original harbour of 
the Carthaginians and Romans. The island called La Escom- 
brera, the ancient Scombraria {i.e. " mackerel fishery "), 2§ m. 
south,, protects Cartagena from, the violence, of wind and waves. 

The mines near the city are very productive, and thousands of 
men and beasts are employed in transporting lead, iron, copper, 
zinc and sulphur to the coast ,The industrial and commercial 
progress of Cartagena was much hindered, during the first half 
of the 19th century; by the prevalence of epidemic diseases, 
the abandonment of the arsenal, 1 and rivalry with the neighhpur- 
ing port of Alicante. Its sanitary condition, though still defective, 
was improved by the drainage of the adjacent Almajar Marsh; 
and after 1870; when the population had dwindled to about 
26,000, Cartagena advanced rapidly in size and wealth. The 
opening of the railway enabled it to compete successfully with 
Alicante, and revived the mining and metallurgical industries, 
whole considerable sums were expended on bringing the coast 
and, land defences up to date, and adding new quays, docks and 
other harbour works. As a naval station, Cartagena suffered 
severely in 1898 from the maritime disasters of the Spanish- 
American 1 War; and its commerce was much affected when, 
at the beginning of the same year, Porman, or Portman, a mining 
village on a well-sheltered bay about n m. east, was declared by 
royal order an independent port. Vessels go to Porman to land 
coke and coal, and to load iron ore and lead. From Cartagena 
the principal exports are metallic ores, esparto grass, wine, 
cereals and fruit. Esparto grass, which grows freely in the 
vicinity, is the spartum, or Spanish broom, which gave the town 
its Roman designation of Carthago Spartaria. It is still used 
locally for making shoes, ships' cables, mats and a kind of spun 
cloth. Timber is largely imported from the United States, 
Sweden and Russia; coal from Great Britain; dried codfish 
from Norway and Newfoundland. In 1904, exclusive of coasters 
and small craft trading with north-west Africa, 662 ships of 
604,208 tons entered the port of Cartagena, 259 being British 
and 1 50 Spanish ; while 90 vessels were accommodated at Porman. 

Cartagena was founded about the year 243 B.C. by the Cartha- 
ginian Hasdrubal, and was called Carthago Nova or New Carthage, 
to distinguish it from the African city of Carthage. It was 
conveniently situated opposite to the Carthaginian territory in 
Africa, and was early noted for its harbour. Its silver and gold 
mines were the source of great wealth both to the Carthaginians 
and to the Romans. In 210 B.C. this important place, the 
headquarters and treasure city of the Punic army, was stormed 
and taken with great slaughter by P. Scipio. The city continued 
to flourish under the Romans, who made it a colony, with the 
name Colonia Victrix Julia Nova Carthago. In a.d. 425 it was 
pillaged and nearly destroyed by the Goths. Cartagena was a 
bishopric from about 400 to 1289, when the see was removed to 
Murcia. Under the Moors it became an independent principality, 
which wasdestroyed by Ferdinand II. of Castile in 1243, restored 
by the Moors, and finally conquered by James I. of Aragon in 
1276. It was rebuilt by Philip II. of Spain (1527-1598) for the 
sake of its harbour. In 1585 it was sacked by an English fleet 
under Sir Francis Drake. In 1706, /in the War of the Spanish 
Succession, it was occupied by Sir John Leake; and in the next 



CARTAGO— CARiTERET 



413 



year it was retaken by the duke of Berwick. On the 5th of 
November 1823 it capitulated to the French. In consequence 
of the insurrection in Spain, Cartagena was in 1844 again the 
scene of warfare. On the 23rd of August 1873 it was bombarded 
by the Spanish fleet under Admiral LoboS; on the nth of 
October a battle took place off the t6wn, between the ships of 
the government and the rebels, and on the 12th of January 1874 
Cartagena was occupied by the government troops. 

See Biblioteca historica de Cartagena, by G. Vicent y Portillo 
(Madrid, 1889, & c -) ! Fechos y fechas de Cartagena, by I. Martinez 
Rito (Cartagena, 1894) ; and Serie de los obispos de Cartagena, by P. 
Diaz Casson (Madrid, 1895). 

CARTAGO, the capital of the province of Cartago, in Costa 
Rica, Central America; 13 m. E.S.E. of San Jose by the trans- 
continental railway. Pop. (1900)4536. Cartago is built 4930 ft. 
above sea-level, on the fertile and beautiful plateau of San Jose, 
andatthe southern baseof the volcano Irazu(n, 200ft.). Some 
of its older buildings, especially the churches, are of considerable 
interest; but all bear marks of the volcanic disturbances from 
which the town has suffered on many occasions — notably in 
1723, when it was nearly overwhelmed by the bursting of the 
flooded crater of Irazu, and in 1841, when it was shattered by an 
earthquake. There are hot mineral springs much frequented 
by invalids at Bella Vista, a suburb connected with the town by a 
tramway 3 m. long. The local trade is chiefly in coffee of fine 
quality, which is readily cultivated in the rich volcanic soil of the 
neighbourhood. Cartago is said to have been in existence as 
early as 1522; it was probably named in 1563 by the Spaniard 
Vazquez de Coronado, to whom its foundation is often ascribed. 
Though several times plundered by buccaneers, it retained its 
importance as the capital of Costa Rica until 1823, when it is said 
by tradition to have contained 30,000 inhabitants. Its prosperity 
rapidly diminished after the transference of the seat of govern- 
ment to San Jose, in 1823, but somewhat revived with the 
development of railways after 187-1. ■ ' 

CARTE, THOMAS (1686- 17 54), English historian, was born 
at Dusmoon, near Clifton. He was educated at Oxford, and 
was first brought into notice by his controversy with Dr Henry 
Chandler regarding the Irish massacre, in which he defended 
Charles I. His attachment to the Stuarts also caused him to 
remain a non-juror, and on the discovery of the plot of Atterbury, 
whose secretary he was, he was forced to flee to France. There 
he collected materials for an English edition of De Thou and 
Rigault, which were purchased and published by Dr Mead. 
Being recalled to England through the influence of Queen 
Caroline, he published, in 1738, A General Account of the Necessary 
Materials for a History of England. The first volume of his 
General History of England, which is only of value for its vast 
and careful collection of facts, was published in 1747. By the 
insertion in it of the statement that the king's evil had been 
cured by the Pretender, Carte forfeited the favour of most of 
his patrons. He, however, continued to publish; and the 2nd 
volume appeared in 1750, the 3rd in 1752, the 4th in 1755.- 
He published also a Life of James, duke of Osmond, containing 
a collection of letters, &c. (3 vols., 1735-1736; new ed., in 6 vols., 
Oxford, 1851), and a History of the Revolutions of Portugal, with 
letters of Sir R. Southwell during his embassy there (London, 
1740). His papers became the property of the university of 
Oxford, and were deposited in the Bodleian library. 

CARTER, ELIZABETH (1717-1806), English poet and trans- 
lator, daughter of the Rev. Nicholas Carter, was born at Deal, 
in Kent, on the 16th of December 171 7. Dr Carter educated 
his children, boys and girls, alike; but Elizabeth's slowness tired 
his patience, and it was only by great perseverance that she 
conquered her natural incapacity for learning, She studied 
late at night and early in the morning, taking snuff and chewing 
green tea to keep herself awake; thus causing severe injury 
to her health. She learned Greek and Latin, and Dr Johnson 
said concerning a celebrated scholar that he " understood 
Greek better than any one whom he had ever known except 
Elizabeth Carter." She learned also Hebrew, French, German, 
Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, and lastly some Arabic. She 



studied astronomy, ancient geography, and ancient and modern 
history. Edward Cave was a friend of Dr Carter, and in 1734 
some of Elizabeth's verses, signed " Eliza," appeared in the 
Gentleman's Magazine, to which she contributed for many years. 
In 1738 Cave published her Poems upon Particular Occasions; 
in 1739 she translated from the French an attack on Pope's 
Essay on Man by J. P. de Crousaz; and in the same year 
appeared her translation from the Italian of Algarotti's New- 
tonianismo per le Dame, under the title of Sir Isaac Newton's 
Philosophy explained for the use of the Ladies, in six Dialogues 
on Light and Colour. Her translation of Epictetus (1758) was 
undertaken in 1749 to please her friends, Thomas Seeker (after- 
wards archbishop of Canterbury) and his niece, Catherine 
Talbot, to whom the translation was sent, sheet by sheet, as it 
was done. In 1762 Miss Carter printed a second collection of 
Poems on Several Occasions. Her letters to Miss Talbot contain 
an account of a tour on the continent undertaken in 1763 in 
company with Edward and Elizabeth Montagu and William 
Pulteriey, 1st earl of Bath. Dr Carter, from 1762 to his death 
in 1774, lived with his daughter in a house at Deal, which she 
had purchased. An annuity was settled on her by Sir William 
Pulteney and his wife, who had inherited Lord Bath's fortune; 
and she had another annuity from Mrs Montagu. Among 
Miss Carter's friends and correspondents were Samuel Johnson, 
Bishop Butler, Richard Savage, Horace Walpole, Samuel 
Richardson, Edmund Burke, Hannah More, and Elizabeth Vesey> 
who was a leader of literary society. She died in Clarges Street, 
Piccadilly, on the 19th of February 1806. 

Her Memoirs were published in 1807; her correspondence with 
Miss Talbot and Mrs Vesey in 1809; and her letters to Mrs Montagu 
in 1817. See also A Woman of Wit and Wisdom (1906), a biography 
by Alice C. C. Gaussen. 

CARTERET, SIR GEORGE (c. 1610-1680), English politician, 
was born between 1609 and 161 7 on the island of Jersey, where his 
family had long been prominent landholders. He was the son 
of Helier de Carteret of St Ouen, and in his youth was trained to 
follow the sea. In 1639 he became comptroller of the English 
navy. During the Civil War he was active in behalf of the king. 
In 1643 he succeeded by reversion from his uncle, Sir Philip 
Carteret, to the post of bailiff of Jersey, and in the same year 
was appointed by the king lieutenant-governor of the island. 
After subduing the Parliamentary party in the island, he was 
commissioned (1644) a vice-admiral of Jersey and "the maritime 
parts adjacent," and by virtue of that office he carried on from 
there an active privateering campaign in the Royalist cause. 
Parliament branded him as a pirate and excluded him specifically 
from future amnesty. His rule in Jersey was severe, but profit- 
able to the island; he developed its resources and made it a 
refuge for Royalists, among whom in 1646 and again in 1649- 
1650 was Prince Charles, who created Carteret a knight and 
baronet. In 1650, in consideration of Carteret's services, Charles 
granted to him " a certain island and adjacent islets near Vir- 
ginia, in America," which were to be called New Jersey; but no 
settlement upon this grant was made. In 165 1 Carteret, after 
a seven weeks' siege, was compelled to surrender Jersey to a 
Parliamentary force; he then joined the Royalist exiles in France, 
where for a time he held a command in the French navy. He 
returned toEngland at theRestoration, became a privy councillor, 
sat in parliament for Portsmouth, and also served as vice-cham- 
berlain of the royal household, a position to which he had been 
appointed in 1647. From 1661 to 1667 he was treasurer of the 
navy. He rendered valuable service during the Dutch War, 
but his lax methods of keeping accounts led to his being censured 
by parliament. In 1667 he became a deputy treasurer of Ireland. 
He continued nevertheless in the royal favour, and subsequently 
•was appointed one of the commissioners of the admiralty and 
a member of the board of trade and plantations. He belonged to 
that group of courtiers interested in the colonization of America, 
and was one of the eight to whom Charles II. granted the country 
of the Carolinas by the charters of 1663 and 1665. In 1664 
James, duke of York, granted that part of his American territory 
between the Hudson and Delaware rivers to Sir George Carteret 



414 



CARTESIANISM 



and John, Lord Berkeley, and in Carteret's honour this tract 
received the name of New Jersey. Sir George's relative, Philip 
Carteret (d. 1682), was sent over as governor in 1665, but was 
temporarily deposed in 1672 by the discontented colonists, 
who chose James Carteret (perhaps a natural son of Sir George) 
as " president." Philip Carteret was restored to his office in 
1674. In this year Lord Berkeley disposed of his share of the 
grant, which finally fell under the control of William Penn and 
his associates. With them Carteret agreed (1676) upon a 
boundary line which divided the colony into East and West 
Jersey. He died in January 1680, and two years later his heirs 
disposed of his New Jersey holdings to Penn and other Quakers. 

CARTESIANISM, 1 the general name given to the philosophy 
developed principally in the works of Descartes, Malebranche and 
Spinoza. It is impossible to exhibit the full meaning of these 
authors except in connexion, for they are all ruled by one and 
the same thought in different stages of its evolution. It may be 
true that Malebranche and Spinoza were prepared, the former 
by the study of Augustine, the latter by the study of Jewish 
philosophy,to draw from Cartesian principles consequences which 
Descartes never anticipated. But the foreign light did not alter 
the picture on which it was cast, but only let it be seen more 
clearly. The consequences were legitimately drawn. It may be 
shown that they lay in the system from the first, and that they 
were evolved by nothing but its own immanent dialectic. At 
the same time it is not likely that they would ever have been 
brought into such clear consciousness, or expressed with such 
consistency, except by a philosopher whose circumstances and 
character had completely detached him from all the convictions 
and prejudices of the age. In Malebranche, Cartesianism found 
an interpreter whose meditative spirit was fostered by the 
cloister, but whose speculative boldness was restrained by the 
traditions of the Catholic church. In Spinoza it found one 
who was in spirit and position more completely isolated than any 
monk, who was removed from the influence of the religious as well 
as the secular world of his time, and who in his solitude seemed 
scarcely ever to hear any voice but the voice of philosophy. 
It is because Cartesianism found such a pure organ of expression 
that its development is, in some sense, complete and typical. 
Its principles have been carried to their ultimate result, and we 
have before us all the data necessary to determine their value. 

The Philosophy of Descartes. — Descartes was, in the full sense 
of the word, a partaker of the modern spirit. He was equally 
moved by the tendencies that produced the Reformation, and 
the tendencies that produced the revival of letters and science. 
Like Erasmus and Bacon, he sought to escape from a tran- 
scendent and unreal philosophy of the other world, to the know- 
ledge of man and the world he lives in. But like Luther, he 
found within human experience, among the matters nearest to 
man, the consciousness of God, and therefore his renunciation 
of scholasticism did not end f either in materialism or in that 
absolute distinction between faith and reason which inevitably 
leads to the downfall of faith. What was peculiar to Descartes, 
however, was the speculative interest which made it impossible 
for him to rest in mere experience, whether of things spiritual or 
of things secular, which made him search, both in our conscious- 
ness of God and our consciousness of the world, for the links 
by which they are bound to the consciousness of self. In both 
_. . . cases it is his aim to go back to the beginning, to retrace 
ot doubt the unconscious process by which the world of ex- 
perience was built up, to discover the hidden logic 
that connects the different parts of the structure of belief, to 
substitute a reasoned system, all whose elements are inter- 
dependent, for an unreasoned congeries of opinions. Hence his 
first step involves reflection, doubt and abstraction. Turning 
the eye of reason upon itself, he tries to measure the value of that 
collection of beliefs of which he finds himself possessed; and the 
first thing that reflection seems to discover is its accidental and 
unconnected character. It is a mass of incongruous materials, 
accumulated without system and untested. Its elements have 
been put together under all kinds of influences, without any con- 
dor biographical details seeDEScARTES; Malebranche; Spinoza, 



scious intellectual process, and therefore we can have no assur- 
ance of them. In order that we may have such assurance we 
must unweave the web of experience and thought which we have 
woven in our sleep, that we may begin again at the beginning and 
weave it over again with " clear and distinct " consciousness 
of what we are doing. De omnibus dubitandum est. We roust 
free ourselves by one decisive effort from the weight of custom, 
prejudice and tradition with which our consciousness of the world 
has been overlaid, that in that consciousness in its simplest an<" 
most elementary form we may find the true beginning of know- 
ledge. The method of doubt is at the same time a«method of 
abstraction, by which Descartes rises above the thought of th» 
particular objects of knowledge, in order that he may find th>; 
primary truth in which lies the very definition of knowledge, o< 
the reason why anything can be said to be true. First disappears 
the whole mass of dogmas and opinions as to God and man 
which are confessedly received on mere authority. Then tho 
supposed evidence of sense is rejected, for external reality is not 
immediately given in sensation. It is acknowledged by all thai 
the senses often mislead us as to the nature of things without us, 
and perhaps they may also mislead us as to there being anything 
without us at all. Nay, by an effort, we can even carry doubf 
beyond this point; we can doubt even mathematical truth. 
When, indeed, we have our thoughts directed to the geometrical 
demonstration, when the steps of the process are immediately 
before our minds, we cannot but assent to the proposition 
that the angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles; 
but when we forget or turn away our thoughts from such demon- 
stration, we can imagine that God or some powerful spirit is 
playing upon our minds to deceive them, also that even our most 
certain judgments may be illusory. In this na'ive manner does 
Descartes express the idea that there are necessities of thought 
prior to, and presupposed in the truth of geometry. He is 
seeking to strip thought of all the " lendings " that seem to 
come to it from anything but itself, of all relation to being 
that can be supposed to be given to it from without, that he may 
discover the primary unity of thought and being on .which all 
knowledge depends. And this he finds in pure self- certainty 
consciousness. Whatever I abstract from, I cannot of the 
abstract from self, from the " I think " that, as Kant linking 
puts it, accompanies all our ideas; for it was in fact the se ' 
very independence of this universal element on the particulars 
that made all our previous abstraction possible. Even doubt 
rests on certitude; alone with self I cannot get rid of this self. 
By an effort of thought I separate my thinking self from all 
that I think, but the thinking self remains, and in thinking I 
am. Cogito, ergo sum:" I think, therefore I am." The objective 
judgment of self-consciousness is bound up with or involved 
in the very faculty of judging, and therefore remains when we 
abstract from all other objective judgments. It is an assertion 
involved in the very process by which we dismiss all other 
assertions. Have we not then a right to regard it as a primitive 
unity of thought and being, in which is contained, or out of which 
may be developed; the very definition of truth ? 

The sense in which Descartes understood his first principle becomes 
clearer when we look at his answers to the objections made against it. 
On the one hand it was challenged by those who asked, _.„ 
like Gassendi, why the argument should be based especi- , ..." . 
ally on thought, and why we might not say with as good *J es ° 
a right, ambulo, ergo sum: " I walk, therefore I am." « CMfto 
Descartes explains that it is only as referred to conscious- erjl £s UBI » 
ness that walking is an evidence of my existence ; but if I 
say, " I am conscious of walking, therefore I exist," this is equivalent 
to saying, " I think in one particular way, therefore I exist." But 
it is not thinking in a particular way, but thinking in general that 
is coextensive with my existence. I am not .always conscious of 
walking or of any other special state or object, but I am always 
conscious, for except in consciousness there is no ego or self, and 
where there is consciousness there is always an ego. ' ' Do I then always 
think, even in sleep?" asks the objector; and Descartes exposes 
himself to the criticisms of Locke, by maintaining that it is im- 
possible that there should ever be an interval in the activity of 
consciousness, and by insisting that as man is essentially a thinking 
substance, the child thinks, or is self-conscious, even in its mother's 
womb. The difficulty disappears when we observe that the question 
as to the conditions under which self-consciousness is developed in 



CARTESIANISM 



4i5 



the individual human subject does not affect the nature of self- 
consciousness in itself or in its relation to knowledge. The force of 
Descartes's argument really lies in this, that the world as an intelli- 
gible world exists only for a conscious self, and that therefore the 
unity of thought and being in self-consciousness is presupposed in 
all knowledge. Of this self it is true to say that it exists only as it 
thinks, and that it thinks always. Cogito, ergo sum is, as Descartes 
points out, not a syllogism, but the expression of an identity which 
is discerned by the simple intuition of the mind. 1 If it were other- 
wise, the major " omne quod cogitat existit " would require to have 
been known before the minor " cogito "; whereas on the contrary 
it is from the immediate consciousness of being as contained in self- 
consciousness that that major can alone be derived. Again, when 
Hobbes and others argued that thinking is or may be a property 
of a material substance, Descartes answers that the question whether 
the material and the thinking substance are one does not meet us 
at the outset, but can only be solved after we have considered what 
is involved in the conception of these different substances respec- 
tively. 2 In other words, to begin by treating thinking as a quality 
of a material substance, is to go outside of the intelligible world for 
an explanation of the intelligible world. It is to ask for something 
prior to that which is first in thought. If it be true that the conscious- 
ness of self is that from which we cannot abstract, that which is 
involved in the knowledge of anything, then to go beyond it and seek 
for a reason or explanation of it in anything else is to go beyond 
the beginning of knowledge; it is to ask for a knowledge before 
knowledge. 

Descartes, however, is himself unfaithful to this point of view ; 
for, strictly taken, it would involve the consequence, not only that 
there is nothing prior to the pure consciousness of self, but that 
there can be no object which is not in necessary relation to it. 
Hence there can be no absolute opposition between thought and 
anything else, no opposition which thought itself does not transcend. 
But Descartes commits the error of making thought the property 
of a substance, a res cogitans, which as such can immediately or 
directly apprehend nothing but thoughts or ideas; while, altogether 
outside of these thoughts and ideas, there is another substance 
characterized by the property of extension, and with which thought 
has nothing to do. Matter in space is thus changed, in Kantian 
language, into a " thing in itself," an object out of all relation to 
the subject; and on the other hand, mind seems to be shut up 
in the magic circle of its own ideas, without any capacity of breaking 
through the circle or apprehending any reality but itself. Between 
thought and being, in spite of their subjective unity in self-conscious- 
ness, a great gulf seems still to be fixed, which cannot be crossed 
unless thought should become extended, or matter think. But to 
Descartes the dualism is absolute, because it is a presupposition with 
which he starts. Mind cannot go out of itself, cannot deal with 
anything but thought, without ceasing to be mind; and matter 
must cease to be matter ere it can lose its absolute externality, its 
nature as having partes extra partes, and acquire the unity of mind. 
They are opposed as the divisible and the indivisible, and there is 
no possible existence of matter in thought except a representative 
existence. The ideal (or, as Descartes calls it, objective) existence 
of matter in thought and the real (or, as Descartes calls it, formal) 
existence of matter out of thought are absolutely different and 
independent things. 

It was, however, impossible for Descartes to be content with 
a subjective idealism that confined all knowledge to the tauto- 
logical expression of self-consciousness " I am I," 
Proof of " What I perceive I perceive." If the individual is to 
of God. fi n( ^ m ms self-consciousness the principle of all know- 
ledge, there must be something in it which transcends 
the distinction of self and not self, which carries him beyond 
the limit cf his own individuality. What then is the point where 
the subjective consciousness passes out into the objective, 
from which it seemed at first absolutely excluded? Descartes 
answers that it is through the connexion of the consciousness of 
self with the consciousness of God. It is because we find God 
in our minds that we find anything else. The proof of God's 
existence is therefore the hinge on which the whole Cartesian 
philosophy turns, and it is necessary to examine the nature of 
it somewhat closely. 

Descartes, in the first place, tries to extract a criterion of truth 
out of the cogito, ergo sum. Why am I assured of my own existence ? 
It is because the conception of existence is at once and immediately 
involved in the consciousness of self. I can logically distin- 
guish the two elements, but I cannot separate them; whenever I 
clearly and distinctly conceive the one, I am forced to think the 
other along with it. But this gives me a rule for all judgments 

1 Resp. ad secundas objectiones, p. 74, — quoting from the Elzevir 
edition. 

2 Resp. ad tertias object, p. 94. 



whatever, a principle which is related to the cogito, ergo sum as 
the formal to the material principle of knowledge. Whatever 
we cannot separate from the clear and distinct conception of 
anything, necessarily belongs to it in reality; and on the other 
hand, whatever we can separate from the clear and distinct 
conception of anything, does not necessarily belong to it in 
reality. Let us therefore set an object clearly before us, let us 
sever it in thought so far as is possible from all other objects, 
and we shall at once be able to determine what properties and 
relations are essential and what are not essential to it. And if 
we find empirically that any object manifests a property or 
relation not involved in the clear and distinct conception of it, 
we can say with certainty that such property or relation does not 
belong to it except by arbitrary arrangement, or, in other words, 
by the external combination of things which in their own nature 
have no affinity or connexion. 

Now, by the application of this principle, we might at once 
assure ourselves of many mathematical truths; but, as has been 
already shown, there is a point of view from which we may 
doubt even these, so long as the idea of a God that deceives us 
is not excluded. If it is not certain that there is a God that 
cannot lie, it is not certain that there is an objective matter in 
space to which mathematical truth applies. But the existence of 
God may be proved in two ways. In the first place, it may be 
proved through the principle of causality, which is a self-evident 
truth. We have in our mind many ideas, and according to the 
principle of causality, all these ideas must be derived from 
something that contains a " formal " reality which corresponds 
to their " objective " reality, i.e. which contains at least as 
much reality in its existence out of thought as they contain in 
their existence in thought. Now we might derive from ourselves 
not only the ideas of other minds like ourselves, but possibly 
also of material objects, since these are lower in the scale of 
existence than ourselves, and it is conceivable that the idea of 
them might be got by omitting some of the qualities which 
distinguish ourselves. But the idea of God, of a being who is 
eternal and immutable, all-powerful, all-wise, and all-good, 
cannot be derived from our own limited and imperfect existence. 
The origin, therefore, must be sought in a being who contains 
actually in himself all that is contained in our idea of him. 

It was objected by some of the critics of Descartes that the idea 
of God as the infinite Being is merely negative, and that it is derived 
from the finite simply by abstracting from its conditions. r 

Descartes answers that the case is just the reverse — the Descartes * 
infinite is the positive idea, and the finite is the negative, m f ta ". 
and therefore the former is the presupposition of the latter. P"y sics - 
As Kant, at a later date, pointed out that space is not a general 
conception, abstracted from the ideas of particular spaces, and 
representing the common element in them, but that, on the contrary, 
the ideas of particular spaces are got by the limitation of the one 
infinite space that is prior to them, so Descartes maintains in general 
that the idea of the finite is had only by limitation of the infinite, 
and not the idea of the infinite by abstraction from the particular 
determinations of the finite. It is a necessary consequence of this 
that the self-consciousness of a finite being is bound up with the 
consciousness of the infinite. Hence the idea of God is not merely 
one among other ideas which we have, but it is the one idea that is 
necessary to our very existence as thinking beings, the idea through 
which alone we can think ourselves, or anything else. " I ought 
never to suppose," says Descartes, " that my conception of the 
infinite is a negative idea, got by negation of the finite, just as I 
conceive repose to be merely negation of movement, and darkness 
merely the negation of light. On the contrary, I see manifestly 
that there is more reality in the infinite than in the finite substance, 
and that therefore I have in me the notion of the infinite, even in 
some sense prior to the notion of the finite, or, in other words, that 
the notion of myself in some sense presupposes the notion of God ; 
for how could I doubt or desire, how could I be conscious of anything 
as a want, how could I know that I am not altogether perfect, if I 
had not in me the idea of a being more perfect than myself, by com- 
parison with whom I recognize the defects of my own existence?" 3 
Descartes then goes on in various ways to illustrate the thesis that 
the consciousness of a defective and growing nature cannot give 
rise to the idea of infinite perfection, but on the contrary presupposes 
it. We could not think of a series of approximations unless there 
were somehow present to us the idea of the completed infinite as the 
goal we aim at. If we had not the consciousness of ourselves as 
finite in relation to the infinite, either we should not be conscious of 



3 Meditatio tertia, p. 21. 



416 



CARTESIANISM 



ourselves at all, or we should be conscious of ourselves as infinite. 
The image of God is so impressed by him upon us, that we " con- 
ceive that resemblance wherein the idea of God is contained by the 
same faculty whereby we are conscious of ourselves." In other 
words, our consciousness of ourselves is at the same time conscious- 
ness of our finitude, and hence of our relation to a being who is 
infinite. 

The principle which underlies the reasoning of Descartes is, that 
to be conscious of a limit, is to transcend it. We could not feel the 
limits either upon our thought or upon our existence, we could not 
doubt or desire, if wc did not already apprehend something beyond 
these limits. Nay, we could not be conscious of our existence as 
individual selves if we were not conscious of that which is not 
ourselves, and of a unity in which both self and not-self are included. 
Our individual life is therefore to us as self-conscious beings a part 
of a wider universal life. Doubt and aspiration are but the mani- 
festation of this essential division and contradiction of a nature 
which, as conscious of itself, is at the same time conscious of the 
whole in which it is a part. And as the existence of a self and its 
consciousness are one, so we may say that a thinking being is not 
only an individual, but always in some sense identified with that 
universal unity of being to which it is essentially related.. 

If Descartes had followed out this line of thought, he would have 
been led at once to the pantheism of Spinoza, if not beyond it. 
As it is, he is on the verge of contradiction with himself when he 
speaks of the consciousness of God as in some sense prior to the con- 
sciousness of self. How can anything be prior to the first principle 
of knowledge? It is no answer to say that the consciousness of 
God is the principium essendi, while the consciousness of self is the 
principium cognoscendi. For, if the idea of God is prior to the idea 
of self, knowledge must begin where existence begins, with God. 
The words "in some sense," with which Descartes qualifies, his 
assertion of the priority of the idea of God, only betray his hesitation 
and his partial consciousness of the contradiction in which, he is 
involved. Some of Descartes's critics presented this difficulty to 
him in another form, and accused him of reasoning in a circle when 
he said that it is because God cannot lie that we are certain that our 
clearand distinct ideas do not deceive us. The very existence of the 
conscious self, the cogito, ergo sum, which is the first of all truths 
and therefore prior in certitude to the existence of God, is believed 
only because of the clearness and distinctness with which we appre- 
hend it. How then, they argued, could God's truthfulness be our 
security for a principle which we must use in order to prove the 
being of God ? The answer of Descartes is somewhat lame. We 
cannot doubt any self-evident principle, or even any truth based 
on a self-evident principle, when we are directly contemplating it 
in all the necessity of its evidence ; it is only when we forget or turn 
away from this evidence, and begin to think of the possibility of a 
deceitful God, that a doubt arises which cannot be removed except 
by the conviction that God is true. 1 It can scarcely be said that 
this is a dignus vindice nodus, or that God can fitly appear as_ a 
kind of second-best resource to the forgetful spirit that has lost its 
direct hold on truth and its faith in itself. God, truth, and thehuman 
spirit are thus conceived as having merely external and accidental 
relations with each other. What Descartes, however, is really ex- 
pressing in this exoteric way is simply that beneath and beyond all 
particular truths lies the great general truth of the unity of thought 
and existence. In contemplating particular truth, we may not 
consciously relate it to this unity, but when we have to defend 
ourselves against scepticism we are forced to realize this relation. 
The ultimate answer to any attack upon a special aspect or element 
of truth must be to show that the fate of truth itself, the very 
possibility of knowledge, is involved in the rejection of it, and that 
wc cannot doubt it without doubting reason itself. But to doubt 
reason is, in the language of Descartes, to doubt the truthfulness of 
God, for, in his view, the idea of God is involved in the very con- 
stitution of reason. Taken in this way then, the import of Descartes's 
answer is, that the consciousness of self, like every other particular 
truth, is not at first seen to rest on the consciousness of God, but 
that when we realize what it means we see that it does so rest. 
But if this be so, then in making the consciousness of self his first 
principle of knowledge, Descartes has stopped short of the truth. 
It can only be the first principle if it is understood, not. as the 
consciousness of the individual self, but in a sense in which the 
consciousness of self is identical with the consciousness of God. 

Descartes, however, is far from a clear apprehension of the] ultimate 
unity of thought and being, which nevertheless he strives to find in 
God. Beginning with an absolute separation of the', res cogitans 
from the res extensa, he is continually falling back into dualism 
just when he seemed to have escaped from it. Even in God the 
absolute unity, idea and reality fall asunder; our idea of God is not 
God in us, it is only an idea of which God's existence is the cause. 
But the category of causality, if it forms a bridge between different 
things, as here between knowing and being, at the same time repels 
them from each other. It is a category of external relation which 
may be adequate to express the relation of the finite to the finite, 
but not the relation of the finite to the infinite. We cannot conceive 
God as the cause of our idea of him, without making God a purely 

1 Resp. quarlae, p. 234. 



objective and therefore finite existence. Nor is the case better 
when we turn to the so-called ontological argument,- — that existence 
is necessarily involved in the idea of God, just as the property of 
having its angles equal to two right angles is involved in the idea of 
a triangle. If indeed we understood this as meaning that thought 
transcends the distinction between itself and existence, and that 
therefore existence cannot be a thing in itself out of thought, but 
must be an intelligible world that exists as such only for the thinking 
being, there is some force in the argument. But this meaning we 
cannot find in Descartes, or to find it we must make him inconsistent 
with himself. He was so far from having quelled the phantom 
" thing in itself," that he treated matter in space as such a thing, 
and thus confused externality of space with externality to the mind. 
On this dualistic basis, the ontological argument becomes a manifest 
paralogism, and lies open to all the objections that Kant brought 
against it. That the idea of God involves existence, proves only 
that God, if he exists at all, exists by the necessity of his being. 
But the link that shall bind thought to existence is still wanting, 
and, in consistency with the other presuppositions of Descartes, it 
cannot be supplied. 

But again, even if we allow to Descartes that God is the unity of 
thought and being, we must still ask what kind of unity ? Is it a 
mere generic unity, reached by abstraction, and therefore leaving 
out all the distinguishing characteristics of the particulars under it ? 
Or is it a concrete unity to which the particular elements are sub- 
ordinated, but in which they are nevertheless included ? To answer 
this question, we need only look at the relation of the finite to the 
infinite, as it is expressed in that passage already quoted, and in 
many others. Descartes always speaks of the infinite as a purely 
affirmative or positive existence, and of the finite in so far as it is 
distinguished from the infinite, as purely negative, or in other words 
as a nonentity. " I am," he says, " a mean between God and 
nothing, between the Supreme Being and not-being. In so far as I 
am created by God, there is nothing in. me that can deceive me 
or lead me into error. But on the other hand, if I consider myself 
as participating in nothingness or not-being, inasmuch as I am not 
myself the Supreme Being, but in many ways defective, I find myself 
exposed to an infinity of errors. Thus error as such is not something 
real that depends on God, but simply a defect; I do not need to 
explain it by means of any special faculty bestowed on me by God, 
but merely by the fact that the faculty for discerning truth from 
error with which he has endowed me, is not infinite." 2 But if we 
follow out this principle to its logical result, we must say not only 
that error is a consequence of finitude, but also that the very existence 
of the finite as such is an error or illusion. All finitude, all determina- 
tion, according to the well-known Spinozistic aphorism, is negation, 
and negation cannot constitute reality. To know the reality of 
things, therefore, we have to abstract from their limits, or in other 
words, the only reality is the infinite. Finite being, qua finite, has 
no existence, and finite self-consciousness, consciousness of a self 
in opposition to or limited by a not-self, is an illusion. But Descartes 
does not thus reason. He does not see " anything in the nature of 
the infinite which should exclude the existence of finite things." 
" What," he asks, " would become of the power of that imaginary 
infinite if it could create nothing ? Perceiving in ourselves the 
power of thinking, we can easily conceive that there should be a 
greater intelligence elsewhere. And even if we should suppose that 
intelligence increased ad infinitum, we need not fear that our own 
would be lessened. And the same is true of all other attributes 
which we ascribe to God, even of his power, provided only that we 
do not suppose that the power in us is not subjected to God's will. 
In all points, therefore, he is infinite without any exclusion of created 
things." 3 The truth of this view we need notdispute; the question 
is as to its consistency with Cartesian principles. It may be a higher 
idea of God to conceive him as revealing himself in and to finite 
creatures; but it is a different idea from that which is implied in 
Descartes's explanations of error. It is an inconsistency that brings 
Descartes nearer to Christianity, and nearer, it may also be said, 
to a true metaphysic; but it is not the less an inconsistency with 
his fundamental principles, which necessarily disappears in their 
subsequent development. To conceive the finite as constituted not 
merely by the absence of some of the positive elements of the infinite, 
but as, in necessary unity with the infinite; to conceive the infinite 
as not merely that which has no limits or determinations, but as 
that which is self-determined and self-manifesting, which through all 
finitude and manifestation returns upon itself, may not be erroneous. 
But it would not be difficult to show that the adoption of such a 
conception involves the rejection or modification of almost every 
doctrine of the Cartesian system. 

In connexion with this inconsistency we may notice the very 
different relations in which Descartes conceives mind on the one side 
and matter on the other, to stand towards God, who yet M , . . 
is the cause of both, and must therefore, by the principle aaana 
of causality, contain in himself all that is in both. Matter ma er ' 
and mind are to Descartes absolute opposites. Whatever can 
be asserted of mind can be denied of matter, whatever can be 
asserted of matter can be denied of mind. Matter is passive, mind 
is active; matter is extended, and therefore divisible ad infinitum; 



Meditatio quarta, p. 26. 



Resp. ad sec. object, p. 75. 



CARTESIANISM 



417 



mind is an indivisible unity. In fact, though of this Descartes is 
not conscious, the determination of the one is mediated by its 
opposition to the other; the ideas of object and subject, the self 
and not-self, are terms of a relation distinguishable but inseparable. 
But in the idea of God we must find a unity which transcends this 
difference in one way or another, whether by combining the two 
under a higher notion, or, as it would be more natural to expect on 
Cartesian principles, by abstracting equally from the particular 
characteristics of both. Descartes really does neither, or rather he 
acts partly on the one principle and partly on the other. In his idea 
of God he abstracts from the properties of matter but not from those 
of mind. " God," he says, " contains in himself formaliter all 'that 
is in mind, but only eminenter all that is in matter "; x or, as he 
elsewhere expresses it more popularly, he is mind, but he is only 
the creator of matter. And for this he gives as his reason, that 
matter as being divisible and passive is essentially imperfect. Ipsa 
natura corporis multas imperfectiones involvit, and, therefore, " there 
is more analogy between sounds and colours than there is between 
material things and God." But the real imperfection here lies in the 
abstractness of the Cartesian conception of matter as merely 
extended, merely passive ; and this is balanced by the equal abstract- 
ness of the conception of mind or self -consciousness as an absolutely 
simple activity, a pure intelligence without any object but itself. 
If matter as absolutely opposed to mind is imperfect, mind as 
absolutely opposed to matter is equally imperfect. _ In fact they are 
the elements or factors of a unity, and lose all meaning when severed 
from each other, and if we are to seek this unity by abstraction, we 
must equally abstract from both. 

The result of this one-sidedness is seen in the fact that Descartes, 
who begins by separating mind from matter, ends by finding the 
essence of mind in pure will, i.e. in pure formal self-deter- 
Reason mma ti on . Hence God's will is conceived as ! absolutely 
a " ' arbitrary, not determined by any end or law, for all laws, 
even the necessary truths that constitute reason, _ spring from 
God's determination, and do not precede it. " He is the author 
of the essence of things no less than their existence," and his will 
has no reason but his will. In man there is an intelligence with 
eternal laws or truths involved in its structure, which so far limits 
his will. " He finds the nature of good and truth already determined 
by God, and his will cannot be moved by anything else." His 
highest freedom consists in having his will determined by a clear 
perception of the nature of good and truth, and "he is never in- 
different except when he is ignorant of it, or at least does not see it 
so clearly as to be lifted above' the possibility of doubt." 2 In- 
difference of will is to him " the lowest grade of liberty," yet, on the 
other hand, in nothing does the image of God in him show itself 
more clearly than in the fact that his will is not limited by his 
clear and distinct knowledge, but is " in a manner infinite." For 
" there is no object of any will, even the infinite will of God, to 
which our will does not extend." 3 Belief is a free act, for as we 
can yield our assent to the obscure conceptions presented by sense 
and the imagination, and thus allow ourselves to be led into error, 
so on the other hand we can refuse to give this assent, or allow ourJ 
selves to be determined by anything but the clear and distinct ideas 
of intelligence. That which makes it possible for us to err is that 
also in which the divine image in us is most clearly seen. We cannot 
have the freedom of God whose will creates the object of his know- 
ledge; but in reserving our assent for the clear and distinct 
perceptions of intelligence, we, as it were, re-enact for ourselves 
the divine law, and repeat, so far as is possible to finite beings, the 
transcendent act of will in which truth and good had their origin. 

The inherent defect of this view is the divorce it makes between the 
form and the matter of intelligence. It implies that reason or self- 
consciousness is one thing, and that truth is another and quite 
different thing, which has been united to it by the arbitrary will of 
God. The same external conception of the relation of truth to the 
mind is involved in the doctrine of innate ideas. It is true_ that 
Descartes did not hold that doctrine in the coarse form in which it 
was attributed to him by Locke, but expressly declares that he has 
" never said or thought at any time that the mind_ required innate 
ideas which were separated from the faculty of thinking. He had 
simply used the word innate to distinguish those ideas which are 
derived from that faculty, and not from external objects or the 
determination of the will. Just as when we say generosity is innate 
in certain families, and in certain others diseases,_ like the gout or 
the stone, we do not mean to imply that infants in their mother's 
womb are affected with these complaints." 4 Yet Descartes, as we 
have seen, does not hold that these truths are involved in the very 
nature of intelligence as such, so that we cannot conceive a self- 
conscious being without them. On the contrary, we are to regard 
the divine intelligence as by arbitrary act determining that two and 
two should be four, or that envy should be a vice. We are "not to 
conceive eternal truth flowing from God as rays from the sun." s 
In other words, we are not to conceive all particular truths as 
different aspects of one truth. It is part of the imperfection of 
man's finite nature that he " finds truth and good determined for 

1 Resp. ad sec. object, pp. 72-73. 2 Resp. Sextae, 160-163. 
3 Principia, i. 35. 4 Notaein Programme, p. 184. 

5 Epistolae, i. 110, 
V. 14 



him." It is something given, — given, indeed, along with his very 
faculty of thinking, but still given as an external limit to it. It 
belongs not to his nature as spirit, but to his finitude as man. 

After what has been said, it is obvious that the transition from 
God to matter must be somewhat arbitrary and external. God's 
truthfulness is pledged for the reality of that of which we _ 
have clear and distinct ideas; and we have clear and "i . 
distinct ideas of the external world so long as we conceive "LStf" 
it simply as extended matter, infinitely divisible, and w 
moved entirely from without, — so long, in short, as we conceive it 
as the direct opposite of mind, and do not attribute to it any one 
of the properties of mind. " Omnes proprietates, quas in ea clare 
percipimus, ad hoc unum reducuntur, quod sit partibilis et mobilis, 
secundum partes." We must, therefore, free ourselves from the 
obscure and confused modes of thought which arise whenever we 
attribute any of the secondary qualities, which exist merely in our 
sensations, to the objects that cause these sensations. The subjec- 
tive character of such qualities is proved by the constant change 
which takes place in them, without any change of the object in 
which they are perceived. A piece of wax cannot lose its extension ; 
but its colour, its hardness, and all the other qualities whereby it is 
presented to sense, may be easily altered. What is objective in all 
this is merely an extended substance, and the modes of motion 
or rest through which it is made to pass. In like manner we must 
separate from our notion of matter all ideas of actio in distans,- — e.g. 
we must explain weight not as a tendency to the centre of the earth 
or an attraction of distant particles of matter, but as a consequence 
of the pressure of other bodies, immediately surrounding that which 
is felt to be heavy. 6 For the only conceivable actio in distans is 
that which is mediated by thought, and it is only in, so far as we 
suppose matter to have in it a principle of activity like thought, 
that we can accept such explanations of its motion. Again, while 
we must thus keep our conception of matter clear of all elements 
that do not belong to it, we must also be careful not to take away 
from it those that do belong to it. It is a defect of distinctness in 
our ideas when we conceive an attribute as existing apart from its 
substance, or a substance without its attribute; for this is to treat 
elements that are only separated by a " distinction of reason," as 
if they were distinct things. The conception of the possibility of a 
vacuum or empty space arises merely from our confusing the possible 
separation of any mode or form of matter from matter in general 
with the impossible separation of matter in general from its own 
essential attribute. Accordingly, in his physical philosophy, 
Descartes attempts to explain everything on mechanical principles, 
Starting with the hypothesis that a certain quantity of motion 
has been impressed on the material universe by God at the first, a 
quantity which can never be lost or diminished, and tha f space is an 
absolute plenum in which motion propagates itself in circles. 

It is unnecessary to follow Descartes into the detail of the theory 
of vortices. It is more to the purpose to notice the nature of the 
reasons by which he is driven to regard such a mechanical 
explanation of the universe as necessary. A real or sub- na } erial 
stantive existence is, in his view, a res completa, a thing un v ^ rse a 
that can be conceived as a whole in itself without relations m ff" aa " 
to any other thing. Now matter and mind are, he s " 
thinks, such complete existences, so long as we conceive them, as 
pure intelligence must conceive them, as abstract opposites of each 
other; and do not permit ourselves to be confused by those mixed 
modes of thought which are due to sense or imagination. Descartes 
does not see that in this very abstract opposition there is a bond 
of union between mind and matter, that they are correlative 
opposites, and therefore in their separation res incompletae. In 
other words, they are merely elements of reality substantiated by 
abstract thought into independent realities. He indeed partly 
retracts his assertion that mind and matter severed from each other 
are res completae, when he declares that neither can be conceived 
as existing apart from God, and that therefore, strictly speaking, 
God alone is a substance. But, as we have seen, he avoids the 
necessary inference that in God the opposition between mind and 
matter is reconciled or transcended, by conceiving God as abstract 
self -consciousness or will, and the material world not as his necessary 
manifestation, but simply as his creation,- — as having its origin in 
an act of bare volition and that only. His God is the God of mono- 
theism and not of Christianity, and therefore the world is to God 
always a foreign matter which he brings into being, and acts on 
from without, but in which he is not revealed. 

It is a natural consequence of this view that nature is essentially 
dead matter, that beyond the motion it has received from God at the 
beginning, and which it transmits from part to part 
without increase or diminution, it has no principle of 



Animals 
automata. 



activity in it. Every trace of vitality in it must be 
explained away as a mere false reflection upon it of the nature of 
mind. The world is thus " cut in two with a hatchet," and there 
is no attraction to overcome the mutual repulsion of its severed 
parts. Nothing can be admitted in the material half that savours of 
self-determination, all its energy must be communicated, not self- 
originated; there is no room for gravitation, still less for magnetism 
or chemical affinity, in this theory. A fortiori, animal life must be 

6 Resp. Sextae, pp. 165-166. 



4i8 



CARTESIANISM 



completelyexplained away. The machine may be very complicated , 
but it is still, and can be nothing but, a machine. If we once ad- 
mitted that matter could be anything but mechanical, we should be 
on the way to admit that matter could become mind. When a 
modern physical philosopher declares that everything, even life and 
thought, is ultimately reducible to matter, we cannot always be 
certain that he means what he seems to say. Not seldom the 
materialist soi-disant, when we hear his account of the properties 
of matter, turns out to be something like a spiritualist in disguise; 
but when Descartes asserted that everything but mind is material, 
and that the animals are automata, there is no such dubiety of 
interpretation. He said what he meant, and meant what he said, 
in the hardest sense his words can bear. His matter was not even 
gravitating, much less living; it had no property except that of 
retaining and transmitting the motion received from without by 
pressure and impact. And his animals were automata, not merely 
in the sense of being governed by sensation and instinct, but precisely 
in the sense that a watch is an automaton. Henry More cries out 
against the ruthless conseq uence with which he develops his principles 
to this result. " In this," he says, " I do not so much admire the 
penetrative power of your genius as I tremble for the fate of the 
animals. What I recognize in you is not only subtlety of thought, 
but a hard and remorseless logic with which you arm yourself as 
with a sword of steel, to take away life and sensation with one blow, 
from almost the whole animal kingdom." But Descartes was not 
the man to be turned from the legitimate result of his principles by 
a scream. " Nee moror astutias et sagacitates canum et vulpium, 
nee quaecunque alia propter cibum, venerem, aut metum a brutis 
fiunt. Profiteor enim me posse perfacile ilia omniaut a solamembrorum 
conformations, profecta explicare." 1 

The difficulty reaches its height when Descartes attempts to 
explain the union of the body and spirit in man. Between two 
Nature of substances which, when clearly and distinctly conceived, 
sensation. ^° no *- i m p'y each other, there can be none but an artificial 
unity, — a unity of composition that still leaves them 
external to each other. Even God cannot make them one in any 
higher sense. 2 And as it is impossible in the nature of mind to see 
any reason why it should be embodied, or in the nature of matter 
to see any reason why it should become the organ of mind, the union 
of the two must be taken as a mere empirical fact. When we put 
on the one side all that belongs to intelligence, and on the other 
all that belongs to matter, there is a residuum in our ideas which we 
cannot reduce to either head. This residuum consists of our appetites, 
our passions, and our sensations, including not only the feelings of 
pain and pleasure, but also the perceptions of colour, smell, taste, of 
hardness and softness, and all the other qualities apprehended by 
touch. These must be referred to the union of mind with body. 
They are subjective in the sense that they give us no information 
as to the nature either of things or of mind. Their function is only 
to indicate what things are useful or hurtful to our composite nature 
as such, or in other words what things tend to confirm or dissolve 
the unity of mind and body. They indicate that something is taking 
place in our body, or without it, and so stimulate us to some kind of 
action, but what it is that is taking place they do not tell us. There 
is no resemblance in the sensation of pain produced by great heat to 
the rending of the fibres of our body that causes it. But we do not 
need to know the real origin of our sensation to prevent us going 
too near the fire. Sensation leads us into error only when we are not 
conscious that its office is merely practical, and when we attempt 
to make objective judgments by means of its obscure and confused 
ideas, e.g. when we say that there is heat in our hands or in the fire. 
And the remedy for this error is to be found simply in the clear 
conviction of the subjectivity of sensation. 

These views of the nature of sense, however, at once force us to 
ask how Descartes can consistently admit that a subjective result 
Theory of sucn as sensation, a result in mind, should be produced 
occasional ^Y matter, and on the other hand how an objective result, 
causes. a resu 't in matter, should be effected by mind. Descartes 
explains at great length, according to his modification of 
the physiology of the day, that the pineal gland, which is the im- 
mediate organ of the soul, is acted on by the nerves through the 
" animal spirits," and again by reaction upon these spirits produces 
motions in the body. It is an obvious remark that this explanation 
either materializes mind, or else puts for the solution the very problem 
to be solved. It was therefore in the spirit of Descartes, it was only 
making explicit what is involved in many of his expressions, when 
Geulincx, one of his earliest followers, formulated the theory of 
occasional causes. The general approval of the Cartesian school 
proved that this was a legitimate development of doctrine. Yet it 
tore away the last veil from the absolute dualism of the system, 
which had so far stretched the antagonism of mind and matter 
that no mediation remained possible, or what is the same thing, 
remained possible only through an inexplicable will of God. The 
intrusion of such a Deus ex machina into philosophy only showed 
that philosophy by its violent abstraction had destroyed the unity 
of the known and intelligible world, and was, therefore, forced to 
seek that unity in the region of the unknown and unintelligible. 
If our light be darkness, then in our darkness we must seek for light ; 



Epist. i. 66, 67,. 



2 Princ. i. 60, 



if reason be contradictory in itself, truth must be found in unreason 
The development of the Cartesian school was soon to show what is the 
necessary and inevitable end of such worship of the unknown. 

To the ethical aspect of his philosophy, Descartes, unlike Spinoza, 
only devoted a subordinate attention. In a short treatise, however, 
he discussed the relation of reason to the passions. After Ethics 
we have got over the initial difficulty, that matter should 
give rise to effects in mind, and mind in matter, and have admitted 
that in man the unity of mind and body turns what in the animals 
is mere mechanical reception of stimulus from without and reaction 
upon it into an action and reaction mediated by sensation, emotion 
and passion, another question presents itself. How can the mere 
natural movement of passion, the nature of which is fixed by the 
original constitution of our body, and of the things that act upon 
it, be altered or modified by pure reason ? For while it is obvious 
that morality consists in the determination of reason by itself, it is 
not easy to conceive how the same being who is determined by 
passion from without should also be determined by reason from 
within. How, in other words, can a spiritual being maintain its 
character as self-determined, or at least determined only by the clear 
and distinct ideas of the reason which are its innate forms, in the 
presence of this foreign element of passion that seems to make it 
the slave of external impressions? Is reason able to crush this 
intruder, or to turn it into a servant ? Can the passions be annihil- 
ated, or can they be spiritualized? Descartes could not properly 
adopt either alternative; he could not adopt the ethics of asceticism, 
for the union of body and mind is, in his view, natural ; and hence 
the passions which are the results of that union are in themselves good. 
They are provisions of nature for the protection of the unity of soul 
and body, and stimulate us to the acts necessary for that purpose. 
Yet, on the other hand, he could not admit that these passions are 
capable of being completely spiritualized; for so long as the unity 
of body and soul is regarded as merely external and accidental, it is 
impossible to think that the passions which arise out of this unity 
can be transformed into the embodiment and expression of reason. 

Descartes, indeed, points out that every passion has a lower and 
a higher form, and while in its lower or primary form it is based 
on the obscure ideas produced by the motion of the animal spirits, 
in its higher form it is connected with the clear and distinct judg- 
ments of reason regarding good and evil. If, however, the unity 
of soul and body be a unity of composition, there is an element of 
obscurity in the judgments of passion which cannot be made clear, 
an element in desire that cannot be spiritualized. If the mind be 
external to the passions it can only impose upon them an external 
rule of moderation. On such a theory no ideal morality is possible 
to man in his present state; for, in order to the attainment of such 
an ideal morality, it would be necessary that the accidental element 
obtruded into his life as a spiritual being by his connexion with the 
body should be expelled. What can be attained under present con- 
ditions is only to abstract so far as is possible from external things, 
and those relations to external things into which passion brings us. 
Hence the great importance which Descartes attaches to the dis- 
tinction between things in our power and things not in our power. 
What is not in our power includes all outward things, and therefore 
it is our highest wisdom to regard them as determined by an absolute 
fate, or the eternal decree of God. We cease to wish for the im- 
possible; and therefore to subdue our passions we only need to 
convince ourselves that no effort of ours can enable us to secure 
their objects. On the other hand, that which is within our power, 
and which, therefore, we cannot desire too earnestly, is virtue. 
But virtue in this abstraction from all objects of desire is simply 
the harmony of reason with itself, the drapajia of the Stoic under 
a slight change of aspect. Thus in ethics, as in metaphysics, 
Descartes ends not with a reconciliation of the opposed elements, 
but with a dualism, or at best, with a unity which is the result of 
abstraction. 

The Philosophy of Malebranche. — Malebranche was prepared, 
by the ascetic training of the cloister and the teaching of Augus- 
tine, to bring to clear consciousness and expression many of the 
tendencies that were latent and undeveloped in the philosophy 
of Descartes. To use a chemical metaphor, the Christian 
Platonism of the church father was a medium in which Cartesian- 
ism could precipitate the product of its elements. Yet the medium 
was, as we shall see, not a perfect one, and hence the product 
was not quite pure. Without metaphor, Malebranche, by his 
previous habits of thought, was well fitted to detect and develop 
the pantheistic and ascetic elements of his master's philosophy. 
But he was not well fitted to penetrate through the veil of popular 
language under which the discordance of that philosophy with 
orthodox Christianity was hidden. On the contrary, the whole 
training of the Catholic priest, and especially his practical spirit, 
with that tendency to compromise which a practical spirit 
always brings with it, enabled him to conceal from himself as 
well as from others the logical result of his principles. And we 



CARTESIANISM 



419 



do not wonder even when we find him treating as a " miserable " 
the philosopher who tore away the veil. 

Malebranche saw " all things in God." In other words, he 
taught that knowledge is possible only in so far as thought is 
the expression, not of the nature of the individual subject as 
such, but of a universal life in which he and all other rational 
beings partake. " No one can feel my individual pain; every 
one can see the truth which I contemplate — why is it so ? The 
reason is that my pain is a modification of my substance, but 
truth is the common good of all spirits." 1 This idea is ever 
present to Malebranche, and is repeated by him in an endless 
variety of forms of expression. Thus, like Descartes, but with 
more decision, he tells us that the idea of'the infinite is prior to 
the idea of the finite. " We conceive of the infinite being by 
the very fact that we conceive of being without thinking whether 
it be finite or no. But in order that we may think of a finite 
being, we must necessarily cut off or deduct something from the 
general notion of being, which consequently we must previously 
possess. Thus the mind does not apprehend anything whatever, 
except in and through the idea that it has of the infinite; and 
so far is it from being the case that this idea is formed by the 
confused assemblage of all the ideas of particular things as the 
philosophers maintain, that, on the contrary, all these particular 
ideas are only participations in the general idea of the infinite, 
just as God does not derive his being from the creatures, but all 
the creatures are imperfect participations of the divine Being." 2 
Again, he tells us, in the same chapter, that " when we wish to 
think of any particular thing, we first cast our view upon all 
being, and then apply it to the consideration of the object in 
question. We could not desire to see any particular object unless 
we saw it already in a confused and general way, and as there is 
nothing which we cannot desire to see, so all objects must be in 
a manner present to our spirit." Or, as he puts it in another 
place, " our mind would not be capable of representing to itself 
the general ideas of genera and species if it did not see all things 
as contained in one; for every creature being an individual 
we cannot say that we are apprehending any created thing 
when we think the general idea of a triangle." 

The main idea that is expressed in all these different ways is 

simply this, that to determine any individual object as such, we 

must relate it to, and distinguish it from, the whole of which 

. it is a part ; and that, therefore, thought could never 

Jl n/ / apprehend anything if it did not bring with itself the 

1 at "*ea of the intelligible world as a unity. Descartes had 
mind to a i rea dy expressed this truth in his Meditations, but 
human ^ e h a d deprived it of its full significance by making a 
ledxe' distinction between the being and the idea of God, the 

' former of which, in his view, was only the cause of the 

latter. Malebranche detects this error, and denies that there is any 
idea of the infinite, which is a somewhat crude way of saying that 
there is no division between the idea of the infinite and its reality. 
What Reid asserted of the external world, that it is not represented 
by an idea in our minds, but is actually present to them, Malebranche 
asserted of God. No individual thing, he tells us — and an idea is 
but an individual thing — could represent the infinite. On the 
contrary, all individual things are represented through the infinite 
Being, who contains them all in his substance " tres efficace, et par 
consequence tres intelligible." 3 We know God by himself, material 
things only by their ideas in God, for they are " unintelligible in 
themselves, and we can see them only in the being who contains 
them in an intelligible manner." And thus, unless we in some way 
" saw God, we should be able to see nothing else." _ The vision of 
God or in God, therefore, is an " intellectual intuition " in which 
seer and seen, knower and known, are one. Our knowledge of things 
is our participation in God's knowledge of them. 

When we have gone so far with Malebranche, we are tempted to 
ask why he does not follow out his thought to its natural conclusion. 
If the idea of God is not separable from his existence, if it is through 
the idea of him that all things are known, and through his existence 
that all things are, then it would seem necessarily to follow that our 
consciousness of God is but a part of God's consciousness of himself, 
that our consciousness of self and other things is but God's conscious- 
ness of them, and lastly, that there is no existence either of ourselves 
or other things except in this consciousness. To understand Male- 
branche is mainly to understand how he stopped short of results 
that seemed to lie so directly in the line of his thought. 

To begin with the last point, it is easy to see that Malebranche 
only asserts unity of idea and reality in God, to deny it everywhere 

1 Morale, i. 1, §2. 2 Recherche, iii. pt. ii. ch. vi. 3 Recherche, ch. viL 



else, which with him is equivalent to asserting it in general snd 
denying it in particular. To him, as to Descartes, the opposition 
between mind and matter is absolute. Material things cannot come 
into our minds nor can our minds go out of themselves " pour se 
promener dans les cieux." 4 Hence they are in themselves absolutely 
unknown; they are known only in God, in whom are their ideas, 
and as these ideas again are quite distinct from the reality, they 
" might be presented to the mind without anything existing." That 
they exist out of God in another manner than the intelligible manner 
of their existence in God, is explained by a mere act of His will, 
that is, it is not explained at all. Though we see all things in God, 
therefore, there is no connexion between his existence and theirs. 
The " world is not a necessary emanation of divinity; God is 
perfectly self-sufficient, and the idea of the infinitely perfect Being 
can be conceived quite apart from any other. The existence cf the 
creatures is due to the free decrees of God." 5 Malebranche, therefore, 
still treats of external things as " things in themselves," which have 
an existence apart from thought, even the divine thought, though 
it is only in and through the divine thought they can be known by us. 
" To see the material world, or rather to judge that it exists (since 
in itself it is invisible), it is necessary that God should reveal it to 
us, for we cannot see the result of his arbitrary will through necessary 
reason." 6 

But if we know external things only through their idea in God, 
how do we know ourselves? Is it also through the idea of us in 
God? Here we come upon a point in which Malebranche diverges 
very far from his master. We do not, he says, properly know 
ourselves at all as we know God or even external objects. We are 
conscious of ourselves by inner sense (sentiment interieur), and from 
this we know that we are, but we do not know what we are. " We 
know the existence of our soul more distinctly than of our body, 
but we have not so perfect a knowledge of our soul as of our body." 
This is shown by the fact that from our idea of body as extended 
substance, we can at once see what are its possible modifications. 
In other words, we only need the idea of extended substance to see 
that there is an inexhaustible number of figures and motions of 
which it is capable. The whole of geometry is but a development 
of what is given already in the conception of extension. But it is 
not so with our consciousness of self, which does not enable us to 
say prior to actual experience what sensations or passions are 
possible to us. We only know what heat, cold, light, colour, hunger, 
anger and desire are by feeling them, Our knowledge extends as 
far as our experience and no further. Nay, we have good reason to 
believe that many of these modificatiors exist in our soul only by 
reason of its accidental association with a body, and that if it were 
freed from that body it would be capable of far other and higher ex- 
periences. " We know by feeling that our soul is great, but perhaps 
we know almost nothing of what it is in itself." The informations 
of sense have, as Descartes taught, only a practical but no theoretical 
value; they tell us nothing of the external world, the real nature 
of which we know not through touch and taste and sight, but only 
through our idea of extended substances; while of the nature of 
the soul they do not tell us much more than that it exists and that 
it is not material. And in this latter case we have no idea, nothing 
better than sense to raise us above its illusions. It is clear from 
these statements that by self-consciousness Malebranche means 
consciousness of desires and feelings, which belong to the individual 
as such, and not consciousness of self as thinking. He begins, in 
fact, where Descartes ended, and Identifies the consciousness of 
self as thinking, and so transcending the limits of its own particular 
being, with the consciousness or idea of God. And between the 
consciousness of the finite in sense and the consciousness of the 
infinite in thought, or in other words, between the consciousness of 
the universal and the consciousness of the individual, he sees no 
connexion. Malebranche is just one step from the pantheistic 
conclusion that the consciousness of finite individuality as such is 
illusory, and that as all bodies are but modes of one infinite extension, 
so all souls are but modes of one infinite thought. But while he 
willingly accepts this result in regard to matter, his religious feelings 
prevent him from accepting it in relation to mind. He is driven, 
therefore, to the inconsistency of holding that sense and feeling, 
through which in his view we apprehend the finite as such, give us 
true though imperfect knowledge of the soul, while the knowledge 
they give us of body is not only imperfect but false. 7 Thus the finite 
spirit is still allowed to be a substance, distinct from the infinite, 
though it holds its substantial existence on a precarious tenure. It 
is left hanging, we may say, on the verge of the infinite, whose 
attraction must soon prove too strong for it. Ideas are living things, 
and often remould the minds that admit them in spite of the greatest 
resistance of dead' custom and traditionary belief. In the grasp of a 
logic that overpowers him the more easily in that he is unconscious 
of its tendency, Malebranche is brought within one step of the pan- 
theistic conclusion, and all his Christian feeling and priestly training 
can do is just to save him from denial of the personality of man. 

But even this denial is not the last word of pantheism. When the 
principle that the finite is known only in relation to the infinite, 
the individual only in relation to the universal, is interpreted as 



4 Recherche, ch. i. 
6 Entretien, i. § 5. 



6 Morale, i. 2, § 5. 

7 Recherche, iii. pt. ii. ch. vii., § 4. 



420 



GARDESIANISM 



meaning that the infinite and universal is complete in itself without 
the finite and individual, when the finite and individual is treated 
as a mere accidental existence due to the " arbitrary will of God/' 
it ceases to be possible to conceive even God as a spirit. Did 
Malebranche realize what he was saying when he declared that God 
was " being in general," but not any particular being? At any rate 
we can see that the same logic that leads him almost to deny the 
reality of finite beings, leads him also to seek the divine nature in 
something more abstract and general even than thought. If we 
must abstract from all relation to the finite in order to know God as 
he is, is it not necessary for us also to abstract from self-consciousness, 
for self-consciousness has a negative element in it that is something 
definite, and therefore limited? We do not wonder, therefore, when 
we find Malebranche saying that reason does not tell us that God 
is a spirit, but only that he is an infinitely perfect being, and that 
he must be conceived rather as a spirit than as a body simply because 
spirit is more perfect than body. "When we call God a spirit,' it 
is not so much to show positively what he is, as to signify that he 
is not material." But as we ought not to give "him a bodily form 
like man's, so we ought not to think of his spirit as similar to our 
own spirits, although we can conceive nothing more perfect. 1 " It 
is necessary rather to believe that as 1 he contains in himself the 
properties of matter without being material, so he comprehends in 
himself the perfections of created spirits Without being a Spirit as 
we alone can conceive spirits, and that his true name is ' He who 
is,' i.e. Being without restriction, Being infinite and universal." 1 
Thus the essentially self-revealing God of Christianity gives way 
to pure spirit, and pure spirit in its turn to the eternal and in- 
comprehensible substance of which we can say nothing but that it is. 
The divine substance contains' in it, indeed, everything that is in 
creation, but it contains them entinenter in some incomprehensible 
form that is reconcilable with its infinitude. But we' have no 
adequate name by which to call it except Being. The curious 
metaphysic of theology by which, in his later writings, Malebranche 
tried to make room for the incarnation by supposing that the finite 
creation, which as finite is unworthy of God, was made worthy by 
union with Christ, the divine Word,' shows that Malebranche had 
some indistinct sense of the necessity of reconciling his philosophy 
with his theology ; but it shows also the necessarily artificial nature 
of the combination. The result of the union of Such incongruous 
elements was something which the theologians at orice recognized as 
heterodox and the philosophers as illogical. • 

There was another doctrine of Malebranche which brought him 
into trouble with the theologians^ and which was the main subject 
of his long controversy with Arnaiild. This was his denial of 
particular providence. As Leibnitz niaintained that this is thd best 
of all possible worlds, and that its evils are to be explained by the 
negative nature of the finite, so Malebranche, with a slight change of 
expression, derived evil from the nature of particular or individual 
existence. It is not conformable to the nature of God to act by any 
but universal laws, and these universal laws necessarily i involve 
particular evil consequences, though their ultimate result is the 
highest possible good. The question why there should be any 
particular existence, any existence but God, seeing such existence 
necessarily involves evil, remains insoluble so long as' the purely 
pantheistic view of God is maintained; and it is this view which is 
really at the bottom' of the assertion that he can have no particular 
volitions. To the coarse and anthropomorphic conception of 
particular providence Malebranche may be right in Objecting, but 
on the other hand, it cannot be doubted that any theoryin which 
the universal is absolutely opposed to the particular, the infinite to 
the finite, is unchristian as Well as unphilosophical. For under this 
dualistic presupposition, there seem to be only two possible alter- 
natives open to thought: either the 'particular and finite must, be 
treated as something independent of the universal and infinite, 
which involves an Obvious contradiction, or else it must be regarded 
as absolute nonentity. We find Malebranche doing the one or the 
other as occasion requires. Thushe vindicates the freedom of man's 
will on the ground that the universal will of God does not completely 
determine the particular volitions of man; and then becoming 
conscious of the difficulty involved in this conception, he tries, like 
Descartes, to explain the particular will as something merely 
negative, a defect, and not a positive existence. 

But to understand fully Malebranche's view of freedom and the 
ethical system connected with it, we must notice an important 
alteration which he makes in the Cartesian theory of the 
Reason relation of will and intelligence. To Descartes, as we have 
and will. seerl| t ji e ultimate essence of mind lay in pure abstract 
self-determination or will, and hence he based even moral and in- 
tellectual truth on the arbitrary decrees of God. With Malebranche, 
on the other hand, abstraction goes a step further ; and the absolute 
is sought not in the subject as opposed to the object, not iti pure 
formal self-determination as. opposed to that which is determined, 
but in a unity that transcends this difference. With him, therefore, 
will ceases to be regarded as the essence of intelligence, and sinks 
into a property or separable attribute of it." As we can conceive an 
extended substance without actual movement, so, he says, we can 
conceive a thinking substance without actual volition. But " matter 

i ' Re-cherthe, ch. ix. 



Ethics. 



or extension without motion would be entirely useless and incapable 
of that variety of forms for which it is made ; and we cannot, there- 
fore, suppose, that an all-wise Being would create it in this way. 
In like manner, if a spiritual or thinking substance were without 
will, 'it is clear that it would be quite useless, for it would not be 
attracted towards the objects of its perception, and would not love 
the good for which it is made. We cannot therefore conceive an 
intelligent being so to fashion it." 2 Now God need not be conceived 
as creating at all, for he is self-sufficient; but if he be a creator 
of spirits, he must create them for himself. " God cannot will that 
there should exist a spirit that does not love him, or that loves him 
less than any other good." 3 The craving for good in general, for an 
absolute satisfaction, is a natural love of God that is common to all. 
" The just, the wicked, the blessed, and the damned all alike love 
God with this love." Out of this love of God arises the love we 
have to ourselves and to others, which are the natural inclinations 
that belong to all created spirits. For these inclinations are but the 
elements of the love which is in God, and which therefore he inspires 
in all his creatures. "'" II s'aime, ii nous aime, il aime toutes ses 
creatures ; il >fte fait done point d'esprits qu'il ne les porte a l'aimer, 
a s/aimer, et a aimer toutes les creatures." 4 Stripping this thought 
of its, theological vesture, what is expressed here is simply that as a 
spiritual being each man is consciou"s of his own limited and indi- 
vidual existence, as well as of the limited and individual existence 
of other beings like himself, only in relation to the whole in which 
they are parts, so he can find his own good only in the good of the 
whole, and he is in contradiction with himself so long as he rests 
in any. good short of that. His love of happiness, his ' natural 
inclinations both selfish and social, may be therefore regarded as an 
undeveloped form of the love of God; and the ideal state of his 
inclinations is that in which the love of self and of others are ex- 
plicitly referred to that higher affection, or in which his love does 
not proceed from a part to the whole, but from the whole to the parts. 
'The question of morals to'Malebranche is the question how these 
natural inclinations are related to the particular passions. Sensation 
and passion arise out of the connexion of body and soul, 
and their use is only to urge us to attend to the wants of 
the former. We can scarcely hear without a smile the simple 
monastic legend which Malebranche weaves together about the 
original ;1 nature of the passions and their alteration by the Fall. 
' ' It is visibly a disorder that a spirit capable of knowing and loving 
God should be obliged to occupy itself with the needs of the body.' 
"A being altogether occupied with what passes in his body and 
with the infinity of objects that surround it cannot be thinking 
on the things that are truly good." 5 Hence the necessity of an 
immediate and instinctive warning from the senses in regard to 
the relations of things to our organism, and also of pains and pleasures 
which may induce us to attend to this warning. " Sensible pleasure 
is the mark that nature has attached to the use of certain things in 
order that without having the trouble of examining them by reason, 
we may employ them, for the preservation of the body, but not in 
order that we may love them." 6 Till the Fall the mind was merely 
united to the body, not subjected to it, and the influence of these 
pleasures and pains was only such as to make men attend to their 
bodily wants, but not to occupy the mind, or fill it with sensuous 
joys and sorrows, or trouble its contemplation of that which is really 
g6od. Our moral aim should therefore be to restore this state of 
things, to weaken our union with the body and strengthen our union 
with God. And to encourage us in pursuing this aim we have to 
remember. that union with God is natural to the spirit, and that, 
while even the condition of union with the body is artificial, the 
condition of subjection to the body is wholly unnatural to it. Our 
primary tendency is towards the supreme good, and we only love 
the objects of our passions in so far as we " determine towards 
particular, and therefore false goods, the love that God gives us for 
himself." The search for happiness is really the search for God in 
disguise, and even the levity and inconstancy with which men rush 
from one finite good to another, is a proof that they were made for 
the infinite. Furthermore, this natural love of God, or inclination 
for good in general, " gives us the power of suspending our consent 
in regard to those particular goods which do not satisfy it." 7 If we 
refuse to be led by the obscure and confused vpice of instinctive 
feelingi ?which arises from and always tends to confirm our union 
with the body, and wait for the light of reason which arises from 
and always tends to confirm our union with God, we have done all 
that is in our power, the rest is God's work. " If we only judge 
precisely of that which we see clearly, we shall never be deceived. 
For then it will not be we that judge, but the universal reason that 
judges in us." 8 And as our love, even of particular goods, is a 
confused love of the supreme good, so the clear vision of God in- 
evitably brings with it the love of him. " We needs must love the 
highest when we see it." When it is the divine reason that speaks 
in us it is the divine love that moves us, " the same love wherewith 
God loves himself and the things he has made." 9 

The general result of the ethics of Malebranche is ascetic. The 



2 Recherche,i. pt. i. ch. i. 
4 Recherche, iv. ch. i. 
6 Recherche, v. ch. iv. 
8 Morale, pt. i. ch. i, § 9. 



3 Recherche, i. pt. i. ch. iv. 

6 Entretien, iv. 

7 Recherche, iv. ch. i. 

* Recherche, iv. ch. v. 



CARTESIAlNISM 



4-21 



passions, like the senses, have no relation to the higher life of the 
soul ; their value is only in relation to the union of soul and body, a 
union which is purely accidental or due to the arbitrary will of God, 
The more silently they discharge their provisional function, and the 
less they disturb or interfere with the pure activity of spirit; 
the more nearly they approach to the only perfection that is possible 
for them. Their ideal state is to remain or become again simple 
instincts that act mechanically like the circulation of the blood. 
Universal light of reason casts no ray into the obscurity of sense ; 
its universal love cannot embrace any of the objects of particular 
passion. It is indeed recognized by Malebranche that sensation in 
man is mixed with thought, that the passions in him are forms of the 
love of good in general. But this union of the rational with the 
sensuous nature is regarded merely as a confusion which is to be 
cleared up, not in a higher unity of the two elements, but simply by 
the withdrawal of the spirit from contact with that which darkens and 
defiles it. Of a transformation of sense into thought, of passion into 
duty : — an elevation of the life of sense till it becomes the embodiment 
and expression of the life of reason — Malebranche has no conception. 
Hence the life of reason turns with him to mysticism in theory 
and to asceticism in practice. His universal is abstract and opposed 
to the particular; instead of explaining it, it explains it away. 

A certain tender beauty as of twilight is spread over the world 
as we view it through the eyes of this cloistered philosopher, and we 
do not at first see that the, softness and ideality of the picture is 
due to the gathering darkness. Abstraction seemsonly to be purifyT 
ing, and not destroying, till it has done its perfect work. Male- 
branche conceived himself to be presenting to the world only the 
purest and most refined expression of Christian ethics arid -theology. 
But if we obey his own continual advice to think clearly and Ais- 
tinctly , if we divest his system of all the sensuous and imaginative 
forms in which he has clothed it, and reduce it to the naked simplicity 
of its central thought, what we find is not a God that reveals himself 
in the finite, and to the finite, but the absolute substance which has 
no revelation, and whose existence is the negation of all but itself. 
Thus to tear away the veil, however, there was needed a stronger, 
simpler, and freer spirit— a spirit less influenced by opinion, less 
inclined to practical compromise, and gifted with a stronger " faith 
in the whispers of the lonely muse "of speculation than Malebranche. 

The Philosophy of Spinoza. — It is a remark of Hegel's that 
Spinoza, as a Jew, first brought into European thought the idea 
of an absolute unity in which the difference of finite and infinite 
is lost. Some later writers have gone further, and attempted to 
show that the main doctrines by which his philosophy is distin- 
guished from that of Descartes were due to the direct influences 
of Jewish writers like Maimonides, Gersoriides, arid Hasdai 
Crescas, rather than to the necessary development of Cartesian 
ideas. And it is undoubtedly true that many points of similarity 
with such writers, reaching down even to verbal coincidence, 
may be detected in the works of Spinoza, although it is not so 
easy to determine how much he owed to their teaching. His own 
view of his obligations is sufficiently indicated by the fact, that 
while in his ethics he carries on a continual polemic against 
Descartes, and strives at every point to show that his own 
doctrines are legitimately derived from Cartesian principles, 
he only once refers to Jewish philosophy as containing an 
obscure and unreasoned anticipation of these doctrines. " Quod 
quidam Hebraeorum quasi per nebulam vidisse videntUr qui 
scilicet statuunt Deum Dei intellectum resque ab ipso intellectas 
unum et idem esse. " 1 It may be that the undeveloped pantheism 
and rationalism of the Jewish philosophers had a deeper influence 
than he himself was aware of, in emancipating him from the 
traditions of the synagogue, and giving to his mind its first 
philosophical bias. In his earlier work there are Neoplatonic 
ideas and expressions which in the Ethics are rejected or re' 
moulded into a form more suitable to the spirit of Cartesianism. 
But the question, after all, has little more than a biographical 
interest. In the Spinozistic philosophy there are few differences 
from Descartes which cannot be traced to the necessary develop- 
ment of Cartesian principles; and the comparison of Malebranche 
shows that a similar development might take place under the 
most diverse intellectual conditions. What is most remarkable 
in Spinoza is just the freedom and security with which these prin- 
ciples are followed out to their last result. His Jewish origin and 
his breach with Judaism completely isolated him from every 
influence but that of the thought that possesses him. And no 
scruple or hesitation, no respect for the institutions or feelings 
of his time interferes with his speculative consequence. ' He 
■ i l Eth. ii. schol. 7. ■ .■•»-.. 



Geo- 
metrical 
.methott 
applied to 
meta- 
physics. 



exhibits tb us the almost perfect type of a mind without super- 
stitions, which has freed itself from all but reasoned and intelligent 
convictions,^ or,;ih, the Cartesian phrase, "clear and distinct 
ideas"; and when he fails, it is not by any inconsistency, or 
arbitrary stopping short of the necessary conclusions of his 
logic, but by 1 the essential defect of his principles. 

Spinoza takes his idea of method from mathematics, and after 
the manner of Euclid, places at the head of each book of his Ethics 
a certain number of definitions, axioms, and postulates 
which £re supposed to be intuitively certain, and to form 
a sufficient, basis for all that follows. Altogether there 
are twehty-sevin definitions, twenty axioms, and eight, 
postulates. If Spinoza is regarded as the' most consequent 
of philosophers it cannot be because he has based his 
system upon so many fragmentary views of truth; it 
must be because a deeper unity has been discerned in the system 
than is visible tin the first aspect of it. We must, therefore, to a 
certain;; extent distinguish between the form and the matter of his 
thought, though it is also true that the defective form itself involves 
a defect in the ihatter. ' 

: What in the first instance recommends the geometrical method to 
Spinoza is, not only its apparent exactness and the necessity of its 
sequence, but, so to speak, its disinterestedness, Confusion of 
thought arises from the fact that we put ourselves, our desires and 
feelings and interests, into our view of things; that we dq not regard 
them as they are in themselves, in their essential nature, but Took 
for sqmfe final cause, that is, some relation to ourselves, by which 
they may be explained. For this reason, he says, " the truth might 
for ever have remained hid from the human race, if mathematics, 
which looks not to the final cause of figures, but to their essential 
nature and the properties involved in it, had not set another type of 
knowledge before them." To understand things is to see how all 
that is true of them flows from the clear and distinct idea expressed 
in their definition, and ultimately, it is to see how all truth flows 
from the' essentia Dei as all geometrical truth flows from the idea of 
quantity. To take a mathematical view of the universe, therefore, 
is to raise ourselves above all consideration of the end or tendency 
of things, above the fears and hopes of mortality into the region 
of tr uth and necessity. "When I turned my mind to this subject," 
he says in the beginning of his treatise on politics, " I did not propose 
to myself any novel or strange aim, but simply to demonstrate by 
certain arid indubitable reason those things which agree best with 
practice. And in order that I might inquire into the matters of 
this science with the same freedom of mind with which we are wont 
to treat lines and surfaces in mathematics, I determined not to 
laugh or to weep over the actions of men, but simply to understand 
them; and to contemplate their affections and passions, such as love, 
hate, anger h envy, arrogance, pity and all other disturbances of soul 
not as vices of human nature, but as properties pertaining to it in 
the same way as heat, cold, storm, thunder pertain to the nature of 
the atmosphere. For these, though troublesome, are yet necessary) 
and have certain causes through which we may come to understand 
them, and thus, by contemplating them in their truth, gain for our 
rninds as much joy as by the knowledge of things that are pleasing 
to the senses." All our errors as to the nature of things arise from 
our judging them from the point of view of the part and not of the 
whole, from a point of view determined by their relation to our own 
individual being, and not from a point of view determined by the 
nature of the things themselves ; or, to put the same thing in another 
way, from the point of view of sense and imagination, and not from 
the point of view of intelligence. Mathematics shows us the in- 
adequacy of such knowledge when it takes us out of ourselves into 
things, and when it presents these things to us as objects of universal 
intelligence apart from all special relation to our individual feelings. 
And Spinoza only wishes that the same universality and freedom of 
thought which belongs to mathematics, because its objects do not 
interest the passions, should be extended to those objects that do 
interest them. ' Purity from interest is the first condition of the 
philosbpher's'being; : he must get beyond the illusion of sense and 
passion that makes our own lives so supremely important and 
interesting to us simply because they are our own. He must look 
at the present as it were through an inverted telescope of reason, 
that will reduce it to its due proportion and place in the sum of 
things. To the heat of passion and the higher heat of imagination, 
Spinoza has only one advice — "Acquaint yourself with God and 
be at peace." Look not to the particular but to the universal, view 
things not under the form of the finite and temporal, but sub, quadam, 
specte deternitatis. ,'.'.. .'■,'..',' 

. The illusion, of the, finite — the illusion of sense,, imagination and 
passion! which, in Bacon's language, tends to make men judge of 
things ex analogia hominis and not ex analogiq universi, <;„_„ the 
which raises the individual life, and even the present 
moment of the individual life, with its passing feelings, 
into the standard for measuring tjip universe — this, in 
the eyes of Spinoza,, is the source of all error and evil to man. 
On the other hand,, his highest good is to live the universal 
life of reason, or what is. the' same- thing, to view all things from 



source of 
error. 



422 



CARTESIANISM 



their centre in God, and to be moved only by the passion for good in 
general, " the intellectual love of God." In the treatise De Etnenda- 
tione Intellectus, Spinoza takes up this contrast in the first instance 
from its moral side. " All our felicity or infelicity is founded on the 
nature of the object to which we are joined by love." To love the 
things that perish is to be in continual trouble and disturbance of 
passion; it is to be full of envy and hatred towards others who 
possess them; it is to be ever striving after that which, when we 
attain it, does not satisfy us; or lamenting over the loss of that 
which inevitably passes away from us; only " love to an object 
that is infinite and eternal feeds the soul with a changeless and 
unmingled joy." But again our love rests upon our knowledge; 
if we saw things as they really are we should love only the highest 
object. It is because sense and imagination give to the finite an 
independence and substantiality that do not belong to it, that we 
waste our love upon it as if it were infinite. And as the first step 
towards truth is to understand our error, so Spinoza proceeds to 
explain the defects of common sense, or in other words, of that first 
and unreflected view of the world which he, like Plato, calls opinion. 
Opinion is a kind of knowledge derived partly from hearsay, and 
partly from experientia vaga. It consists of vague and general con- 
ceptions of things, got either from the report of 6thers or from an 
experience which has not received any special direction from in- 
telligence. The mind that has not got beyond the stage of opinion 
takes things as they present themselves in its individual experience ; 
and its beliefs grow up by association of whatever happens to have 
been found together in that experience. And as the combining 
principle of the elements of opinion is individual and not Universal, 
so its conception of the world is at once fragmentary and accidental. 
It does not see things in their connexion with the unity of the whole, 
and hence it cannot see them in their true relation to each other. 
" I assert expressly," says Spinoza, " that the mind has no adequate 
conception either of itself or of external things, but only a confused 
knowledge of them, so long as it perceives them only in the common 
order of nature, i.e. so long as it is externally determined to contem- 
plate this or that object by the accidental concourse of things, and 
so long as it is not internally determined by the unity of thought in 
which it considers a number of things to understand their agreements, 
differences and contradictions." l 

There are two kinds of errors which are usually supposed to 
exclude each other, but which Spinoza finds to be united in opinion. 

These are the errors of abstraction and imagination; 
Vices o tne f ormer ex pi a i ns ; rs vice by defect, the latter its vice 
tin"d k y excess. On the one hand, opinion is abstract and one- 
imaeiaa- s ' c ' e< ^ > 't ' s defective in knowledge and takes hold of 
t/ „ ' things only at one point. On the other hand, and just 

because of this abstractness and one-sidedness, it is forced 
to give an artificial completeness and independence to that which is 
essentially fragmentary and dependent. The word '* abstract " is 
misleading, in so far as we are wont to associate with abstraction the 
idea of a mental effort by which parts are separated ' from a given 
whole; but it may be applied without violence to any imperfect 
conception, in which things that are really elements of a greater 
whole are treated as if they were res completae, independent objects, 
complete in themselves. And in this sense the ordinary conscious- 
ness of man is often the victim of abstractions when it supposes itself 
most of all to be dealing with realities. The essences and substances 
of the schoolman may delude him, but he cannot think these notions 
clearly without seeing that they are only abstract elements of reality, 
and that they have a meaning only in relation to the other elements 
of it. But common sense remains unconscious of its abstractness 
because imagination gives a kind of substantiality to the fragmentary 
and limited, and so makes it possible to conceive it as an independent 
reality. Pure intelligence seeing the part as it is in itself could never 
see it but as a part. Thought, when it rises to clearness and distinct- 
ness in regard to any finite object, must at once discern its relation 
to other finite objects and to the whole, — must discern, in Spinozistic 
language, that it is " modal " and not " real." But though it is 
not possible to think the part as a whole it is possible to picture it 
as a whole. The limited image that fills the mind's eye seems to 
need nothing else for its reality. We cannot think a house clearly 
and distinctly in all the connexion of its parts with each other 
without seeing its necessary relation to the earth on which it stands, 
to the pressure of the atmosphere, &c. The very circumstances by 
which the possibility of such an existence is explained make it im- 
possible to conceive it apart from other things. But nothing hinders 
me from resting on a house as a complete picture by itself. Imagina- 
tion represents things in the externality of space and time, and is 
subjected to no other conditions but those of space and time. Hence 
it can begin anywhere and stop anywhere. For the same cause it 
can mingle and confuse together all manner of inconsistent forms- 
can imagine a man with a horse's head, a candle blazing in vacuo, a 
speaking tree, a man changed into an animal. There may be ele- 
ments in the nature of these things that would prevent such com- 
binations; but these elements are not necessarily present to the 
ordinary consciousness, the abstractness of whose conceptions leaves 
it absolutely at the mercy of imagination or accidental association. 
To thought in this stage anything is possible that can be pictured. 

l Eth. i. schoi. 29. ' " 



On the other hand, as knowledge advances, this freedom of com- 
bination becomes limited, " the less the mind understands and the 
more it perceives the greater is its power of fiction, and the more it 
understands the narrower is the limitation of that power. For 
just as in the moment of consciousness we cannot imagine that we 
do not think, so after we have apprehended the nature of body we 
cannot conceive of a fly of infinite size, and after we know the nature 
of a soul we cannot think of it as a square, though we may use the 
words that express these ideas." 2 Thus, according to Spinoza, 
the range of possibility narrows as knowledge widens, until to 
perfected knowledge posibility is lost in necessity. 

From these considerations it follows that all thought is imperfect 
that stops short of the absolute unity of all things. Our first im- 
perfect notion of things as isolated from each other, or 
connected only by co-existence and succession, is a mere IfsufHcl- 
imagination of things. It is a fictitious substantiation e ? cy , of . 
of isolated moments in the eternal Being. Knowledge, ,* ,' 
so far as it deals with the finite, is engaged in a continual v '" ua '- 
process of self-correction which can never be completed, for at every 
step there is an element of falsity, in so far as the mind rests in the 
contemplation of a certain number of the elements of the world, 
as if they constituted a complete whole by themselves, whereas 
they are only a part, the conception of which has to be modified 
at the next step of- considering its relation to the other parts. Thus 
we rise from individuals of the first to individuals of the second order, 
and we cannot stop short of" the idea of " all nature as one individual 
whose parts vary through an infinite number of modes, without 
change of the whole individual." 3 At first we think of pieces of 
matter as independent individuals, either because we can picture 
them separately, or because they preserve a certain proportion or 
relation of parts through their changes. But on further considera- 
tion, these apparent substances sink into modes, each of which is 
dependent on all the others. All nature is bound together by 
necessary law, and not an atom could be other than it is without 
the change of the whole world. Hence it is only in the whole world 
that there is any true individuality or substance. And the same 
principle applies to the minds of men. Their individuality is a mere 
semblance caused by our abstraction from their conditions. Isolate 
the individual man, and he will not display the character of a think- 
ing being at all. _ His whole spiritual life is bound up with his rela- 
tions to other minds, past and present. He has such a life, only in 
and through that universal life of which he is so infinitesimal a part 
that his own contribution to it is as good as nothing. " Vis qua 
homo in existendo perseverat limitata est, et a potentia causarum 
externarum infinite superatur." 4 What can be called his own? 
His body is a link in a cyclical chain of movement which involves 
all the matter of the world, and which as a whole remains without 
change through all. His mind is a link in a great movement of 
thought, which makes him the momentary organ and expression of 
one of its phases. His verv consciousness of self is marred by a false 
abstraction, above which he must rise ere he can know himself as he 
really is. 

" Let us imagine,"' says Spinoza in his fifteenth letter, " a little 
worm living in blood which has vision enough to discern the particles 
of blood, lymph, &c, and reason enough to observe how one particle 
is repelled by another with which it comes into contact, or com- 
municates a part of its motion to it. Such a worm would live in the 
blood as we do in this part of the universe, and would regard each 
particle of it, not as a part, but as a whole, nor could it know how 
all the parts are influenced by the universal nature of the blood, and 
are obliged to accommodate themselves to each other as is required 
by that nature, so that they co-operate together according to a fixed 
law. For if we suppose that there are no causes outside of the blood 
which could communicate new motions to it, and no space beyond 
the blood, nor any other bodies to which its particles could transfer 
their motion, it is certain that the blood as a whole would always 
maintain its present state, and its particles would suffer no other 
variations than those which may be inferred from the given relation 
of the motion of the blood to lymph, chyle, &c. And thus in that 
case the blood would require to be considered always as a whole and 
not as a part. But since there are many other causes which influence 
the laws of the nature of blood, and are in turn influenced thereby, 
other motions and other variations must arise in the blood which are 
not due to the proportion of motion in its constituents but also to 
the relation between that motion and external causes. And there- 
fore we cannot consider the blood as a whole, but only as a part of 
a greater whole." 

"Now we can think, and indeed ought to think, of all natural 
bodies in the same manner in which we have thought of this blood, 
for all bodies are surrounded by other bodies, and reciprocally 
determine and are determined by them, to exist and operate in a 
fixed and definite way, so as to preserve the same ratio of motion 
and rest in the whole universe. Hence it follows that every body, 
in so far as it exists under a certain definite modification, ought to 
be considered as merely a part of the whole universe which agrees 
with its whole, and thereby is in intimate union with all the other 
parts ; and since the nature of the universe is not limited like that 
of the blood, but absolutely infinite, it is clear that by this nature, 

8 De Emend, viii. § 58. 3 Eth. ii. lemma, 7 schol. * Eth. iv. 3. 



CARTESIANISM 



423 



with its infinite powers, the parts are modified in an infinite number 
of ways, and compelled to pass through an infinity of variations. 
Moreover, when I think of the universe as a substance, I conceive 
of a still closer union of each part with the whole; for, as I have 
elsewhere shown, it is the nature of substance to be infinite, and 
therefore every single part belongs to the nature of the corporeal 
substance, so that apart therefrom it neither can exist nor be con- 
ceived. And as to the human mind, I think of it also as of part of 
nature, for I think of nature as having in it an infinite power of 
thinking, which, as infinite, contains in itself the idea of all nature, 
and whose thoughts run parallel with all existence." 

From this point of view it is obvious that our knowledge of things 
cannot be real and adequate, except in so far as it is determined by 
The whole tne '^ ea °^ tne wno ' e ' an< ^ proceeds from the whole to the 
dominates P arts> A knowledge that proceeds from part to part 
the oarts mus t always be imperfect; it must remain external to 
its object, it must deal in abstractions or mere entia 
rationis, which it may easily be led to mistake for realities. Hence 
Spinoza, like Plato, distinguishes reason whose movement is regres- 
sive (from effect to cause, from variety to unity) from scientia 
intuitiva, whose movement is progressive, which " proceeds from 
the adequate idea of certain of God's attributes to an adequate 
knowledge of the nature of things." x The latter alone deserves to 
be called science in the highest sense of the term. " For in order that 
our mind may correspond to the exemplar of nature, it must develop 
all its ideas from the idea that represents the origin and source of 
nature, so that that idea may appear as the source of all other 
ideas." 2 The regressive mode of knowledge has its highest value in 
preparing for the progressive. The knowledge of the finite, ere it 
can become perfectly adequate, must be absorbed and lost in the 
knowledge of the infinite. 

In a remarkable passage in the Ethics, Spinoza declares that the 
defect of the common consciousness of men lies not so much in their 
PI He ignorance, either of the infinite or of the finite, as in their 

thlnvs incapacity for bringing the two thoughts together, so as 

modes of to P ut tne ' atter m ' ts proper relation to the former. 
Infinite ^U are ready to confess that God is the cause both of the 
substance, existence and of the nature of things created, but they 
do not realize what is involved in this confession — and 
hence they treat created things as if they were substances, that is, 
as if they were Gods. " Thus while they are contemplating finite 
things, they think of nothing less than of the divine nature; and 
again when they turn to consider the divine nature, they think of 
nothing less than of their former fictions on which they have built 
up the knowledge of finite things, as if these things could contribute 
nothing to our understanding of the divine nature. Hence it is not 
wonderful that they are always contradicting themselves." 3 As 
Spinoza says elsewhere, it belongs to the very nature of the human 
mind to know God, for unless we know God we could know nothing 
else. The idea of the absolute unity is involved in the idea of every 
particular thing, yet the generality of men, deluded by sense and 
imagination, are unable to bring this implication into clear conscious- 
ness, and hence their knowledge of God does not modify their view 
of the finite. It is the business of philosophy to correct this defect, 
to transform our conceptions of the finite by relating it to the 
infinite, to complement and complete.the partial knowledge produced 
by individual experience by bringing it into connexion with the idea 
of the whole. And the vital question which Spinoza himself prompts 
us to ask is how far and in what way this transformation is effected 
in the Spinozistic philosophy. 

There are -two great steps in the transformation of knowledge by 
the idea of unity as that idea is conceived by Spinoza. The first 
step involves a change of the conception of individual finite things 
by which they lose their individuality, their character as independent 
substances, and come to be regarded as modes of the infinite. But 
secondly, this negation of the finite as such is not conceived as 
implying the negation of the distinction between mind and matter. 
Mind and matter still retain that absolute opposition which they 
had in the philosophy of Descartes, even after all limits have been 
removed. And therefore in order to reach the absolute unity, and 
transcend the Cartesian dualism, a second step is necessary, by 
which the independent substantiality of mind and matter is with- 
drawn, and they are reduced into attributes of the one infinite 
substance. Let us examine these steps successively. 

The method by which the finite is reduced into a mode of the 
infinite has already been partially explained. Spinoza follows to its 
Aoollca- legitimate result the metaphysical or logical principles of 
Hon to ' Descartes and Malebranche. According to the former, 
nature of as we nave seen, the finite presupposes the infinite, and, 
matter. indeed, so far as it is real, it is identical with the infinite. 
The infinite is absolute reality, because it is pure affirma- 
tion, because it is that which negationem nullam involvit. The finite 
is distinguished from it simply by its limit, i.e. by its wanting some- 
thing which the infinite has. At this point Spinoza takes up the 
argument. If the infinite be the real, and the finite, so far as it is 
distinguished therefrom, the unreal, then the supposed substantiality 
or individuality of finite beings is an illusion. In itself the finite is 
but an abstraction, to which imagination has given an apparent 

1 Eth. ii. 40, schol. 2. 2 Dr Emend, vii. § 42. l Eih. ii. schol. 10. 



independence. All limitation or determination is negative, and in 
order to apprehend positive reality we must abstract from limits. 
By denying the negative, we reach the affirmative; by annihilating 
finitude in our thought, and so undoing the illusory work of the 
imagination, we reach the indeterminate or unconditioned being 
which alone truly is. All division, distinction and relation are but 
entia rationis. Imagination and abstraction can give to them,_as 
they can give to mere negation and nothingness, " a local habitation 
and a name," but they have no objective meaning, and in the highest 
knowledge, in the scientia intuitiva, which deals only with reality, 
they must entirely disappear. Hence to reach the truth as to matter, 
we must free ourselves from all such ideas as figure or number, 
measure or time, which imply the separation and relation of parts. 
Thus in his 50th letter, in answer to some question about figure, 
Spinoza says, " to prove that figure is negation, and not anything 
positive, we need only consider that the whole of matter conceived 
indefinitely, or in its infinity, can have no figure; but that figure 
has a place only in finite or determinate bodies. He who says that 
he perceives figure, says only that he has before his mind a limited 
thing and the manner in which it is limited. But this limitation 
does not pertain to a thing in its ' esse,' but contrariwise in its 
' non-esse ' (i.e. it signifies, not that some positive quality belongs 
to the thing, but that something is wanting to it). Since, then, 
figure is but limitation, and limitation is but negation, we cannot 
say that figure is anything." The same kind of reasoning is else- 
where (Epist. 29) applied to solve the difficulties connected with the 
divisibility of space or extension. Really, according to Spinoza, 
extension is indivisible, though modally it is divisible. In other 
words, parts ad infinitum may be taken in space by the abstracting 
mind, but these parts have no separate existence. You cannot 
rend space, or take one part of it out of its connexion with other 
parts. Hence arises the impossibility of asserting either that there 
is an infinite number of parts in space, or that there is not. The 
solution of the antinomy is that neither alternative is true. There 
are many things "quae nullo numero explicari possunt," and to 
understand these things we must abstract altogether from the 
idea of number. The contradiction arises entirely from the applica- 
tion of that idea to the infinite. We cannot say that space has a 
finite number of parts, for every finite space must be conceived as 
itself included in infinite space. Yet, on the other hand, an infinite 
number is an absurdity; it is a number which is not a number. 
We escape the difficulty only when we see that number is a category 
inapplicable to the infinite, and this to Spinoza means that it is 
not applicable to reality, that it is merely an abstraction, or ens 
imaginationis. 

The same method which solves the difficulties connected with the 
nature of matter is applied to mind. Here also we reach the reality, 
or thing in itself, by abstracting from all determination. Nature of 
All conceptions, therefore, that involve the independence mu1 d; 
of the finite, all conceptions of good, evil, freedom and 
responsibility disappear. When W. Blyenburg accuses Spinoza of 
making God the author of evil, Spinoza answers that evil is an ens 
rationis that has no existence for God. " Evil is not something posi- 
tive, but a state of privation, and that not in relation to the divine, 
but simply in relation to the human intelligence. It is a conception 
that arises from that generalizing tendency of our minds, which 
leads us to bring all beings that have the external form of man 
under one and the same definition, and to suppose that they are all 
equally capable of the highest perfection we can deduce from such a 
definition. When, therefore, we find an individual whose works are 
not consistent with this perfection, straightway we judge that he is 
deprived of it, or that he is diverging from his own nature, — a 
judgment we should never make if we had not thus referred him to 
a general definition, and supposed him to be possessed of the nature 
it defines. But since God does not know things abstractly, or through 
such general definitions, and since there cannot be more reality 
in things than the divine intelligence and power bestows upon them, 
it manifestly follows that the defect which belongs to finite things, 
cannot be called a privation in relation to the intelligence of God, 
but only in relation to the intelligence of man." 4 Thus evil and good 
vanish when we consider things sub specie aeternitatis, because they 
are categories that imply a certain independence in finite beings. 
For the idea of a moral standard implies a relation of man to the 
absolute good, a relation of the finite to the infinite, in which the 
finite is not simply lost and absorbed in the infinite. But Spinoza 
can admit no such relation. In the presence of the infinite the finite 
disappears, for it exists only by abstraction and negation; or it 
seems to us to exist, not because of what is present to our thoughts, 
but because of what is not present to them. As we think ourselves 
free because we are conscious of our actions but not of their causes, 
so we think that we have an individual existence only because the 
infinite intelligence is not wholly but only partially realized in us. 
But as we cannot really divide space, though we can think of a part 
of it, so neither can we place any real division in the divine intelli- 
gence. In this way we can understand how Spinoza is able to speak 
of the human mind as part of the infinite thought of God, and of the 
human body as part of the infinite extension of God, while yet he 
asserts that the divine substance is simple, and not made up of parts. 



Eph$. 32. 



424 



GARTESIANISM 



So far. as they exist, they must be conceived as parts of the divine 
substance, but when we look directly at that divine substance their 
separate existence altogether disappears. >■ >• , 

It has, however, been already mentioned that this ascending 
movement of abstraction does not at once and directly bring 
s id and Spinoza to the absolute unity of substance. The prin- 

° ciple that " determination is negation," and that there- 

' oaay ' fore the absolute reality is to be found only in the 

indeterminate, would lead us to expect this conclusion; but the 
Cartesian dualism prevents Spinoza from reaching it. lylind and 
matter, are so absolutely opposed, that even when we take away 
all limit and determination from both, they still . retain their 
distinctness. Raised to infinity, they still refuse to be identified. 
We are forced, indeed, to take, from them their substantial or sub- 
stantive existence, for there can be no other substance, but God, 
wiio includes all reality in himself. But though reduced to attributes 
of a common substance, the difference of thought and extension is 
insoluble. The independence of individual finite things disappears 
whenever we substitute thought for imagination, but even to pure 
intelligence, extension remains extension, and thought remains 
si za's thought. Spinoza seems therefore reduced to a dilemma ; 

P nQ he cannot surrender either the unity or the duality of 



*? "^ things, yet he cannot relate them to each other. The only 

Descartes' 
dualism. 



Q , course left open to him is to conceive each attribute in its 
turn as the whole substance, and to regard their difference 
as the difference of expression. As; the patriarch was 
called by the two names of Jacob and Israel, under different aspects, 
each of which included the whole reality of the man, so our minds 
apprehend the absolute substance in two ways, each of which 
expresses its whole nature. 1 In this way the extremes of absolute 
identity and absolute difference seem tobe reconciled. There is a 
complete parallelism of thought and extension, " ordo et connexio 
idearum idem est ac ordo et connexio rerum,"' yet there is also a 
complete independence and absence of relation between theni, for 
each is the whole. A thing in one expression cannot lie related to 
itself in another expression. Hence in so far as we look at the 
substance under the attribute of thought, we must take no account 
of extension, and in so far as we look at it under the attribute of 
extension, we must equally refuse to take any account of thought. 
This parallelism may be best illustrated by Spinoza's account of the 
relation of the human soul and body. The soul is the idea of the 
body, and the body is the object of the soul, whatever is in the one 
really is in the other ideally; yet this relation of object and subject 
does not imply any connexion. The motions and changes of the 
body have to be accounted for partly by itself, partly by the influence 
of other bodies; and the thoughts of the soul in like manner have 
to be accounted for partly by what God thinks as constituting the 
individual mind, and partly by what he thinks as constituting the 
minds of other individuals. But to account for thought by the 
motions of the body, or for the motions of the body by! .thought, 
is to attempt to bridge the impassable gulf: between thought and 
extension. : It involves the double absurdity of accounting for a 
thing by itself, and of accounting for it by that which has nothing 
in common with it. 

In one point of view, this theory of Spinoza deserves the highest 
praise for that very characteristic which probably excited most 
_ , , odium against it at the time it was first published, namely, 
.ap ooza s j ts exa i ta ti on of matter. It is the mark of an imperfect 
ih ii spiritualism to hide its eyes from outward nature, and to 

Idealism. s h r i n k from the material as impure and defiling. But 
its horror and fear are proofs of weakness ; it flies from an enemy 
it cannot overcome. Spinoza's bold identification of spirit and 
matter, God and nature, contains in it the germ of a higher idealism 
than can be found in any philosophy that asserts the claims of the 
former at the expense of the latter. A system that begins by making 
nature godless, will inevitably end, as Schelling once said, in making 
God unnatural. The expedients by which Descartes keeps matter at 
a distance from God, were intended to maintain his pure spirituality; 
but their ultimate effect was seen in his reduction of the spiritual 
nature to. mere will. As Christianity has its superiority over other 
religions in this, that it does not end with the opposition of the human 
to the divine, the natural to the spiritual, but ultimately reconciles 
them, so a true idealism must vindicate its claims by absorbing 
materialism into itself; It was, therefore, a true instinct of philosophy 
that led Spinoza to raise matter to the co-equal of spirit, and at 
the same time to protest against the Cartesian conception of rhatter 
as mere inert mass, moved only by impulse from without. "What 
were a God that only impelled the world from without?" says 
Goethe. "It becomes him to stir it by an inward energy, to involve 
nature in himself, himself in nature, so that that which lives and* 
moves and has a being in him can never feel the want of his power 
or his spirit." ,:■..• >; 

While, however, Spinoza thus escapes some of the inconsequences 
of Descartes, the contradiction that was implicit in the Cartesian 
system between the duality and the unity, the attributes and the 
substance, in his system becomes explicit. When so great emphasis 
is laid upon the unity of substance, it becomes more diffioult to 
explain the difference of the attributes. The result is, that Spinoza 



l Epist. 27. 



*Eth. ii. 7. 



is forced to account for it, not by the nature of substance itself, 
but by the inature of the intelligence to Which it is revealed. '■ By 
substance," he says, ■" I understand that which Is in itself, ^ „ jca f 
and is conceived through itself. By attribute I understand difficulties 
the same thing, nisi quod attributum dicatur respectu Ig 
intellectus substantiae certum talem naturam tribuentis." 3 solnoza's 
Hence we are naturally led with J. E. Erdmann to think \,, 
of the intelligence dividing the substance as a kind of >. " 
prism that breaks the white: light into different colours, ** yscs ' 
through each of which the same world is seen, only with a 
different aspect. But if the intelligence in itself is but a mode of 
one of the attributes, how can it be itself the source of their 
distinction? : • ... 

The key to this difficulty is that Spinoza has really, and almost in 
spite of his logical principles, two' opposite conceptions of substance, 
between which he alternates without ever bringing them to a uni^y. 
On the one handy in accordance with the principle that determination 
is negation, substance must be taken as that which is utterly in- 
determinate, like the Absolute of the Buddhist, which we can char- 
acterize only by denying of it everything that we assert of the finite. 
In. this view, no predicate can be applied univocally to God and to 
the creatures; he differs from them, not only in existence, but in 
essence. 4 If we follow out this view to its legitimate result, God is 
withdrawn into his own absolute unity, and no difference of attributes 
can be ascribed to him, except in respect of something else than 
himself. It is owing to the defects of our intelligence that he appears 
under different forms or expressions ; in himself he is pure being, 
without form or expression at all.: But, on the other hand, it is to be 
observed, that while Spinoza really proceeds by abstraction and 
negation, he does not mean to do so. The abstract is to him the 
unreal and imaginary, and what he means by substance is not 
simply Being in general, the conception that remains when we omit 
all that distinguishes the particulars, but the absolute totality of 
things conceived as a unity in which all particular existence is 
included and subordinated. Hence at a single stroke the indeter- 
minate passes into the most determinate Being, the Being with no 
attributes at all into the Being constituted by an infinite number 
of attributes. And while, under the former conception, the defect 
of our intelligence seemed to be that it divided the substance, or 
saw a difference of attributes in its absolute unity,' under the second 
conception its defect lies in its apprehending only two out of the 
infinite multitude of these attributes. 

To do justice to Spinoza, therefore, we must distinguish between 
the actual effect of his logic and its effect as he conceived it. The 
actual effect of his logic is to dissolve ail in the ultimate abstraction 
of Being, from which we can find no way back to the concrete. 
But his intent was simply to relate all the parts to that absolute 
unity which is the presupposition of all thought and being, and so 
to arrive at^the most ■concrete and complete idea of the reality of 
things. He failed to see what is involved in his own principle that 
determination is negation; for if affirmation is impossible without 
negation, then the attempt to divorce the two from eaeh other, the 
attempt to find a purely affirmative being, must necessarily: end in 
the barest of all abstractions being confused with the unity of all 
things. But even when the infinite substance is defined as the 
negative of the finite, the idea of the finite becomes an essential 
element in the conception of the infinite. Even the Pantheist, who 
says that God is what finite things are not, in spite of himself recog- 
nizes that God has a relation to finite things. Finite things may in 
his eyes have no positive relation to God, yet they have a negative 
relation ; it is through their evanescence and transitoriness, through 
their nothingness, that the eternal, the infinite reality alone is 
revealed to him. Spinoza is quite conscious of this process, conscious 
that he reaches the affirmation of substance by a negation of what 
he conceives as the purely negative and unreal existence of finite 
things, but as he regards the assertion of the finite as merely an 
illusion due to our imagination, so he regards the correction of this 
illusion, the negation of the finite as a movement of reflection which 
belongs merely to our intelligence, and has nothing to do with the 
nature of substance in itself. We find the true affirmation by the 
negation of the negative, but in itself affirmation has nd relation 
to negation. Hence his absolute being is the dead all-absorbing 
substance and not the self-revealing spirit. It is the being without 
determination, and not the being that determines itself. There is no 
reason in the nature of substance why it should have either attributes 
or modes ; neither individual finite things nor the general distinction 
of mind and matter can be deduced from it. The descending move- 
ment of thought is not what Spinoza himself said it should be, an 
evolution, but simply an external and empirical process by which 
the elements dropped in the ascending movement of abstraction are 
taken up again with a merely nominal change. For the sole difference 
in the conception of mind and matter as well as in the conception 
of individual minds and bodies which is made by their reference to 
the idea of God, is that they lose their substantive character and 
become adjectives. Aristotle objected to Plato that his ideas were 
merely alcrBrfri. itiia, that is, that his idealization of the world was 
merely superficial, and left the things idealized very much what they 
were before to the sensuous consciousness ; and the same may be 



3 Epist.27. 



'Etk, i'whol.; 17. 



CARTESIAMSM 



said of Spinoza's negation of finite things. It was an externat and 
imperfect negation, which did not transform the idea of thefinite, 
but merely substituted the names of attributes and modes for the 
names of general and individual substances. 

The same defective logic, by which the movement of. thought in 
determining the substance is regarded as altogether external to the 
subgtance itself, is seen again in Spinoza's conceptions of the relations 
of the attributes to each other. Adopting the Cartesian opposition of 
mind and matter, he does not see, any more than Descartes, that in 
their opposition they are correlative. r if he did see it (as seems 
possible from a passage in his earliest treatise), 1 he regarded the 
correlation as merely subjective, merely belonging to our thought. 
They are to him only the two attributes which we happen, to know 
out of the infinite number belonging to God. There is no necessity 
that the substance should manifest itself in just these attributes 
and no others, for abstract substance is equally receptive of all 
determinations, and equally indifferent to them all. Just because 
the unity is merely generic, the differences are accidental, and do 
not form by their union any complete whole. If Spinoza had seen 
that matter in itself is the correlative opposite 1 of mind in itself, he 
need not have sought by abstracting f torn the difference of these 
elements to reach a unity which is manifested in that very difference, 
and his absolute would have been not substance but spirit. ;This 
idea he never reached, but we find him approximating to it in two 
ways. On the one hand, he condemns the Cartesian conception of 
matter as passive and self -external, or infinitely divisible — as, in 
short, the mere opposite of thought. 2 And sometimes he insists 
on the parallelism of extension and thought at the expense of their 
opposition in a way that almost anticipates the assertion by Leibnitz 
of the essential identity of mind and matter. On the other hand, 
he recognizes that this parallelism is not complete. Thought is not 
like a picture; it is conscious, and conscious not only. of itself, 
but of extension. It transcends therefore the absolute distinction 
between itself and other attributes. It is. only because he cannot rid 
himself of the phantom of an extended matter as a thing in itself, 
which is entirely different from the idea of it, that Spinoza i$; pre- 
vented from recognizing in mind that unity that transcends all 
distinctions, even its own distinction from matter. As it is, his main 
reason for saying that intelligence is not an attribute of God, but 
merely a mode, seems to be this, that the thought of God must be 
conceived as producing its own object, i.e. as transcending the dis- 
tinction of subject and object which is necessary to our intelligence. 3 
But this argument of itself points to a concrete quite as much as to 
ah abstract unity. It is as consistent with the idea of absolute spirit 
as with that of absolute substance. Spinoza's deliberate and formal 
doctrine is undoubtedly the latter; but. he constantly employs 
expressions Which imply the former, as when he speaks of God as 
causa sui. The higher idea inspires him, though his consciousness 
only embraces the lower idea. 

The ethical philosophy of Spinoza is determined by the. same 
principles and embarrassed by the same difficulties as his meta- 
_. , physics. In it also we find the same imperfect conception 
Spiaoza s of the re i at ; on f t h e positive to the negative elements, 
ethl fi al and, as a consequence, the same confusion of the highest 
system. un j tv f thought, the affirmation that subordinates and 
transcends all negation with mere abstract affirmation. Or, to put 
the same thing in ethical language, Spinoza teaches a morality 
which is in every point the opposite of asceticism, a morality of self- 
assertion or self-seeking, and not of self-denial. The conatus sese 
conservandi is to him the supreme principle of virtue; 4 yet this self- 
seeking is supposed, under the guidance of reason, to identify itself 
with the love of man and the love of God, and to find blessedness 
not in the reward of virtue, but in virtue itself. It is only confusion 
of thought and false mysticism that could object to this result on 
the ground of the element of self still preserved in the amor Dei 
intellectualis. For it is just the power of identifying himself with 
that which is wider and higher than his individual being that makes 
morality possible to man. But the difficulty lies in this, that 
Spinoza will not admit the negative element, the element of mortifica- 
tion or sacrifice, into morality at all, even as a moment of transition. 
For him there is no dead self; by which we may rise to higher things, 
no losing of life that we may find it. For the negative is nothing, 
it is evil in the only sense in which evil exists, and cannot be the 
source of good. The higher affirmation of our own being, the higher 
seeking of ourselves which is identical with the love of God, must 
therefore be regarded as nothing distinct in kind from that first 
seeking of our natural self which in Spinoza's view belongs to us in 
common with the animals, and indeed in common with all, beings 
whatever. It must be regarded merely as a direct development 
and extension of the same thing. The main interest of the Spinozistic 
•ethics therefore lies in observing by what steps he accomplishes this 
transition, while excluding altogether the idea of a real division of 
the higher and the lower life, the spirit and flesh, and of a conflict 
in which the former is day-eloped through the sacrifice of the latter. 

Finite creatures exist only as modes of the divine substance, only 
so far as they partake in the infinite, or what is the same thing with 
Spinoza, in the purely affirmative or self -affirming nature of God. 



1 Traclatus de Deo et homine. ii. 19. 
3 Eth. i.'schol. 17. 



2 Epist. 29, 76. 
4 Eth. iv. schol. 22. 



They therefore must also be self -affirming. They can never limit 
themselves; their limit lies in this, that they are not identified with 
the infinite substance which expresses itself also in other modes. 
In other words, the limit of any finite creature, that which makes it 
finite, lies without it, and its own existence, so far as it goes, must 
be pure self-assertion and self-seeking. " Unaquaeque res quantum 
in se est ih suo esse perseverare conatur," and this conatus is its very 
essence or inmost nature. 6 In the animals this conatus takes the 
form of appetite, in man of desire, which is " appetite with the 
consciousness of it." 6 But this constitutes no essential difference 
between appetite and desire, for "whether a man be conscious of 
his appetite or no, the appetite remains one and the same thing." 7 
Man therefore; like the animals, is purely self-asserting and self- 
seeking. He can neither know nor will anything but his own being, 
or if he knows of wills anything el'se, it must be something involved 
in his own being. If he knows other beings, or seeks their good, 
it must be because their existence and their good are involved in His 
own. If he loves and knows God it must be because he cannot know 
himself without knowing God, or find his supreme good anywhere 
but in God. 

What at first makes the language difficult to us is the identification 
of will arid intelligence. Both are represented as affirming their 
objects. Descartes had prepared the way for this when he treated 
the will as the faculty of judging or giving assent to certain com- 
binations of ideas, and distinguished it from the purely intellectual 
faculties by which the ideas are apprehended. By this distinction 
he had, as he supposed, secured a place for human freedom. Admit- 
ing that intelligence is under a law of necessity, he claimed for the 
Will a certain latitude Or liberty of indifference, a power of giving 
or withholding assent in all cases where the relations of ideas were 
not absolutely clear and distinct. Spinoza points out that there is 
no ground for such a distinction, that the acts of apprehension and 
judgment cannot be separated from each other. "In the mind 
there is,' nd volition, i.e. no affirmation or negation which is not 
immediately involved in the idea it apprehends," and therefore 
" intellect and will are one and the same thing." 8 If, then, there is 
no freedom except, the liberty of indifference, freedom is impossible. 
Man, like all other beings and things, is under an absolute law of 
necessity. All the actions of his will, as well as of his intelligence, 
are but different forms of the self-assertive tendency to which he 
cannot but yield, because it is one with his very being, or only 
ideally distinguishable therefrom. There is, however, another idea 
of liberty. Liberty as the opposite of necessity is an absurdity — it 
is impossible for either God or man; but liberty as the opposite of 
slavery is possible, and it is actually possessed by God. The divine 
liberty consists in this, that God acts from the necessity of his own 
nature alone, 'and is not in any way determined from without. 
And the great question of ethics is, How far can man partake in this 
liberty? At first it would seem impossible that he should partake 
in it. He is a finite 'being, whose power is infinitely surpassed by 
the power of other beings to which he is related. His body acts 
only as it is acted oil, arid his mind cannot therefore apprehend his 
body,' except as affected by other things. His self-assertion and 
self-seeking are therefore confused with the asserting and seeking 
of other things, arid are never pure. His thought and activity cannot 
be understood except through the influence of other things which 
lie outside of his consciousness, and upon which his will has no 
influence. '' He cannot know clearly and distinctly either himself or 
anything else; how then can he know his own good or determine 
himself by the idea of it ? 

The answer is the answer of Descartes, that the apprehension of 
any finite thing involves the adequate idea of the infinite and eternal 
nature of God. 9 ' This is the primary object of intelligence, in which 
alone is grounded the possibility of knowing either ourselves or 
anything else. In so far as our knowledge is determined by this 
idea, 6r by the ideas of other things, which are referred to this idea 
and seen in its light, in so far its action flows from an internal 
and not an external necessity. In so far, on the other hand, as we 
are determined by the affections of the body, ideas in which the 
nature of our own body and the nature of other things are confused 
together, in so far we are determined by an external necessity. Or 
to put the same thing in what has been shown to be merely another 
way of expression, in so far as we are determined by pure intelligence 
we art free, but ?n so far as we are determined by opinion and 
imagination we are slaves. 

From these premises it is easy to see what form the opposition 
of reason and passion must necessarily take with Spinoza. The 
passions belong to bur nature as finite; they are grounded on, or 
rather are but another form of inadequate ideas ; but we are free 
only in so far as our ideas either immediately are, or can be made, 
adequate. Our idea of God is adequate ex vi termini; our ideas 
of the affections of our body are inadequate, but can be made 
adequate in so far as they are referred to the idea of God. And as 
the idea of God is purely affirmative, this reference to the idea of 
God implies the elimination of the negative element from the ideas 
of the affections of the body, " for nothing that is positive in a false 
idea is removed 1 by the presence of truth as such." u Brought into 



5 Eth. iii. 6, 7. 
8 Eth. ii. 49. 



6 Eth. iii. 9. 
9 Eth. ii. 45. 



7 Eth. iii.Def. Affect. 
10 Eth. iv. 1. 



426 



CARTHAGE 



contact with the idea of God, all ideas become true and adequate, 
by the removal of the negative or false element in them. The idea 
of God is, as it were, the touchstone which distinguishes the gold 
from the dross. It enables us to detect the higher spiritual element 
in the natural passions, and to sever the element belonging to that 
pure love of self which is identical with the love of perfection from 
the elements belonging to that impure love of our own finite 
individuality as such which is identical with the love of evil. 

The imperfection in Spinoza's development of this principle has 
already been indicated. It is in fact the same imperfection which 
Implicit runs through his whole system. Just as he supposed that 
dim- tne ideas of finite things were at once made consistent 

cutties. w ' tn tne i( lea. of the infinite when he had named them 
modes, so here his conception of the change through which 
selfish natural desire must pass in order to become spiritual is far 
too superficial and external. Hence he has no sympathy with 
asceticism, but treats it, like Bentham, as a torva et tristis superstitio. 
Joy is the "transition from less to greater perfection," and cannot 
be but good ; pain is the "transition from greater to less perfection," 
and cannot be but evil. The revolt against the medieval opposition 
of the nature and spirit is visible in many of his sayings. " No 
Deity who is not envious can delight in my weakness or hurts, or 
can regard as virtues those fears and sighs and tears which are the 
signs of the mind's weakness; but contrariwise, the greater is our 
joy, the greater is our progress to perfection, and our participation 
in the divine nature." 1 "A free man thinks of nothing less than 
death, his wisdom is a meditation not of death but of life." 2 The 
same idea, combining with the idea of necessity, leads him to con- 
demn repentance and pity, as well as pride and humility. Un- 
consciously, Spinoza reproduces the principle of asceticism, while 
in words he utterly rejects' it. For though he tells us that pure 
self-complacency is the highest thing we can hope, yet from this 
self-complacency all regard to the finite individuality of the subject 
is eliminated. " Qui Deum amat, conari non potest ut Deus ipsum 
contra amet." In like manner, he absolutely condemns all hatred, 
envy, rivalry and ambition, as springing out of an over-estimate of 
those finite things which one only can possess, while the highest good 
is that which is enjoyed the more easily and fully the greater the num- 
ber of participants. Yet Spinoza's exaltation of the social life, and 
of the love that binds it together, is too like the Buddhist's universal 
charity that embraces all creatures, and all creatures equally. Both 
are based on an abstraction from all that is individual, only the Buddh- 
ist's abstraction goes a step further, and erases even the distinction 
between man and the animals. Spinoza felt the pressure of this all- 
levelling logic when he said, " I confess I cannot understand how 
spirits express God more than the other creatures, for I know that 
between the finite and the infinite there is no proportion, and that 
the distinction between God and the most excellent of created things 
differs not a whit from the distinction between him and the lowest 
and meanest of them." 3 As Pope said, God is "as full and perfect 
in a hair as a heart " ; in all finite things there is a ray of divinity, 
and in nothing more than a ray. Yet in another epistle Spinoza 
contradicts this view, and declares that, while he does not consider 
it necessary to " know Christ after the flesh, he does think it is 
necessary to know the eternal Son of God, i.e. God's eternal wisdom, 
which is manifested in all things, but chiefly in the mind of man, 
and most of all in Christ Jesus." 4 In the Ethics the distinction of 
man and the animals is treated as an absolute distinction, and it is 
asserted with doubtful consistency that the human soul cannot 
all be destroyed along with the body, for that there is something 
of it which is eternal. Yet from this eternity we must, of course, 
eliminate all notion of the consciousness of the finite self as such. 
At this point, in short, the two opposite streams of Spinoza's thought, 
the positive method he intends to pursue, and the negative or 
abstracting method he really does pursue, meet in irreconcilable 
contradiction. The finite must be related to the infinite so as to 
preserve all that is in it of reality ; and therefore its limit or the 
negative element in it must be abstracted from. But it turns out 
that, with this abstraction from a negative element involved in the 
existence of the finite, the positive also disappears, and God is all in 
all in a sense that absolutely excludes the existence of the finite. 
" The mind's intellectual love of God," says Spinoza, " is the very 
love wherewith God loves himself, not in so far as he is infinite, but 
in so far as he can be expressed by the essence of the human mind, 
considered under the form of eternity; i.e. the mind's intellectual 
love of God is part of the infinite love wherewith God loves him- 
self." s This double "in so far," which returns so frequently in' 
Spinoza, just conceals for a moment the contradiction of two streams 
of thought, one of which must be swallowed up by the other, if they 
are once allowed to meet. 

We have n&w reviewed the main points of the system, which 
was the ultimate result of the principles of Descartes. The 
importance of this first movement of modern philosophy lies 
in its assertion and exhibition of the unity of the intelligible 
world with itself and with the mind of man. In this point of 



1 Eih. iv. schol. 45. 
4 Epist. 21. 



2 Eth. iv. 67. 



3 Epist. 57. 
5 Eth. v. 36- 



view, it was the philosophical counterpart of Protestantism; 
but, like Protestantism in its earliest phase, it passed rapidly 
from the doctrine that God is, without priest or Ge _ er .« 
authority, present to man's spirit, to the doctrine import- 
that man's spirit is as nothing before God. The anceofthe 
object was too powerful for the subject, who effaced Ca ^ eslan 
himself before God that he might be strong towards 
men. But in this natural movement of feeling and thought it 
was forgotten that God who effaced the world and the finite spirit 
by his presence could not be a living God. Spinoza gives the 
ultimate expression to this tendency, and at the same time 
marks its limit, when he says that whatever reality is in the 
finite is of the infinite. But he is unsuccessful in showing that, 
on the principles on which he starts, there can be any reality in 
the finite at all. Yet even if the finite be an illusion, still more 
if it be better than an illusion, it requires to be accounted for. 
Spinoza accounts for it neither as illusory nor as real. It was 
reserved for the following generation of philosophers to assert, 
in different ways, the reality of the finite, the value of experience 
and the futility of abstractions. Spinoza had declared that true 
knowledge consists in seeing things under the form of eternity, 
but it is impossible that things can be seen under the form of 
eternity unless they have been first seen under the form of 
time. The one-sided assertion of individuality and difference in 
the schools of Locke and Leibnitz was the natural complement of 
the one-sided assertion of universality and unity in the Cartesian 
school. But when the individualistic tendency of the 18th 
century had exhausted itself, and produced its own refutation 
in the works of Kant, it was inevitable that the minds of men 
should again turn to the great philosopher, who, with almost 
perfect insight working through imperfect logic, first formulated 
the idea of a unity presupposed in and transcending the difference 
of matter and mind, subject and object. 

See the Histories of Philosophy, especially those by Hegel, 
Feuerbach, Erdmann and Fischer; F. Bouillier, Histoire de la 
philosophic cartesienne (1854); Olle-Laprune, Philosophic de Male- 
branche; E. Saisset, Precurseurs et disciples de Descartes (1862). 
The German treatises on Spinoza are too numerous to mention. 
Jacobi's Letters on Spinoza, which were the beginning of a true 
interpretation of his philosophy, are still worth reading. We may 
also mention C. Schaarschmidt, Descartes und Spinoza (1850); 
C. Sigwart, Spinozas neuentdeckter Tractat von Cott, dem Menschen, 
und dessen Gliickseligketi (1866). Both these writers have published 
German translations of the Tractatus de Deo. See also Trendelen- 
burg, Historische Beilrdge zur Philosophic (1867); R. Avenarius, 
Uber die beiden ersten Phasen des spinozischen Pantheismus (1868) ; 
M. Joel, Zur Genesis der Lehre Spinozas (1871) ; R. Willis, Benedict 
de Spinoza: his Ethics, Life and Influence on Modern Religious 
Thought (1870) ; F. Pollock, Spinoza, his Life and Philosophy (1880) ; 
J. Martineau, Types of Ethical Theory (1885); J. Caird, Spinoza (in 
Blackwood's Philosophical Series) ; H. H. Joachim, A Study of the 
Ethics of Spinoza (1901) ; R. Adamson, The Development of Modern 
Philosophy (1903); also articles Descartes, Malebranche, and 
Spinoza. (E. C.) 

CARTHAGE (Phoenician Kart-hadshat, "New City"; Gr. 
Kapx^Scbv, Lat. Carthago or Carchedon), one of the most 
famous cities of antiquity, on the north coast of Africa; it was 
founded about 822 B.C. by the Phoenicians, destroyed for the 
first time by the Romans in 146 B.C., rebuilt by the Romans, 
and finally destroyed by the Arabs in a.d. 698. It was situated 
in the heart of the Sinus Uticensis (mod. Gulf of Tunis), which 
is protected on the west by the promontory of Apollo (mod. 
Ras Ali el Mekki), and on the east by the promontory of Mercury 
or Cape Bon (mod. Ras Addar). Its position naturally formed 
a sort of bastion on the inner curve of the bay between the 
Lake of Tunis on the south and the marshy plain of Utica (Suk- 
hara) on the north. Cape Gamart, the Arab village of Sidi-bu- 
Said and the small harbour of Goletta (La Goulette, Halk el Wad) 
form a triangle which represents the area of Carthage at its 
greatest, including its extramural suburbs. Of this area the 
highest point is Sidi-bu-Said, which stands on a lofty cliff about 
490 ft. high. On Cape Gamart (Kamart) was the chief cemetery; 
the citadel, Byrsa, was on the hill on which to-day stand the 
convent of Les Peres Blancs (White Fathers) and the cathedral 
of St Louis. The harbours lay about three- fifths of a mile 
south of Byrsa, near the modern hospital of the Khram, at 



CARTHAGE 



427 



Cartagenna. The tongue of land, which runs from the harbours 
as far as Goletta, to the mouth of the Catadas which connects 
the Lake of Tunis with the sea, was known as taenia (ribbon, 
band) or ligula (diminutive of lingua, tongue). The isthmus 
connecting the peninsula of Carthage with the mainland was 
roughly estimated by Polybius as 25 stades (about 15,000 ft.); 
the peninsula itself, according to Strabo, had a circumference 
of 360 stades (41 m.). The distance between Gamart and 
Goletta is about 6 m. 

From Byrsa, which is only 105 ft. above the sea, there is a fine 
view; thence it is possible to see how Carthage was able at once 
to dominate the sea and the gently undulating plains which 
stretch westward as far as Tunis and the line of the river Bagradas 
(mod. Mejerda). On the horizon, on the other side of the Gulf 
of Tunis, rise the chief heights of the mountain-chain which was 
the scene of so many fierce struggles between Carthage and Rome, 
between Rome and the Vandals: — the Bu-Kornaitn ■(" Two- 
Horned Mountain "), crowned by the ruins of the temple of 
Saturn Balcaranensis; Jebel Ressas, behind which lie the ruins of 
Neferis; Zaghwan, the highest point in Zeiigitana; Hammam-Lif, 
Rades (Ghades, Gades, the ancient Maxula) on the coast, and 
10 m. to the south-west the " white " Tunis (\ewc6s Tvvrjs 
of Diodorus) and the fertile hills of Ariana. All round Byrsa, 
alike on the plain and on the slopes, are fields of barley, vineyards 
and patches of cactus, interrupted only by huge heaps of rubbish 
and excavation-mounds, the haunts of green lizards, and by 
houses and villages built of materials drawn for many a century 
from the ancient ruins. 

The ancient harbours were distinguished as the military and the 
commercial. The remains of the latter are to be seen in a par- 
tially ruined artificial lagoon which originally, according to 
Beule, had an area of nearly 60 acres; there were, however, 
in addition a large quay for unloading freight along the shore, 
and huge basins or outer harbours protected by jetties, the remains 
of which are still visible at the water-level. The military 
harbour, known as Cothon, communicated with the commercial 
by means of a canal now partially ruined; it was circular in 
shape, surrounded by large docks 16^ ft. wide, and capable of 
holding 220 vessels, though its area was only some 22 acres. 
In the centre was an islet from which the admiral could inspect 
the whole fleet. 1 

Among the other ruins which have been identified are the circus 
or hippodrome, traversed by the railway at the north of the 
village of Duar-es-Shat; the forum, between Cothon and Byrsa, 
where stood the Curia, the regular place of assembly of the senate, 
and near which were the moneychangers' shops, the tribunal, 
the temple of Apollo, and in the Byzantine period the baths of 
Theodora. Three main streets led from the forum to Byrsa. 

The hill of St Louis, the ancient citadel of Byrsa, has a circuit 
of 4525 ft. It appears to have been surrounded at least at 
certain points by several lines of fortifications. It was, however, 
dismantled by P. Scipio Africanus the younger, in 146 B.C., and 
was only refortified by Theodosius II. in a.d. 424 ; subsequently its 
walls were again renewed by Belisarius in 553. On the plateau 
of Byrsa have been found the most ancient of the Punic tombs, 
huge cisterns in the eastern part, and near the chapel of St Louis 
the foundations of the famous temple of Eshmun (see below), 
and the palace of the Roman proconsul. 

About 325 ft. from the railway station of La Malga are the still 
imposing ruins of the amphitheatre. Near by, at the spot 
called Bir el Jebana, Pere Delattre has discovered four cemeteries, 
one of which contains the tombs of state officials or servants of 
the imperial government. Rather more than half a mile north- 
west of Byrsa are the huge cisterns of La Malga, which, at the 
time of the Arab geographer, Idrlsl, still comprised twenty-four 
parallel covered reservoirs, 325 ft. by 71$- ft.; of these fourteen 
only remain. 

1 The whole question of these harbours has been fully discussed by 
Cecil Torr, Otto Meltzer, R. Ohler, S. Gsell, M. de Roquefeuil; 
see Aug. Audollent, Carthage romaine, pp. 198 seq.; Revue archeol.. 
3rd series, xxiv. ; Jahrbiich f. class. PMlqlogie, vols, cxlvii., cxlix. ; 
also Classical Review, vols, v., vii., viii. 



On the hill of the Petit Seminaire, which is separated from 
Byrsa by a valley, Pere Delattre has discovered a Christian 
basilica, the baths of Gargilius, large graves with several levels 
of tombs, and much debris of sculpture, which, however, is 
insufficient to enable us to say that this is the site of the temple 
of Tanit or Juno Caelestis. The quarter of Dermeche, near the 
sea, whose name recalls the Latin Thermis or Thermas, is re- 
markable for the imposing remains of the baths {thermae) of 
Antoninus. In one place called Douimes was the Ceramicus 
where excavation has discovered a graceful basilica, proto-Punic 
tombs, potters' ovens with numerous terra-cotta moulds which 
were abandoned after the siege in 146 B.C., and finally a Roman 
palace with superb marble statues. Farther on are huge reser- 
voirs of Borj-Jedid which are sufficiently well-preserved to be 
used again. 

Behind the small fort of Borj-Jedid is the plateau of the Odeum 
where the theatre and fine marble statues of the Roman period 
have been laid bare; beyond is the great Christian basilica of 
Damus-el-Karita (perhaps a corruption of Domus Caritatis); 
in the direction of Sidi-bu-Saiid is the platea nova, the huge stairway 
of which, like so many other Carthaginian buildings, has of late 
years been destroyed by the Arabs for use as building material; 
on the coast near St Monica is the necropolis of Rabs where 
Delattre dug up fine anthropoid sarcophagi of the Punic period. 

In the quarter of Megara (Magaria, mod. La Marsa) it would 
seem that there never were more than isolated buildings, villas 
in the midst of gardens. At Jebel Khaui (Cape Kamart) there 
is a great necropolis, the sepulchral chambers of which were 
long ago rifled by Arabs and Vandals. This cemetery had a 
Jewish quarter. 

We must mention finally the gigantic remains in the western 
plain of the Roman aqueduct which carried water from Jebel 
Zaghwan (Mons Zeugitanus) and Juggar (Zucchara) to the 
cisterns of La Malga. From "the nymphaeum of Zaghwan to 
Carthage this aqueduct is 61 Roman miles (about 56 English 
miles) long; in the plain of Manuba its arches are nearly 49 ft. 
high. 

Though several famous travellers visited and described the ruins 
of Carthage during the first thirty years of the 19th century, such as 
Major Humbert, Chateaubriand, Estrup, no scientific investigations 
took place till 1833 In that year Captain Falbe, Danish consul at 
Tunis, made a plan of the ruins so far as they were visible. In 1837 
there was formed in Paris, on the initiative of Dureau de la Malle, a 
Societe pour les fouilles de Carthage ; under the auspices of this body 
Falbe and Sir Grenville Temple undertook researches, and a little 
later Sir Thomas Read, English consul, following the example of the 
Genoese and the Pisans, carried away to England the mosaics, 
columns and statues of the baths of Antoninus. The Abbe Bour- 
gade, chaplain of the church of St Louis erected in 1841, collected 
together Punic stelae and other antiquities from the surrounding 
plain; these formed the nucleus of the magnificent museum subse- 
quently formed by Pere Delattre at the instigation of Cardinal 
Lavigerie. Between 1856 and 1858 Nathan Davis made excavations 
on the supposed site of the Odeum, and in 1859 Beule undertook 
his celebrated investigations on Byrsa. Among other explorers 
were A. Daux in 1866; von Maltzan in 1870; E. de Sainte-Marie in 
1874; Ch. d'Herisson in 1883; E. Babelon and S. Reinach in 1884; 
Vernaz in 1885 ; Gauckler in 1903. Of these the majority were sent 
officially by the French government. But their attempts were 
partial, disjointed and without any systematic plan; they were 
entirely superseded by the brilliant and persevering work of R. P. 
Delattre. The Musee Lavigerie, the result of his labours, contains 
a vast archaeological treasure, the interest of which is doubled by 
the fact that it stands in the very midst of the ancient site. Un- ' 
fortunately Delattre's work suffered too often from the absence of 
a cordial understanding with the directors of the antiquities depart- 
ment, La Blanchere and P. Gauckler, who, having themselves 
undertaken excavations, transported their finds to the Bardo 
museum, by the help of the public funds at their disposal. 

The main authority for the topography and the history of the 
excavations is Aug. Audollent's Carthage romaine (Paris, 1901). A 
topographical and archaeological map of the site was published 
under the direction of Colonel Dolot and with the assistance of 
Delattre and Gauckler by the Ministere de l'lnstruction Publique in 
1907. 

History. — The history of Carthage falls into four periods: (1) 
from the foundation to the beginning of the wars with the 
Sicilian Greeks in 550 B.C.; (2) from 550 to 265, the first year of 
the Punic Wars; (3) the Punic Wars to the fall of Carthage in 



428 



CARTHAGE 



146 B.C.; (4) the periods of Roman and Byzantine rule down to 
the destruction of the city by the Arabs in a.d. 6g8. 

(1) Foundation to 550 B.C. — From an extremely remote period 
Phoenician sailors had visited the African coast and had had 
commercial relations with the Libyan tribes who inhabited the 
district which forms the modern Tunis. In the 16th century B.C. 
the Sidonians already had trading stations on the coast; with 
the object of competing with the Tyrian colony at Utica they 
established a trading station calted Cambe or Caccabe on the very 
site afterwards occupied by Carthage. Near Borj-Jedid unmisr 
takable traces of this early settlement have been found, though 
nothing is known of its history. According to the classical tradi- 
tion Carthage was founded about 850 B.C. by Tyrian emigrants 
led by Elissa or Elissar, the daughter of the Tyrian kitig Muttonl., 
fleeing from the tyranny of her brother Pygmalion. According to 
the story, Elissa subsequently received the name of Dido, i.e. " the 
fugitive." Cambe welcomed the new arrivals, who bought from 
the mixed Libyo-Phoenician peoples of the neighbourhood, 
tributaries of the Libyan king Japon, a piece of land on which 
to build a "new city," Kart-hadshat, whence the Greek andlRornari 
forms of the name. The story goes that Dido, having obtained 
" as much land as could be contained by the skin of an ox," 
proceeded to cut the skin of a slain ox into strips narrow enough 
to extend round the whole of the hill, which afterwards from 
this episode gained the name of Byrsa. This last detail obviously 
arose from a mere play on words by which Bvpaa "hide," 
" skin," is confused with the Phoenician bosra, borsa, " citadel," 
" fortress." In memory of its Tyrian origin, Carthage paid an 
annual tribute to the temple of Melkarth at Tyr, and under the 
Roman empire coins were struck showing Dido fleeing in a galley;, 
or presiding over the building of Byrsa. On the Vatican Virgil 
there is a representation in miniature of workmert shaping 
marble blocks and columns for Dido's palace. 

The early history of Carthage is very obscure. It is only in 
the 6th century that real history begins. By this time the city 
is unquestionably a considerable capital with a domain divided 
into the three districts of Zeugitana (the environs of Carthage 
and the peninsula of C. Bon), Byzacium (the shore of the Syrtes), 
and the third comprising the emporia which stretch in the form 
of a crescent to the centre of the Great Syrtis as far as Cyrenaica. 
The first contest against the Greeks arose from a boundary 
question between the settlements of Carthage and those of the 
Greeks of Cyrene. The limits were eventually fixed and marked 
by a monument known as the "Altar of Philenae." The de- 
struction of Tyre by Nebuchadrezzar (q.v.), in the first half of 
the 6th century, enabled Carthage to take its place as mistress 
of the Mediterranean. The Phoenician colonies founded by 
Tyre and Sidon in Sicily and Spain, threatened by the Greeks, 
sought help from Carthage, and from this period dates the 
Punic 1 supremacy in the western Mediterranean. The Greek 
colonization of Sicily was checked, while Carthage established 
herself on all the Sicilian coast and the neighbouring islands as 
far as the Balearic Islands and the coast of Spaini The inevitable 
conflict between Greece and Carthage broke out about 550. 

(2) Wars with the Greeks. — In 550, the Carthaginians, led by the 
suffetes Malchus, conquered almost all Sicily and expelled the 
Greeks. In 536 they defeated the Phocaeans and the Massaliotes 
before Alalia on the Corsican coast. But Malchus, having failed 
' in Sardinia, was banished by the stern Carthaginian senate 
and swore to avenge himself. He laid siege to Carthage itself, 
and, after having sacrificed his son Carthalo to his lust for 
vengeance, entered the city as a victor. He ruled until he was 
put to death by the party which had supported him. Mago, 
son of Hanno, succeeded Malchus, as suffetes and general-in-chief . 
He was the true founder of the Carthaginian military power. 
He conquered Sardinia and the Balearic Islands, where he founded 
Port Mahon (Portus Magonis), and so increased the power of 
Carthage that he was able to force commercial treaties upon 
the Etruscans, and the Greeks of both Sicily and Italy. -The 
first agreement between Carthage and Rome was made in 509, 
\jne year after the expulsion of the Tarquins, in the consulship of 
1 i.e. " of the Poeni (Phoenicians)." !: < 



Junius Brutus and Marcus Horatius. The text is preserved by 
Polybius {Hist. iii. 22-23). It assigned Italy to the Romans and 
the African waters to Carthage, but left Sicily as a dangerous 
neutral zone. 

Mago was succeeded as commander-in-chief by his elder 
son, Hasdrubal (c. 500), who was thrice chosen suffetes;, he 
died in Sardinia about 485. His brother Hamilcar, having 
collected a fleet of 200 galleys for the conquest of Sicily, was 
defeated by the combined forces of Gelo of Syracuse and Theron 
of Agrigentum under the ; walls of Himera in 480, the year in 
which the Persian fleet wast defeated at Salamis (some say 
the two battles were simultaneous); it is said that 150,000 
Carthaginians were taken prisoners, The victory is celebrated 
by Pindar (Pyth.L). .'■';■•;. 

Thesetwo leaders of the powerful house of the Barcidae each left 
three sons. Those of Hasdrubal were HannibaL Hasdrubal and 
Sapho; those of Hamilcar, Himilco, Hanno and Gisco. All, 
under various titles, succeeded to the authority which it had 
already enjoyed.. About 460 Hanno ,9 passing beyond the 
Pillars of Hercules (Straits of Gibraltar), founded settlements 
along the West African coast in the modern Senegal and- Guinea, 
and even in Madeira and the Canary Islands. 

In .Sicily the war lasted for. a century with varying success. 
In 406 Hannibal and Himilco destroyed Agrigentum and 
threatened Gela, but the Carthaginians were forced back on 
their strc-ngholds in the south-west by Dionysius the Elder, 
Dionysius the Younger, Timoleon and Agathocles successively, 
whose cause was aided by a terrible plague and civil troubles 
in Carthage itself, A certain Hanno, unquestionably of the 
Barcide house, attempted to seize the supreme power, but 
his partisans were overwhelmed and he himself suffered the 
most cruel punishment. Profiting by these troubles, Timoleon 
defeated the Carthaginians at Crimissus in 340, and compelled 
them to sue for peace. This peace was not of long duration; 
Agathocles crossed to Africa and besieged Carthage, which was 
then, handicapped by the conspiracy of Bomilcar. Bomilcar 
was crucified, and Agathocles having been obliged to return to 
Sicily, his general Eumarcus was compelled to carry his army out 
of Africa, where it had maintained itself for three years (August 
31Q to October 307), After the death of Agathocles, the Car- 
thaginians re-established their supremacy in Sicily, and Mago 
even offered assistance to Rome against the invasion of Pyrrhus 
G?$o). Pyrrhus crossed to Sicily in 27 7 , and. was preparing to 
emulate Agathocles by sailing to Africa when he was compelled 
to return to Italy (see Sicily: History). 

Delivered from these daxigers and more arrogant than before, 
Carthage claimed the monopoly of Mediterranean waters, and 
seized every foreign ship found between Sardinia and the Pillars 
of Hercules. " At Carthage," said Polybius, " no one is blamed, 
however he may have acquired his wealth." The sailors took 
the utmost care to conceal the routes which they followed; there 
is a story that a Carthaginian ship, pursued by a Roman galley 
as far as the Atlantic, preferred to be driven out of her course 
and sunk rather than reveal the course to the Cassiterides, 
whither she was bound in quest of tin. The owner being saved, 
the senate made good his losses from the public treasury (Strabo, 
iii. 5- ")• 

(3) Wars with Rome?-- The first Punic War lasted twenty- 
seven years (268^241) ; it was fought by Carthage for the defence 
of her Sicilian possessions and her supremacy in the Tyrrhenian 
Sea. The Romans, victorious at the naval battles of Mylae 
(Melazzo) and Ecnomus (260 and 256), sent M. Atilius Regulus 
with an army to Africa. But the Carthaginians, by the help of 
the Spartan Xanthippus, were successful, and Regulus was 
captured. The fighting was then transferred to Sicily, where 
Hasdrubal was defeated at Panormus (250); subsequently the 
Romans failed before Lilybaeum and were defeated at Drepanum, 
but their victory at the Aegates Islands ended the war (241). 

2 The identification of this Hatlnb with the son of Hamilcar is 
conjectural; see Hann6. ■ 

'For the military side of these wars see Punic Wars ; Hannibal ; 
Hasdrubal. 



CARTHAGE 



4*9 



Carthage' now desired to disband her forces, but the- mercenaries 
claimed their arrears of pay, and on being refused revolted under 
Spendius and Matho, pillaged the suburbs oi Carthage and laid 
siege to the city itself. Only the genius of Hamikar Barca raised 
the siege; the mercenaries were caught in the defile of the Axey 
where they were cut down without mercy. This War, which all 
bat ruined Carthage, is known to the Roman historians; as the 
bellum itiexpiabik. ■; 

This peril averted, Carthage undertook the conquest of Spain. 
It was the wofk of Hamilcar, and lasted nine years up to the day 
of ' Hamilcar's death, sword in hand, in 228. His son-in-law, 
Hasdrubal Pulcher, built Carthagena in 227 and concluded with 
Rome a treaty by which the Ebro was adopted as the boundary 
of the Carthaginian sphere. On his death the soldiers chose for 
themselves as leader Hannibal, son of Hamilcar. At this period 
Carthage, with a : population of perhaps 1,000,000, was ill the 
enjoyment of extraordinary prosperity alike in its internal 
industries and in its foreign trade. The manufacture of woven 
goods, especially, was a flourishing industry; the Greek writer 
Polemo records a special treaty dealing with Carthaginian 
fabrics which were a recognized luxury throughout the ancient 
world. In Sicily, Italy and Greece the . Carthaginians sold 
especially black slaves, ivory, metals, precious stones and all 
the products of Central Africa, which came thence by caravan. 
In Spain they sought copper and silver, and it was by them that 
the modern mines of Huelva, as also those of Osca and Cartha- 
gena, were first exploited. The district round Carthage, with 
its amazing fertility, was the granary of the city, as it was later 
that of Rome. Mago had drawn up a treaty dealing with agri- 
culture and' rural economy generally, which was subsequently 
brought to Rome and translated into Latin by Decimus Silanus 
by order of the senate (J. P. Mahaffy, " The Work of Mago," in 
Hermathena, xv. pp. 29-35). 

In the midst of this prosperity the Second War with Rome 
broke out. At this time the genius of Carthage is incarnate in 
Hannibal; his campaigns in Spain, Italy and Africa have won 
the admiration of military experts of all periods. The war 
became inevitable in 219 when Hannibal captured Saguntum, 
which was in alliance with Rome. Passing 'thrbugh Spain and 
Gaul, Hannibal resolved to carry the war into the heart of Italy 
(218-217). The battles of the Ticinus, Trebia and Trasimene 
Lake are but stages in the wonderful progress which culminated 
in the battle of Cannae (August 2, 216). The road to Rome was 
now open to him, but he did not profit by his advantage, while 
the Carthaginian senate, to its shame, withheld all further 
support. His brother Hasdrubal with his relieving army was 
defeated at the Metaurus in 207; the Romans recovered their 
hold in Spain, and, seeing that Hannibal was unable to move in 
Italy, carried the war back to Africa. Hearing that Scipio had 
taken Utica (203) and defeated Hasdrubal and Syphax, king of 
Numidia, Hannibal returned from Italy, but With a hastily 
levied army was defeated at Zama (October 19; 202). The sub' 
sequent peace was disastrous to Carthage, which lost its fleet 
and all save its African possessions. 

After the Second War Carthage soon revived. The population 
is Said still to have numbered 700,000, and despite its humiliation, 
the city never ceased to inspire alarm at Rome. The Numidian 
ptirice Massinissa, rival of Syphax and a Roman protege, took 
advantage of a clause in the treaty of 202, which forbade Carthage 
to make war without the consent of the Roman senate, to extend 
his possessions at the expense of Carthage. In response to a 
protest from Carthage an embassy including M. Porcius Cato the 
Elder was sent to inquire into the matter, and Cato was so 
impressed with the city as a whole that on returning to Rome 
he never made a speech without concluding with the warning 
" Delenda est Carthago." 

At this time there were three political parties in Carthage: 
(1) that which upheld the Roman alliance, (2) that which advo- 
cated the Numidian alliance, and (3) the popular party. These 
three were led respectively by Hanno, Hannibal Passer, Has- 
drubal and Carthalo. The popular faction, which was turbulent 
and exasperated by the bad faith of the Romans, expelled the 



Numidian party and declared' war in 149 on Massinissa, who was 
victorious at Oroscope. Rome then intervened, determined 
finally to destroy her now enfeebled rival. War was declared on 
the pretext that Carthage had engaged in war with Massinissa 
without the sanction of Rome. The third Punic War lasted three 
years, and; after a heroic resistance the city fell in 146: The last 
champions of liberty entrenched themselves under Hasdrubal 
in the temple of Eshmun, the site of which is now occupied by 
the chapel of St Louis. The Roman troops were let loose to 
plunder and burn. The thick bed of cinders, blackened stones, 
broken glass, fragments of metal twisted by fire, half-calcined 
bones, which is found to-day at a depth of 13 to 16 ft. under the 
remains of Roman Carthage between Byrsa and the harbours, 
bears grim witness, in accord with the accounts of Polybius and 
Appian, to the terrible fate which overtook this part of the city. 
Before long a commission arrived from Rome to decide the fate 
of the province of Carthage. In the city itself, temples, houses 
and fortifications were levelled to the ground, the site was 
dedicated with solemn imprecations to the infernal gods, and all 
human habitation throughout the vast ruined area was expressly 
forbidden! 

Constitutional History. — The narrative must here be interrupted 
by an account of the political and religious development of Phoenician 
Carthage|. . Carthage was an aristocratic republic based on wealth 
rather than on birth. Indeed, the popular party, which included 
certain noble families such as the Barcidae, Was always powerful, 
and thus government by demagogues was not infrequent. So 
Aristotle, wrkingabout 330, emphasizes the importance of great 
wealth in Carthaginian politics. The government was in fact a 
plutocracy. The aristocratic , party was represented by the. two 
suffetes and the 'senate; the democratic by the popular assembly. 
The stiff etefe (Sofelim) presided in the senate and controlled the civil 
administration; the office was annual, but there was no limit to 
re-election. Hannibal was elected for twenty-two years. The 
senate, which, like that of Tyre, was composed of 300 members, 
exercised ultimate control over all public affairs, decided on peace 
and war, nominated the Commission of Ten, which was charged 
with aiding and controlling the suffetes. This commission was 
subsequently replaceo^ by a council of one hundred, called by the 
Greeks gerousia. . This tribunal, which maintained law and order 
and called the generals to account, gradually became a tyrannical 
inquisitiom Frequently it met at night in the Temple of Eshmun 
On Byrsa, in secret sessions described by Aristotle as ovaobnu ruv 

The popular assembly was composed, not of all. the citizens, but 
of the timuchi (Gr. ti/^, txav), i.e. those who possessed a certain 
property-qualification. The election of the suffetes had to be ratified 
by this assembly. The two bodies were almost always in opposition, 
and this was one of the chief causes of the ruin of Carthage. 

The army was recruited externally by senators who were sent to 
the great emporia or trade-centres, even to the most remote, to 
contract with local princes for men and officers. The payments, 
agreed upon in this' way, were frequently in arrears; hence the 
terrible revolts such as that of the " bellum inexpiabile."; It was 
not till the 3rd century that Carthage, in imitation of the kings of 
Syria and Egypt, began to make use of elephants in war. The 
elephant used was the African type {elephas capensis), which was 
smaller than the Asiatic (elephas indicus), though, with longer ears. 
In addition to the mercenaries, the army contained a bgion com- 
posed of young men belonging to the best families in the state; 
this force was important as a nursery of officers. 

Religion. — The religion of Carthage was that of the Phoenicians. 
Over an army of' minor deities (alonim and baalim) towered the 
trinity of great gods composed of Baal- Amnion or Moloch (identi- 
fied by the Romans with Cronus or .Saturn) ; Tanit, the virgin 
goddess of the heavens and the moon, the Phoenician Astarte, and 
known as Juno Caelestis in the Roman period; Eshmun, the pro- 
tecting deity and protector of the acropolis, generally identified 
with Aesculapius. There were also special cuits: of Iolaus or 
Tammuz- Adonis, whom the Romans identified to some extent with 
Mercury; of the god Patechus or Pygmaeus, a deformed and 
repulsive monster like the Egyptian Ptah, whose images were placed 
on the prows of ships to frighten the enemy ; and lastly of the Tyrian 
Melkarth, whose functions were analogous to those of Hercules. 
The statue of this god was carried to Rome after the siege of 146 
(Pliny, Nat. Hist, xxxvi. 12. 39). From inscriptions we know the 
names of other minor deities, which are perhaps only other names 
of the same gods, e.g. Rabbat Umma, " the great mother "; Baalat 
haedrat, " mistress of the sanctuary "; Ashtoreth (Astarte), Illat, 
Sakon, Tsaphon, Sid, Aris (? Ares). 

From the close of the 4th century B.C. the intimate relations 
between the Carthaginians and the Sicilian Greeks began to introduce 
Hellenic elements into this religion. In the forum of Carthage was a 
temple to Apollo containing a colossal statue, which was transported 



430 



CARTHAGE 



to Rome. The Carthaginians once at least sent offerings to Delphi, 
and Tanit approximated to some extent to Demeter; hence on the 
coins we find the head of Tanit or the Punic Astarte crowned with 
ears of corn, in imitation of the coins of the Greek Sicilian colonies. 
The symbol of Tanit is the crescent moon ; in her temple at Carthage 
was preserved a famous veil or peplus which was venerated as the 
city's palladium. On the innumerable votive stelae which have 
been unearthed, we find invocations to Tanit and Baal-Ammon, 
as two associate deities (Beol irapeSpoi). The usual formula in these 
inscriptions is, " To the great lady Tanit, the manifestation [reflex, 
face] of Baal (Tanit-Pene-Baal) and to our lord Baal-Ammon, 
the vow of Bomilcar, son of Mago, son of Bomilcar, because they 
have heard his prayer" (Corp. inscr. semit. vol. i. pp. 276 f. ; 
Audollent, Carth. Rom. p. 369). 

Baal-Ammon or Moloch, the great god of all Libya, is represented 
as an old man with ram's horns on his forehead ; the ram is frequently 
found with his statues. He appears also with a scythe in his hand 
(" falcem ferens senex pingitur," St Cyprian, De idol, vanit, 11). 
At Carthage children were sacrificed to him, and in his temple there 
was a colossal bronze statue in the arms of which were placed the 
children who were to be sacrificed (Diod. Sic. xx. 14; Justin xviii. 
6, xix. 1; Plut. De superstit. 13, De sera num. vindic. 6.). _ The 
children slipped one by one from the arms into a furnace amid the 
plaudits of fanatical worshippers. These sacrifices persisted even 
under Roman rule; Tertullian states that even in his time they 
took place in secret (Apolog. cix. ; cf. Delattre, " Inscript, de Carth.," 
in Bulletin epigraphique, iv. p. 317; Audollent, op. cit. p. 398). 

(4) Roman Period. — In 122 B.C., twenty-four years after the 
destruction of the city by Scipio Aemilianus, the Roman senate, 
on the proposal of Rubrius, decided to plant a Latin colony on 
the site. C. Gracchus and Fulvius Flaccus were entrusted 
with the foundation of the new city, which was christened 
Colonia Junonia, and placed under the protection of Juno 
Caelestis, the new name for the Punic Tanit. But its prosperity 
was obstructed both by unpropitious omens and by the very 
recollection of the ancient feud, and fifty years later Marius, 
proscribed by Sulla, found the ruins practically deserted. In 
the neighbourhood were the scattered remnants of the old Punic 
population, who, according to Athenaeus (Deipnosoph. v. 50), 
had actually had the assurance to send ambassadors to Mithra- 
dates the Great assuring him of their support against Rome. 
Ultimately M. Minucius Rufus passed a law abrogating that of 
122 and suppressing the Colonia Junonia. 

Julius Caesar, pursuing the lost supporters of Pompey, 
encamped on the ruins of the city, and there, according to 
tradition, had a dream which induced him to re-establish the 
abandoned colony. Returning to Rome, he despatched thither 
the poor citizens who were demanding land from him. Later on 
Augustus sent new colonists, and, henceforward, the machinery 
of administration was regularly centred there (Appian viii. 136; 
Dio Cass. lxxx. 1; Audollent, op. cit. p. 46). The proconsuls of 
the African province had hitherto lived at Utica; in 14-13 B.C. 
C. Sentius Saturninus transferred his headquarters to Carthage, 
which was henceforth known as Colonia Julia Carthago. Several 
inscriptions use this name, as also the bronze coins which bear 
the heads of Augustus and Tiberius, and were struck at first in 
the name of the suffetes, afterwards in that of duumviri. 

Pomponius Mela and Strabo already describe Carthage as 
among the greatest and most wealthy cities of the empire. 
Herodian puts it second to Rome, and such is the force of tradi- 
tion that the Roman citizens resident in Carthage boasted of its 
Punic past, and loved to recall its glory. Virgil in the Aeneid 
celebrated the misfortunes of Dido, whom the colonists ultimately 
identified with Tanit-Astarte; a public Dido-cult grew up, and 
the citizens even pretended to have discovered the very house 
from which she had watched the departure of Aeneas. The 
religious character of these legends, coupled with the city's 
resumption of its old role as mistress of Africa, and its inde- 
pendent spirit, reawakened the old distrust, and even up to the 
invasions of the Vandals the jealous rivalry of Rome forbade 
the reconstruction of the city walls. 

The revolt of L. Clodius Macer, legate of Numidia, in a.d. 68 
was warmly supported by Carthage, and one of the coins of this 
short-lived power bears the symbol of Carthage personified. 
At the moment of the accession of Vitellius, Piso, governor of 
the province of Africa, was in his turn proclaimed emperor at 
Carthage. A little later, under Antoninus Pius, we read of a fire 



which devastated the quarter of the forum; about the samo 
time, i.e. under Hadrian and Antoninus, there was built the 
famous Zaghwan aqueduct, which poured more than seven 
million gallons of water a day into the reservoirs of the Mapalia 
(La Malga); the cost of this gigantic work was defrayed by a 
special tax which pressed heavily on the inhabitants as late as 
the reign of Septimius Severus; allusions to it are made on the 
coin-types of this emperor (E. Babelon, Rivista italiana di 
numismatica, 1903, p. 157). 

In the early history of Christianity Carthage played an 
auspicious part, in virtue of the number of its disciples, the 
energy and learning of their leaders, the courage and eloquence 
of its teachers, the persecutions of which it was the scene, the 
number of its councils and the heresies of which it witnessed 
the birth, propagation or extinction (see Carthage, Synods of). 
The labours of Delattre have filled the St Louis museum at 
Carthage with memorials of the early Church. From the end 
of the 2nd century there was a bishop of Carthage; the first was 
Agrippinus, the second Optatus. At the head of the apologists, 
whom the persecutions inspired, stands Tertullian. In 202 or 
203, in the amphitheatre, where Cardinal Lavigerie erected a 
cross in commemoration, occurred the martyrdom of Perpetua 
and Felicitas. Tertullian was succeeded (248) by a no less 
famous bishop Cyprian. About this time the proconsul Gordian 
had himself proclaimed (239) emperor at Thysdrus (El Jem). 
Shortly afterwards Sabinianus, aspiring to the same dignity, 
was besieged by the procurator of Mauretania; the inhabitants 
gave him up and thus obtained a disgraceful pardon (R. Cagnat, 
L'armie romaine d'Afrique, p. 52; Audollent, op. cit. p. 73). 
Peace being restored, the persecution of the Christians was 
renewed by an edict of the emperor Decius (250). Cyprian 
escaped by hiding, and subsequently caused the heresy of 
Novatian to be condemned in the council of 251. In 257, in a 
new persecution under Valerian, Cyprian was beheaded by the 
proconsul Galerius Maximus. 

About 264 or 265 a certain Celsus proclaimed himself emperor 
at Carthage, but was quickly slain. Probus, like Hadrian and 
Severus, visited the city, and Maximian had new baths con- 
structed. Under Constantius Chlorus, Maxentius proclaimed 
himself emperor in Africa; this caused great excitement in 
Carthage, and the garrison, which was hostile to the pre- 
tender, compelled L. Domitius Alexander to assume the purple. 
Domitius was, however, captured by Maxentius and strangled 
at Carthage. About 311 there arose the famous Donatist 
heresy, supported by 270 African bishops (see Donatists and 
Constantine I.). At the synod of Carthage in 411 this heresy 
was condemned owing to the eloquence of Augustine. Two 
years later the Carthaginian sectaries even ventured upon a 
political rebellion under the leadership of Heraclianus, who 
proclaimed himself emperor and actually dared to make a descent 
on Italy itself, leaving his son-in-law Sabinus in command at 
Carthage. Being defeated he fled precipitately to Carthage, 
where he was put to death (413). Donatism was followed by 
Pelagianism (see Pelagius), also of Carthaginian origin, and 
these religious troubles were not settled when in May 429 the 
Vandals, on the appeal of Count Boniface, governor of Africa, 
crossed the Straits of Gibraltar and invaded Mauretania. Gen- 
seric, who was hailed with one accord by all the different sectaries 
as the champion of their several views, appeared in 439 before 
the walls of Carthage, which had been hastily rebuilt after five 
hundred years by the order of Theodosius II. The priest 
Salvianus has left a splendid picture of Carthage at this moment 
(de Gubern. vii. 16). It had 500,000 inhabitants, and 22 basilicas 
(several of which have been discovered by Delattre). Genseric 
entered almost without a blow (October 19, 439), and gave 
over the city to plunder before departing for his attack on Italy. 
From this time Carthage became, in the hands of the Vandals, 
a mere pirate stronghold, such as Tunis and Algiers were sub- 
sequently to become. Once, in 470, the fleet of the Eastern 
empire under the orders of Basiliscus appeared in the Bay of 
Carthage, but Genseric succeeded in setting fire to the attacking 
ships and from Byrsa watched their entire annihilation. 



CARTHAGE— CARTHAGE, SYNODS OF 



43i 



Byzantine Rule. — Under Genseric's successors (see Vandals), 
Carthage was still the scene of many displays of savage brutality, 
though Thrasamund built new baths and a basilica. Ultimately 
Gelimer, the last Vandal king, was defeated at Ad Decimum by 
the Byzantine army under Belisarius, who entered Carthage 
unopposed (September 14, 533). The restored city now received 
the name of Colonia Justiniana Carthago; Belisarius rebuilt the 
walls and entrusted the government to Solomon. New basilicas 
and other monuments were erected, and Byzantine Carthage re- 
covered for a century the prosperity of the Roman city. 

At length the Arabs, having conquered Cyrenaica and Tri- 
politana (647), and founded Kairawan (670), arrived before 
Carthage. In 697 Hasan ibn en-Noman, the Gassanid governor 
of Egypt, captured the city almost without resistance. But 
the garrison left by the Arabs was quite unable to defend itself 
against the patrician Joannes, who retook the city and hastily 
put it in a state of defence. Hasan returned furious with anger, 
defeated the Byzantines again, and decreed the entire destruction 
of the city. His orders were fulfilled; and in 698 Carthage 
finally disappears from history. Once again only does the name 
appear in the middle ages, when the French king, Louis IX., at 
the head of the eighth crusade, disembarked there on the 17th of 
July 1270. He died, however, of the plague on the 25thof August 
without having recovered northern Africa for civilization. 

Bibliography. — I. Ancient. — (a) Polybius, Diodorus Siculus, 
Livy, Appian, Justin, Strabo; (i) for the Christian period, Tertullian, 
Cyprian, Augustine; (c) for the Byzantine and Vandal, Procopius 
and Victor de Vita. All the references to the topography of Roman 
and Byzantine Carthage are collected in Audollent, Carthage romaine 
(1901), pp. 775-825, which also contains a full list of modern works 
(pp. 13-32, and p. 835). 

II. Modern. — The most important are: Falbe, Recherches sur 
V emplacement de Carthage (Paris, 1833); Dureau de la Malle, Topo- 
graphie de Carthage (Paris, 1835); Nathan Davis, Carthage and her 
Remains (London, 1861); Beule, Fouilles d. Carthage (Paris, 1861); 
Victor Guerin, Voyage archeologique dans la regence de Tunis (Paris, 
1862); E. de Sainte Marie, Mission d, Carthage (Paris, 1884); C. 
Tissot, Geographie comparee de la province romaine d'Afrique (Paris, 
1884-1888, 2 vols.); E. Babelon, Carthage (Paris, 1896); Otto 
Meltzer, Geschichte der Karthager (Berlin, 1879-1896, 2 vols.); Paul 
Monceaux, Les Africains, etude sur la litterature latine de I'Afrique; 
Les Paiens (Paris, 1898) ; Histoire litteraire de I'Afrique chretienne 
(Paris, 1901-1909, 3 vols.) ; Pallu de Lessert, Vicaires et comtes 
d'Afrique (Paris, 1892); Pastes des provinces africaines sous la 
domination romaine (Paris, 1 896-1901, 2 vols.) ; R. Cagnat, L'Armee 
romaine d'Afrique (Paris, 1892); C. Diehl, L'Afrique byzantine, 
histoire de la domination byzantine en Afrique (Paris, 1896); Aug. 
Audollent, Carthage romaine (Paris, 1901); A. J. Church and A. 
Gilman, Carthage in " Story of the Nations " series (1886). For the 
numerous publications of PereDelattre scattered in various periodicals 
see Etude sur les diver ses publications du R. P. Delattre, by Marquis 
dAnselme de Puisaye (Paris, 1895); Miss Mabel Moore's Carthage 
of the Phoenicians (London, 1905) contains a useful summary of 
Delattre's excavations. See further for the discussion of particular 
points: " Chronique archeologique africaine," published by Steph. 
Gsell, in the Revue africaine of Algiers, 1893, and following years; 
and in the Melanges d' archeologie et d'histoire de I'&ole francaise de 
Rome, vol. xv. (1895 and following years); Dr Carton, " Chronique 
archeologique nord-africaine," in the Revue tunisienne. (E. B.*) 

CARTHAGE, a city and the county-seat of Jasper county, 
Missouri, U.S.A., on the Spring river, about 950 ft. above sea- 
level, and about 150 m. S. by E. of Kansas City. Pop. (1890) 
7981; (1900) 9416, of whom 539 were negroes; (1910 census) 
9483. It is served by the St Louis & San Francisco, the 
Missouri Pacific, and the St Louis, Iron Mountain & Southern 
railways, and is connected with Webb City and Joplin, Mo., 
and Galena, Kan., by the electric line of the Southwest Missouri 
railway. The town is built on high ground underlain by solid 
limestone, and has much natural and architectural beauty. It 
is the seat of the Carthage Collegiate Institute (Presbyterian). 
A Chautauqua assembly and a county fair are held annually. 
In the vicinity there are valuable lead, zinc and coal mines, and 
quarries of Carthage "marble," with which the county court 
house is built. Carthage is a jobbing centre for a fruit and grain 
producing region; live-stock (especially harness horses) is raised 
in the vicinity; and among the city's manufactures are lime, 
flour, canned fruits, furniture, bed springs and mattresses, 
mining and quarrying machinery, ploughs and woollen goods. 



In 1905 the factory products were valuedatfi, 179,661. Natural 
gas for domestic use and for factories is piped from the Kansas 
gas fields. The municipality owns and operates the electric- 
lighting plant. Carthage, founded in 1833, was laid out as a 
town and became the county-seat in 1842, was incorporated 
as a town in 1868, was chartered as a city in 1873, and in 1890 
became a city of the third class under the general (state) law. 
On the 5th of July 1861 about 3500 Confederates under General 
James E. Rains and M. M. Parsons, accompanied by Governor 
Claiborne Fox Jackson (1807-1862), and 1500 Union troops 
under Colonel Franz Sigel, were engaged about 7 m. north of the 
city in an indecisive skirmish which has been named the battle 
of Carthage. . 

CARTHAGE, SYNODS OF. During the 3rd, 4th, and 5th 
centuries the town of Carthage (q.v.) in Africa served as the 
meeting-place of a large number of church synods, of which, 
however, only the most important can be treated here. 

1. In May 251 a synod, assembled under the presidency of 
Cyprian to consider the treatment of the lapsi (those who had 
fallen away from the faith during persecution), excommunicated 
Felicissimus and five other Novatian bishops (Rigorists), and 
declared that the lapsi should be dealt with, not with indiscrim- 
inate severity, but according to the degree of individual guilt. 
These decisions were confirmed by a synod of Rome in the 
autumn of the same year. Other Carthaginian synods concern- 
ing the lapsi were held in 252 and 254. 

; See Hefele, 2nd ed., i. pp. in sqq. (English translation, i. pp. 93 
sqq.); Mansi, i. pp. 863 sqq., 905 sqq.; Hardouin, i. pp. 133 sqq!, 
147 sqq.; Cyprian, Epp. 52, 54, 55, 68. 

2. Two synods, in 255 and 256, held under Cyprian, pro- 
nounced against the validity of heretical baptism, thus taking 
direct issue with Stephen, bishop of Rome, who promptly 
repudiated them, and separated himself from the African 
Church. A third synod, September 256, unanimously reaffirmed 
the position of the other two. Stephen 's pretensions to authority 
as " bishop of bishops " were sharply resented, and for some 
time the relations of the Roman and African Churches were 
severely strained. 

See Hefele, 2nd ed., i. pp. 117-119 (English translation, i. pp. 99 
sqq.); Mansi, i. pp. 921 sqq., 951 sqq.; Hardouin, i. pp. 153 sqq.; 
Cyprian, Epp. 69-75. 

3. The Donatist schism (see Donatists) occasioned a number 
of important synods. About 348 a synod of Catholic bishops, 
who had met to record their gratitude for the effective official re- 
pression of the " Circumcelliones " (Donatist terrorists), declared 
against the rebaptism of any one who had been baptized in the 
name of the Trinity, and' adopted twelve canons of clerical 
discipline. 

See Hefele, 2nd. ed., i. pp. 632-633 (English translation, ii. pp. 
184-186) ; Mansi, iii. pp. 143 sqq. ; Hardouin, i. pp. 683 sqq. 

4. The " Conference of Carthage " (see Donatists), held by 
imperial command in 41 1 with a view to terminating the Donatist 
schism, while not strictly a synod, was nevertheless one of the 
most important assemblies in the history of the African church, 
and, indeed of the whole Christian church. 

See Hefele, 2nd ed., ii. pp. 103-104 (English translation, ii. pp. 
445-446) ; Mansi, iv. pp. 7-283 ; Hardouin, i. pp. 1043-1190. 

5. On the 1st of May 418 a great synod (" A Council of Africa," 
St Augustine calls it), which assembled under the presidency of 
Aurelius, bishop of Carthage, to take action concerning the 
errors of Caelestius, a disciple of Pe'agius (q.v.), denounced the 
Pelagian doctrines of human nature, original sin, grace and 
perfectibility, and fully approved the contraryviews of Augustine. 
Prompted by the reinstatement by the bishop of Rome of a 
deposed African priest, the synod enacted that " whoever 
appeals to a court on the other side of the sea (meaning Rome) 
may not again be received into communion by any one in Africa " 
(canon 17). 

See Hefele, 2nd ed., ii. pp. 116 sqq. (English translation, ii. pp. 
458 sqq.); Mansi, iii. pp. 810 sqq., iv. pp. 377 sqq., 451 sqq.; 
Hardouin, i. pp. 926 sqq. 

6. The question of appeals to Rome occasioned two synods, 
one in 419, the other in 424. The latter addressed a letter to 



433 



;( 



CARTHUSIANS 



the. bishop of Rome, Gelestine, protesting against his claim to 
appellate jurisdiction, and urgently requesting the immediate 
recall of his legate, and advising him to send no more judges to 
Africa. ' : 

See Hefele, 2nd ed., ii. pp. 120 sqq., 137 sqq, (English translation, 
ii. pp.462 sqq., 480 sqq.) ; Mansi, iii. pp. 835 sqq., iv. pp, 401 sqq., 
477 sqq- J Hardouin, i. pp. 943 sqq., 1241 sqq. (T. F. C.) 

CARTHUSIANS, an order of monks founded by St Bruno (#.?.■); 
In 1084 Bruno and his six companions presented themselvep 
before the bishop of Grenoble and explained to him their desire 
to lead an ascetical life in a solitary place. He 'pointed out, to 
them a desolate spot named Chartreuse, on the mountains near 
Grenoble, rocky and precipitous, and snow-covered during a 
great portion of the year, and told them they might there carry 
out their design. They built themselves three huts and an 
oratory, and gave themselves up to a life of prayer and silence 
and extreme austerity. After a few years Bruno was summoned 
to Rome by Urban II., as an adviser in the government of the 
Church, c. 1090; but after a year or, so he obtained permission 
to withdraw from Rome, and was able to found in the forests of 
Calabria near Squillace a second, and later on a third and a fourth 
monastery, on the same lines as the Chartreuse. On one of these 
south Italian foundations Bruno died in noi. On leaving the 
Chartreuse he had appointed a successor as superior, and the 
institute steadily took more settled shape and further develop- 
ment. Peter the Venerable, abbot of Cluny, writing about 
forty years later, speaks thus of the mode of life of the earliest 
Carthusians: — 

" Warned by the negligence and lukewarmness of many of the 
older monks, they adopted for themselves and for their followers 
greater precaution against the artifices of the Evil One. As 
remedy against pride and vain-glory they chose a dress more poor 
and contemptible than that of any other religious body ; so that it 
is horrible to look on these garments, so short, scanty, coarse and 
dirty are they. In order to cut up avarice by the toots, they en- 
closed around their cells a certain quantity of land, more or less, 
according to the fertility of the district ; and they would not accept 
a foot of land beyond that limit if you were to offer them the whole 
world. For the same motive they limit the quantity of their cattle, 
oxen, asses, sheep and goats. And in order that they might have 
no motive for augmenting their possessions, either of land or animals, 
they ordained that in every one of their monasteries there should 
be no more than twelve monks, with their prior 1 the thirteenth, 
eighteen lay brothers and a few paid servants. , To, mortify the 
flesh they always wear hair shirts of the severest kind, and their 
fasting is wellnigh continuous. They always eat bread of unbolted 
meal, and take so much water with thefr wine that it has hardly 
any flavour of wine left. They never eat meat, whether in health 
or ill. They never buy fish, but they accept it if it is given to them 
for charity. They may eat cheese and eggs only on Sundays and 
Thursdays. On Tuesdays and Saturdays they eat cooked vegetables. 
On Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays they take only bread and 
water. They eat once a day only, save during the octaves of 
Christmas, Easter, Pentecost, Epiphany and other solemnities. 
They live in separate little houses like the ancient m.oijks of Egypt, 
and they occupy themselves continually with reading, prayer and 
the labour of their hands, especially the writing of books; Thgy i 
recite the prayers for minor canonical hours in their own dwellings, 
when warned by the bell of the church; but they all .assemble in 
church for matins and vespers. On feast days they eat twice, and 
sing all the offices in the church, and eat in the refectory. They 
do not say mass save on festivals and Sundays. They boil the 
vegetables served out t<» them in their own dwellings, and never 
drink wine save with their food." (Migne, Patrol. Lat. clxxxjx.,943.) 

In its broad outlines this description of primitive Carthusian 
life has remained true, even to the present day: the regulations 
as to food are not quite so stringent, and the habit is now an 
ordinary religious habit of white serge. It was not until n 70 
that the Carthusians were formally; constituted a separate 
religious order by papal act. Owing to its very nature, the 
institute never had any great expansion: at the middle of the 
•13th century there were some 50 Charterhouses; at the beginning 
of the 18th there were 17c, 75 being iri. France. 

There was no written rule before 1130, when Guigo, the 
fifth prior of the Grande Chartreuse, reduced to writing the 
body of customs that had been the basis of Carthusian life 
(Migne, Patrol. Lat. cliii. 631); enlargements and modifications 
of this code were made in 1259, 1367, 1509 and 1681: this last 
form of the statutes is the present Carthusian rule. 



The life is very nearly eremitical: except on Sundays and 
feasts, the Carthusians meet only three times a day in the 
church 1 — for the Midnight Office, for Mass and for Vespers; 
once a week, on Sundays (and feasts) they have their meal in 
the refectory, and once a week they have recreation together 
and a walk outside enclosure. All the rest of their time is passed 
iri solitude in their hermitages, which are built quite separate 
from one another. Each hermitage is a house, containing 
living-room; bedroom and oratory, workshop and store-room, 
and has a small garden attached. The monks are supplied with 
such tools as they wish to employ in workshop and garden, and 
with such books as they need from the library. The Carthusian 
goes to bed every evening at 7 and is called about n, when 
he says in his private oratory the Officium B. Mariae Virginis. 
Towards midnight all repair to the church for Matins and Lauds, 
which are celebrated with extraordinary solemnity and prolixity, 
so as to last from 2 to 3 hours, according to the office. They 
then return to bed until 5, when they again go to the church for 
the daily High Mass, still celebrated according to the phase of 
liturgical and ritual development of the nth century. The 
private Masses are then said, and the monks betake themselves 
to work or study. At 10 in summer, n in winter, 12 on feast 
days, they have their dinner, alone except on Sundays and feasts; 
the dinner is supplied from the common kitchen through a small 
window. On many days of the year there is but one meal; 
meat is never eaten, even in sickness — this has always been an 
absolute rule among the Carthusians. In the afternoon they 
again assemble in the church for Vespers; the lesser portions 
of the canonical office, as well as the Office of the Blessed Virgin 
and the Office of the Dead, are said privately in the oratories.; 

.This manner of life has been kept up almost without variation 
for eight centuries: among the Carthusians there have never 
b^en any, of those revivals and reforms that are so striking a 
feature in the history of other orders — " never reformed, because 
never deformed." The Carthusians have always lived thus 
wholly cut off from the outer world, each one in almost entire 
isolation. They introduced and have kept up in western 
Europe a life resembling that of the early Egyptian monks, 
as under St Anthony's guidance monasticism passed from the 
utter individualism of the first hermits to the half eremitical, 
half cenobitical life of the Lauras (see Monasticism). Owing 
to certain resemblances in external matters to the Benedictine 
rule and practice, the Carthusians have sometimes been regarded 
as one of the offshoots from the Benedictines; but this view is 
not tenable, the whole Carthusian conception, idea and spirit 
being quite different from the Benedictine. 

The superiors of the Charterhouses are priors, not abbots, 
and the prior of the Grande Chartreuse is the superior general 
of the order. A general chapter of the priors is held annually 
at the Grande Chartreuse. The Carthusians have always 
flourished most in France, but they had houses all over western 
Europe; some of the Italian Certose, as those at Pa via, Florence 
and Naples, are renowned for their wonderful beauty. 

The first English Charterhouse was established in 11 78 at 
Witham by Selwood Forest, and at the Dissolution there were 
nine, the most celebrated being those at Sheen in Surrey and at 
Smithfield in London (for list see Catholic Dictionary, art. " Car. 
thusians"). The Carthusians were the only order that made 
any corporate resistance to the ecclesiastical policy of Henry 
VnL The community of the London Charterhouse stood firm, 
and the prior and several of the monks were put to death in 
1535 under circumstances of barbarous cruelty. In Mary's 
reign a community was reassembled at Sheen, and on het 
death it emigrated, fifteen in number, to Flanders, and finally 
settled in Nieuport; it maintained itself as an English community 
for a considerable time, but gradually dwindled, and the last ol 
the old English Carthusian stock died in 183 1. There is now one 
Charterhouse in England established at Parkminster in Sussex 
in 1883; the community numbers so choir-monks, but it is 
almost wholly made up of foreigners, including many of those 
recently expelled from France. 

At the French Revolution the monks were driven from the 



CARTIER^ SIR G. E^r-GARTIER, J. 



433 



Grande Chartreuse, but they returned in 1816; they were again 
driven out under the Association Laws of 1901, and the commun- 
ity of the Grande Chartreuse is now settled in an old Certosa 
near Lucca. Of late years the community at the Grande 
Chartreuse had consisted of some 40 choir-monks and 20 lay 
brothers. Before the recent expulsions from France there were 
in all some 20 Charterhouses. 

There have been since the middle of the 13th. century a very 
few convents of Carthusian nuns, not more than ten; in recent 
times there have been but two or three, one situated. a few miles 
from the Grande Chartreuse. The rule resembles that of the 
monks, but the isolation, solitude and silence are much less 
stringent. The habit of the Carthusians, both monks and nuns,, 
is white. ■ • ': ' 

A word may be added as to the famous liqueur., known as 
Chartreuse, made by the monks. At the Revolution the property 
of the Carthusians was confiscated, and on their restoration they 
recovered only the barren desert in which the monastery stood, 
and for it they had to pay rent. Thus they were for some years 
in want even of the needful means of subsistence. Then < the 
liqueur was invented as a means of supplying the wants of the 
community; it became a great commercial success and produces 
a large yearly income. This income the monks have not spent 
on themselves, nor does it accumulate. _ The first charge is the 
maintenance of the Grande Chartreuse and the other Charter- 
houses, and out of it have been built and established the new 
monasteries of the order, as at Diisseldorf, Parkminster and 
elsewhere; but by far the largest portion has been' spent; on 
religious and charitable purposes in France and all over the world, 
— churches, schools, hospitals, almshouses, foreign missions. 
One thing is certain: the profits made no difference at all to 
the secluded and austere life of the monks of the Grande 
Chartreuse. 

Authorities. — The most comprehensive historical work on the 
Carthusian order is B. Troinby, Storia del patriarca S. Brunone-e 
del suo ordine (10 vols., 1773). References to other histories, old 
and new, will be found in Max Heimbucher, Orden u. Kongregation'en 
(1896), i. § 36; Wetzer und Welte, Kirchenlexicon (ed. 2), art. 
" -Karthauserorden "; Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklopddie (ed. 3), art, 
" Karthauser." For the English Carthusians, see E. Margaret 
Thompson, Somerset Carthusians (1895), and Dom L. Hendriks, 
London Charterhouse (1889). The best study on St Bruno and the 
foundation of the order is Hermann Lobbel, " Dei* Stifter des 
Kafthauser-Ordens," 1899 (vol. v. No. I of Kirchengeschichtlicke 
Studien, Miinster) ; and the best account of the actual life is by Algar 
Thorold (Dublin Review, April 1892), who spent some months in the 
noviciate at the Grande Chartreuse. A little tract (anonymous) 
translated from French, The Carthusians, 1902 (Orphans Press, 
Buckley Hall, Rochdale), gives precise infdrmation on the history, 
spirit and life of the Carthusians. '-(E, C. B.)' . 

CARTIER, SIR GEORGES ETIENNE, Bart. (1-814-1873), 
Canadian statesman, was born in the province of Quebec on the 
6th of September 1814. Called to the bar in 1835, he soon 
gained a large practice. He took part in the rebellion of 1837, 
and was forced for a time to fly the country. In 1848 he was 
elected to the Canadian parliament. His youthful ebullition 
of 1837 was soon repented of, and he became a loyal subject of 
the British crown. So greatly had he changed that in 1854 
he became a leading member of the reconstructed Liberal- 
Conservative party. In 1855 he was appointed provincial 
secretary, and in 1857 attorney-general for Lower Canada. 
From 1858 to 1862 he and Sir John Macdonald were joint prime 
ministers of Canada, and their alliance lasted till the death of 
Cartier. He took the chief part in promoting many useful 
measures, such as the abolition of seigneurial tenure in Lower 
Canada (see Quebec), and the codification of the civil law of 
that province (1857-1864). Above all he favoured the con- 
struction of railways, and to his energy and fearless; optimism 
are largely due the eventual success of the Grand Trunk railway, 
and the resolve to construct the Canadian Pacific. In the face 
of great opposition, he carried his native province into federation 
(1864-1867), which would have been impossible without his aid. 
In the first cabinet of Sir John Macdonald he sat as minister of 
militia and defence, and carried in 1868 an important act estab- 
lishing the land forces of Canada on a sound basis. Though a 



devout Catholic, he became involved in a political quarrel with 
his church, and was defeated by clerical influence at the general 
election of 1872. Another seat was found for him, but his health 
failed and he died on the 20th of May 1873. 

The Life, by Alfred O. De Celles (Toronto, 1904), may be supple- 
mented by the sketch in Dent's Canadian Portrait Gallery (Toronto, 
1880). , . . . . (W. L. G.) 

CARTIER, JACQUES (1491-1557), French navigator, dis- 
coverer of the Canadian river St Lawrence, was born at St Malo 
in Brittany. Of his early life nothing is known. On the suppres- 
sion by Admiral Chabot of the trade to Brazil, an expedition 
consisting of two ships and sixty-one men was despatched from 
St Malo under Cartier on the 20th of April 1 534, to look for a 
north-west passage, to the East. Cartier reached Newfoundland 
on /the ioth of May, and at once entered the strait of Belle Isle) 
then knowtl to the fishermen as the bay of Castles. While the 
ships renewed their supply of wood and water in Belles Amours 
harbour on the north side of the strait, the long-boats discovered 
that the coast farther west was barren, rocky and uninviting. 
In view of this Cartier set sail on Monday, the 15th of June, for 
the south side of the, strait, by following which he was led down 
almost the whole west coast of Newfoundland. Off St George's 
Bay a storm drove the ships outinto the gulf, ;but on resuming 
his course Cartier fell in with the Bird Rocks. The island south 
of these he named Brion Island, after Chabot. Cartier mistook 
our, Magdalen and Prince Edward Islands for the main shore on 
the south side of this inland sea. Following the coast of New 
Brunswick northward he was greatly disappointed to discover 
Chaleur Bay was not a strait. During a ten days' stay in Gaspe 
Harbour Cartier made friends with' a tribe of Huron-Iroquois 
Indians from Quebec, two of whom he carried off with him. A 
mirage deceived him into thinking the passage up the river south 
of Anticosti was a bay; whereupon he proceeded to coast the 
southern, eastern and northern shores of Anticosti. On dis- 
covering the passage between this island and the Quebec shore 
a council was held, at which it was decided to postpone the 
exploration of this strait until the following year. Heading 
eastward along the Quebec shore, Cartier soon regained the Strait 
of Belle Isle and, entering the Atlantic on the 15th of August, 
reached St Malo in safety on the 5th of September. 

Cartier set sail again from St Malo with three vessels on the 
16th of May 1536, and passing through the strait of Belle Isle 
anchored on the 9th of August in Pillage Bay, opposite Anticosti. 
The next day he named this the bay of St Lawrence. In course 
of time the name spread to the gulf and finally to the river. 
Proceeding through the passage north of Anticosti, Cartier 
anchored on the 1st of September at the mouth of the Saguenay, 
whichVthe two Indians who had passed the winter in France 
informed him was the name of a kingdom " rich and wealthy 
in precious stones." Again on reaching the island of Orleans, 
so named after the third son of Francis L, they told Cartier he 
was now in the kingdom of Canada, in reality the Huron-Iroquois 
word lor village. Leaving his two larger vessels in the St Charles, 
which there enters the St Lawrence, Cartier set off westward 
with the bark and the long-boats. The former grounded in Lake 
St Peter, buti in the latter he reached, on the 2nd of October, 
the Huron-Iroquois village of Hochelaga on the site of the city 
of Montreal., Further progress was checked by the Lachine 
Rapid. From the top of Mount Royal, a name still in use, 
Cartier beheld the St Lawrence and the Ottawa stretching away 
to the west. On his return to the St Charles, where during the 
winter twenty-five men died of scurvy, Cartier sought further. 
information about the rich country called Saguenay, which he 
was informed could be reached more easily by way of the 
Ottawa. In order to give Francis I. authentic information of 
this northern Mexico, Cartier seized the chief and eleven of the 
headmen of the village and carried them off to France. This 
time he passed south of Anticosti and, entering the Atlantic 
through Cabot Strait, reached St Malo on the 16th of July 

1537- • '■ ' 

Francis I. was, unable to do anything further until the spring 
of 1 541, when Carrier set sail with five vessels and lookup 



434 



CARTILAGE— CARTOON 



his quarters at Cap Rouge, 9 m. above Quebec. A soldier, the 
seigneur de Roberval, had been chosen to lead the men to the 
conquest of Saguenay; but when he did not arrive, Cartier made 
a fresh examination of the rapid of Lachine, preparatory to 
sending the men up the river Ottawa. Roberval at length set 
sail in April 1542, but on reaching St John's, Newfoundland, met 
Cartier on his way back to France. In the summer of 1543, 
Cartier was sent out to bring home Roberval, whose attempt to 
make his way up the Ottawa to this mythical Saguenay had 
proved futile. From 1544 until his death at St Malo, on the 1st 
of September 1557, Cartier appears to have done little else than 
give technical advice in nautical matters and act as Portuguese 
interpreter. 

A critical edition of Carrier's Brief Recit de la navigation faicte is 
isles de Canada (1545), from the MSS., has been published by the 
university of Toronto. The best English version is that by James 
Phinney Baxter, published at Portland, Maine, in 1906. (H. P. B.) 

CARTILAGE (Lat. cartilaga, gristle), the firm elastic and gristly 
connective tissue in vertebrates. (See Connective Tissues 
and Joints.) 

CARTOON (Ital. cartone, pasteboard), a term used in pictorial 
art in two senses. (1) In painting, a cartoon is used as a model 
for a large picture in fresco, oil or tapestry, or for statuary. 
It was also formerly employed in glass and mosaic work. When 
cartoons are used in fresco-painting, the back of the design is 
covered with black-lead or other colouring matter; and, this 
side of the picture being applied to the wall, the artist passes over 
the lines of the design with a point, and thus obtains an impression. 
According to another method the outlines of the figures are 
pricked with a needle, and the cartoon, being placed against the 
wall, is " pounced," i.e. a bag of black colouring-matter is drawn 
over the perforations, and the outlines are thus transferred to the 
wall. In fresco-painting, the portions of the cartoon containing 
figures were formerly cut out and fixed (generally in successive 
sections) upon the moist plaster. Their contour was then traced 
with a pointed instrument, and the outlines appeared lightly 
incised upon the plaster after the portion of the cartoon was 
withdrawn. In the manufacture of tapestries upon which it 
is wished to give a representation of the figures of cartoons, these 
figures are sometimes cut out, and laid behind or under the woof, 
to guide the queries of the artist. In this case the cartoons
are coloured. 

Cartoons have been executed by some of the most distinguished 
masters; the greatest extant performances in this line of art 
are those of Raphael. They are seven in number, coloured in 
distemper; and at present they adorn the Victoria and 
Albert Museum, in South Kensington, having been removed 
thither from their former home, the palace of Hampton Court. 
With respect to their merits, they count among the best of 
Raphael's productions; Lanzi even pronounces them to be in 
beauty superior to anything else the world has ever seen. Not that 
they all present features of perfect loveliness, and limbs of 
faultless symmetry, — this is far from being the case; but in 
harmony of design, in the universal adaptation of means to one 
great end, and in the grasp of soul which they display, they stand 
among the foremost works of the designing art. The history of 
these cartoons is curious. Leo X. employed Raphael in design- 
ing (in 1515-1516) a series of Scriptural subjects, which were 
first to be finished in cartoons, and then to be imitated in tapestry 
by Flemish artists, and used for the decoration of the Sistine 
Chapel. Two principal sets of tapestries were accordingly 
executed at Arras in Flanders; but it is supposed that neither 
Leo nor Raphael lived to see them. The set which went to Rome 
was twice carried away by invaders, first in 1 527 and afterwards in 
1798. In the first instance they were restored in a perfect state; 
but after their return in 1814 one was wanting — the cupidity of 
a Genoese having induced him to destroy it for the sake of 
the precious metal which it contained. Authorities differ as 
to the original number of cartoons, but there appear to have 
been twenty-five, — some by Raphael himself, assisted by Gian- 
francesco Penni, others by the surviving pupils of Raphael. 
The cartoons after which the tapestries were woven were not, 



it would seem, restored to Rome, but remained as lumber 
about the manufactory in Arras till after the revolution of the 
Low Countries, when seven of them which had escaped destruc- 
tion were purchased by Charles I., on the recommendation of 
Rubens. They were found much injured, " holes being pricked 
in them for the weavers to pounce the outlines, and in other parts 
they were almost cut through by tracing." It has never been 
ascertained what became of the other cartoons. Three tapestries, 
the cartoons of which by Raphael no longer exist, are in the 
Vatican,— representing the stoning of St Stephen, the conversion 
of St Paul, and St Paul in prison at Philippi. 

Besides the cartoons of Raphael, two, to which an extra- 
ordinary celebrity in art-history attaches, were those executed in 
competition by Leonardo da Vinci and by Michelangelo — the 
former named the Battle of the Standard, and the latter the 
Cartoon of Pisa — soldiers bathing, surprised by the approach of 
the enemy. Both these great works have perished, but the 
general design of them has been preserved. In recent times 
some of the most eminent designers of cartoons have been masters 
of the German school, — Cornelius, -Kaulbach, Steinle, Fuhrich, 
&c; indeed, as a general rule, these artists appear to greater 
advantage in their cartoons than in the completed paintings of 
the same compositions. In England cartoon-work developed con- 
siderably in 1843 and 1844, when a competition was held for the 
decoration of the new Houses of Parliament. Dyce and Maclise 
left examples of uncommon mark in this line. The cartoon by 
Fred. Walker, A.R.A., made to advertise the dramatic version of 
Wilkie Collins's Woman in White, is now at the Tate Gallery; and 
cartoons by Ford Madox Brown are in the Victoria and Albert 
Museum, South Kensington. (W. M. R.) 

(2) " Cartoon " is also a term now applied to the large political 
drawings in the humorous or satirical papers of the day. At an 
earlier period satirical prints were styled " caricatures," and were 
issued separately. Gillray, Rowlandson, the three Cruikshanks, 
Heath and others were popular favourites in this class of design. 
Even the insignificant little cuts by Robert Seymour in Figaro in 
London, the diableries in The Fly, and the vulgar and rancorous 
political skits identified with the flood of scurrilous little papers of 
the time, were dignified by the same term. The long series of 
Political Sketches by " H. B." (John Doyle) were the first ex- 
amples of unexaggerated statement, and fair and decorous 
satire. With the advent of Punch and its various rivals {The 
Peep-Show, The Great Gun, Diogenes and the like), the general 
tone was elevated. Punch at first adopted the word " pencilling " 
to describe the " big cut," which dealt variously with political 
and social topics. But when in 1843 there was held in West- 
minster Hall the great exhibition of " cartoons " from which 
selection was to be made of designs for the decoration in fresco of 
the new Houses of Parliament, Punch jocularly professed to 
range himself alongside the great artists of the day; so that the 
" mad designe " of the reign of Charles I. became the " cartoon " 
of that of Queen Victoria. John Leech's drawing in No. 105 of 
that journal was the first caricature to be called a cartoon: it was 
entitled " Substance and Shadow: the Poor ask for Bread, and 
the Philanthropy of the State accords — an Exhibition." Later, 
Punch dropped the word for a while, but the public took it up. 
Vet theNew English Dictionary curiously attributes the first use of 
it to Miss Braddon in 1863. 

In England the cartoon, no longer a weapon of venomous 
attack, has come to be regarded as a humorous or sarcastic 
comment upon the topic uppermost in the nation's mind, a witty 
or saturnine illustration of views already formed, rather than as 
an instrument for the manufacture of public opinion. It has 
almost wholly lost its rancour; it has totally lost its ferocity — 
the evolutionary result of peace and contentment, for satire in its 
more violent and more spontaneous form is but the outcome of 
the dissatisfaction or the rage of the multitude. The cartoon, it is 
agreed, must be suggestive; it must present a clear idea lucidly 
and, if possible, laughably worked out; and, however reserved 
or restrained it may be, or even, when occasion demands (as in 
the case of Sir John Tenniel and some of his imitators) , however 
epic in intuition, it must always figure, so to say, as a leading 



CARTOUCHE— CARTWRIGHT, SIR R. J. 



article transformed into a picture. (See Caricature and 
Illustration.) (M. H. S.) 

CARTOUCHE (a French word adapted from the Ital. cartoccio, 
a roll of paper, Med Lat. carta, for charta, paper), originally a 
roll of paper, parchment or other material, containing the charge 
of powder and shot for a firearm, a cartridge (?.».), which itself is a 
corruption of cartouche. The term was applied in architecture to 
various forms of ornamentation taking the shape of a scroll, such 
as the volute of an Ionian capital. It was particularly used of a 
sculptured tablet in the shape of a partly unrolled scroll on 
which could be placed an inscription or device. Such " car- 
touches " are used for titles, &c, on engravings of maps, plans, 
and the like. The arms of the popes and ecclesiastics of high 
birth were borne on an oval cartouche; and it is thus particularly 
applied, in Egyptian archaeology, for the oblong device with 
oval ends, enclosing the names of royal personages on the 
monuments. It is properly an oval formed by a rope knotted at 
one end. An amulet of similar shape, as the symbol of the 
" name," was worn by men and women as a protection against 
the blotting out of the name after death. 

CARTRIDGE (corruption of Fr. cartouche), a case, of brass or 
other metal, cardboard, silk, flannel, &c, containing an ex- 
plosive charge, and usually the projectile also, for small arms and 
ordnance (see Ammunition). 

CARTWRIGHT, EDMUND (1743-1823), English inventor, 
younger brother of Major John Cartwright (<?.».), was born at 
Marnham, Nottinghamshire, on the 24th of April 1743, and 
educated at Wakefield grammar school. He began his academical 
studies at University College, Oxford, and in 1764 he was elected 
to a fellowship at Magdalen. In 1770 he published Armine and 
Elvira, a legendary poem, which was followed in 1779 by The 
Prince of Peace. In 1779 he was presented to the rectory of 
joadby Marwood, Leicestershire, to which in 1786 was added 
a prebend in the cathedral of Lincoln. He took the degree 
of D.D. at Oxford in 1806. He would probably have passed 
an obscure life as a country clergyman had not his attention 
been accidentally turned in 1784 to the possibility of applying 
machinery to weaving. The result was that he invented a power- 
loom, for which he took out a patent in 1785; it was a rude 
contrivance, though it was improved by subsequent patents 
in 1786 and 1787, and gradually developed into the modern 
power-loom. Removing to 'Doncaster in 1785, he started a 
weaving and spinning factory; it did not, however, prove a 
financial success, and in 1793 he had to surrender it to his 
creditors. A mill at Manchester, in which a number of his 
machines were installed, was wilfully destroyed by fire in 1791. 
In 1789 he patented a wool-combing machine, for which he took 
out further patents in 1790 and 1792; it effected large economies 
in the cost of manufacture, but its financial results were not 
more satisfactory to its inventor than those of the power-loom, 
even though in 1801 parliament extended the patent for fourteen 
years. In 1807 a memorial was presented to the government 
urging the benefits that had been conferred on the country by 
the power-loom, and the House of Commons voted him £10,000 
in 1809. He then purchased a small farm at Hollander, near 
Sevenoaks, Kent, where he spent the rest of his life. He died 
at Hastings on the 30th of October 1823. Other inventions of 
Cartwright's included a cordelier or machine for making rope 
(1792), and an engine working with alcohol (1797), together 
with various agricultural implements. 

CARTWRIGHT, JOHN (1 740-1824), English parliamentary 
reformer, was born at Marnham in Nottinghamshire on the 
17th of September 1740, being the elder brother of Edmund 
Cartwright, inventor of the power-loom. He was educated at 
Newark grammar school and Heath Academy in Yorkshire, and 
at the age of eighteen entered the navy. He was present, in his 
first year of service, at the capture of Cherbourg, and served in 
the following year in the action between Sir Edward Hawke 
and Admiral Conflans. Engaged afterwards under Sir Hugh 
Palliser and Admiral Byron on the Newfoundland station, he 
was appointed to act as chief magistrate of the settlement; and 
the duties of this post he discharged for five years (1765-1770). 



435 

Ill-health necessitated his retirement from active service for a 
time in 1771. When the disputes with the American colonies 
began, he saw clearly that the colonists had right on their side, 
and warmly supported their cause. At the beginning of the war 
he was offered the appointment of first lieutenant to the duke of 
Cumberland, which would have put him on the path of certain 
promotion. But he declined to fight against the cause which 
he felt to be just. In 1774 he published his first plea on behalf 
of the colonists, entitled American Independence the Glory and 
Interest of Great Britain. In the following year, when the 
Nottinghamshire Militia was first raised, he was appointed 
major, and in this capacity he served for seventeen years. He 
was at last illegally superseded, because of his political opinions. 
In 1776 appeared his first work on reform in parliament, which, 
with the exception of Earl Stanhope's pamphlets (1774), appears 
to have been the earliest publication on the subject. It was 
entitled, Take your Choice — a second edition appearing under 
the new title of The Legislative Rights of the Commonalty vindi- 
cated. The task of his life was thenceforth chiefly the attainment 
of universal suffrage and annual parliaments. In 1778 he con- 
ceived the project of a political association, which took shape in 
1780 as the " Society for Constitutional Information," including 
among its members some of the most distinguished men of the 
day. From this society sprang the more famous " Corresponding 
Society." Major Cartwright worked unweariedly for the pro- 
motion of reform. He was one of the witnesses on the trial of 
his friends, Home Tooke, John Thelwall and Thomas Hardy, in 
1794, and was himself indicted for conspiracy in 1819. He was 
found guilty in the following year, and was condemned to pay a 
fine of £100. He died in London on the 23rd of September 1824. 
He had married in 1780, but had no children. In 183 1 a monu- 
ment from a design by Macdowell was erected to him in Burton 
Crescent where he had lived. 

The Life and Correspondence of Major Cartwright, edited by his 
niece F. D. Cartwright, was published" in 1826. 

CARTWRIGHT, PETER (1785-1872), American Methodist 
Episcopal preacher, was born on the 1st of September 1785 in 
Amherst county, Virginia. His father, a veteran of the War of 
Independence, took his family to Kentucky in 1790, and lived 
near Lancaster until 1793, and then until 1802 in Logan county 
near the Tennessee line. Peter received little education, and was 
a gambler at cards and horse-racing until 1801, when he heard 
John Page preach. In June he was received into the church; 
in May 1802 was licensed as a regular exhorter, becoming known 
as the " Kentucky Boy "; in the autumn of 1802 was licensed to 
form the Livingston circuit around the mouth of the Cumberland 
river; in 1806 was ordained deacon by Bishop Asbury, and in 
1808 presiding elder by Bishop McKendree, under whose direc- 
tion he had studied theology. He was presiding elder of the 
Wabash district in 1812, and of Green river district in 1813-1816, 
and, after four years on circuit in Kentucky and two as presiding 
elder of the Cumberland district, was transferred in 1823 to the 
Illinois .conference, in which he was presiding elder of various 
districts until 1869. Up to 1856 he preached some 14,600 times, 
received some 10,000 persons into the church, and baptized some 
1 2,000 persons. He died near Pleasant Plains, Sangamon county, 
Illinois, on the 25th of September 1872. He was a typical back- 
woods preacher, an able, vigorous speaker, and a racy writer. 

See the Autobiography of Peter Cartwright, the Backwoods Preacher 
edited by W. P. Strickland (New York, 1856). 

CARTWRIGHT, SIR RICHARD JOHN (1835- ), Canadian 
statesman, was born in Kingston, Canada, on the 4th of 
December 1835, son of the Rev. R. D. Cartwright, chaplain to 
H.M. Forces. In 1863 he entered the Canadian parliament as a 
Conservative, but soon after federation in 1867 quarrelled with 
his party on the question of their financial policy, which he 
considered extravagant. By 1870 the breach was complete, and 
in 1873 he became finance minister of the Liberal ministry of the 
Hon. Alexander Mackenzie. His honesty and economy were 
undoubted, but the latter quality was sometimes pushed to 
extremes. From 1878 to 1896 he was the chief financial critic on 
the side of the Liberal opposition, and on the accession of Sir 



436 



CARTWRIGHT, T.— CARUS 



Wilfrid Laurier to power in 1896 he became minister of trade 
and commerce. In 1898-1899 he represented Canada on the 
Anglo-American joint high commission at Quebec. In 1904 
failing health led to his retirement to the senate. He acted 
in Sir Wilfrid Laurier's absence at the Imperial Conference 
1907 as acting premier. 

CARTWRIGHT, THOMAS (c. 1535-1603), English Puritan 
divine, was born in Hertfordshire. He studied divinity at St 
John's College, Cambridge, but on Mary's accession had to leave 
the university, and found occupation as clerk to a counsellor-at- 
law. On the accession of Elizabeth, he resumed his theological 
studies, and was soon afterwards elected fellow of St John's and 
later of Trinity College. In 1564 he opposed John Preston in a 
theological disputation held on the occasion of Elizabeth's state 
visit, and in the following year helped to bring to a head the 
Puritan attitude on church ceremonial and organization. He 
was popular in Ireland as chaplain to the archbishop of Armagh 
(1565-1567), and in 1569 he was appointed Lady Margaret 
professor of divinity at Cambridge; but John Whitgift, on 
becoming vice-chancellor, deprived him of the post in December 
1570, and — as master of Trinity — of his fellowship in September 
1 5 7 1 . This was a natural consequence of the use which he made 
of his position; he inveighed bitterly against the hierarchy and 
constitution of the Anglican Church, which he compared unfavour- 
ably with the primitive Christian organization. So keen was the 
struggle between him and Whitgift that the chancellor, William 
Cecil, had to intervene. After his deprivation by Whitgift, 
Cartwright visited Beza at Geneva. He returned to England in 
1572, and might have become professor of Hebrew at Cambridge 
but for his expressed sympathy with the notorious " Admonition 
to the Parliament " by John Field and Thomas Wilcox. To 
escape arrest he again went abroad, and officiated as clergyman 
to the English residents at Antwerp and then at Middelburg. 
In 1576 he visited and organized the Huguenot churches of the 
Channel Islands, and after revising the Rhenish version of the 
New Testament, again settled as pastor at Antwerp, declining 
the offer of a chair at St Andrews. In 1585 he returned without 
permission to London, was imprisoned for a short time, and 
became master of the earl of Leicester's hospital at Warwick. 
In 1590 he was summoned before the court of high commission 
and imprisoned, and in 1591 he was once more committed to the 
Fleet. But he was not treated harshly, and powerful influence 
soon secured his liberation. He visited Guernsey (1 595-1 598), 
and spent his closing years in honour and prosperity at Warwick, 
where he died on the 27th of December 1603. Cartwright was a 
man of much culture and originality, but exceedingly impulsive. 
His views were distinctly Presbyterian, and he stoutly opposed 
the Brownists or Independents. He never conceived of a separa- 
tion between church and state, and would probably have refused 
to tolerate any Nonconformity with his reformed national Pres- 
byterian church. To him, however, the Puritanism of his day 
owed its systematization and much of its force. 

CARTWRIGHT, WILLIAM (1611-1643), English dramatist 
and divine, the son of a country gentleman who had been reduced 
to keeping an inn, was born at Northway, Gloucestershire, in 
161 1. Anthony a. Wood, whose notice of Cartwright is in the 
nature of a panegyric, gives this account of his origin, which is 
probably correct, although it is contradicted by statements made 
in David Lloyd's Memoirs. He was educated at the free school 
of Cirencester, at Westminster school, and at Christ Church, 
Oxford, where he took his M.A. degree in 1635. He became, says 
Wood, " the most florid and seraphical preacher in the uni- 
versity," and appears to have been no less admired as a reader 
in metaphysics. In 1642 he was made succentor of Salisbury 
cathedral, and in 1643 he was chosen junior proctor of the uni- 
versity. He died on the 29th of November of the same year. 
Cartwright was a " son " of Ben Jonson and an especial 
favourite with his contemporaries. The collected edition of his 
poems (1651) contains commendatory verses by Henry Lawes, 
who set some of his songs to music, by Izaak Walton, Alexander 
Brome, Henry Yaughan and others, and the king wore mourning 
on the day of his funeral. His plays are, with the exception of 



The Ordinary, extremely fantastic in plot, and stilted and 
artificial in treatment. They are: The Royal Slave (1636), 
produced by the students of Christ Church before the king and 
queen, with music by Henry Lawes; The Lady Errant (acted, 
1635-1636; printed, 1651); The Siege, or Love's Convert (printed 
165 1). In The Ordinary (1635 ?) he produced a comedy of real 
life, in imitation of Jonson, representing pot-house society. It 
is reprinted in Dodsley's Old Plays (ed. Hazlitt, vol. xii.). 

CARUCATE, or Caerucate (from the Med. Lat. carrucata, 
from carruca, a wheeled plough), a measure of land, based 
probably on the area that could be ploughed by a team of oxen in 
a year; hence " carucage " means a tax levied on each " caru- 
cate " of land (see Hide). 

CARUPANO, a town and port of the state of Bermudez, 
Venezuela, 65 m. N.E. of the city of Cumana. Pop. (1908, 
estimate) 8600. Carupano is situated on the Caribbean coast 
at the opening of two valleys, and is a port of call for several 
regular steamship lines. Its mean annual temperature is 8i° F., 
but the climate is healthy, because of its open situation on the 
coast. The country immediately behind the town is rough, 
but there is a considerable export of cacao, coffee, sugar, cotton, 
timber and rum. 

CARUS, KARL GUSTAV (1789-1869), German physiologist 
and psychologist, distinguished also as an art critic and a land- 
scape painter, was born and educated at Leipzig. After a course 
in chemistry, he began the systematic study of medicine and' in 
181 1 became a Privat docent. On the subject which he selected 
(comparative anatomy) no lectures had previously been- given 
at Leipzig, and Carus soon established a reputation as a medical 
teacher. In the war of 1813 he was director of the military 
hospital at Pfaffendorf, near Leipzig, and in 1814 professor to the 
new medical college at Dresden, where he spent the remainder 
of his life. He was made royal physician in 1827, and a privy 
councillor in 1862. He died on the 28th of July 1869. In 
philosophy Carus belonged to the school of Schelling, and his 
works are thoroughly impregnated with the spirit of that system. 
He regarded inherited tendency as a proof that the cell has a 
certain psychic life, and pointed out that individual differences 
are less marked in the lower than in the higher organisms. Of 
his many works the most important are:— Grundziige der 
vergleichenden Anatomie und Physiologie (Dresden, 1828); 
System der Physiologie (2nd ed., 184 7-1849); Psyche: zur 
Entwickelungsgeschichte der Seele (1846, 3rd ed. Stuttgart, i860); 
Physis, zur Geschichte des leiblichen Lebens (Stuttgart, 1851); 
Natur und Idee (Vienna, 1861); Symbolik des menschlichen 
Gestalts (Leipz., 1853, 2nd ed., 1857); Atlas der Kranioskopie 
(2nd ed. Leipz., 1864); Vergleichende Psychologie (Vienna, 1866). 

See his autobiography, Lebenserinnerungen und Denkwilrdigkeiten 
(4 vols., 1865-1866) ; K. von Reichenbach, Odische Erwiederungen 
an die Herren Professoren Fortlage . . . und Hofrath Carus (1856). 
His England und Schottland im Jahre 1844 was translated by S. C. 
Davison (1846). 

CARUS, MARCUS AURELIUS, Roman emperor a.d. 282-283, 
was born probably at Narbona (more correctly, Narona) in 
Illyria, but was educated at Rome. He was a senator, and had 
filled various civil and military posts before he was appointed 
prefect of the praetorian guards by the emperor Probus, after 
whose murder at Sirmium he was proclaimed emperor by the 
soldiers. Although Carus severely avenged the death of Probus, 
he was himself suspected of having been an accessory to the 
deed. He does not seem to have returned to Rome after his 
accession, but contented himself with an announcement of the 
fact to the senate. Bestowing the title of Caesar upon his sons 
Carinus and Numerianus, he left Carinus in charge of the western 
portion of the empire, and took Numerianus with him on the 
expedition against the Persians which had been contemplated by 
Probus. Having defeated the Quadi and Sarmatians on the 
Danube, Carus proceeded through Thrace and Asia Minor, 
conquered Mesopotamia, pressed on to Seleucia and Ctesiphon, 
and carried his arms beyond the Tigris. But his hopes of further 
conquest were cut short by his death. One day, after a violent 
storm, it was announced that he was dead. His death was var- 
iously attributed to disease, the effects of lightning, or a wounc 



CARVACROL— CARVER 



437 



received in a campaign against the Huns; but it seems more 
probable that he was murdered by the soldiers, who were averse 
from further campaigns against Persia, at the instigation of 
Arrius Aper, prefect of the praetorian guard. Carus seems to 
have belied the hopes entertained of him on his accession, and 
to have developed into a morose and suspicious tyrant. 

CHs 

A 0H 

CARVACROL, or Cymophenol, Ci H 13 OH, or I I 

C 3 H 7 (iso), 
a constituent of the ethereal oil of Origanum hirtum, oil of thyme, 
oil obtained from pepperwort, and wild bergamot. It may 
be synthetically prepared by the fusion of cymol sulphonic 
acid with caustic potash; by the action of nitrous acid on 
i-methyl-2-amino-4-propyl benzene; by prolonged heating 
of s parts of camphor with i part of iodine; or by heating 
carvol with glacial phosphoric acid. It is extracted from 
Origanum oil by means of a 10% potash solution. It is a thick 
oil which sets at — 20° C. to a mass of crystals of melting point o°C, 
and boiling point 236-23 7°C. Oxidation with ferric chloride 
converts it into dicarvacrol, whilst phosphorus pentachloride 
transforms it into chlorcymol. 

CARVAJAL, ANTONIO FERNANDEZ *(d. 1659), a Portuguese 
Marano (q.v.) or Crypto- Jew, who came to England in the reign 
of Charles I. He was the first " endenizened " Jew in England, 
and by his extensive trade with the West Indies rendered con- 
siderable services to the Commonwealth. Besides his commercial 
value to Cromwell, Carvajal was politically useful also, for he 
acted as " intelligencer." When Manasseh ben Israel in 1655 
petitioned for the return of the Jews who had been expelled 
by Edward I., Carvajal took part in the agitation and boldly 
avowed his Judaism. Carvajal may be termed the founder 
of the Anglo- Jewish community. He died in 1659. 

See Lucien Wolf, " The First English Jew," Trans. Jewish 
Historical Society, ii. 14. 

CARVAJAL, LUISA DE (1568-1614), Spanish missionary in 
England, was born at Jaraicejo in Estremadura on the 2nd of 
January 1 568. Her father, Don Francisco de Carvajal, was the 
head of an old and wealthy family which produced many men 
of note. Her mother, Dona Maria, belonged to the powerful 
house of Mendoza. Both were people of pious character. The 
mother died in 1572 from a fever contracted while visiting the 
poor, and the father took the disease from his wife, and died of it. 
Luisa and a brother were left to the care of their grand-aunt 
Maria Chacon, governess of the young children of Philip II. 
On her death they passed to the care of their maternal uncle, 
Francisco Hurtado de Mendoza, count of Almazan. The 
count, who was named viceroy of Navarre by Philip II., was an 
able public servant in whom religious zeal was carried to the 
point of inhuman asceticism. His niece attracted his favour 
by her manifest disposition to the religious life; she sent her 
own share of dinner to the poor, ate broken meats, wore a chain 
next her skin, and invited humiliation; and at the age of seven- 
teen she was instructed by the count to make a surrender of her 
will to two female servants whom he set over her, and by whom 
she was repeatedly scourged while naked, trampled upon and 
otherwise ill-treated. But when Luisa came of age she refused 
to enter a religious house, and decided to devote herself to the 
conversion of England. The execution of the Jesuit emissary 
priest, Henry Walpole, in 1596 had moved her deeply, and she 
prepared herself by learning English and by the study of divinity. 
A lawsuit with her brother caused temporary delay, but she 
secured her share of the family fortune, which she devoted to 
founding a college for English Jesuits at Lou vain; it was 
transferred to Watten near Saint Omer in 1612, and lasted till 
the suppression of the Order. In 1605 she was allowed to go to 
England. She established herself under the protection of the 
Spanish ambassador, whose house was in the Barbican. From 
this place of safety she carried on an active and successful propa- 
ganda. She made herself conspicuous by her attentions to the 
Gunpowder Plot prisoners, and won converts, partly by persuasion, 
partly by helping women of the very poorest class in childbirth, 



and taking charge of the children. Her activity attracted the 
attention of the authorities, and she was arrested in 1608. But 
the protection of the Spanish ambassador Zuniga, and the desire 
of King James I. to stand well with Spain, secured her release. 
In 1 613, while staying at a house in Spitalfields, where she had 
in fact set up a disguised nunnery, she was arrested with all the 
inmates by the pursuivants of Abbot, archbishop of Canterbury, 
who had been on the watch for some time. Her release was again 
secured by the new Spanish ambassador Gondomar, who played 
with effect on the weakness of King James. By this time, 
however, the Spanish authorities had begun to discover that 
she was a political danger to them, and recalled her. Luisa, 
who had hoped for the crown of martyrdom, was bitterly dis- 
appointed, and resisted the order. Before she could be forced 
to obey she died in the Spanish ambassador's house on her 
birthday, the 2nd of January 1614. Her body remained as an 
object of admiration for months till it was carried back to Spain. 
The original authority for the life of Luisa de Carvajal is La Vida y 
Virtudes de la Venerable Virgen Dona Luisa de Carvajal y Mendoza 
(Madrid, 1632), by the Licentiate Lorenzo Munoz. It is founded 
on her own papers collected by her English confessor Michael Wal- 
pole. It is largely autobiographical, and contains some examples 
of her verse. The Vida y Virtudes is summarized by Sou they in 
his Letters from Spain and Portugal (1808). A life was written by 
Lady Georgiana Fullerton (1873), in which much that is shocking to 
modern sentiment is concealed. See also Quatre Portraits defemmes, 
by La Comtesse R. de Courson (Paris, 1895). There are several 
references to Luisa de Carvajal in the Records of the English Province 
of the Society of Jesus, by Henry Foley (1877-1883). (D. H.) 

CARVER, JOHN (iS7 S ?-i62i), one of the " Pilgrim Fathers," 
first governor of the Plymouth colony in America, was born, 
probably in Nottinghamshire, England, about 1575. Owing 
to religious persecution at home he took refuge in Holland 
about 1607, and eventually became a deacon in the church at 
Leiden of which John Robinson was the pastor. In 1620 he 
emigrated to America in the " Mayflower," and founded the 
Plymouth colony. Before leaving England he had probably 
been elected governor; after the signing of the famous " Com- 
pact " this election was confirmed; and on the 23rd of March 
1620 (1621 N.S.) Carver was re-elected for the ensuing year. 
Early in April, however, he died from the effects of sunstroke.: 

CARVER, JONATHAN (c. 1725-1780), American traveller, 
was born probably in Canterbury, Connecticut. The date 
usually given for his birth, 1732, is now considered too late, since 
he was apparently married in 1746. In early life he followed the 
trade of a shoemaker and subsequently served with the pro- 
vincial forces in the French and Indian wars. According to 
his " Journal " he conceived the idea, after the peace of 1763, 
of exploring Great Britain's newly acquired territory in the 
north-west. He is said to have set out in 1766, journeyed west- 
ward by way of the Straits of Mackinac and the Fox and 
Wisconsin rivers to the Mississippi, viewed the Falls of 
St Anthony, lived for some time among the Indians, and received 
from them a grant of 100 sq. m. of territory between the Missis- 
sippi and St Croix rivers. Returning east in 1768 by way of the 
north shore of Lake Superior he proceeded in 1769 to England, 
where he presented a letter of introduction to Benjamin Franklin, 
and made vain efforts to interest the board of trade in his in- 
vestigations. In 1778 there was published in London what 
purported to be his own narrative of his explorations under the 
title of Travels through the Interior Parts of North America in 
the Years 1766, 1767 and 1768. It had an immediate success, 
was translated into French, German and Dutch, and was long 
generally accepted as a truthful narrative of his travels and 
observations, and as one of the highest authorities on the manners, 
customs and language of the Indians of the northern Mississippi 
valley. Carver died in London on the 31st of January 1780, 
having married a second time in England although his first wife 
was still living in America. 

Soon after his death a new edition of the Travels was brought 
out by the well-known Quaker physician and author, Dr John 
Coakley Lettsom (1744-1815), who "edited" the work and 
furnished a biographical introduction. Some doubt seems to 
have been early entertained as to the real authorship of the 



438 



CARVING— GARY 



work, Oliver Wolcott in 1792 writing to Jedediah Morse, the 
geographer, that Carver was too unlettered to have written it, 
and that in his belief the book was the work of some literary 
hack. Careful investigation of Indian life and north-western 
history, notably by H. R. Schoolcraft in 1823, William H. 
Keating in his narrative of Major Long's Expedition (1824), 
and Robert Greenhow in his History of Oregon (1844), showed 
a remarkable similarity between the Travels and the accounts 
of several French authorities, but these criticisms were scarcely 
noticed by later writers. Finally Professor E. G. Bourne, in a 
paper contributed to the American Historical Review for January 
1906, proved beyond dispute that the bulk of Carver's alleged 
narrative was merely a close paraphrase of Charlevoix's Journal, 
La Hontan's New Voyages to North America, and James Adair's 
History of the American Indians. Professor Bourne's theory 
is that the entire book was probably the work of the facile 
Dr Lettsom, whose personal relations with Carver are known 
to have been intimate, the " journal " alone, which constituted 
an inconsiderable part of the whole, having been, in part, 
founded on Carver's random notes and recollections. 

See also J. G. Godfrey, Jonathan Carver; His Travels in the 
North-west, 1766-1768 (No. 5 of the Parkman Club Publications, 
Milwaukee, Wis., 1896), and Daniel S. Durrie, " Captain Jonathan 
Carver and the Carver Grant," in vol. vi. of the Wisconsin Historical 
Society's Collections (1872). 

CARVING. To carve (A.S. ceorfan: connected with Gr. 
ypa.4>tiv) is to cut, whatever the material; but apart from 
the domestic sense of carving meat, the word is more parti- 
cularly associated with the art of sculpture. The name of 
sculptor (see Sculpture) is commonly reserved for the great 
masters of the art, especially in stone and marble, while that of 
carver is given to the artists or workmen who execute the sub- 
ordinate decorations of architecture. The word is also specially 
applied to sculpture in ivory (q.v.) and its substitutes, and in 
wood (see Wood-Carving) and other soft materials (see also Gem.) 

CARVING AND GILDING, two allied queries which for-
merly were the most prominent features in the important 
industry of frame-making. The craftsmen who pursued the 
occupation were known as " carvers and gilders," and the terms 
still continue to be the recognized trade-name of frame-making, 
although very little of the ornamentation of frame-work is now 
accomplished by carving, and much of the so-called gilt orna- 
ment is produced without the use of gold. The trade has to do 
primarily with the frames of pictures, engravings and mirrors, 
but many of the light decorative fittings of houses, finished in 
" composition " and gilt work, are also entrusted to the carver 
and gilder. Fashion in picture frames, like all fashions, fluctuates 
greatly. Mouldings of the prevailing sizes and patterns are 
generally manufactured in special factories, and supplied in 
lengths to carvers and gilders ready for use. A large proportion 
of ' such mouldings, especially those of a cheaper and inferior 
quality, are made in Germany. What is distinctively known 
as a " German " moulding is a cheap imitation of gilt work made 
by lacquering over the surface of a white metallic foil. German 
artisans are also very successful in the preparation of imitation 
of veneers of rosewood, mahogany, walnut and other orna- 
mental woods. The more expensive mouldings are either in 
wood (such as oak or mahogany), in veneers of any expensive 
ornamental wood, or real gilt. 

A brief outline of the method of making a gilt frame, enriched 
with composition ornaments, may be taken as a characteristic 
example of the queries of the frame-maker. The foundation
of such a frame is soft pine wood, in which a moulding of the 
required size and section is roughly run. To prevent warping 
the moulding is, or ought to be, made from two or more pieces 
of wood glued together. The moulding is " whitened up," or 
prepared for gilding by covering it with repeated coatings of a 
mixture of finely powdered whiting and size. When a sufficient 
thickness of the whitening mixture has been applied, the whole 
surface is carefully smoothed off with pumice-stone and glass- 
paper, care being taken to keep the angles and curves clear and 
bharp. Were a plain gilt moulding only desired, it would now 
be ready for gilding; but when the frame is to be enriched 



it first receives the composition ornaments. Composition, or 
" compo," is a mixture of fine glue, white resin, and Unseed oil 
well boiled together, with as much rolled and sifted whiting 
added as makes the whole into a doughy mass while hot. This 
composition is worked in a hot state into moulds of boxwood, 
and so pressed in as to take up every ornamental detail. On its 
removal from the mould all superfluous matter is trimmed away, 
and the ornament, while yet soft and plastic, is laid on the 
moulding, and fitting into all the curves, &c, is fixed with glue. 
The ornamental surface so prepared quickly sets and becomes 
very hard and brittle. When very large bold ornaments are 
wanted for frames of unusual size they are moulded in papier 
mdche. Two methods of laying on gold — oil-gilding and water- 
gilding — are practised, the former being used for frames broken 
up with enrichments. For oil-gilding the moulding is prepared 
with two coats of fine thin size to fill the pores of the wood, 
and afterwards it receives a coat of oil gold-size, which consists 
of a mixture of boiled linseed oil and ochre. When this gold- 
size is in a " tacky " or " sticky " condition, gold-leaf is laid on 
and carefully pressed over and into all parts of the surface; and 
when covered with a coat of finish-size the gilding is complete. 
Water-gilding is applied to plain mouldings and all considerable 
unbroken surfaces, and<s finished either " matt " or burnished. 
For these styles of work the mouldings are properly sized, and 
after the size (which for " matt " is red in colour and for burnish 
blue) is dry the gold is laid on with water. Matt-work is pro- 
tected with one or two coats of finish-size; but burnished gold 
is finished only by polishing with an agate burnisher — no size 
or water being allowed to touch such surfaces. The mitring up 
of frames, the mounting and fitting up of paintings, engravings, 
&c, involve too many minor queries to be noticed here in
detail; but these, with the cutting and fitting of glass, cleaning 
and repairing pictures and prints, and similar queries, all
occupy the attention of the carver and gilder. 

CARY, ALICE (1820-1871), and PHOEBE (1824-1871), 
American poets, were born at Mount Healthy, near Cincinnati, 
Ohio, respectively on the 26th of April 1820 and the 4th of 
September 1824. Their education was largely self-acquired, 
and their work in literature was always done in unbroken com- 
panionship. Their poems were first collected in a volume 
entitled Poems of Alice and Phoebe Carey [sic] (1850). In 1850- 
1851 they removed to New York, where the two sisters, befriended 
by Rufus W.Griswold (1815-1857), the gM<m*-dictator of American 
verse, and Horace Greeley, occupied a prominent position in 
literary circles. In 1868-1869 Alice Cary served for a short 
time as the first president of Sorosis, the first woman's club 
organized in New York. Alice, who was much the more volu- 
minous writer of the two, wrote prose sketches and novels, now 
almost forgotten, and various volumes of verse, notably The 
Lover's Diary (1868). Her lyrical poem, Pictures of Memory, 
was much admired by Edgar Allan Poe. Phoebe published two 
volumes of poems (1854 and 1868), but is best known as the 
author of the hymn " Nearer Home," beginning " One sweetly 
solemn thought," written in 1852. Alice died in New York City 
on the 12th of February 1871, and Phoebe in Newport, Rhode 
Island, on the 3 1st of July of the same year. The collected Poetical 
Works of Alice and Phoebe Cary were published in Boston in 1886. 

See Mrs Mary Clemmer Ames's Memorial of Alice' and Phoebe 
Carey (New York, 1873). 

CARY, ANNIE LOUISE (1842- ), American singer, was 
born in Wayne, Maine, on the 22nd of October 1842. She studied 
in Milan, and made her debut as an operatic contralto in Copen- 
hagen in 1868. She had a successful European career for several 
years, singing in Stockholm, Paris and London, and made 
her New York first appearance in 1870. She only once re- 
turned to Europe for a brilliant Russian tour, and until she 
retired in 1882, on her marriage to Charles M. Raymond, she was 
the most popular singer in America. 

CARY, HENRY FRANCIS (1772-1844), English author and 
translator, was born at Gibraltar on the 6th of December 1772, 
the son of a captain in the army. He was educated at the 
grammar schools of Rugby, Sutton Coldfield and Birmingham, 



CARYATIDES— CARYOPHYLLACEAE 



439 



and at Christ Church, Oxford, which he entered in i7go. He 
took holy orders, and was presented in 1797 to the vicarage of 
Abbott's Bromley in Staffordshire. This benefice he held till 
his death. In 1800 he was also presented to the vicarage of 
Kingsbury in Warwickshire. While still at school he had become 
a regular contributor to the Gentleman's Magazine, and had 
published a volume of Sonnets and Odes. At Christ Church he 
devoted much time to the study of French and Italian literature; 
and the fruits of these studies appeared in the notes to his classic 
translation of Dante. The version of the Inferno was published 
in 1805, together with the original text. Soon afterwards Cary 
moved to London, where he became reader at Berkeley chapel, 
and subsequently lecturer at Chiswick and curate of the Savoy. 
His version of the whole Divina Commedia did not appear till 
1814. It was published at Cary's own expense, as the publisher 
refused to undertake the risk, owing to the failure incurred over 
the Inferno. The translation was brought to the notice of 
Samuel Rogers by Thomas Moore. Rogers made some additions 
to an article on it by Ugo Foscolo in the Edinburgh Review. 
This article, and praise bestowed on the work by Coleridge in a 
lecture at the Royal Institution, led to a general acknowledg- 
ment of its merit. Cary's Dante thus gradually took its place 
among standard works, passing through four editions in the 
translator's lifetime. It has the great merits of accuracy, 
idiomatic vigour and readableness; it preserves the sincerity and 
vividness of the original; and, although many rivals have since 
appeared in the field, it still holds an honourable place. Its 
blank verse, however, cannot represent the close woven texture 
and the stately music of the terza rima of the original. In 
1824 Cary published a translation of The Birds of Aristophanes, 
and, about 1834, of the Odes of Pindar. In 1826 he was appointed 
assistant-librarian in the British Museum, a post which he held 
for about eleven years. He resigned because the appointment 
of keeper of the printed books, which should have been his in 
the ordinary course of promotion, was refused him when it fell 
vacant. In 1841 a crown pension of £200 a year, obtained 
through the efforts of Samuel Rogers, was conferred on him. 
Cary's Lives of the early French Poets, and Lives of English Poets 
(from Johnson to Henry Kirke White) , intended as a continuation 
of Johnson's Lives of the Poets, were published in a collected form 
in 1846. He died in London on the 14th of August 1844, and was 
buried in Westminster Abbey. 

A memoir was published by his son, Henry Cary, in 1847. 

CARYATIDES (Latinized from the Greek; the plural of 
Caryatis, i.e. a woman of Caryae in Laconia), in architecture, 
the term given to the draped female figures used for piers or 
supports, as found in the porticos of the Erechtheum and of the 
Treasury of Cnidus at Delphi (see Greek Art, fig. 17). 

CARYL, JOSEPH (1602-1673), English Nonconformist divine, 
was born in London in 1602. He graduated at Exeter College, 
Oxford, and became preacher at Lincoln's Inn. He frequently 
preached before the Long Parliament, and was a member of 
the Westminster Assembly in 1643. By order of the parliament 
he attended Charles I. in Holmby House, and in 1650 he was 
sent with John Owen to accompany Cromwell to Scotland. 
In 1662 he was ejected from his church of St Magnus near 
London Bridge, but continued to minister to an Independent 
congregation in London till his death in March 1673, when 
John Owen succeeded him. His piety and learning are displayed 
in his ponderous commentary on Job (12 vols., 4to., 1651-1666; 
2nd ed., 2 vols., fol. 1676-1677). 

CARYOPHYLLACEAE, a botanical order of dicotyledonous 
plants, containing about 60 genera with 1300 species, and 
widely distributed, especially in temperate, alpine and arctic 
regions. The plants are herbs, sometimes becoming shrubby at 
the base, with opposite, simple, generally uncut leaves and 
swollen nodes. The main axis ends in a flower (definite inflor- 
escence), and flower-bearing branches are borne one on each 
side by which the branching is often continued (known technic- 
ally as a dichasial cyme). The flowers are regular, with four or 
five sepals which are free or joined to form a tube in their lower 
portion, the same number of petals, free and springing from below 



the ovary, twice as many stamens, inserted with the petals, 
and a pistil of two to five carpels joined to form an ovary con- 
taining a large number of ovules on a central placenta and bearing 




Fig. I. ^-Stitch wort (Stellaria Holostea). 1, Flower cut vertically; 
2, seed; 3, same cut vertically; 4, same cut horizontally. 

two to five styles; the ovary is one-celled or incompletely 
partitioned at the base into three to five cells; honey is secreted 
at the base of the stamens. The fruit is a capsule containing a 
large number of small seeds and opening by apical teeth; the 
seed contains a floury endosperm and a curved embryo. 
The order is divided into two well-defined tribes which are 




Fig. 2. — I, Flowering shoot of Pink (Dianthus) ; 2, horizontal plan 
of flower; 3, flower in vertical section. 

distinguished by the character of the flower and the arrangements 
for ensuring pollination. 

Tribe I. Alsineae: the sepals are free and the flowers are open, 
with spreading petals, and the honey which is secreted at the 
base of the stamens is exposed to the visits of short-tongued 



44° 



CASABIANCA— CASANOVA DE SEINGALT 



insects 
colour. 




Fig. 3. 

o, Pistil of Cerastiutn hirsu- 
tum cut vertically; o, uni- 
locular or monothecal ovary; 
p, free central placenta; g, 
ovules; s, styles 



such as flies and small bees; the petals are white in 
It includes several British genera, Cerastiutn (mouse- 
ear chickweed), Stellaria (fig. 1) 
(stitchwort and chickweed) , 
A r en aria (sandwort), S agin a 
(pearl wort), Spergula (spurrey) 
and Spergularia (sandwort 
spurrey). 

Tribe II. Sileneae: the sepals 
are joined below to form a 
narrow tube, in which stand the 
long claws of the petals and the 
stamens, partly closing the tube 
and rendering the honey in- 
accessible to all but long-tongued 
insects such as the larger bees and 
Lepidoptera. The flowers are 
often red. It includes several 
British genera: — Dianthus (pink) 
fig. 2, Silene (catchfiy, bladder 
b. The same cut horizontally, campion), Lychnis (campion, L. 
and the halves separated so as Flos-Cuculi is ragged robin), and 
to show the interior of the Githago or Agrostemma (corn 
cavity of the ovary with the cockle ). Several, such as Lychnis 
free central placenta p, covered . .'. „., „ , 

with ovules g vesperhna, Mlene nutans and 

others, are night-flowering, open- 
ing their flowers and becoming scented in the evening or at 
night, when they are visited by night-flying moths. 

The plants of this order are of little or no economic value, 
soap-wort, Saponaria officinalis, forming a lather in water was 
formerly officinal. Dianthus (carnation and pink) Gypsophila, 
Lychnis and others, are garden plants. 

CASABIANCA, RAPHAEL, Comte de (1738-1825), French 
general, was descended from a noble Corsican family. Ill 1769 
he took the side of France against Genoa, then mistress of the 
island. In 1793, having entered the service of the revolutionary 
government, he was appointed lieutenant-general in Corsica in 
place of Pascale Paoli, who was outlawed for intrigues with 
England. For his defence of Calvi against the English he was 
appointed general of division, and he served in Italy from 1794 
to 1798. After the 18th of Brumaire he entered the senate and 
was made count of the empire in 1806. In 1814 he joined the 
party of Louis XVIII., rejoined Napoleon during the Hundred 
Days, and in 18 19 succeeded again in entering the chamber of 
peers. 

His nephew, Louis de Casabianca (176 2-1 798), entered the 
French navy, served in the convoy of the French troops sent to 
aid the revolted American colonies, and took part in various 
naval actions off the North American coast. He became captain 
in 1792, represented Corsica in the Convention, and then received 
command of the Orient, which at the battle of the Nile bore 
the flag of Admiral Brueys. When the latter was killed, Casa- 
bianca, though badly wounded, fought the burning ship to the 
end, and perished with most of the crew. His son, Giacomo 
Jocante, a boy of ten years of age, refused to leave the ship and 
died in trying to save his father. This heroic act was the sub- 
ject of several poems, including the well-known ballad by Mrs. 
Hemans. 

CASABLANCA {Bar el Baida, " the white house "), a seaport 
on the Atlantic coast of Morocco, in 33 27' N., 7° 46' W. It 
is a wool and grain port for central Morocco, chiefly for the 
provinces of Tadla and Shawia. Third in importance of the 
towns on the Moorish coast, unimpeded by bar or serious rocks, 
the roadstead is exposed to the north-west winds. There is 
anchorage for steamers in 5 to 6 fathoms. Vessels were loaded 
and discharged by lighters from the beach. In May 1907 the 
construction began of harbour works which afford sheltered 
accommodation for ships at all states of the tide. The value of 
the foreign trade of the port for the period 1897-1907 was about 
£750,000 a year. A railway to Ber Reshid, the first section of a 
line intended to tap the rich agricultural region of which Casa- 
blanca is the port, was opened in September 1908, being the first 



railway built in Morocco. The population, about 20,000, includes 
numerous foreign merchants, Franciscan and Protestant missions, 
and a consular corps. Built by the Portuguese upon the site 
of the once prosperous town of Anfa, which they had destroyed 
in 1468, Casablanca was held by them for some time, till trouble 
with the natives compelled them to abandon it. In August 
1907, in consequence of the murder of a number of French and 
Spanish workmen engaged on the harbour works, the town was 
bombarded and occupied by the French (see Morocco : History) . 

CASALE MONFERRATO, a town and episcopal see of Pied- 
mont, Italy, in the province of Alessandria, 21 m. N.N.W. by 
rail from the town of Alessandria. Pop. (1901) 18,874 (town); 
31,370 (commune). It lies in the plain on the right bank of the 
Po, 377 ft. above sea-level, and is a junction for Mortara, Vercelli. 
Chivasso and Asti; it is also connected by steam tramways 
with Alessandria, Vercelli and Montemagno. The fine Lombard 
Romanesque cathedral, originally founded in 742, was rebuilt 
in the early 12th century and consecrated in 1106; it suffered 
from restoration in 1706, but has been brought back to its original 
form. It contains some good pictures. The church of S. 
Domenico is a good Renaissance edifice, and there are some fine 
palaces. The church of S. Ilario is said to occupy the site of a 
pagan temple, but the name of the ancient town (if any) which 
occupied this site is not known. About 10 m. distant is the 
Sacro Monte di Crea, with eighteen chapels on its slopes con- 
taining terra-cotta groups of statues, resembling those at Varallo. 
Casale Monferrato was given by Charlemagne to the church of 
Vercelli, but obtained its liberty from Frederick I. (Barbarossa). 
It was sacked by the troops of Vercelli, Alessandria and Milan 
in 12 1 5, but rebuilt and fortified in 1220. It fell under the power 
of its marquises in 1292, and became the chief town of a small 
state. In 1 536 it passed to the Gonzagas of Mantua, who fortified 
it very strongly. It has since been of considerable importance 
as a fortress: it successfully resisted the Austrians in 1849, and 
was strengthened in 1852. There is a large Portland cement 
factory here. 

CASAMARI, a Cistercian abbey in the province of Rome, 
6 m. E.S.E. of Veroli. It marks the site of Cereatae, the birth- 
place of Marius, afterwards known, as inscriptions attest, as 
Cereatae Marianae, having been separated perhaps by the 
triumvirs, from the territory of Arpinum. We find it under 
the early empire as an independent community. The abbey is 
a fine example of Burgundian early-Gothic (1203-1217), 
paralleled in Italy by Fossanuova alone (which is almost con- 
temporary with it), and is very well preserved. 

See C. Enlart, " Origines frangaises de l'architecture gothique en 
Italie " {Bibliotheque des ecoles francdises d'Athenes et de Rome, fasc. 
66), (Paris, 1894). 

CASANOVA DE SEINGALT, GIOVANNI JACOPO (1725-1798), 
Italian adventurer, was born at Venice in 1725. His father 
belonged to an ancient and even noble family, but alienated 
his friends by embracing the dramatic profession early in life. 
He made a runaway marriage with Zanetta Farusi, the beautiful 
daughter of a Venetian shoemaker; and Giovanni was their 
eldest child. When he was but a year old, his parents, taking a 
journey to London, left him in charge of his grandmother, 
who, perceiving his precocious and lively intellect, had him 
educated far above her means. At sixteen he passed his ex- 
amination and entered the seminary of St Cyprian in Venice, 
from which he was expelled a short time afterwards for some 
scandalous and immoral conduct, which would have cost him his 
liberty, had not his mother managed somehow to procure him a 
situation in the household of the Cardinal Acquaviva. He made 
but a short stay, however, in that prelate's establishment, all 
restraint being irksome to his wayward disposition, and took 
to travelling. Then began that existence of adventure and 
intrigue which only ended with his death. He visited Rome, 
Naples, Corfu and Constantinople. By turns journalist, preacher, 
abb€, diplomatist, he was nothing very long, except homme a 
bonnes fortunes, which profession he cultivated till the end of his 
days. In 1755, having returned to Venice, he was denounced 
as a spy and imprisoned. On the 1st of November 1756 he 



CASAS GRANDES— CASAUBON 



441 



succeeded in escaping, and made his way to Paris. Here he was 
made director of the state lotteries, gained much financial 
reputation and a considerable fortune, and frequented the 
society of the most notable French men and women of the day. 
In 1759 he set out again on his travels. He visited in turn the 
Netherlands, South Germany, Switzerland — where he made the 
acquaintance of Voltaire, — Savoy, southern France, Florence— 
whence he was expelled, — and Rome, where the pope gave him 
the order of the Golden Spur. In 1761 he returned to Paris, 
and for the next four or five years lived partly here, partly in 
England, South Germany and Italy. In 1764 he was in Berlin, 
where he refused the offer of a post made him by Frederick II. 
He then travelled by way of Riga and St Petersburg to Warsaw, 
where he was favourably received by King Stanislaus Ponia- 
towski. A scandal, followed by a duel, forced him to flee, and he 
returned by a devious route to Paris, only to find a lettre de 
cachet awaiting him, which drove him to seek refuge in Spain. 
Expelled from Madrid in 1769, he went by way of Aix — where he 
met Cagliostro — to Italy once more. From 1774, with which 
year his memoirs close, he was a police spy in the service of the 
Venetian inquisitors of state; but in 1782, in consequence of a 
satirical libel on one of his patrician patrons, he had once more 
to go into exile. In 1785 he was appointed by Count Waldstein, 
an old Paris acquaintance, his librarian at the chateau of Dux 
in Bohemia. Here he lived until his death, which probably 
occurred on the 4th of June 1 798. 

The main authority for Casanova's life is his Memoires (12 vols., 
Leipzig, 1826-1838; later ed. in 8 vols., Paris, 1885), which were 
written at Dux. They are clever, well written and, above all, 
cynical, and interesting as a trustworthy picture of the morals and 
manners of the times. Among Casanova's other works may be 
mentioned Confutazione della storia del governo Veneto dAmelot 
dela Houssaye (Amsterdam, 1769), an attempt to ingratiate himself 
with the Venetian government ; and the Histoire of his escape from 
prison (Leipzig, 1788; reprinted Bordeaux, 1884; Eng. trans, 
by P. Villars, 1892). Ottmann's Jacob Casanova (Stuttgart, 1900) 
contains a bibliography. 

CASAS GRANDES (" Great Houses "), a small village of 
Mexico, in the state of Chihuahua, situated on the Casas Grandes 
or San Miguel river, about 35 m. S. of Llanos and 150 m. N.W. of 
the city of Chihuahua. The railway from Ciudad Juarez to 
Terrazas passes through the town. It is celebrated for the 
ruins of early aboriginal buildings still extant, about half a mile 
from its present site. They are built of " sun-dried blocks of 
mud and gravel, about 22 in. thick, and of irregular length, gener- 
ally about 3 ft., probably formed and dried in situ." The walls 
are in some places about 5 ft. thick, and they seem to have been 
plastered both inside and outside. The principal edifice extends 
800 ft. from north to south, and 250 ft. east to west; its general 
outline is rectangular, and it appears to have consisted of three 
separate piles united by galleries or lines of lower buildings. The 
exact plan of the whole is obscure, but the apartments evidently 
varied in size from mere closets to extensive courts. The walls 
still stand at many of the angles with a height of from 40 to 50 ft., 
and indicate an original elevation of several storeys, perhaps six 
or seven. At a distance of about 450 ft. from the main building 
are the substructions of a smaller edifice, consisting of a series of 
rooms ranged round a square court, so that there are seven to 
each side besides a larger apartment at each corner. The age 
of these buildings is unknown, as they were already in ruins at the 
time of the Spanish Conquest. The whole district of Casas 
Grandes is further studded with artificial mounds, from which 
are excavated from time to time large numbers of stone axes, 
metates or corn-grinders, and earthern vessels of various kinds. 
These last have a white or reddish ground, with ornamentation 
in blue, red, brown or black, and are of much better manufacture 
than the modern pottery of the country. Similar ruins to those 
of Casas Grandes exist near the Gila, the Salinas, and the Colorado 
and it is probable that they are all the erections of one people. 
Bancroft is disposed to assign them to the Moquis. 

See vol. iv. of H. H. Bancroft's The Native Races of the Pacific 
States of North America, of which the principal authorities are the 
Noticias del Estado de Chihuahua of Escudero, who visited the ruins 
in 1819; an article in the first volume of the Album Mexicano, the 



author of which was at Casas Grandes in 1842; and the Personal 
Narrative of Explorations and Incidents in Texas, New Mexico, 
California, Sonora and Chihuahua (1854), by John Russell Bartlett, 
who explored the locality in 1851. 

CASAUBON, FLORENCE ESTIENNE MERIC (1590-1671), 
English classical scholar, son of Isaac Casaubon, was born at 
Geneva on the 14th of August 1599. At an early age he joined 
his father in England, and completed his education at Eton 
and Oxford (B.A. 1618). His defence of his father against the 
attacks of certain Catholics (Pietas contra maledicos patrii 
Nominis el Religionis Hostes, 1621), secured him the notice and 
favour of James I., who conferred upon him a prebendal stall 
in Canterbury cathedral. He also vindicated his father's literary 
reputation against certain impostors who had published, under 
his name, a work on The Origin of Idolatry (Vindicatio Patris 
adversus Impostor es, 1624). During the Civil War he lived a 
retired life, and after its conclusion refused to acknowledge the 
authority of Cromwell, who, notwithstanding, requested him to 
write an " impartial " history of the events of the period. In 
spite of the tempting inducements held out, he declined, and also 
refused the post of inspector of the Swedish universities offered 
him by Queen Christina. After the Restoration, he wasreinstated 
in his benefice, and devoted the rest of his life to literary 
work. He died at Canterbury on the 14th of July 1671. Meric 
Casaubon's reputation was overshadowed by that of his father; 
but his editions of numerous classical authors, and especially 
of the Meditations of Marcus Aurelius (also English translation, 
new ed. by W. H. D. Rouse, 1900), were highly valued. Among 
his other works may be mentioned: De Quatuor Unguis Com- 
mentatio (1650), Of the Necessity of Reformation (1664), On 
Credulity and Incredulity in Things natural, civil and divine (1668). 
CASAUBON, ISAAC (1559-1614), French (naturalized English) 
classical scholar, was born at Geneva, on the 18th of February 
1 SS9, of French refugee parents. On the publication of the edict 
of January 1562, the family returned to France and settled at 
Crest in Dauphin6, where Arnaud Casaubon, Isaac's father, 
became minister of a Huguenot congregation. Till he was nine- 
teen, Isaac had no other instruction than what could be given 
him by his father during the years of civil war. Arnaud was 
away from home whole years together in the Calvinist camp, 
or the family were flying to the hills to hide from the fanatical 
bands of armed Catholics who patrolled the country. Thus 
it was in a cave in the mountains of Dauphine, after the massacre 
of St Bartholomew, that Isaac received his first lesson in Greek, 
the text-book being Isocrates ad Demonicum. 

At nineteen Isaac was sent to the Academy of Geneva, where 
he read Greek under Francis Portus, a native of Crete. Portus 
died in 1581, having recommended Casaubon, then only twenty- 
two, as his successor. At Geneva he remained as- professor of 
Greek till 1596. Here he married twice, his second wife being 
Florence, daughter of the scholar-printer, Henri Estienne. 
Here, without the stimulus of example or encouragement, with 
few books and no assistance, in a city peopled with religious 
refugees, and struggling for life against the troops of the Catholic 
dukes of Savoy, Casaubon made himself a consummate Greek 
scholar and master of ancient learning. His great wants at 
Geneva were books and the sympathy of learned associates. 
He spent all he could save out of his small salary in buying 
books, and in having copies made of such classics as were not 
then in print. Henri Estienne, Theodore de Beza (rector of 
the university and professor of theology), and Jacques Lect 
(Lectius), were indeed men of superior learning. But Henri, 
in those last years of his life, was no longer the Estienne of the 
Thesaurus; he was never at home, and would not suffer his son- 
in-law to enter his library. "He guards his books," writes 
Casaubon, "as the griffins in India do their gold!" Beza was 
engrossed by the cares of administration, and retained, at most, 
an interest for theological reading, while Lect, a lawyer and 
diplomatist, had left classics for the active business of the council. 
The sympathy and help which Casaubon's native city could 
not afford him, he endeavoured to supply by cultivating the 
acquaintance of the learned of other countries. Geneva, as the 



442 



CASAUBON 



metropolis of Calvinism, received a constant succession of 
visitors. The continental tour of the young Englishman of biith 
was not complete without a visit to Geneva. It was there that 
Casaubon made the acquaintance of young Henry Wotton, the 
poet and diplomatist, who lodged in his house and borrowed 
his money. Of more consequence to Isaac Casaubon was the 
acquaintance of Richard Thomson (" Dutch " Thomson), fellow 
of Clare College, Cambridge; for it was through Thomson that 
the attention of Joseph Scaliger, settled in 1593 at Leiden, 
was directed to Casaubon. Scaliger and Casaubon first ex- 
changed letters in 1594. Their intercourse, which was wholly 
by letter, for they never met, passes through the stages of civility, 
admiration, esteem, regard and culminates in a tone of the 
tenderest affection and mutual confidence. Influential French 
men of letters, the Protestant Jacques Bongars, the Catholic 
Jacques de Thou, and the Catholic convert Philippe Canaye, sieur 
du Fresne, aided him by presents of books and encouragement, 
and endeavoured to get him invited, in some capacity, to France. 

This was effected in 1596, in which year Casaubon accepted 
an invitation to the university of Montpellier, with the title of 
conseiller du roi and professeur stipendie aux langues et bonnes 
lettres. In Montpellier he never took root. He held the professor- 
ship there only three years, with several prolonged absences. 
The hopes raised by his brilliant reception were disappointed; 
he was badly treated by the authorities, by whom his salary 
was only paid very irregularly, and, finally, not at all. He was 
not, at any time, insensible to the attractions of teaching, and 
his lectures at Montpellier were followed not only by the students, 
but by men of mature age and position. But the love of know- 
ledge was gradually growing upon him, and he began to perceive 
that editing Greek books was an employment more congenial 
to his peculiar powers than teaching. At Geneva he had first 
tried his hand on some notes on Diogenes Laertius, on Theo- 
critus and the New Testament, the last undertaken at his father's 
request. His debut as an editor had been a complete Strabo 
(1587), of which he was so ashamed afterwards that he apologized 
for its crudity to Scaliger, calling it " a miscarriage." This was 
followed by the text of Polyaenus, an editio princeps, 1589; a 
text of Aristotle, 1590; and a few notes contributed to Estienne's 
editions of Dionysius oi Halicarnassus and Pliny's Epistolae. 
It is not till we come to his edition of Theophrastus's Characteres 
(1592), that we have a specimen of that peculiar style of illus- 
trative commentary, at once apposite and profuse, which dis- 
tinguishes Casaubon among annotators. At the time of his 
removal to Montpellier he was engaged upon what is the capital 
work of his life, his edition of, and commentary on, Athenaeus. 

In 1598 we find Casaubon at Lyons, superintending the 
passage of his Athenaeus through the press, for which he had 
been unable to find facilities at Montpellier. Here he lived 
in the house of Meric de Vicq, surintendant de la justice, a Catholic, 
but a man of acquirements, whose connexions were with the 
circle of liberal Catholics in Paris. In the suite of De Vicq 
Casaubon made a flying visit to Paris, and was presented to 
Henry IV. The king was very gracious, and said something 
about employing Casaubon's services in the " restoration " 
of the fallen university of Paris. Full of hope he returned to 
Montpellier. In January 1599, he received a summons to repair 
to Paris. But the terms of the letter missive were so vague that, 
though it bore the sign manual, Casaubon hesitated to act 
upon it. However, he resigned his chair at Montpellier, but 
instead of hastening to Paris, he lingered more than a year at 
Lyons, in De Vicq's house, where he hoped to meet the king, 
who was expected to visit the south. Nothing more was heard 
about the professorship, but instead he was summoned by 
De Vicq, who was then in Paris, to come to him in all haste on 
an affair of importance. The business proved to be the Fontaine- 
bleau Conference. Casaubon allowed himself to be persuaded 
to sit as one of the referees who were to adjudicate on the 
challenge sent to Du Plessis Mornay by Cardinal Duperron. By 
so doing he placed himself in a false position, as Scaliger said: 
" Non debebat Casaubon interesse colloquio Plessiaeano; erat 
asinus inter simias, doctus inter imperitos " {Scaliger ana 2 a ). 



The issue was so contrived that the Protestant party could not 
but be pronounced to be in the wrong. By concurring in the 
decision, which was unfavourable to Du Plessis Mornay, Casaubon 
lent the prestige of his name to a court whose verdict would 
without him have been worthless, and confirmed the suspicions 
already current among the Reformed churches that, like his 
friend and patron, Canaye du Fresne, he was meditating abjura- 
tion. From this time forward he became the object of the hopes 
and fears of the two religious parties; the Catholics lavishing 
promises, and plying him with arguments; the Reformed 
ministers insinuating that he was preparing to forsake a losing 
cause, and only higgling about his price. We now know enough 
of Casaubon's mental history to know how erroneous were these 
computations of his motives. But, at the time, it was not 
possible for the immediate parties to the bitter controversy to 
understand the intermediate position between Genevan Calvin- 
ism and Ultramontanism to which Casaubon's reading of the 
fathers had conducted him. 

Meantime the efforts of De Thou and the liberal Catholics 
to retain him in Paris were successful. The king repeated his 
invitation to Casaubon to settle in the capital, and assigned him 
a pension. No more was said about the university. The recent 
reform of the university of Paris had closed its doors to all but 
Catholics; and though the chairs of the College de France were 
not governed by the statutes of the imiversity, public opinion 
ran so violently against heresy, that Henry IV. dared not appoint 
a Calvinist to a chair, even if he had desired to do so. But it was 
designed that Casaubon should succeed to the post of sub- 
librarian of the royal library when it should become vacant, 
and a patent of the reversion was made out in his favour. In 
November 1604, Jean Gosselin died in extreme old age; and 
Casaubon succeeded him as sub-librarian, with a salary of 
400 livres in addition to his pension. 

In Paris Casaubon remained till 16 10. These ten years were 
the brightest period of his life. He had attained the reputation 
of being, after Scaliger, the most learned man of the age, — an 
age in which learning formed the sole standard of literary merit. 
He was placed above penury, though not in easy circumstances. 
He had such facilities for religious worship as a Huguenot could 
have, though he had to go out of the city to Hablon, and after- 
wards to Charenton, for them. He enjoyed the society of men 
of learning, or of men who took an interest in learned publica- 
tions. He had the best opportunities of seeing men of letters 
from foreign countries as they passed through Paris. Above 
all, he had ample facilities for using Greek books, both printed 
and in MS., the want of which he had felt painfully at Geneva 
and Montpellier, and which no other place but Paris could at 
that period have supplied. 

, In spite of all these advantages we find Casaubon restless, 
and ever framing schemes for leaving Paris, and settling elsewhere. 
It was known that he was open to offers, and offers came to him 
from various quarters, — from Nimes, from Heidelberg, from 
Sedan. His friends Lect and Giovanni Diodati wished, rather 
than hoped, to get him back to Geneva. The causes of Casaubon's 
discomfort in Paris were various, but the principal source of 
uneasiness lay in his religion. The life of any Huguenot in Paris 
was hardly secure at that time, for it was doubtful if the police 
of the city was strong enough to protect them against any sudden 
uprising of the fanatical mob, always ready to re-enact the St 
Bartholomew. But Casaubon was exposed to persecution of 
another sort. Ever since the Fontainebleau Conference an 
impression prevailed that he was wavering. It was known 
that he rejected the outre anti-popery opinions current in the 
Reformed churches; that he read the fathers, and wished for 
a church after the pattern of the primitive ages. He was given 
to understand that he could have a professorship only by re- 
cantation. When it was found that he could not be bought, he 
was plied by controversy. Henry IV., who liked Casaubon 
personally, made a point of getting him to follow his own ex- 
ample. By the king's orders Duperron was untiring in his efforts 
to convert him. Casaubon's knowledge of the fathers was that 
of a scholar, Duperron's that of an adroit polemist; and the 



CASAUBON 



443 



scholar was driven to admit that the polemist was often too 
hard for him. These encounters mostly took place in the king's 
library, over which the cardinal, in his capacity of aumonier, 
exercised some kind of authority; and it was therefore impossible 
for Casaubon to avoid them. On the other hand, the Huguenot 
theologians, and especially Pierre du Moulin, chief pastor of the 
church of Paris, accused him of conceding too much, and of 
having departed already from the lines of strict Calvinistic 
orthodoxy. 

When the assassination of Henry IV. gave full rein to the 
Ultramontane party at court, the obsessions of Duperron 
became more importunate, and even menacing. It was now 
that Casaubon began to listen to overtures which had been 
faintly made before, from the bishops and the .court of England. 
In October 1610 he came to England in the suite of the ambas- 
sador, Lord Wottonof Marley (brotherof Casaubon'searlyfriend), 
an official invitation having been sent him by Richard Bancroft, 
archbishop of Canterbury. He had the most flattering reception 
from James I., who was perpetually sending for him to discuss 
theological matters. The English bishops were equally delighted 
to find that the great French scholar was an Anglican ready 
made, who had arrived, by independent study of the Fathers, at 
the very via media between Puritanism and Romanism, which 
was becoming the fashion in the English Church. Casaubon, 
though a layman, was collated to a prebendal stall in Canter- 
bury, and a pension of £300 a year was assigned him from the 
exchequer. Nor were these merely paper figures. When Sir 
Julius Caesar made a difficulty about payment, James sent a 
note in his own hand: " Chanceler of my excheker, I will have Mr 
Casaubon paid before me, my wife, and my barnes." He still 
retained his appointments in France, and his office as librarian. 
He had obtained leave of absence for a visit to England, where 
his permanent settlement was not contemplated. In order to 
retain their hold upon him, the government of the queen regent 
refused to allow his library to be sent over. It required a special 
request from James himself to get leave for Madame Casaubon 
to bring him a part of his most necessary books. Casaubon 
continued to speak of himself as the servant of the regent, and 
to declare his readiness to return when summoned to do so. 

Meanwhile his situation in London gradually developed 
unforeseen sources of discomfort. Not that he had any reason 
to complain of his patrons, the king and the bishops. James 
continued to the last to delight in his company, and to be as 
liberal as the state of his finances allowed. John Overall had 
received him and his whole family into the deanery of St Paul's, 
and entertained him there for a year. Overall and Lancelot 
Andrewes, then bishop of Ely, were the most learned men of 
a generation in which extensive reading was more general among 
the higher clergy than it has ever been since. These two were 
attracted to Casaubon by congenial studies and opinions. With 
the witty and learned bishop of Ely in particular Casaubon was 
always happy to spend such hours as he had to spare from the 
labours of the study. Andrewes took him to Cambridge, where 
he met with a most gratifying reception from the notabilities 
of the university. They went on together to Downham, where 
Casaubon spent six weeks of the summer of 161 1, in which year 
he became naturalized. In 1613 he was taken to Oxford by Sir 
Henry Savile, where, amid the homage and feasting of which he 
was the object, his principal interest was for the MSS. treasures 
of the Bodleian. The honorary degree which was offered him 
he declined. 

But these distinctions were far from compensating the serious 
inconveniences of his position. Having been taken up by the 
king and the bishops, he had to share in their rising unpopularity. 
The courtiers looked with a jealous eye on a pensioner who 
enjoyed frequent opportunities of taking James I. on his weak 
side — his love of book talk — opportunities which they would 
have known how to use. Casaubon was especially mortified by 
Sir Henry Wotton's persistent avoidance of him, so inconsistent 
with their former intimacy. His windows were broken by the 
roughs at night, his children pelted in the streets by day. On 
one occasion he himself appeared at Theobalds with a black eye, 



having received a blow from some ruffian's fist in the street. 
The historian Hallam thinks that he had "become personally 
unpopular "; but these outrages from the vulgar seem to have 
arisen solely from the cockney's antipathy to the Frenchman. 
Casaubon, though he could make shift to read an English book, 
could not speak English, any more than Mme Casaubon. This 
deficiency not only exposed him to insult and fraud, but restricted 
his social intercourse. It excluded him altogether from the 
circle of the " wits "; either this or some other cause prevented 
him from being acceptable in the circle of the lay learned — the 
" antiquaries." William Camden, the antiquary and historian, 
he saw but once or twice. Casaubon had been imprudent enough 
to correct Camden's Greek, and it is possible that the ex-head- 
master of Westminster kept himself aloof in silent resentment of 
Casaubon's superior learning. With Robert Cotton and Henry 
Spelman he 'was slightly acquainted. Of John Selden we find 
no mention. Though Sir Henry Savile ostensibly patronized 
him, yet Casaubon could not help suspecting that it was Savile 
who secretly prompted an attempt by Richard Montagu to 
forestall Casaubon's book on Baronius. Besides the jealousy 
of the natives, Casaubon had now to suffer the open attacks 
of the Jesuit pamphleteers. They had spared him as long as 
there were hopes of getting him over. The prohibition was taken 
off, now that he was committed to Anglicanism. Not only 
Joannes Eudaemon, Heribert Rosweyd and Scioppius (Gaspar 
Schoppe), 1 but a respectable writer, friendly to Casaubon, 
Andreas Schott of Antwerp, gave currency to the insinuation 
that Casaubon had sold his conscience for English gold. 

But the most serious cause of discomfort in his English 
residence was that his time was no longer his own. He was 
perpetually being summoned out of town to one or other of James's 
hunting residences that the king might enjoy his talk. He had 
come over from Paris in search of leisure, and found that a new 
claim on his time was established. The king and the bishops 
wanted to employ his pen in their literary warfare against Rome. 
They compelled him to write first one, then a second, pamphlet 
on the subject of the day, — the royal supremacy. At last, 
ashamed of thus misappropriating Casaubon's stores of learning, 
they set him upon a refutation of the Annals of Baronius, then 
in the full tide of its credit and success. Upon this task Casaubon 
spent his remaining strength and life. He died in great suffering 
on the 1st of July 1614. His complaint was an organic and 
congenital malformation of the bladder; but his end was 
hastened by an unhealthy life of over-study, and latterly by his 
anxiety to acquit himself creditably in his criticism on Baronius. 
He was buried in Westminster Abbey. The monument by which 
his name is there commemorated was erected in 1632 by his friend 
Thomas Morton when bishop of Durham. 

Besides the editions of ancient authors which have been 
mentioned, Casaubon published with commentaries Persius, 
Suetonius, the Scriptores Historiae Augustae. The edition of 
Polybius, on which he had spent vast labour, he left unfinished. 
His most ambitious work was his revision of the text of 
the Deipnosophistae of Athenaeus, with commentary. The Theo- 
phrastus perhaps exhibits his most characteristic excellences 
as a commentator. The Exercitationes in Baronium are but a 
fragment of the massive criticism which he contemplated; 
it failed in bringing before the reader the uncritical character of 
Baronius's history, and had only a moderate success, even 
among the Protestants. His correspondence (in Latin) was 
finally collected by Van Almeloveen (Rotterdam, 1709), who 
prefixed to the letters a careful life of Isaac Casaubon. But this 
learned Dutch editor was acquainted with Casaubon's diary 
only in extract. This diary, Ephemerides, of which the MS. 
is preserved in the chapter library of Canterbury, was printed in 
1850 by the Clarendon Press. It forms the most valuable 
record we possess of the daily life of a scholar, or man of letters, 
of the 16th century. (M. P.) 

A few minor changes have been made in the above article, com- 
pared with its form in the 9th edition. The most complete account 

1 Eudaemon was a Cretan, Rosweyd a Dutch, Jesuit; Schoppe, a 
German philologist and critic. 



444 



CASCADE MOUNTAINS— CASERTA 



of Casaubon is the full biography by Mark Pattison (1875), of 
which a second and revised edition, by H. Nettleship, was published in 
1892; the most recent work on the subject is Isaac Casaubon, sa vie 
et son temps, by L. J. Nazelle (1897); there is a monograph on the 
Fontainebleau conference by J. A. Lalot (1889). Casaubon is the 
subject of one of St Beuve's Causeries, the 30th of July i860 (a notice 
of the Oxford edition of the Ephemerides). See also the article in 
E. Haag's La France Protestante (1882), and J. E. Sandys, Hist, of 
Class. Schol. vol. ii. (ed. 1908), pp. 204 foil. 

CASCADE MOUNTAINS, a continuation northward of the 
Sierra Nevada, some 500 m. across the states of Oregon and 
Washington, U.S.A., into British Columbia. In American 
territory the range lies from 100 to 150 m. from the coast.' The 
Cascades are separated on the S. from the Sierras by deep 
valleys near Mt. Shasta in California, while on the N, somewhat 
below the international boundary of 49 N., they approach the 
northern Rockies, mingling with these in inextricable confusion, 
although their name is given also to the much-broken, river- 
dissected, central mountain plateau that crosses British Columbia 
from S.E. to N.W. Geologically the Sierras and Cascades are 
very different, though their exact relations are not yet clearly 
determined; topographically they are also different. The 
Cascades are in general a comparatively low, broad mass sur- 
mounted by a number of imposing peaks in Oregon and 
Washington. Especially north of the Columbia river, the 
range widens out into a plateau. There are no notable elevations 
in British Columbia. Evidences of volcanic activity in com- 
paratively recent geologic time are abundant throughout the 
length of the range, and all the highest summits are volcanic 
cones, covered with snow fields and, in a number of instances, 
with glaciers. The grandest peaks are Shasta (14,380 ft.) at 
the southern end, and Rainier (or Tacoma, 14,363 ft.) in 
Washington, two of the most magnificent mountains of America. 
Other notable summits are Mt. Pitt (9760), Mt. Scott (9122), 
Diamond Peak (8807), Mt. Thielsen (9250), Mt. Jefferson 
(10,200) and Mt. Hood (11,225), in Oregon; and Stuart (9470), 
St Helens (10,000), Baker (10,827) and Adams (12,470), in 
Washington. The Fraser river in the far north, the Columbia 
at the middle, and the Klamath in the south cut athwart the 
range to the Pacific, and many minor streams descend the range 
to swell their waters, while some drain directly from the flanks 
of the mountains into Puget Sound and Gray's Harbor. The 
Columbia has cut almost to the sea-level through the great 
mountain mass, the Dalles being only about 100 ft. above the 
sea. It is to the Cascades of the tremendous rapids at this point 
that the mountains owe their name. The slopes of the Cascades, 
particularly on the west, which has a very much moister climate 
than the eastern slope, are clothed with magnificent forests, 
chiefly of coniferous evergreens: firs, pine, tamarack and cedar. 
The Douglas fir, the " Oregon pine " of commerce, often attaining 
a height of 250 ft., is one of the most beautiful trees in the world. 
There are also a variety of deciduous trees, but in the aggregate 
they are unimportant. In 1910 the mountain forests were 
largely included in ten national forest reserves, with a total 
area of nearly 16,000,000 acres, extending from the northern 
boundary of Washington to the southern boundary of Oregon. 
The magnificent forest cloak, splendid peaks, great open 
mountain plateau pastures, and exquisite lakes embosomed in 
mountain fastnesses and forest gloom,, give variety to the 
scenery, which is often grand, and throughout the range inde- 
scribably beautiful, though perhaps not equal to the Sierra 
Nevada in splended light and colour. Large game — deer, bears, 
mountain sheep and goats, wolves and panthers — still abound. 
Two great railway systems, the Great Northern and the Northern 
Pacific, cross the Cascades through noteworthy tunnels; that 
on the former line is 2J m. long, that on the latter a little less 
than 2 m. 

See Oregon and Washington; also G. O. Smith and F. C. 
Calkins, A Geological Reconnaissance across the Cascade Range near 
the Forty-Ninth Parallel (Washington, D.C., 1904), being U.S. 
Geological Survey Bulletin 253. 

CASE, JOHN (d. 1600), English Aristotelian scholar and 
physician, was born at Woodstock. He was educated at Oxford, 



and elected to a fellowship at St John's College, which he was 
obliged to resign in consequence of his Roman Catholic sym- 
pathies. He subsequently opened a philosophical school in 
Oxford, which was largely attended. He enjoyed a great reputa- 
tion as a logician and dialectician, and was in addition an 
authority on music and a distinguished physician. He is de- 
scribed as " a man of an innocent, meek, religious and studious 
life," an agreeable conversationalist, an enthusiastic teacher, 
and a great favourite with his pupils. Most of his works were 
commentaries on various treatises of Aristotle (Organon, Ethics, 
Politics, Oeconomics, Physics) under curious titles; they enjoyed 
a large circulation during his time, and were frequently reprinted. 
He was also the author of The Praise of Musicke (1586), dedicated 
to Sir Walter Raleigh. 

CASE. (1) (From Lat. casus, that which falls or happens; 
coder e, to fall), a word used in various senses traceable to the 
derivation. In grammar, the " cases " are the various forms 
in the declension of a noun, adjective or pronoun, the Latin 
word being a translation of the Greek XTtocns, falling, applied 
by Aristotle to the variations from the simple form of the word, 
whether noun, verb or adjective (of which the adverb would be 
a 7TT&J(ris). Later grammarians confined the term to nouns, 
and included the nominative. In law, " case " is the common 
term for a cause or suit brought before a court of justice. Certain 
particular legal usages may also be noted. Action on the case 
means an action for the recovery of damages for an injury to the 
person or property, where the act done was not immediately 
injurious (see Contract; Tort). A case stated is a statement 
of facts drawn up by one court for the opinion of another on a 
point of law. A special case is a statement of facts agreed to on 
behalf of two or more litigant parties, and submitted for the 
opinion of a court of justice as to the law bearing upon the facts 
so stated. A leading case is a decision which settles some point 
of importance. In the legal systems of the United Kingdom 
and of the United States decided cases are considered authoritative 
for courts of at least equal jurisdiction with those in which the 
judgments were given, but on the continent of Europe the rule 
is, following that of the Roman law, that they are instructive 
but not authoritative. 

(2) (O. Fr. casse, mod. chdsse, Lat. capsa, from capere, to hold; 
cf. " cash "), a box, sheath or covering. The term is applied to 
the natural protective covering of seed-vessels, and of a pupa 
or chrysalis. It is also used of a box containing instruments, 
pistols, swords, &c, and sometimes of the contents. In building, 
a " case " is the facing where the backing may be of inferior 
material; the framework in which a window or door is hung; 
or the wall surrounding a stair, " staircase " properly signifying 
the whole structure of walls and stairs. In bookbinding, a 
" case " means the boards and back in which the books are bound; 
and in typography, the tray, divided into partitions, containing 
the type ready for the compositor's use. 

CASEMATE (Ital. casa, a house, and matta, dull or dim), 
an armoured vault or chamber, or in field fortification, a bomb- 
proof shelter; in architecture, a hollow moulding, chiefly 
employed in cornices. 

CASEMENT (from a Lat. form casamentum), in architec- 
ture, a frame in wood or metal, which holds the glass of 
a window, and is hung by hinges either at the top, bottom or 
sides. 

CASERTA, a town and episcopal see of Campania, Italy, 
the capital of the province of Caserta, situated 21 m. N. by E. 
of Naples by rail via Accerra, and 23 m. via Aversa. Pop. 
(1901) town, 19,180; commune, 33,373. The modern town 
(229 ft.) was a mere village belonging to the Caetani family of 
Sermoneta, who were counts of Caserta, until its purchase from 
them by Charles IV. of Naples, and the erection of the royal 
palace, begun by Luigi Vanvitelli (van Wittel) in 1752, but not 
completed until 1774 for Charles's son Ferdinand IV. It forms 
a rectangle, the south front being 830 ft. long and 134 ft. high, 
with 37 windows in each storey. The interior is richly decorated 
with marbles, almost all of which, except the white Carrara 
marble, are Neapolitan or Sicilian. The staircase, the chapel 



CASE-SHOT— CASHEW NUT 



445 



and the theatre are especially sumptuous. The extensive 
gardens which occupy the hillside behind the palace are adorned 
with fountains and cascades; the botanical garden contains 
many trees from northern climates. Two miles north is S. Leucio, 
a village founded by Ferdinand IV. in 1789, with a royal casino, 
and large silk factories which are still active. The old town 
(Caserta Vecchia) lies high (13 10 ft.) about 3 m. to the north-east. 
It was founded in the 9th century by the Lombards of Capua. 
The cathedral has not suffered fromrestoration. It was completed 
in 1153. It is a copy of that of Sessa Aurunca, and preserves 
the type of the Latin basilica. The campanile, Sicilian in style, 
was completed in 1234, while the dome, which betrays similar 
motives, is even later. Its pulpit is decorated with the richest 
polychrome mosaic that can be found anywhere in Sicily or 
south Italy, and is quite Moslem in its brilliance. It is indeed re- 
markable to find these motives in a church so far inland (Bertaux, 
L'Art dans Vltalie mtridionale, Paris, 1904, i. 353, &c). There 
are also the ruins of the old walls. 

CASE-SHOT, a projectile used in ordnance for fighting at 
close quarters. It consists of a thin metal case containing a 
large number of bullets or other small projectiles (see 
Ammunition). Case-shot was formerly called " canister," 
though the term now used occurs as early as 1625. 

CASH. (1) (From O. Fr. casse, mod. caisse, a box or chest; 
cf. " case "), a term which, originally meaning a box in which 
money is kept, is now commonly applied to ready money or coin. 
In commercial and banking usage " cash " is sometimes confined 
to specie; it is also, in opposition to bills, drafts or securities, 
applied to bank-notes. Hence " to cash " means to convert 
cheques and other negotiable instruments into coin. In book- 
keeping, in such expressions as " petty cash," " cash-book," 
and the like, it has the same significance, and so also in 
" cash-payment " or ready-money payment as opposed to 
" credit," however the payment may be made, by coin, notes 
or cheque. 

The " cash on delivery " or " collect on delivery " system, 
known as C.O.D., is one whereby a tradesman can, through a 
delivery agency, send goods to a customer, and have the money 
due to him collected on the delivery of the same, with a guarantee 
from the carrier that, if no money be collected, the goods shall 
be returned. The function of such an agency is performed in 
the United States of America by the express companies (see 
Express). In most countries of the continent of Europe the 
post office acts as such an agent, as in Germany (where the 
system is known as Post-Nachnahme) and in France (contre 
remboursement) . It is also in use in India, where it is known as 
" value payable," and was introduced in 1877 in Australia. 
The advantages of the system are obvious, from the point of view 
bo'th of the customer, who can, by post or telegram, order and 
obtain speedy delivery from large towns, and of the tradesman, 
whose area of trade is indefinitely extended. The system does 
away with credit or the delay and inconvenience of paying in 
advance. The success of the large " catalogue " houses in 
America has been mainly due to the system as operated by the 
express companies. At various times, notably in 1904, it has 
been proposed that the General Post Office of the United 
Kingdom should adopt the system. The consistent opposition 
of the retail traders in large urban centres other than the large 
stores, and of the country shopkeeper generally, has been 
sufficient to secure the refusal of the postmaster-general to 
the proposed scheme, but a commencement was made in 1908 
for orders not exceeding £20 between the United Kingdom and 
Egypt, Cyprus and Malta, and certain British post offices in 
Turkey and Tangier. 

(2) (From Tamil kasil, Sinhalese kasi, a small coin, adopted 
by Portuguese as caixa, a box, and similarly assimilated in 
English to " cash " above), a name given by English residents 
in the East to native coins of small value, and particularly to 
the copper coinage of China, the native name for which is isien. 
This, the only coin minted by the government, should bear a 
fixed ratio of 1000 cash to one tael of silver, but in practice 
there is no such fixed value. It is the universal medium of 



exchange throughout China for all retail transactions. The tsien 
is a round disk of copper alloy, with a square hole punched 
through the centre for stringing. A " string of cash " amounts 
to 500 or 1000 cash, strung in divisions of 50 or 100. 

CASHEL, a city of Co. Tipperary, Ireland, in the east parlia- 
mentary division, 5 m. S.E. of Goold's Cross and Cashel station 
on the main line of the Great Southern & Western railway, 
96 m. S.W. from Dublin. Pop. of urban district (1901) 2938. 
The town, which lies at the base of the Rock of Cashel, is of 
somewhat poor appearance, but contains several public buildings. 
There are also the cathedral church of St John the Baptist 
(c. 1780), the deanery house (once the bishop's palace), and a 
Roman Catholic church. Cashel gives name to a Roman Catholic 
archdiocese. 

The Rock of Cashel is the object of chief interest in the place. 
This elevation of limestone formation rises abruptly from the 
plain to a height of about 300 ft. and is a commanding object 
for many miles around. Its summit is occupied by one of the 
most interesting assemblages of ruins in Ireland, consisting of the 
remains of St Patrick's cathedral, a round tower, Cormac's 
chapel, and an ancient cross. The chapel, which is said to have 
been erected by King Cormac M'Carthy in the 12th century, 
combines the ancient form of high stone roof, having chambers 
between the pitch and the vault-, with the richest Norman 
decoration; the chancel arch being of especial magnificence. 
The cathedral, of the 13th century, is cruciform in design, 
with lancet windows and pointed arches, and contains many 
interesting sculptures and tombs. In the adjoining cemetery 
there stands, on a rude pedestal, whereon the kings of Munster 
were crowned, the " Cross of Cashel," with an effigy of St Patrick 
and a portrayal of the Crucifixion sculptured on its sides. The 
round tower, situated at the north-east angle of the cathedral, 
is 80 ft. high with a circumference of 50 ft., and unlike the 
neighbouring ruins is built, not of the limestone of the " Rock," 
but of freestone. Of the defences of the Rock a massive guard- 
tower and portions of the wall remain. At the base of the Rock 
is Hore Abbey, a Cistercian foundation (1272), exhibiting a 
similar style of architecture to that of the cathedral on the Rock; 
and within the town is a Dominican priory (1243), of which the 
east window is a beautiful example of the style of the period. 
From the Rock itself an extensive prospect is commanded over 
the rich Golden Vale backed by the Galtee Mountains, the Devil's 
Bit, and other ranges; the clustering roofs of the city providing 
a picturesque foreground. 

The history of Cashel belongs to the early period of Irish 
chronology. Legend states that the vision of an angel blessing 
the Rock, seen by two swineherds early in the 5th century, led 
Core Mac Luighdheach, king of Munster, to establish a strong- 
hold here. It became one of the principal seats of the kings 
of Munster, but in 1101 it was given over to the church by 
King Murkertagh O'Brien. It afterwards became noteworthy 
as the place where Henry II. received the homage of 
O'Brien, king of Limerick, and still later, where Edward Bruce 
held his Irish parliament. The cathedral was burnt in 1495 
by the earl of Kildare. Cashel was taken by storm during 
the wars of 1647. It was reduced from an archbishopric to a 
bishopric in 1839, and was disfranchised, on account of corrupt 
practice, in 1870, having previously returned one member to 
parliament. 

CASHEW NUT, the fruit of the cashew, cadju or acajou 
tree, Anacardium occidentale (nat. ord. Anacardiaceae) , a native 
of the West Indian Islands. The fruit is kidney-shaped, about 
an inch in length, and the kernel is enclosed in two coverings, 
the outer of which is smooth, grey and leathery. Inside this 
external rind is a dark-coloured layer, containing an excessively 
acrid juice. The kernels have a bland, oily, pleasant taste. 
They are much eaten, both raw and roasted, in the tropical 
regions in which the tree is cultivated, and they yield a light- 
coloured, sweet-tasted oil, said to be equal to olive oil for culinary 
purposes. The fruit-stalk, immediately under the fruit, is 
swollen and fleshy, and assumes a pear-like shape. This swollen 
portion of the stalk has a pleasant acid taste, and is eaten under 



446 



CASHIBO— CASIMIR III. 




Anacardium occidentale, Cashew Nut plant, belonging to the 
nat. ord. Anacardiaceae. 



Branch (reduced), bearing 
flowers and fruit. The fruit- 
stalks are enlarged in a pear- 
like form, bearing the nut 
(the true fruit) at their apex. 

Flower expanded. 

Stamen and pistil, with the ' 
calyx; one fertile stamen 
longer than the others. 



4. Stamen separated. 

5. Nut constituting the fruit. 

6. Nut opened longitudinally. 

7. Seed separated from the 

nut. 

8. Cotyledons opened to show the 

radicle a, and the plumule. 



the name of cashew apple. By fermentation it yields an alcoholic 
beverage, from which a spirit for drinking is distilled in the West 
Indies and Brazil. The stem of the tree yields a gum analogous 
to gum arabic. 

CASHIBO, or Carapache (" bat "), a tribe of South American 
Indians of Pannoan stock, living in scanty numbers on the west 
side of the Ucayali, Peru. They are a wild, savage people who 
have always been foremost in attacks on the Jesuits. They 
joined Juan Santos in 1744 in the destruction of missions. 

CASHIER. (1) (Adapted from the Fr. caissier, one in charge 
of the caisse, or money-box), one who has charge of the payment 
or receiving of money in a business house. The " cashier " 
may be a high executive official of a .banking or mercantile house 
— thus the name of chief cashier of the Bank of England appears 
on all notes issued during his occupation of the post — or he may 
be merely a clerk, who receives payment for goods sold, and has 
the right to give receipts for the same. 

(2) (In origin ultimately the same as " quash," to annul, 
from Lat. quassare, to dash or break to pieces, a frequenta- 
tive of qualere, to shake, but also connected in form and 
meaning with cassare, to make, cassus, empty or void), a military 
term, meaning originally to disband, and probably adopted from 
the Dutch in the 16th century. The word in various forms is 
used in the same sense in most European languages. It is now 
used in English for the dismissal of a commissioned officer from 
the army and navy for particularly serious offences, in the words 



of the Army Act, 1881, s. 16, for " behaving in a scandalous 
manner unbecoming an officer and a gentleman." " Cashiering " 
involves not merely the loss of the commission, but also a per- 
manent disqualification from serving the state in any capacity. 

CASH REGISTER, a species of calculating machine adapted 
for use in connexion with the cash-tills of shops, in order to 
provide a record of the money received. Such machines are made 
in great variety and widely used. Sometimes the records are 
constituted by holes punched in a roll of paper; in other cases 
they are shown on dials by the aid of adding mechanism. A 
common form has a number of keys, each representing a particular 
sum and each attached to a counting mechanism which records 
how many times it has been used. By pressing appropriate 
combinations of these keys the amount of any purchase can be 
registered, and the combined records of all thecountingmechanism 
give the total that has been passed through the machine in any 
selected period. Each key when pressed also raises an indicator 
which informs the customer how much he has to pay. In their 
more elaborate forms these cash registers may have a separate 
money-drawer for each assistant employed in the shop, thus 
enabling the proprietor to ascertain how many customers each 
man has served and how much money he has taken, and also to 
fix responsibility for mistakes, bad money, &c. The machines 
are also made to deliver a printed receipt for each purchase, 
showing the amount, date and assistant concerned, and they 
may be arranged to keep separate records of credit sales, money 
received on account, and money paid out. 

CASILINUM (mod. Capua), an ancient city of Campania, 
Italy, 3 m. N.W. of the ancient Capua. Its position at the point 
of junction of the Via Appia and Via Latina, and at their crossing 
of the river Volturnus by a three-arched bridge, which still 
exists, gave it considerable importance under the Roman 
republic; and while the original pre-Roman town, which was 
doubtless dependent on the neighbouring Capua, stood entirely 
on the left (S.) bank, surrounded on three sides by the river, 
the Roman city extended to the right bank also; remains of 
it have been found at some 25 ft. below the modern ground-level, 
the river-bed having risen considerably. In the Second Punic War 
it was occupied by Fabius Cunctator in 217 B.C., taken by Hanni- 
bal a.fter a gallant defence by troops from Praeneste and Perusia 
in the winter of 216-215, DU t recaptured in the following year, 
serving the Romans as their base of queries against Capua.
It lost its independence and became a praefectura. Caesar 
conducted a colony thither in 59 B.C., which was renewed by 
Antony in 44 B.C. The veterans took Octavian's side after 
Caesar's death, but it seems to have been united with Capua 
before the time of Vespasian, and it does not occur in the list of 
independent communities given by Pliny, who indeed (Hist. 
Nat. iii. 70) speaks of the morientis Casilini reliquiae, and only 
its position at the junction of the roads redeemed it from utter 
insignificance. (T. As.) 

CASIMIR III., called "The Great," king of Poland (1310- 
1370), the son of Wladislaus Lokietek, king of Poland, and 
Jadwiga, princess of Kalisch, was born at Kowal in Kujavia 
in 13 10. Casimir belongs to that remarkable group of late 
medieval sovereigns who may be called the fathers of modern 
diplomacy, inasmuch as they relegated warfare to its proper 
place as the instrument of politics, and preferred the council- 
chamber to the battle-field. He was educated at the court of 
Charles Robert of Hungary, who had married Casimir's beautiful 
sister Elizabeth, and who gave his brother-in-law an excellent 
education under Italian masters. In his youth Casimir was 
considered frivolous and licentious; while his sudden flight 
from the field of Plowce, the scene of his father's great victory 
over the Teutonic knights, argued but poorly for his personal 
courage. When, therefore, he ascended the Polish throne in 1333, 
the future of his country, which then consisted of little more than 
the lately reunited provinces of Great and Little Poland, seemed 
dark indeed ; especially as she was still at war with the Teutonic 
Order and with John of Luxemburg, king of Bohemia, who 
claimed the crown of Poland also. Fortunately Casimir was a 
man of penetrating genius. His father had been a hero who 



CASIMIR IV. 



447 



trusted entirely to his sword, yet the heroic struggle of a lifetime 
had barely sufficed to keep at bay the numerous and potent foes 
with which Poland was environed. Casimir recognized from the 
first that further fighting against tremendous odds was unprofit- 
able. A careful, calculating dynastic policy, which aimed at the 
establishment of an equilibrium by means of prudent compro- 
mises and defensive alliances, was, he rightly judged, the best 
guarantee for the future safety and glory of Poland. Casimir began 
by tying the hands of the Teutonic Order by the truce of Thorn; 
he induced the king of Bohemia to relinquish his claims to the 
Polish throne by consenting to leave him a free hand in Silesia 
(conference of Trencsen, early in 1335); and subsequently he 
attended the celebrated congress of Visegrad (November 12- 
December 3, ^35), where Charles Robert entertained him 
and the king of Bohemia magnificently. At this congress the 
differences between Casimir and John of Bohemia were finally 
adjusted; peace was made between the king of Poland and the 
Teutonic Order on the basis of the cession of Pomerania, Kulm, 
and Michalow to the knights, who retroceded Kujavia and 
Dobrzyn; and the kings of Hungary and Poland further agreed 
to assist each other in the acquisition of the south-eastern 
border province of Halicz, or Red Russia (very nearly correspond- 
ing to the modern Galicia), in case the necessity for intervention 
should arise. The Holy See, jealous of the growing power of 
the house of Luxemburg, attempted to set aside the decrees 
of the congress of Visegrad, by urging Casimir to take up arms 
against the knights once more; but Casimir prudently refrained 
from hostilities, and ultimately compensated himself in the south- 
east for his losses in the north. To guarantee still further the 
integrity of Poland, Casimir, who had no male issue, concluded 
a compact with Charles Robert whereby he recognized Louis, 
Charles Robert's son, as the successor to the Polish crown; 
Louis on his part contracting to confirm the privileges of the 
Polish gentry and clergy, and to rule Poland through natives only. 

In 1340 the death of George II. of Halicz, and the ravaging 
of that fruitful border principality by the Tatars, induced Casimir 
and Charles Robert to establish their joint influence there, and 
in 1344 the Red Russian boyar, Demetrius Detko, was appointed 
starosta, or governor, in the names of the two kings. Nine years 
later Lubart of Lithuania, who also had claims upon Red Russia, 
disputed the sway of Poland in that principality. Hungary 
coming to the assistance of Poland, Lubart was defeated and 
taken prisoner; but Casimir, anxious to avoid a bloody war 
with Lithuania's Tatar allies, came to a compromise with Lubart 
whereby Poland retained Halicz with Lemberg, while Vladimir, 
Belz, and Brzesc fell to the share of Lithuania. With the Teutonic 
knights, still Poland's most dangerous foe, Casimir preserved 
peaceful relations throughout his reign. He kept them within 
due bounds by using the influence of the Luxemburgers against 
them at the papal, court; but the disputes between Poland and 
the order were ultimately settled by the peace of Kalisz (July 
23, 1343), when the knights engaged for the first time to pay 
tribute to the Pob'sh crown. John of Bohemia was also a con- 
stant "thorn in the side of Casimir. Silesia, now split up into 
seventeen principalities, was the bone of contention between them ; 
and when Casimir suddenly invaded that country, took Wschowa, 
and made Prince Charles of Bohemia a prisoner, war between 
the two kingdoms actually broke out and Casimir was besieged in 
Cracow by the Czechs. But his Hungarian allies hastened to 
his assistance, and the mediation of the Holy See restored 
peace in 1346. The death of the adventurous John at Crecy, 
and the election of his son as emperor, still further improved the 
situation. Charles IV., a cautious sovereign with many cares, 
was as anxious for the maintenance of peace as Casimir himself. 
Thus the relations between them were never very seriously 
disturbed. 

Throughout his reign Casimir never neglected the great work 
of domestic reform, greatly aided by Jaroslaw Skotowicki, 
archbishop of Gnesen, formerly a professor at Bologna. The 
first result of their joint labours was the much-needed codification 
of the laws of Great and Little Poland in 1347. This was followed 
by the establishment of a supreme court of appeal in 1357. 



Towards everything like disorder, tyranny, or aristocratic 
oppression, Casimir was always inexorably severe; all dis- 
turbers of the peace were remorselessly put to death as the worst 
enemies of their country and he enjoyed in consequence the 
honourable title of " the Peasants' King." The lawlessness 
of the nobility was most noticeable in the province of Great 
Poland, where outrageous acts of violence were of everyday 
occurrence. To remedy the evil, Casimir drew up and pro- 
mulgated the severe statute of Great Poland, which went to the 
very root of the matter and greatly strengthened the hands of 
the king's justices. Casimir also did much for education. 
Stimulated by the example of Charles IV., who had founded the 
university of Prague in 1348, Casimir on the 12th of May 1364 
established and richly endowed the first university of Cracow, 
which had five professors of Roman law, three of Canon law, 
two of physics, and one master of arts. The security of the 
kingdom was sensibly promoted by the erection of a cordon of 
fortresses on its north-eastern borders, and a blow was given to 
foreign interference when Casimir succeeded in gaining dominant 
influence over the independent Polish principality of Masovia, 
which had hitherto gravitated between Bohemia and the 
Teutonic Order. 

Casimir's last political act was the conclusion of a fresh 
alliance with Louis of Hungary against Charles IV. at Buda 
in 1369. He died on the 5th of November 1370 from the effects 
of an injury received while hunting. Though married three 
times Casimir left no sons; but he had the satisfaction of knowing 
that his domains would pass into the hands of a nephew every 
whit as capable and sagacious as himself. 

See Jan Leniek, The Congress of Visegrad (Pol.), (Lemberg, 1884) ; 
J. K. Kochanowski, Casimir the Great (Pol.), (Warsaw, 1900); 
Kazimierz J. Gorzycki, The Annexation of Red Russia by Casimir the 
Great (Pol.), (Lemberg, 1889) ; Stanislaw Kryzanowski, The Embassy 
of Casimir the Great to Avignon (Pol.), (Cracow, 1900). (R. N. B.) 

CASIMIR IV., king of Poland (1427-1492), second son of 
Wladislaus II. Jagiello, was appointed while still a lad grand- 
duke of Lithuania by his father, and crowned king of Poland 
at Cracow in June 1447, three years after the death of his elder 
brother, Wladislaus III., at the battle of Varna. The cause of 
this long interregnum was the disinclination of the Lithuanians 
to part with their prince till their outstanding differences with 
Poland, relating chiefly to the delimitation of the frontiers of the 
two states, had been settled. Casimir's reign of forty-five years 
was epoch-making for Poland. He was without doubt one of the 
greatest" statesmen of his age, concealing beneath a simple 
exterior and homely habits a profound political sagacity and an 
unerring common-sense, and possessing in a high degree those 
useful qualities of patience, moderation, and tenacity, which 
characterized nearly all the princes of the house of Jagiello. 
Throughout life he steadily followed two guiding principles — 
the preservation of the political union between Poland and 
Lithuania at whatever cost, and the recovery of the lost lands 
of old Poland. It was.due entirely to his steadfast adherence to 
these principles that Poland in the course of the 15 th century 
rose to the rank of a great power; but by a singular irony of 
fate, Casimir, in consequence of his unswerving efforts to make 
his country glorious and prosperous, entirely forfeited the 
popularity of his Polish subjects, whose true interests he under- 
stood far better than they did themselves. Thus his refusal to 
sacrifice Polish to Lithuanian or Lithuanian to Polish interests 
caused bo th Poles and Lithuanians to accuse the far-seeing monarch 
of' partiality and favouritism; while his anti-German policy, 
on which the future safety of the dual state depended, could 
only be carried through by the most humiliating concessions 
to patrician pride and greed. His difficulties were moreover 
considerably enhanced by the fact that he was not of an essentially 
martial temperament, and could not therefore appeal to the 
heroic side of the Polish character. 

The great triumph of Casimir's reign was the final subjugation 
of the Teutonic Order, a triumph only accomplished after a 
harassing and desultory thirteen years' war, during which 
Casimir's own subjects gave him more trouble than all his 
enemies. The pretext of the rupture was the attempt of the 



44 8 



CASIMIR-PERIER— CASINO 



knights to crush the Prussian diet, which, bearing as it did most 
of the burdens, claimed fairly enough a proportionate share 
in the government of the Prussian provinces. Excommunicated 
by the pope and placed under the ban of the Empire, the 
Prussian cities and gentry naturally turned to their nearest 
neighbour, Poland, for protection. In October 1453 they placed 
themselves beneath the overlordship of Casimir; on the 4th of 
February 1454 formally renounced their ancient allegiance to the 
Order; and some weeks later captured no fewer than fifty-seven 
towns and castles. On the 6th of March 1454 Casimir issued 
a manifesto directing the incorporation of the Prussian provinces 
with Poland, but granting them at the same time freedom 
from taxation and full autonomy. But except in the border 
province of Great Poland, the acquisition of this new territory 
excited little interest and no enthusiasm in Poland generally. 
The local diets granted subsidies with a niggard hand, and for 
the conduct of the war the king soon had to depend almost 
entirely on Hussite mercenaries, who frequently turned against 
him when their wages were not paid. The Polish gentry on the 
other hand exhibited far less energy in the field than in the 
council chamber; they were defeated again and again by the 
knights, and showed themselves utterly incapable of taking 
fortresses. No wonder then if in the earlier years of the war 
the Order recovered its lost ground, and the king, irritated 
beyond endurance by the suicidal parsimony of the estates, 
threatened to retire to the forests of Lithuania. But manlier 
counsels prevailed, the struggle was resumed, and after the 
bloody victory of Puck (September 17, 1462) the scales of 
fortune inclined decisively to the side of Poland. Finally 
the Holy See intervened, and by the second peace of Thorn 
(October 14, 1466) all West Prussia, as it is now called, 
was ceded to Poland, while East Prussia was left in the hands of 
the knights, who held it as a fief of the Polish crown. 

The intervention of the Curia, which hitherto had been hostile 
to Casimir because of his steady and patriotic resistance to papal 
aggression, was due to the permutations of European politics. 
The pope was anxious to get rid of the Hussite king of Bohemia, 
George Podebrad, as the first step towards the formation of a 
league against the Turk. Casimir was to be a leading factor in this 
combination, and he took advantage of it to procure the election 
of his son Wladislaus as king of Bohemia. But he would not 
commit himself too far, and his ulterior plans were frustrated 
by the rivalry of Matthias Corvinus, king of Hungary, who even 
went so far as to stimulate the Teutonic Order to rise against 
Casimir. The death of Matthias in 1490 was a great relief to 
Poland, and Casimir employed the two remaining years of his 
reign in consolidating his position still further. He expired rather 
suddenly while hunting at Troki in Lithuania in June 1492. 

The feature of Casimir's character which most impressed his 
contemporaries was his extraordinary simplicity and sobriety. 
He, one of the greatest monarchs in Europe, habitually wore 
plain Cracow cloth, drank nothing but water, and kept the 
most austere of tables. His one passion was the chase. Yet 
his liberality to his ministers and servants was proverbial, and 
his vanquished enemies he always treated with magnificent 
generosity. Casimir's married life was singularly happy; His 
consort, Elizabeth of Austria, " the mother of the Jagiellos," 
bore him six sons and seven daughters, and by her affection and 
good counsel materially relieved the constant anxieties and 
grievous burdens of his long and arduous reign. 

See Jan Dlugosz, Opera (Cracow, 1887) ; August Sokolowski, Illus- 
trated History of Poland (Pol.), vol. ii. (Vienna, 1904). (R. N. B.) 

CASIMIR-PERIER, JEAN PAUL PIERRE (1847-1907), fifth 
president of the French Republic, was born in Paris on the 8th 
of November 1847, being the grandson of Casimir Pierre Pener 
(q.v.) the famous premier of Louis Philippe. He entered public 
life as secretary to his father, A. V.L. C. Perier, who was minister 
of the interior under the presidency of Thiers. In 1874 he was 
elected general councillor'.of the Aube, and was sent by the same 
department to the chamber of deputies in the general elections 
of 1876, and he was always re-elected until his presidency. In 
spite of the traditions of his family, Casimir-Perier joined the 



group of Republicans on the Left, and was one of the 363 on the 
Seize-Mai (1877). If he refused to vote the expulsion of the 
princes in 1883, and resigned as deputy upon the enactment of 
the law, it was only owing to personal connexions with the family 
of Orleans. On the 17th of August 1883 he became under- 
secretary of state for war, and retained that position until the 7 th 
of January 1885. From 1890 to 1892 he was vice-president of 
the chamber, then in 1893 president. On the 3rd of December 
he became prime-minister, holding the department of foreign 
affairs, resigned in May 1894, and was re-elected president of the 
chamber. On the 24th of June 1894, after the assassination of 
President Carnot, he was elected president of the republic by 
45 1 votes against 195 for Henri Brisson and 97 for Charles Dupuy. 
His presidency lasted only six months. The resignation of the 
Dupuy ministry on the 14th of January 1895 was followed the 
next day by that of the president. Casimir-Perier explained his 
action by the fact that he found himself ignored by the ministers, 
who did not consult him before taking decisions, and did not keep 
him informed upon political events, especially in foreign affairs. 
From that time he definitely and absolutely abandoned politics, 
and devoted himself to business — especially mining. At the 
trial of Dreyfus at Rennes, Casimir-Perier's evidence, as opposed 
to that of General Mercier, was of great value to the cause of 
Dreyfus. He died on the nth of March 1907. 

CASINO (diminutive of casa, a house), the Italian name for a 
pleasure-house in a garden, which has been extended to a place 
of public amusement at pleasure resorts, in which concerts, 
theatrical performances and public balls are given, and which 
usually contains a cafi-restaurant and gaming saloons. " Casino " 
as an architectural term is still employed in France, and the 
subject is given in competitive programmes in the French schools 
of design. In the 18th century in England many Italian examples 
were built in the parks of country mansions, and Sir William 
Chambers in his treatise on civil architecture publishes plates of 
the casinos he had built at Marino, near Dublin, Wilton near 
Salisbury, and Birdshall, Yorkshire. 

Casino or Cassino is also the name given to a game of cards of 
obscure origin, played with a full whist-pack. The object is to 
take as many cards as possible, particularly such as have special 
value. It may be played by two, three or four persons, partners 
sitting opposite one another. The player at the dealer's right is 
called the pony {pone), the one at his left the eldest hand. The 
dealer (selected by the cut of the lowest card) deals four cards to 
each player by twos and also, just before dealing to himself, four 
to the table, face upwards. The eldest hand begins the game by 
playing a card in one of three ways. Either he may take one of 
the exposed cards on the table by matching it with one from his 
own hand; or he may put one of his cards upon one of the table 
hand and call the sum of the pips (called building); or thirdly, 
failing to do either of these things, he must trail, ix. lay a card 
face upwards on the table beside the exposed cards, and the 
player at his left then plays in his turn. When each player has 
played out all four of his cards the dealer deals four more all 
round, and the game proceeds until the pack is exhausted. The 
game either (1) ends at this juncture, the player having secured 
the most points winning; or (2) the side or player first securing 
21 points wins; or (3) the points secured in a given number of 
deals may determine the winner. The points and their respective 
values are as follows : — Big (or Great) Casino (ten of diamonds) , 2 ; 
Little Casino (deuce of spades), 1; Cards (greatest number), 3; 
Spades (greatest number), 1; Aces, 1 each or 4 together; Sweeps^ 
1 each. Thus, without sweeps, the maximum points in one deal 
are n. A sweep is a play that clears the table of all exposed cards. 
The game then proceeds by the next player placing a card on the 
table face upwards. 

" Building," referred to above, is done as follows. Should a 3 
lie exposed on the table, a player may place a 4 upon it, saying, 
" I build a 7," and, if it is not disturbed before his next turn, he 
may then take the two cards with another 7 from his hand. It 
follows that no combination may be built unless the builder holds 
the proper card in his hand. But a build may be increased. Thus, 
in the case cited above, another player may put a 2 upon the two 
cards which make 7 and say, " I build 9," in which case the original 



CASINUM— CASKET LETTERS 



449 



builder loses control of the build unless he also holds a 9 in his hand 
or can himself increase the build again; for instance, adding an ace 
and calling 10. In the old way of playing the ace counted 1, the 
deuce 2, and so on as at whist, excepting that all court cards counted 
10. But in the popular variation called Royal Casino, now almost 
universally played, the ace counts either I or 14, the king 13, the 
queen 12 and the knave II. In this manner the opportunities for 
simple and increased building are greatly multiplied, resulting in a 
much livelier game. 

If a player has made a build he must take it in on his next play, 
unless he can take some other card. He cannot have two builds on 
the table at the same time, nor increase another build if he already 
has one of his own. Double Builds cannot be increased, e.g. if a 
player combines a 3 and 4 lying on the table and places a 7 from his 
hand upon them, saying, " I build sevens," this build can be taken 
only with a 7, and cannot be built upon further. Of course in the 
case cited the builder must still have another 7 in his hand. In 
playing partners each may take in the other's builds, or may build 
to a card that has been declared by his partner; e.g. if his partner 
has built an 8 that has been captured by an opponent, he may build 
another 8 with a card from his own hand to the 8 that he knows 
to be in his partner's hand, even though he has no 8 himself. In 
trailing, i.e. laying down a card without matching or building, one 
usually plays small cards, avoiding aces and (if Big and Little 
Casino have not yet been played) tens and deuces, as well as any 
cards one has reason to think will be of service to the enemy. High 
cards are usually played last, as they are stronger in taking com- 
binations. Such rules are, however, quite general, each situation 
calling for special treatment. In the last round all cards remaining 
on the table become the property of the player taking the last trick. 
A good memory and keen powers of observation are essential in 
playing this game. 

In Twenty-One-Point Casino nothing is scored until the end of the 
deal. A second or third deal is usually necessary before one side 
scores the requisite 21. In the final deal each side keeps a mental 
count of the points made, and as soon as 21 are scored the game 
is claimed and the points shown. But if , when added to those already 
scored in previous deals, they make more or less than 21, the claimant 
loses the game. In counting out cards count first, followed by spades, 
Big Casino, Little Casino, aces and sweeps, in that order. 

Spade Casino is a variation in which the usual 11 points count as 
in the regular game, and, in addition, each spade counts I, excepting 
the knave of spades, which counts 2, making 24 points in all. These 
are scored on a cribbage-board, each point being marked as it is 
made. The game is for 61 points, or once round the board and into 
the game-hole. 

CASINUM, an ancient town of Italy, probably of Volscian 
origin. Varro states that the name was Sabine, and meant forum 
vetus, and also that the town itself was Samnite,but he is probably 
wrong. When it came under Roman supremacy is not known, 
but it probably received the citizenship in 188 B.C. It was the 
most south-easterly town in Lalium adjectum, situated on the Via 
Latina about 40 m. N.W. of Capua. It appears occasionally 
in the history of the Hannibalic War. Varro possessed a villa near 
it, in which later on Mark Antony held his orgies. Towards the 
end of the republic it was a praefectura, and under the empire it 
appears as a colony (perhaps founded by the triumvirs) , though 
in two (not local) inscriptions it is called municipium. Strabo 
speaks of it as an important town; Varro mentions the olive-oil 
of its district as especially good. The older Volscian Casinum 
must have stood on the hill (1715 ft.) above the Roman town 
( 148 f t.) , where considerable remains of fortifications in Cyclopean 
masonry, of finely cut blocks of limestone, still exist. The site is 
now occupied by the Benedictine monastery of Monte Cassino 
(q.v.) founded by St Benedict himself in 5 29. A number of Roman 
inscriptions from Casinum are preserved there. The wall which 
runs south-west and west starting from the west side of the 
monastery, for a total length of about 300 yds., is not so clearly 
traceable on the other side of the hill, though there is one fragment 
under the east side of the monastery; but it seems to have 
defended the summit and was perhaps the original acropolis. 
The Roman town lay at the foot of the mountain, close to the 
Via Latina. The amphitheatre, erected by Ummidia Quadratilla 
(whose passion for actors is mentioned by Pliny, Epist. vii. 24, 
on the occasion of her death at the age of about eighty), is still 
existing: it is built of opus reticulatum and the five entrances are 
by arches of larger blocks of stone; it is approximately circular 
in plan. The external walls are 50 ft. high. The seats in the 
interior have disappeared. Above it on the hillside is a theatre 
of opus reticulatum, less well preserved. Close by is a building 
v. is 



converted into the Cappella del Crocefisso, originally perhaps a 
tomb in the Via Latina; it is a chamber in the form of a Greek 
cross, constructed of large masses of travertine, with a domed roof 
of the same material. On the opposite bank of the Rapido are 
theruins called Monticelli, attributed to the villa of Varro, apartof 
which was frequently drawn by the architects of the 16th century 
(T. Ashby in Papers of the British School at Rome, ii. 19). The 
medieval town of S. Germano, which resumed the name Cassino 
in 187 1, lies a little to the north. The cathedral was founded in 
the 8th century, but the present building was constructed in the 
1 7 th century. The church of S . Maria delle Cinque Tcrri contains 
twelve ancient marble columns; above the town is a picturesque 
medieval castle. (T. As.) 

CASIRI, MIGUEL (1710-1791), a learned Maronite, was bcrn 
at Tripoli (Syria) in 1 7 10. He studied at Rome, where he lectured 
on Arabic, Syriac, Chaldee, philosophy and theology. In 1748 
he went to Spain, and was employed in the royal library at 
Madrid. He was successively appointed a member of the Royal 
Academy of History, interpreter of oriental languages to the 
king, and joint-librarian at the Escorial. In 1763 he became 
principal librarian, a post which he appears to have held till his 
death in 1791. Casiri published a work entitled Bibliotheca 
Arabico-Hispana Escurialensis (2 vols., Madrid, 1760-1770). 
It is a catalogue of above 1800 Arabic MSS., which he found in 
the library of the Escorial; it also contains a number of quota- 
tions from Arabic works on history. The MSS. are classified 
according to subjects; the second volume gives an account of 
a large collection of geographical and historical MSS., which 
contain valuable information regarding the wars between the 
Moors and the Christians in Spain. Casiri's work is not yet 
obsolete, but a more scientific system is adopted in Hartwig 
Derenbourg's incomplete treatise, Les Manuscrits arabes de 
V Escorial (Paris, 1884). 

CASKET, a small box or coffer, commonly used for jewels, 
money, papers, or other objects of value. The etymology is 
doubtful. It is possibly a diminutive of " cask," a barrel for 
wine or other liquor. The Spanish casco meant also a skull, 
helmet, or rind of an onion, and is probably connected with 
cascar, tobreak open, Latin quassare, Trench casser, to break, shake. 
The French casque, casquet, of the same origin is only used of a 
helmet, and the sense of " small chest " is not found in languages 
other than English. Skeat suggests that the word is a corruption 
of French cassette, diminutive of casse, box, Latin capsa, from 
capere, to hold, contain, cf. English " case ." History and 
literature are full of references to the often disconcerting contents 
of these famous receptacles. The " Casket Letters " (q.v.) are 
one of the mysteries of history. Hsopagnon's casket plays 
an important part in Moliere's L'Avare; Bluebeard gives his 
too-curious wife the keys of his caskets filled with precious stones; 
the contents of Sainte-Croix's casket brought about the trial and 
condemnation of the marquise de Brinvilliers, the poisoner. 
This very ancient piece of furniture was no doubt derived from 
the chest, which was the original wardrobe. It was often an 
object of great value, covered with ivory, enamel, or stamped 
leather, enriched with precious metals, or encrusted with jewels. 
One which belonged to St Louis and is preserved in the Louvre is 
covered with enamelled shields of arms and other decorations. 
In the 16th and 17th centuries secret hiding-places were some- 
times in the thickness of the lid or in a false bottom. The word 
is now little used — the natural result of the desuetude of the 
object; but auctioneers occasionally announce that they will sell 
a " casket of jewels," and undertakers, especially in the United 
States, frequently use it as a grandiose synonym for " coffin." 

CASKET LETTERS'. This is the name generally given to 
eight letters, and a sequence of irregular sonnets, all described as 
originally in French, and said to have been addressed by Mary, 
queen of Scots, to the earl of Bothwell, between January and 
April 1 566-1 567. The nature of these -documents — authentic, 
forged, or partly forged, partly genuiifie%has been the theme of 
much discussion. If authentic throughout, they afford perfect 
proof of Mary's complicity in the murderiof her husband, Henry, 
Lord Darnley. The topic is so perplexing, and possibilities 



459 



CASKET LETTERS 



are so delicately balanced, that inquirers may change their 
views, and modify or reverse their opinions, on the appearance of 
each fresh document that is brought to light; or even upon a 
new consideration of existing evidence. Controversy centres 
round a very long and singular undated epistle called " The 
Glasgow Letter " or " Letter II." If Mary wrote all of this, or 
even wrote some compromising parts of it, she was certainly 
guilty. But two questions remain to be settled — (i) did her 
accusers at one time possess another version of this letter which 
if it existed was beyond doubt a forgery ? and (2) is not part of 
Letter II. a forged interpolation, based on another document, 
not by Mary ? 

The whole affair has been obscured and almost inextricably 
entangled, as we shall see, by the behaviour of Mary's accusers. 
Of these Maitland of Lethington was consenting to Darnley's 
murder; the earl of Morton had, at least, guilty foreknowledge; 
the regent Moray (Mary's natural brother) had " looked through 
his fingers " at the crime, and for months remained on intimate 
terms with the criminals. He also perjured himself when putting 
before Elizabeth's commission of inquiry at Westminster (Dec- 
ember 1568) a copy of the confession of Hepburn of Bowton 
(Cotton MSS. British Museum. Caligula C.I. fol. 325). This 
is attested as a "true copy," but Moray, who had been present 
when Bowton was examined (December 8, 1567), knew that 
the copy presented at Westminster (December 1 568) had been 
mutilated because the excised passages were damning to Lething- 
ton and the earl of Morton, accomplices in the crime of Darnley's 
murder, and accomplices of Moray in his prosecution of his 
sister. (See in Cambridge University Library, MS. Oo. 47, 
fol. s et seq. Compare the MS. copy of the confession in the 
British Museum, Cotton MSS. Caligula, C.I. fol. 325, printed 
in Anderson's Collections, vol. ii. pp. 183-188.) 

If Moray the righteous could act thus, much more might the 
murderer Morton perjure himself in his averment that there 
had been no tampering with the Casket Letters in his custody. 
We cannot, in short, believe Mary's accusers on their oaths. 
When they all went, in October-December 1568, to York and 
London to accuse their queen — and before that, in their pro- 
clamations — they contradicted themselves freely and frequently; 
they put in a list of dates which made Mary's authorship of Letter 
II. impossible; and they rang the changes on Scots translations 
of the alleged French originals, and on the French itself. For 
example, when Moray, after Mary was in Elizabeth's power 
(May 16, 1568), wished Elizabeth to have the matter tried, 
he in May- June 1568 sent John Wood to England with Scots 
translations of the letters. Wood was to ask, " if the French 
originals are found to tally with the Scots translations, will that be 
reckoned good evidence?" It was as easy to send copies of 
the French, and thus give no ground for the suspicion that the 
Scots letters were altered on the basis of information acquired 
between May and October 1568, and that the French versions 
were made to fit the new form of the Scots copies. Another 
source of confusion, now removed, was the later publication in 
France of the letters in French. This French did not correspond 
with French copies of some of the originals recently discovered 
in Cecil's MSS. and elsewhere. But that is no ground of suspicion, 
for the published French letters were not copies of the alleged 
originals, but translations of Latin translations of them, from 
the Scots (see T. F. Henderson, The Casket Letters, 1890). German 
historians have not made matters more clear by treating the 
Letters on the principle of " the higher criticism " of Homer and 
the Bible. They find that the documents are of composite 
origin, partly notes from Mary to Darnley, partly a diary of 
Mary's, and so on; all combined and edited by some qne who 
played the part of the legendary editorial committee of Peisis- 
tratus (see Homer), which compiled the Iliad and Odyssey out 
of fragmentary lays ! From all these causes, and others, arise 
confusion and suspicion. 

So much information unknown to older disputants such as 
Goodali, the elder Tytler, Chalmers, and Malcolm Laing, and in 
certain cases unknown even to Froude and Skelton, has accrued, 
that the question can now best be studied in The Casket Letters, 



by T. F. Henderson (1880; second issue, 1890, being the more 
accurate); in The Mystery of Mary Stuart, by Andrew Lang 
(4th edition, 1904), and in Henderson's criticism of that book, 
in his Mary, Queen of Scots (1905) (Appendix A). The conclu- 
sion arrived at here is that of Henderson, but it is reached 
independently. 

The history of the letters must be given in summary. Hen- 
derson, in The Casket Letters (1889), was the first to publish and 
use as evidence a document of which the existence was made 
known in the fifth report of the royal commission on historical 
manuscripts. It is a sworn statement of the earl of Morton, 
written in 1568. A silver casket (originally Mary's property, 
but then in the possession of Bothwell) was placed in his hands 
on the 20th of June, and was inspected by several nobles and 
gentlemen on the 21st of June 1567. Morton denies that the 
contents, the letters, sonnets, and some other papers, had been 
in any way tampered with. But if Moray could knowingly 
submit garbled evidence, Morton's oath is of no value if un- 
corroborated. 

Mary was, on the 21st of June 1567, a prisoner in Loch Leven 
Castle. A messenger was at once sent from Edinburgh to London 
with a letter from Lethington and a verbal message. By the 1 2th 
of July, de Silva, the Spanish ambassador, reports on the 
authority of the French ambassador that du Croc, French envoy 
to Scotland, avers that Mary's Scottish enemies have autograph 
letters of hers proving her guilt, and himself possesses copies. 
Of these copies no more is heard, and they cannot be found. 
According to de Silva, Elizabeth said that she did not believe 
in the Letters, and that Lethington, who wrote to Cecil on the 
21st of June, and sent a verbal message by the bearer, " had 
behaved badly in the matter," — whether that of the letters, or in 
general. On what evidence she based that opinion, if she 
really held it, is unknown. In December 1567 the Scottish 
parliament was informed that the letters were signed by Mary 
(they are unsigned), but the phrase is not used in the subsequent 
act of parliament. The letters were exhibited and apparently 
were read, probably read aloud. Mary's party in September 
1568 declared that they were garbled, and that the handwriting 
was not hers. In the end of July 1567 the earl of Moray, Mary's 
brother, passing through London from France, told de Silva, 
as de Silva reported to his government, that there was proof 
of Mary's guilt in a letter of three double sheets of paper signed 
by her. 

According to Moray's version of the letter, Mary was to try 
to poison Darnley in a house on the way between Glasgow 
and Edinburgh where he and she were to stop. Clearly Lord 
Livingstone's house, Callendar, where they did rest on their 
journey, is intended. If this failed, Mary would put Darnley 
"in the house where the explosion was arranged for the night 
upon which one of the servants was to be married." No such 
arrangement had been made, as the confessions of the murderers, 
at which Moray was present, clearly prove. It may be said that 
de Silva means " the house in which the explosion was afterwards 
arranged." But the earl of Lennox, Darnley's father, understood 
Moray to mean that as early as January 21-22, 1567, the 
house of Kirk o' Field, where Darnley was slain, had already been 
mined. Moray's version of the letter made Mary tell Bothwell 
to poison or put away his wife. No such matters occur in Letter 
II.; Moray spoke, he said, on the authority of " a man who had 
read the letter." A similar account of this letter is given in a 
document of Darnley's father, the earl of Lennox (Cambridge 
University Library MSS. Oo. 7. 47; f. 17 b.). Can we suppose 
that "the man who had read the letter" invented much of its 
contents, and told them to Moray, who told de Silva, and told 
Darnley's father, Lennox, then in or near London ? 

At this point comes in the evidence — unknown to Froude, 
Skelton, Hosack, and Henderson in his book The Casket Letters— 
of a number of documents, notes of information, and indictments 
of Mary, written for or by the earl of Lennox. These MSS 
are in the University Library of Cambridge, and were transcribed 
by Father Stevenson. His transcripts were brought to light by 
Father Pollen, S- J-, who lent them, with his own notes on them, 



CASKET LETTERS 



45' 



to Andrew Lang for use in his book, The Mystery of Mary Stuart 
(1Q00-1904). 

Not one of the Lennox documents is dated; all but one are 
endorsed in an English hand of the period. It may be conjectured 
that they were selected by Lennox from his papers, and lent by 
him to some one who was writing against Mary. Among them 
(Cambridge University MSS. Oo. 7. 47. fol. 17 b.) is a long 
indictment of Mary, in which Lennox describes a wicked letter of 
hers. As has been said, he closely follows Moray's version re- 
ported by de Silva in July 1567. Lennox also gives several 
stories of cruel words of Mary spoken to Darnley in the hearing 
of her servants. 

Now, on the nth of June 1568, Lennox was in the company of 
John Wood, a creature of Moray's, and Wood, as we saw, brought 
copies of the Scots renderings of the Letters into England in 
May- June 1568. It was argued by Andrew Lang that Wood 
was likely to show these letters to Lennox; and that as Lennox 
follows Moray's version of Mary's long and murderous letter, 
and does not follow Letter II., the murderous letter (a forgery) 
was then part of the dossier of Mary's accusers. Again, as 
Lennox's indictment of Mary (Cambridge Oo. 7. 47. fol. 17 b.) 
is rife in " reports and sayings of Mary's servants " about her 
cruel words to Darnley, and as Lennox had not these reports 
on the nth of June 1568, for on that day he wrote to Scotland 
asking his friends to discover them and send them to him, the 
indictment (Oo. 7. 47) must have been composed long after the 
nth of June. This must be so, for Lennox's letters of the nth 
of June were intercepted by his foes, the Hamiltons, and were 
found in the Hamilton Muniment Room. Thus answers to 
his inquiries were delayed. (The letters of Lennox were published 
in Miscellany of the Maitland Club, vol. iv.) 

Henderson, on the other side, believes that Wood " indu- 
bitably " showed to Lennox the Scots copies of the Casket 
Letters about the nth of June 1568. But Lennox, he says, 
could not quote Letter II. in his indictment against Mary, 
and had to rest on Moray's version of July 1567, because Lennox's 
indictment was completed, and even laid before Elizabeth, as 
early as the 28th of May 1568. Henderson seeks to prove that 
this is so by quoting from Chalmers's Mary Queen of Scots (vol. 
ii. p. 289) the statement that Lennox and his wife on that day 
presented to Elizabeth a " Bill of Supplication "; and (though he 
submits that the indictment [Oo. 7. 47] is a draft for the Bill) 
he strengthens his case by heading the indictment, which he 
publishes, Bill of Supplication. The document, in fact, is 
unendorsed, and without a title, and there is not a word of 
" supplication " in it. It is a self-contradictory history of the 
relations between Mary and Darnley. 

Henderson's contention therefore seems erroneous. Lennox 
could not begin to prepare an English indictment against Mary 
till she was in England and in Elizabeth's power. He could not 
hear of this fact — Mary's arrival in England (May 16, 1568) — 
before, say, the 19th of May; and between the 19th of May and 
the 28th of May he could not write for and receive from Scotland 
" the reports and sayings of her servants." He did not possess 
them on the nth of June, when he asked for them; he did not 
get them at once, for his letters were intercepted; the indictment 
(Oo. 7. 47) is rich in them; therefore that paper is not the " Bill 
of Supplication" of the 28th of May. 

Thus the question remains, why, if Wood about the nth of 
June showed to Lennox Letter II. in Scots, did Lennox follow 
Moray's erroneous version of July 1567 ? Because in June 1568 
that version, forged, was in the Scots collection of the Casket 
Letters ? If so, there was time for Lennox to lend to the accusers 
certain notes which a retainer of his, Thomas Crawford of Jordan 
Hill, swore (December 9, 1568) that he had made for Lennox 
(about January 22, 1567) of secret conversations between 
Darnley and Mary. Lennox (June 11, 1568) asked Crawford 
for his reminiscences, not of Darnley's reports of his talks with 
Mary, but of Crawford's own interview with her as she entered 
Glasgow to visit Darnley, probably on the 21st of January 1567. 
It follows that Lennox possessed Crawford's written notes of 
the Darnley and Mary conversations. If he had not possessed 



them on the nth of June 1568, he must have asked Crawford 
for his reminiscences of these talks. But he did not ask. 

Crawford's evidence was all-important, because it corroborated 
Mary's own account of her interviews with Darnley in Letter II. 
That part of the letter then, it is argued by many, is a forged 
interpolation based on Crawford's notes and memories. The 
force of this contention lies in the close verbal identities between 
Crawford's account of the Darnley-Mary interviews (see Craw- 
ford's Declaration of December 9, 1568, in Lang's Mystery 
of Mary Stuart, pp. 428-431; from State Papers Scotland, 
Elizabeth vol. xiii. No. 14. Record Office) and the correspond- 
ing passages in Letter II. (Mystery of Mary Stuart, pp. 396-398). 
The verbal identities can only be explained in one of the following 
ways. Either Letter II. is here based on Crawford; or Crawford 
has copied Letter' II. by way of corroborating it (a fatal step, 
if the case came before a modern English court of justice); or 
Darnley's memory of his conversation with Mary was so fresh, 
when he dictated his recollection of it to Crawford on 2ist-22nd 
January 1567, that he reported speeches in almost the very 
same words as Mary used in writing Letter II. Henderson prefers 
the hypothesis that Lennox had lost Crawford's notes ; and that 
the identities are explained by the "remarkably good memories 
of Crawford and Mary, or by the more likely supposition that 
Crawford, before preparing his declaration for the conference " 
(at Westminster, December 1568) "refreshed his memory by 
the letter." (Letter II., Mary Queen of Scots, p. 650.) 

Mary did not need a particularly good memory; if she wrote, 
she wrote unchecked her recollections of the day's talk. But 
no human memory of a conversation reported on the 22nd of 
January 1567, could be so nearly " word perfect " as Crawford's 
must have been two years later. If Crawford " refreshed his 
memory by the letter," he exposed himself, and the entire case, 
by copying whole passages, often with few verbal changes. If 
he had access to his original notes of the 21st and 22nd of January 
1567, then he was safe — that is, if Darnley's memory of the con- 
versations tallied so exactly with Mary's. Whether that could 
be, Darnley dictating while still hot from the exciting inter- 
change of words which he meant to report, is a question for 
psychologists. Experiments made by a person who possesses 
a good memory seem to show that the thing is very possible, 
especially if Darnley revised Crawford's notes. 

Thus the probabilities are delicately balanced. But if any 
one compares Crawford's whole declaration with Letter II. in 
Scots, he will find that Crawford has sources of information not 
yielded by Letter II. ; while Letter II. abounds in matter spoken 
by Mary and Darnley which could not be borrowed by the 
hypothetical forger from Crawford's Declaration, for it does not 
contain the facts. These facts, again, in Letter II., are worthless 
to a forger, because they concern matters never alluded to in any 
of the records; never employed in any indictment (though 
Lennox's are copious in private talk between Darnley and Mary, 
" reports of her servants "), and totally useless for the purposes 
of the accusers. Here is one of several examples. Letter II. has, 
and Crawford has not, the statement that Darnley " showed me, 
amongst other talk, that he knew well enough that my brother 
had revealed to me what he (Darnley) had spoken at Stirling. 
Of this he (Darnley) denies half, and above all that he (the 
brother?) ever came to his (Darnley's) chamber." 

Nothing is known about this matter. The Lennox papers are 
full of reports of bitter words that passed between Darnley and 
Mary at Stirling (December 1566), where Darnley was sulking 
apart while the festivities of the baptism of his son (later 
James VI.) were being held. But nothing is said in the Lennox 
papers of words spoken by Darnley to Mary's brother (probably 
Lord Robert of Holyrood) and revealed by Lord Robert to Mary. 
Lord Robert was the only friend of Darnley in Mary's entourage; 
and he even, according to the accusers, warned him of his danger 
in Kirk o' Field, to which they said that a Casket Letter (III.) 
referred. The reference is only to be seen by willing eyes. 

Is it credible that a forger, using Crawford's Declaration, which 
is silent as to Mary's brother at Stirling, should have superfluously 
added what is not to any purpose ? Could he have combined 



452 



CASLON— CASPIAN SEA 



with Crawford's matter the passage " he (Darnley) showed me 
almost all that is in name of the Bishop and Sutherland, and yet 
I have never touched a word of what you (Bothwell) showed 
me . . . and by complaining of the Bishop, I have drawn it all 
out of him. " 

Who but Mary herself could have written about this unknown 
affair of the Bishop, and what had the supposed forger to gain 
by inventing and adding these references to affairs unconnected 
with the case? 

There remains what looks like absolute proof that, in essence, 
Crawford's Declaration and Letter Il.are independent documents. 
We are not aware that this crucial point has been noticed by the 
earlier critics of the Letters. In Letter II. (paragraph 7, p. 398, 
in Lang's Mystery of Mary Stuart, 1901) Mary writes, " I asked 
why he (Darnley) would pass away in the English ship. He 
denies it, and swears thereunto; but he grants that he spoke 
unto the men." Here Crawford's declaration has, " She asked 
him why he would pass away in the English ship. He answered 
that he had spoken with the Englishman, but not of mind to go 
away with him. And, if he had, it had not been without cause, 
considering how he was used. For he had neither [means] to 
sustain himself nor his servants, and need not make further 
rehearsal thereof, seeing she knew it as well as he." (Mystery of 
Mary Stuart, p. 429.) 

It may seem to the reader doubtful whether these complaints 
are words of Darnley's, or an indignant addition by his friend 
Crawford. But Mary, in Letter II., shows that the complaints 
and the self-defence are Darnley's own. It was in paragraph 7 
that she wrote about the English ship; she did not then give 
Darnley's remonstrances, as Crawford does. But in paragraph 
18 (Mystery, p. 406) Mary returns to the subject, and writes, " He 
(Darnley) spoke very bravely at the beginning, as the bearer will 
show you, upon the subject of the Englishmen, and of his depart- 
ing; but in the end he returned to his humility." 

Thus it is certain that Darnley had reported to Crawford his 
brave words and reproaches of Mary, which Crawford gives in the 
proper place. But Letter II. omits them in that place (para- 
graph 7); and only on her second day of writing, in paragraph 
18, does Mary's mind recur to Darnley's first brave words — " he 
spoke very bravely at the beginning," about his wrongs, " but in 
the end he returned again to his humility. ' ' 

Here is proof positive that Crawford does not copy Letter II., 
but gives Darnley's words as reported to him by Darnley — ■ 
words that Darnley was proud of, — while Mary, returning on the 
second day of writing to the topic, does not quote Darnley's 
brave words, but merely contrasts his speaking " very bravely 
at the beginning" with his pitiful and craven later submission; 
" he has ever the tear in his eye," with what follows. (Mystery, 
paragraph 12, p. 402.) 

When we add to these and other proofs the strange lists of 
memoranda in the middle of the pages of the letter, and the 
breach in internal chronology which was apparently caused by 
Mary's writing, on her second day, on the clean verso of a page 
on the other side of which she had written some lines during her 
first night in Glasgow; when we add the dramatic changes of her 
mood, and the heart-breaking evidence of a remorse not stifled 
by lawless love, we seem compelled to believe that she wrote the 
whole of Letter II.; that none of it is forged. 

In The Mystery of Mary Stuart the evidence for an early forged 
letter was presented with confidence; the interpolation of 
forgeries based on Crawford's declaration was more dubiously 
suggested. That position the writer now abandons. It may be 
asked why, after being with Wood on the nth of June, did 
Lennox still rely on Moray's version of Mary's letter? The reply 
may be that the Scots versions were regarded as a great secret; 
that Lennox was a married man; and that though Lennox in 
June knew about Mary's letters, doubtless from Wood, or from 
common report (Bishop Jewell in a letter of August 1567 mentions 
that he had heard of them), yet Wood did not show to him the 
Scots copies. Lennox quotes Letter II. later, in an indictment 
to be read to the commission sitting at York (October 1568). 
But, on the other hand, as Lennox after meeting Wood wrote to 



Crawford for his reminiscences of his own interview with Mary 
(January 21, 1567), and as these reminiscences were only useful 
as corroborative of Mary's account in Letter II., it seems that 
Wood had either shown Lennox the letters or had spoken of 
their contents. In that case, when Lennox later quotes Moray's 
version, not Letter II. itself, he is only acting with the self- 
contradictory stupidity which pervades his whole indictment 
(Oo. 7. 47. fol. 17 b.). 

The letters are not known to have been seen by any man — they 
or the silver casket — after the death of the earl of Gowrie (who 
possessed them). In May 1584 Bowes, the English ambassador 
to Holyrood, had endeavoured to procure them for Elizabeth, 
" for the secrecy and benefit of the cause." Conceivably the 
letters fell into the hands of James VI. and were destroyed by 
his orders. (A. L.) 

CASLON, the name of a famous family of English typefounders. 
William Caslon (1692-1766), the first of the name, was born at 
Cradley, Worcestershire, and in 17 16 started business in London 
as an engraver of gun locks and barrels, and as a bookbinder's 
tool-cutter. Being thus brought into contact with printers, 
he was induced to fit up a type foundry, largely through the 
encouragement of William Bowyer. The distinction and legi- 
bility of his type secured him the patronage of the leading 
printers of the day in England and on the continent. The use 
of Caslon types, discontinued about the beginning of the 19th 
century, was revived about 1845 at the suggestion of Sir Henry 
Cole, and used for printing the Diary of Lady Willoughby (a 
pseudo- 17th-century story) by the Chiswick Press. The head- 
line on this page is " Caslon Old Face." He died on the 23rd of 
January 1766. His son, William Caslon (1720-1778), who had 
been partner with his father for some years, continued the 
business. 

CASPARI, KARL PAUL (1814-1892), German Lutheran 
theologian and orientalist, was born of Jewish parents at Dessau, 
Anhalt, on the 8th of February 18 14. He studied at Leipzig and 
Berlin, became a Christian in 1838, and in 1857 was appointed 
professor of theology at Christiania, having declined invitations 
to Rostock and Erlangen. He died at Christiania on the nth 
of April 1892. Caspari is best known as the author of an Arabic 
grammar (Grammatica Arabica, 2 vols., 1844-1848; new edition, 
Arabische Grammatik, edited by A. Miiller; 5th ed. 1887). He 
also wrote commentaries on the prophetical books of the Old 
Testament, dogmatic and historical works on baptism, and 
from 1857 helped to edit the Theologisk Tidskrift for den evan- 
gelisk-lutherske Kirke i Norge. His writings include: Beitrage 
zur Einleitung in Jesaja (1848), and Alte und neue Quellen zur 
Geschichte des Tauf symbols und der Glaubensregel (1879). 

CASPIAN SEA (anc. Mare Caspium or Mare Hyrcanium; 
Russian, Kaspiyskoe M ore, formerly Hvalynskoe More; Persian, 
Darya-i-Kkyzyr or Gurzem; Tatar, Ak-denghiz; the Sikim and 
Jurjan of the ancient Eastern geographers), an inland sea between 
Europe and Asia, extending from 36° 40' to 47° 20' N. lat., and 
from 46 50' to 55 10' E. long. Its length is 760 m. from N. 
to S., and its breadth 100 to 280 m., and its. area reaches 
169,330 sq. m., of which 865 sq. m. belong to its islands. It 
fills the deepest part of a vast depression, sometimes known as 
the Aralo-Caspian depression, once an inland sea, the Eurasian 
Mediterranean or Sarmatian Ocean. At the present time its 
surface lies 86 ft. below the level of the ocean, or 96- 7 ft. according 
to the Aral-Caspian levelling 1 and 242-7 ft. below the level of 
the Aral. 

Hydrography and Shores. — The hydrography of the Caspian 
Sea has been studied by von Baer, by N. Ivashintsev (1819-1871) 
in 1862-1870, by O. Grimm, N. I. Andrusov (1895), and by J. 
B. Spindler (1897), N. von Seidlitz and N. Knipovich (1904) 
since the last quoted date. Its basin is divided naturally into 
three sections — (1) A northern, forming in the east the Gulf 
of Mortvyi Kultuk or Tsarevich Bay. This is the shallowest 
part, barely reaching a depth of 20 fathoms. It is being gradually 

1 By the triangulation of 1840 its level was found to be 84 ft. 
below the level of the Black Sea. The Caucasus triangulation of 
1 860- 1 870 gave 89 ft. 



CASPIAN SEA 



453 



silted up by the sedimentary deposits brought down by the 
rivers Volga, Ural and Terek. The western shore, from the delta 
of the Volga to the mouth of the Kuma, a distance of 170 m., 
is gashed by thousands of narrow channels or lagoons, termed 
limans, from 12 to 30 m. in length, and separated in some cases 
by chains of hillocks, called bugors, in others by sandbanks. 
These channels are filled, sometimes with sea-water, sometimes 
with overflow water from the Volga and the Kuma. The coast- 
line of the Gulf of Mortvyi Kultuk on the north-east is, on the 
other hand, formed by a range of low calcareous hills, constituting 
the rampart of the Ust-Urt plateau, which intervenes between 
the Caspian and the Sea of Aral. On the south this gulf is backed 
by the conjoined peninsulas of Busachi and Manghishlak, 
into which penetrates the long, narrow, curving bay or fjord of 
Kaidak or Kara-su. (2) South of the line joining the Bay of 
Kuma with the Manghishlak peninsula, in 44° 10' N. lat, the 
western shore is higher and the water deepens considerably, 
being over one-half of the area 50 fathoms, while the maximum 
depth (between 41° and 42° N. lat.) reaches 437 fathoms. This, 
the middle section of the Caspian, which extends as far as the 
Apsheron peninsula, receives the Terek and several smaller 
streams (e.g. Sulak, Samur), that drain the northern slopes of 
the Caucasus. At Derbent, just north of 42 lat., a spur of the 
Caucasus approaches so close to the sea as to leave room for only 
a narrow passage, the Caspiae Pylae or Albanae Portae, which 
has been fortified for centuries. The eastern shore of this section 
of the sea is also formed by the Ust-Urt plateau, which rises 
550 ft. to 750 ft. above the level of the Caspian; but in 42 N. 
lat. the Ust-Urt recedes from the Caspian and circles round the 
Gulf of Kara-boghaz or Kara-bugaz (also called Aji-darya and 
Kuli-darya). This subsidiary basin is separated from the 
Caspian by a narrow sandbar, pierced by a strait i|- m. long 
and only 115 to 170 yds. wide, through which a current flows 
continuously into the gulf at the rate of i| to 5 m. an hour, 
the mean velocity at the surface being 3 m. an hour. To this 
there exists no compensating outflow current at a greater 
depth, as is usually the case in similar situations. The area of 
this lateral basin being about 7100 sq. m., and its depth but 
comparatively slight (35 to 36 ft.), the evaporation is very ap- 
preciable (amounting to 3-2 ft. per annum), and sufficient, 
according to von Baer, to account for the perpetual inflow from 
the Caspian. South of the Kara-Boghaz Bay the coast rises 
again in another peninsula, formed by an extension of the 
Balkhan Mountains. This marks (40° N. lat.) the southern 
boundary of the middle section of the Caspian. This basin may 
be, on the whole, considered as a continuation of the synclinal 
depression of the Manych, which stretches along the northern foot 
of the Caucasus from the Sea of Azov. It is separated from 
(3), the southern and deepest section of the Caspian, by a sub- 
marine ridge (30 to 150 fathoms of water), which links the main 
range of the Caucasus on the west with the Kopet-dagh in the 
Transcaspian region on the east. This section of the sea washes 
on the south the base of the Elburz range in Persia, sweeping 
round from the mouth of the Kura, a little north of the Bay of 
Kizil-agach, to Astarabad at an average distance of 40 m. from 
the foot of the mountains. A little east of the Gulf of Enzeli, 
which resembles the Kara-boghaz, though on a much smaller 
scale, the Sefid-rud pours into the Caspian the drainage of the 
western end of the Elburz range, and several smaller streams 
bring down the precipitation that falls on the northern face of 
the same range farther to the east. Near its south-east corner 
the Caspian is entered by the Atrek, which drains the mountain 
ranges of the Turkoman (N.E.) frontier of Persia. Farther 
north, on the east coast, opposite to the Bay of Kizil-agach, 
comes the Balkhan or Krasnovodsk Bay. In the summer of 
1894 a subterranean volcano was observed in this basin of the 
Caspian, in 38 10' N. lat. and 52 37' E. long. The depth in 
this section ranges from 300 to 500 fathoms, with a maximum 
of 602 fathoms. 

Drainage Area and Former Extent. — The catchment area from 
which the Caspian is fed extends to a very much greater distance 
on the west and north than it does on the south and east. From 



the former it is entered by the Volga, which is estimated to drain 
an area of 560,000 sq. m., the Ural 96,000 sq. m., the Terek 
59,000 sq. m., the Sulak 7000 sq. m., the Samur 4250 sq. m.; 
as compared with these, there comes from the south and east 
the Kura and Aras, draining the south side of the Caucasus 
over 87,250 sq. m., and the Sefid-rud and the Atrek, both rela- 
tively short. Altogether it is estimated (by von Dingelstedt) 
that the total discharge of all the rivers emptying into the 
Caspian amounts annually to a volume equal to 174-5 cub. m - 
Were there no evaporation, this would raise the surface of 
the sea 55 ft. annually. In point of fact, however, the entire 
volume of fresh water poured into the Caspian is only just 
sufficient to compensate for the loss by evaporation. Indeed 
in recent times the level appears to have undergone several 
oscillations. From the researches of Philippov it appears that 
during the period 1851-1888 the level reached a maximum on 
three separate occasions, namely in 1868-1869, 1882 and 1885, 
while in 1853 and 1873 it stood at a minimum; the range of 
these oscillations did not, however, exceed 3 ft. 6J in. The 
Russian expedition which investigated the Kara-boghaz in 
1896 concluded that there is no permanent subsidence in the 
level of the sea. In addition to these periodical fluctuations, 
there are also seasonal oscillations, the level being lowest in 
January and highest in the summer. 

The level of the Caspian, however, was formerly about the 
same as the existing level of the Black Sea, although now some 
86 ft. below it. This is shown by the evidences of erosion on 
the face of the rocks which formed the original shore-line of its 
southern basin, those evidences existing at the height of 65 to 
80 ft. above the present level. That a rapid subsidence did take 
place from the higher level is indicated by the fact that between 
it and the present level there is an absence of indications of 
erosive energy. There can be no real doubt that formerly the 
area of the Caspian was considerably greater than it is at the 
present time. - Nearly one hundred and fifty years ago Pallas 
had his attention arrested by the existence of the salt lakes and 
dry saline deposits on the steppes to the east of the Caspian, 
and at great distances from its shores, and by the presence in the 
same localities of shells of the same marine fauna as that which 
now inhabits that sea, and he suggested the obvious explanation 
that those regions must formerly have been covered by the 
waters of the sea. And it is indeed the fact that large portions 
of the vast region comprised between the lower Volga, the Aral- 
Irtysh water-divide, the Dzungarian Ala-tau, and the outliers 
of the Tian-shan and Hindu-kush systems are actually covered 
with Aralo-Caspian deposits, nearly always a yellowish-grey 
clay, though occasionally they assume the character of a more or 
less compact sandstone of the same colour. These deposits 
attain their maximum thickness of 90 ft. east of the Caspian, 
and have in many parts been excavated and washed away by 
the rivers (which have frequently changed their beds) or been 
transported by the winds, which sweep with unmitigated 
violence across those wide unsheltered expanses. The typical 
fossils unearthed in these deposits are shells of species now living 
in both the Caspian and the Aral, though in the shallow parts 
of both seas only, namely (according to Ivan V. Mushketov 
[1850-1902]) Cardium edule, Dreissena polymorpha, Neritina 
liturata, Adacna vitrea, Hydrobia stagnalis, in the Kara-kum 
desert, and Lithoglyphus caspius, Hydrobia stagnalis, Anodonta 
ponderosa and the sponge Metchnikovia tuberculata, in the Kizil- 
kum desert. The exact limits of the ancient Aralo-Caspian sea 
are not yet settled, except in the north-west, where the Ergeni 
Hills of Astrakhan constitute an unmistakable barrier. North- 
wards these marine deposits are known to exist 80 m. away from 
Lake Aral, though they do not cross the Aral-Irtysh water- 
divide, so that this sea will not probably have been at that time 
connected with the Arctic, as some have supposed. The eastern 
limits of these deposits lie about 100 m. from Lake Aral, though 
Severtsov maintained that they penetrate into the basin of Lake 
Balkash. Southwards they have been observed without a break 
for 160 m. from Lake Aral, namely in the Sary-kamysh depression 
(the surface of which lies below the level of the Caspian) and up 



454 



CASPIAN SEA 



the Uzboi trench for ioo m. from the latter sea. How far they 
reach up the present courses of the Oxus (Amu-darya) and 
Jaxartes (Syr-darya) is not known. Hence, it is plain that in late 
Tertiary, and probably also in Post-Tertiary, times the Aralo- 
Caspian Sea covered a vast expanse of territory and embraced 
very large islands (e.g. Ust-Urt) , which divided it into an eastern 
and a western portion, communicating by one or two narrow 
straits only, such as on the south the Sary-kamysh depression, 
and on the norththe lineof thelakes of Chumyshty and Asmantai. 
More than this, the Caspian was also, it is pretty certain, at the 
same epoch, and later, in direct communication with the Sea of 
Azov, no doubt by way of the Manych depression; for in the 
limans or lagoons of the Black Sea many faunal species 
exist which are not only identical with species that are found in 
the Caspian, but also many which, though not exactly identical, 
are closely allied. As examples of the former may be named— 
Archaeobdella, Clessinia variabilis, Neritina liturata, Gmelina, 
Gammarus moeoticus, Pseudocuma pectinata, Paramysis Baeri, 
Mesomysis Kowalevskyi and M. intermedia, Limnomysis Benedeni 
and L. Bra,ndti, and species of the ichthyological fauna Gobius, 
Clupea and Acipenser; while as illustrating the latter class 
the Black Sea contains Dreissenia bugensis (allied to D. rostriformis 
and D. Grimmi), Cardium ponticum (to C. caspium), C. color alum 
(to Monodacna edentula), Amphicteis antiqua (to A. Kowalevskyi) 
and Bythotrephes azovicus (to B. socialis). 

In the opinion of Russian geologists the separation of the 
Caspian from the great ocean must have taken place at a com- 
paratively recent geological epoch. During the early Tertiary 
age it belonged to the Sarmatian Ocean, which reached from 
the middle Danube eastwards through Rumania, South Russia, 
and along both flanks of the Caucasus to the Aralo-Caspian 
region, and westwards had open communication with the great 
ocean, as indeed the ancient geographers Eratosthenes, Strabo 
and Pliny believed it still had in their day. This communication 
began to fail, or close up presumably in the Miocene period; 
and before the dawn of Pliocene times the Sarmatian Ocean 
was broken up or divided into sections, one of which was the 
Aralo-Caspian sea already discussed. During the subsequent 
Ice Age the Caspian flowed over the steppes that stretch away 
to the north, and was probably still connected with the Black 
Sea (itself as yet unconnected' with the Mediterranean), while 
northwards it sent a narrow gulf or inlet far up the Volga valley, 
for Aralo-Caspian deposits have been observed along the lower 
Kama in 56° N. lat. Eastwards' it penetrated up the Uzboi 
depression between the Great and Little Balkhan ranges, so that 
that depression, which is strewn (as mentioned above) with 
Post-Tertiary marine deposits, was not (as is sometimes supposed) 
an old bed of the Oxus, but a gulf of the Caspian. After the 
great ice cap had thawed and a period of general desiccation set in, 
the Caspian began to shrink in area, and simultaneously its 
connexions with the Black Sea and the Sea of Aral were severed. 

Fauna. — The fauna of this sea has been studied by Eichwald, 
Kowalevsky, Grimm, Dybowski, Kessler and Sars. At the 
present time it represents an intermingling of marine and fresh- 
water forms. To the former belongs the herring {Clupea), and 
to the latter, species of Cyprinus, Perca and Silurus, also a 
lobster. Other marine forms are Rhizopoda (Rotalia and 
Textillaria), the sponge Amorphina, the Amphicteis worm, 
the molluscs Cardium edule and other Cardidae, and some 
Amphipods (Cumacea and Mysidae,), but they are forms which 
either tolerate variations in salinity or are especially characteristic 
of brackish waters. But there are many species inhabiting the 
waters of the Caspian whichare not foundelsewhere. These include 
Protozoa, three sponges, Vermes, twenty-five Molluscs, numerous 
Amphipods, fishes of the genera Gobius, Benthophilus and Cobitis, 
and one mammal (Phoca caspia). This last, together with some 
of the Mysidae and the species Glyptonotus entomon, exhibits 
Arctic characteristics, which has suggested the idea of a geologic- 
ally recent connexion between the Caspian and the Arctic, an 
idea of which no real proofs have been as yet discovered. The 
Knipovich expedition in 1904 found no traces of organic life 
below the depth cf 220 fathoms except micro-organisms and a 



single Oligochaete; but above that level there exist abundant 
evidences of rich pelagic life, more particularly from the surface 
down to a depth of 80 fathoms. 

Fisheries.— No other inland sea is so richly stocked with fish 
as the Caspian, especially off the mouths of the large rivers, 
the Volga, Ural, Terek and Kura. The fish of greatest economic 
value are sturgeon (four species), which yield great quantities 
of caviare and isinglass, the herring, the salmon and the lobster. 
The annual catch of the entire sea is valued at an average of one 
million sterling. Some 50,000 persons are engaged in this 
industry off the mouth of the Volga alone. Seals are hunted 
in Krasnovodsk Bay. 

Salinity. — The proportion of salt in the water of the Caspian, 
though varying in different parts and at different seasons, 
is generally much less than the proportion in oceanic water, 
and even less than the proportion in the water of the Black Sea. 
In fact the salinity of the Caspian is only three-eights of that of 
the ocean. In the northern section, which receives the copious 
volumes brought down by the Volga, Ural and Terek, the salinity 
is so slight (only 0-0075% i n the surface layers) that the water 
is quite drinkable, its specific gravity being not higher than 
1-0016. In the middle section the salinity of the surface layers 
increases to 0-015%, though it is of course greater along the 
shores. The concentration of the saline ingredients proceeds 
with the greatest degree of intensity in the large bays on the east 
side of the sea, and more especially in that of Kara-boghaz, 
where it reaches 16-3% (Spindler expedition). The bottom 
of this almost isolated basin is covered for an area of 1300 sq. m. 
with a deposit of Epsom salts (sulphate of magnesia), 7 ft. thick, 
amounting to an estimated total of 1,000,000,000 tons. While 
the proportion of common salt to sulphate of magnesia is as n 
to 1 in the water of the Black Sea and as 2 to 1 in the Caspian 
water generally, it is as 12-8 to 5-03 in the Kara-boghaz. The 
salinity of the surface water of the southern section of the 
Caspian averages 1 • 5 %. 

Climate. — The temperature of the air over the Caspian basin 
is remarkable for its wide range both geographically and season- 
ally. The January isotherm of 15 F. skirts its northern shore; 
that of 40 crosses its southern border. But the winter extremes 
go far below this range: during the prevalence of north-east 
winds the thermometer drops to -20 , or even lower, on the 
surrounding steppes, while on the Ust-Urt plateau a temperature 
of -30° is not uncommon. Again, the July isotherm of 75 
crosses the middle section of the Caspian, nearly coinciding with 
the January isotherm of 25 , while that of 8o° skirts the southern 
shore of the sea, nearly coinciding with the January curve of 40°,. 
so that the mean annual range over the northern section of the 
sea is 60° and over the southern section 40 . The former section, 
which is too shallow to store up any large amount of heat during 
the summer, freezes for three or four months along the shores, 
effectually stopping navigation on the lower Volga, but out in the 
middle ice appears only when driven there by northerly winds. 

The prevalent winds of the Caspian blow from the south-east, 
usually between October and March, and from the north and 
north-west, commonly between July and September. They 
sometimes continue for days together with great violence, 
rendering navigation dangerous and driving the sea-water up 
over the shores. They also, by heaping up the water at the one 
end of the sea or the other, raise the level temporarily and locally 
to the extent of 4 to 8 ft. The currents of the Caspian were 
investigated by the Knipovich expedition; it detected two of 
special prominence, a south-going current along the west shore 
and a north-going current along the east shore. As a consequence 
of this the temperature of the water is higher on the Asiatic than 
on the European side. The lowest temperature obtained was 
35° -24 on the bottom in shallow water, the highest 70 -7 on the 
surface. But in March the temperature, as also the salinity, 
was tolerably uniform throughout all the layers of water. Another 
interesting fact ascertained by the same expedition is that the 
amount of oxygen contained in the water decreases rapidly with 
the depth: off Derbent in the middle section of the sea the 
amount diminished from 5-6 cc. per litre at a depth of 100 metres 



CASS 



455 



(330 ft.) to 0-32 cc. per litre at a depth of 700 metres (say 2300 ft.). 
At the same spot samples of water drawn from the bottom were 
found to contain 0-3 cc. of sulphuretted hydrogen per litre. In 
the southern section of the sea the decrease is not so rapid. In 
this latter section Spindler ascertained in July 1897 that the 
temperature of the surface water 60 m. from Baku was 72-9°, 
but that below 10 fathoms it sank rapidly, and at 200 fathoms 
and below it was constant at 21-2°. 

Navigation. — The development of the petroleum industry in 
the Apeshron peninsula (Baku) and the opening (1886) of the 
Transcaspian railway have greatly increased the traffic across 
the Caspian Sea. A considerable quantity of raw cotton is 
brought from Ferghana by the latter route and shipped at 
Krasnovodsk for the mills in the south and centre of Russia, as 
well as for countries farther west. And Russia draws her own 
supplies of petroleum, both for lighting and for use as liquid fuel, 
by the sea route from Baku. Other ports in addition to those 
just mentioned are Astrakhan, on the Volga; Petrovsk, Derbent 
and Lenkoran, on the west shore; Enzeli or Resht, and Astarabad, 
on the Persian coast; and Mikhailovsk, on the east coast. The 
Russians keep a small naval flotilla on the Caspian, all other 
nations being debarred from doing so by the treaty of Turk- 
manchai (1828). 

At various times and by various persons, but more particularly 
by Peter the Great, the project has been mooted of cutting a 
canal between the Volga and the Don, and so establishing 
unrestricted water communication between the Caspian and the 
Black Sea; but so far none of these schemes has taken practical 
shape. In 1900 the Hydrotechnical Congress of Russia discussed 
the plan of constructing a canal to connect the Caspian more 
directly with the Black Sea by cutting an artificial waterway 
about 22 ft. deep and 180 ft. wide from Astrakhan to Taganrog 
on the Sea of Azov. 

See works quoted under Aral ; also von Baer, " Kaspische 
Studien," in Bull. Sci. St-Petersbourg (1855-1859), and in Erman's 
Archiv russ. (1 855-1 856); Radde, Fauna und Flora des siidwest- 
lichen Kaspigebietes (1886); J. V. Mushketov, Turkestan (St Peters- 
burg, 1886), with bibliographical references; Ivashintsev, Hydro- 
graphic Exploration of the Caspian Sea (in Russian), with atlas 
(2 vols., 1866); Philippov, Marine Geography of the Caspian Basin 
(in Russian, 1877); Memoirs of the Aral-Caspian Expedition of 
1876-1877 (2 vols., in Russian), edited by the St Petersburg Society 
of Naturalists; Andrusov, " A Sketch of the Development of the 
Caspian Sea and its Inhabitants," in Zapiski of Russ. Geog. Soc.: 
General Geog. vol. xxiv. ; Eichwald, Fauna Caspio-Caucasica 
(1841); Seidlitz, "Das Karabugas Meerbusen," in Globus, with 
map, vol. lxxvi. (1899); Knipovich, " Hydrobiologische Unter- 
suchungert des Kaspischen Meeres," in Petermanns Mitteilungen, 
vol. 1. (1904); and Spindler, in Izvestia of Russ. Geog. Soc. vol. 
xxxiv. (P. A. K.;J. T. Be.) 

CASS, LEWIS (1782-1866), American general and statesman, 
was born at Exeter, New Hampshire, on the 9th of October 1782. 
He was educated at Phillips Exeter Academy, joined his father 
at Marietta, Ohio, about 1799, studied law there in the office of 
Return Jonathan Meigs (1765-1825), and was admitted to the 
bar at the age of twenty. Four years later he became a member 
of the Ohio legislature. During the War of 1812 he served under 
General William Hull, whose surrender at Detroit he strongly 
condemned, and under General W. H. Harrison, and rose from 
the rank of colonel of volunteers to be major-general of Ohio 
militia and finally to be a brigadier-general in the regular United 
States army. In 18 13 he was appointed governor of the territory 
of Michigan, the area of which was much larger than that of the 
present state. This position gave him the chief control of Indian 
affairs for the territory, which was then occupied almost entirely 
by natives, there being only 6000 white settlers. During the 
eighteen years in which he held this post he rendered valuable 
services to the territory and to the nation; he extinguished the 
Indian title to large tracts of land, instituted surveys, constructed 
roads, and explored the lakes and sources of the Mississippi river. 
His relations with the British authorities in Canada after the War 
of 18 1 2 were at times very trying, as these officials persisted in 
searching American vessels on the Great Lakes and in arousing 
the hostility of the Indians of the territory against the American 
government. To those experiences was largely due the antipathy 



for Great Britain manifested by him in his later career. Upon 
the reorganization of President Jackson's cabinet in 183 1 he 
became secretary of war, and held this office until 1836. It fell 
to him, therefore, to direct the conduct of the Black Hawk and 
Seminole wars. He sided with the president in his nullification 
controversy with South Carolina and in his removal of the 
Indians from Georgia, but not in his withdrawal of the govern- 
ment deposits from the United States Bank. 

In 1836 General Cass was appointed minister to France, and 
became very popular with the French government and people. 
In 1842, when the Quintuple Treaty was negotiated by representa- 
tives of England, France, Prussia, Russia and Austria for the 
suppression of the slave trade by the exercise of the right of 
search, Cass attacked it in a pamphlet entitled " An Examination 
of the Questions now in Discussion between the American and 
British Government Concerning the Right of Search," and 
presented to the French government a formal memorial which 
was probably instrumental in preventing the ratification of the 
treaty by France. In this same year the Webster-Ashburton 
treaty between Great Britain and the United States was con- 
cluded, and, as England did not thereby relinquish her claim of 
the right to search American vessels, Cass, after having taken 
such a decided stand in this controversy, felt himself in an 
awkward position, and resigned his post. His attitude on this 
question made him very popular in America, and he was a strong, 
but unsuccessful, candidate for the Democratic nomination for 
the presidency in 1844. From 1845 to 1848 and from 1849 to 
1857 he was a member of the United States Senate, and in 1846 
was a leader of those demanding the " re-annexation " of all the 
Oregon country south of 54 40' or war with England, and was 
one of the fourteen who voted against the ratification of the 
compromise with England at the 49th parallel. He loyally 
supported Polk's administration during the Mexican War, 
opposed the Wilmot Proviso, and advocated the Compromise 
Measures of 1850 and the Kansas-Nebraska Bill of 1854. In his 
famous " Nicholson letter " of December 1847 he made what was 
probably the earliest enunciation of the doctrine of " popular 
sovereignty," namely, that the people of the territories should 
decide for themselves whether or not they should have slavery. 

In 1848 he received the Democratic nomination for the presi- 
dency, but owing to the defection of the so-called " Barnburners " 
(see Free-Soil Party) he did not receive the united support of 
his party, and was defeated by the Whig candidate, Zachary 
Taylor. His name was again prominent before the Democratic 
convention of 1852, which, however, finally nominated Franklin 
Pierce. On account of his eminently conservative attitude on all 
questions concerning slavery, General Cass has been accused of 
pandering to the southern Democrats in order to further his 
political aspirations. His ideas of popular sovereignty, however, 
were not inconsistent with the vigorous Democratic spirit of the 
west, of which he was a typical representative, and it is not clear 
that he believed that the application of this principle would result 
in the extension of slavery. As the west became more radically 
opposed to slavery after the troubles in Kansas, Cass was soon 
out of sympathy with his section, and when the Republicans 
secured control of the legislature in 1857 they refused to return 
him to the Senate. President Buchanan soon afterward made 
him secretary of state, and in this position he at last had the 
satisfaction of obtaining from the British government an ac- 
knowledgment of the correctness of the American attitude with 
regard to the right of search (or " visitation," as Great Britain 
euphemistically termed it). In December i860 he retired 
from the cabinet when the president refused to take a firmer 
attitude against secession by reinforcing Fort Sumter, and he 
remained in retirement until his death at Detroit, Michigan, on 
the 17th of June 1866. He wrote for the North American and 
the American Quarterly Reviews, and published Inquiries 
Concerning the History, Traditions and Languages of Indians 
Living Within the United States (1823), and France: Its King, 
Court and Government (1840). 

See W. T. Young, Life and Public Services of General Lewis Cass 
(Detroit, 1852); W. L. G. Smith, Life and Times of Lewis Cass 



45 6 



CASSABA— CASSANDRA 



(New York, 1856). The best biography is by A. G. McLaughlin, 
Lewis Cass (revised edition, Boston, 1899), in the " American 
Statesmen " series. 

CASSABA, a town of Asia Minor, in the sanjak of Manisa, 
63 m. E. of Smyrna, with which it is connected by rail. Pop. 
estimated at 23,000, of which two-thirds are Mussulman; but 
the estimate is probably excessive. It has considerable local 
trade, and exports the products of the surrounding district. 
Cotton is the most important article, and there are ginning 
factories in the town; the silkworm is largely raised and 
exported; and the " melons of Cassaba " are sent not only to 
Smyrna but to Constantinople. There are fragments of marbles 
built into the houses, but the modern town does not seem to 
occupy any ancient site of importance. 

CASSA6NAC, BERNARD ADOLPHE GRANIER DE (1806- 
1880), French journalist, was born at Averon-Bergelle in the 
department of Gers on the nth of August 1806. In 1832 he 
began his career as a Parisian journalist, contributing ardent 
defences of Romanticism and Conservatism to the Revue de 
Paris, the Journal des Dibats, and to La Presse. Then he founded 
a political journal, L'Upoque (1845-1848), in which his violent 
polemics in support of Guizot brought him notoriety and not 
a few duels. In 1851, in the Constitutionnel, he declared himself 
openly an imperialist; and in 1852 was elected as " official 
candidate " by the department of Gers. As journalist and 
deputy he actively supported an absolutist policy. He de- 
manded the restoration of religion, opposed the laws in favour 
of the press, and was a member of the club of the rue de l'Arcade. 
In March 1868 he accused the Liberal deputies of having received 
money from the king of Prussia for opposing the emperor, and 
when called upon for proof, submitted only false or trivial 
documents. After the proclamation of the republic (4th of 
September 1870) he fled to Belgium. He returned to France 
for the elections of 1876, and was elected deputy. He continued 
to combat all the republican reforms, but with no advantage to 
his party. He died on the 31st of January 1880. In addition 
to his journalistic articles he published various historical works, 
now unimportant. 

His son, Paul Adolphe Marie Prosper Granier de 
Cassagnac (1843-1904), while still young was associated with 
his father in both politics and journalism. In 1866 he became 
editor of the Conservative paper Le Pays, and figured in a long 
series of political duels. On the declaration of war in 1870 he 
volunteered for service and was taken prisoner at S6dan. On 
his return from prison in a fortress in Silesia he continued 
to defend the Bonapartist cause in Le Pays, against both 
Republicans and Royalists. Elected deputy for the department 
of Gers in 1876, he adopted in the chamber a policy of obstruc- 
tion "to discredit the republican regime." In 1877 he openly 
encouraged MacMahon to attempt a Bonapartist coup d'etat, 
but the marshal's refusal and the death of the prince imperial 
foiled his hopes. He now played but a secondary r61e in the 
chamber, and occupied himself mostly with the direction 
of the journal L'AutoritS, which he had founded. He was 
not re-elected in 1902, and died in November 1904. His 
sons took over L'AutoritS and the belligerent traditions of the 
family. 

CASSANA, NICCOLO (1659-1714), often called Nicoletto, 
Italian painter, was born at Venice, and became a disciple of his 
father, Giovanni Francesco Cassana, a Genoese, who had been 
taught the art of painting by Bernardino Strozzi (" il Prete 
Genovese ")• Having painted portraits of the Florentine court, 
and also of some of the English nobility, Nicoletto was invited 
to England, and introduced to Queen Anne, who sat to him for 
her likeness, and conferred on him many marks of favour. He 
died in London in 17 14, having given way to drinking in his 
later years. Cassana was a man of the most vehement temper, 
and would wallow on the ground if provoked with his work. 
One of his principal paintings is the " Conspiracy of Catiline," 
now in Florence. 

CASSANDER (c. 350-297 B.C.), king of Macedonia, eldest son 
of Antipater, first appears at the court of Alexander at Babylon, 



where he defended his father against the accusations of his 
enemies. Having been passed over by his father in favour of 
Polyperchon as his successor in the regency of Macedonia, 
Cassander allied himself with Ptolemy Soter and Antigonus, 
and declared war against the regent. Most of the Greek states 
went over to him, and Athens also surrendered. He further 
effected an alliance with Eurydice, the ambitious wife of King 
Philip Arrhidaeus of Macedon. Both she and her husband, 
however, together with Cassander's brother, Nicanor, were 
soon after slain by Olympias. Cassander at once marched 
against Olympias, and, having forced her to surrender in Pydna, 
put her to death (316). In 310 or 309 he also murdered Roxana 
and Alexander, the wife and son of Alexander the Great, whose 
natural son Heracles he bribed Polyperchon to poison. He 
had already connected himself with the royal family by mar- 
riage with Thessalonica, Alexander the Great's half-sister, 
and, having formed an alliance with Seleucus, Ptolemy and 
Lysimachus, against Antigonus, he became, on the defeat and 
death of Antigonus in 301, undisputed sovereign of Macedonia. 
He died of dropsy in 297. Cassander was a man of literary 
taste, but violent and ambitious. He restored Thebes after its 
destruction by Alexander the Great, transformed Therma into 
Thessalonica, and built the new city of Cassandreia upon the 
ruins of Potidaea. 

See Diod. Sic. xviii., xix., xx. ; Plutarch, Demetrius, 18. 31, 
Phocion, 31; also Macedonian Empire. 

CASSANDER (or Cassant), GEORGE (15 13-1566), Flemish 
theologian, born at Pitthem near Bruges, went at an early age 
to Louvain and was teaching theology and literature in 1541 
at Bruges and shortly afterwards at Ghent. About 1549 he 
removed to Cologne, where, after a profound study of the 
points of difference between the Catholic and reformed churches, 
he devoted himself to the project of reunion, thus anticipating 
the efforts of Leibnitz. In 1561 he published anonymously 
De Officiis pii ac publicae tranquillitatis vere amantis viri in hoc 
dissidio religionis (Basel), in which, while holding that no one, 
on account of abuses, has a right utterly to subvert the Church, 
he does not disguise his dislike of those who exaggerated the 
papal claims. He takes his standpoint on Scripture explained 
by tradition and the fathers of the first six centuries. At a time 
when controversy drowned the voice of reason, such a book 
pleased neither party; but as some of the German princes 
thought that he could heal the breach, the emperor Ferdinand 
asked him to publish his Consultatio de Articulis Fidei inter 
Catholicos et Protestantes Controversis (1565), in which, like 
Newman at a later date, he tried to put a Catholic interpretation 
upon Protestant formularies. While never attacking dogma, and 
even favouring the Roman church on the ground of authority, 
he criticizes the papal power and makes reflections on practices. 
The work, attacked violently by the Louvain theologians on 
one side, and by Calvin and Beza on the other, was put on the 
Roman Index in 1617. He died at Cologne on the 3rd of 
February 1 566. The collected edition of his works was published 
in 1616 at Paris. (E. Tn.) 

CASSANDRA, in Greek legend, daughter of Priam and Hecuba. 
She was beloved of Apollo, who promised to bestow on her the 
spirit of prophecy if she would comply with his desires. Cas- 
sandra accepted the proposal; but no sooner had she obtained 
the gift than she laughed at the tempter, and refused to fulfil her 
promise. Apollo revenged himself by ordaining that her pre- 
dictions should be discredited (Apollodorus iii. 12. 5) ; and hence 
it was in vain that on the arrival of Helen she prophesied the ruin 
of Troy. On the capture of that city she was ravished by Ajax, 
the son of Oileus, in the temple of Minerva (Strabo vi. p. 264). 
In the distribution of the booty, Cassandra fell to the lot of 
Agamemnon; but again her foresight was useless, for he would 
not believe her prediction that he should perish in his own 
country. The prophecy was fulfilled, for both were slain through 
the intrigues of Clytaemnestra (Odyssey, xi. 421 ff.). It is to be 
noticed that there is no mention in Homer of her prophetic gifts. 
Together with Apollo, she was worshipped under the name of 
Alexandra. 



CASSANO ALL' IONIO— CASSEL 



457 



CASSANO ALL' IONIO, a town of Calabria, Italy, in the 
province of Cosenza; its railway station (6 m. S. of the town) 
is 37 m. N. by E. from the town of Cosenza, while it is 6 m. W. 
of Sibari, on the line between Metaponto and Reggio. Pop. 
6842. It is very finely situated, 820 ft. above sea-level: the 
rock above it is crowned by a medieval castle commanding 
beautiful views: a tower is still pointed out as that from which 
the stone was thrown which killed Milo, but this rests on an 
erroneous identification of Cassano with the ancient Compsa 
(q.v.). There are warm sulphurous springs here which are used 
for baths. 

CASSAVA, the name given to the farinaceous root of two 
species of Euphorbiaceous plants, the bitter cassava, Manihot 
utilissima, and the sweet cassava, M. Aipi, both highly im- 
portant sources of food starches; Manihot is given as the native 
Brazilian name in Spanish writings of the 16th century. They 
are herbaceous or semi-shrubby perennials with very large 
fleshy, cylindrical, tapering roots as much as 3 ft. long and 6 to 
9 in. in diameter, and filled with milky juice. The slender stems, 




Cassava or Manioc {Manihot utilissima), less than half nat. size. 

1, An inflorescence showing at a 3, Stamens and fleshy disc of male 

a fruit which will presently flower. 

separate into five one-seeded 4, Seed with its appendage (stro- 

parts, about f nat. size. phiole or caruncle). 

2, Pistil of female flower. 

S to o ft. high, bear large spreading long-stalked leaves, with 
the blade divided nearly to the base into three to seven long 
narrow segments. The plants are probably natives of South 
America, but the bitter cassava, which is the more important 
of the two in an economic sense, has been introduced into most 
tropical regions, and is extensively cultivated in west tropical 
Africa and the Malay Archipelago, from which, as well as from 
Brazil and other South American states, its starch in the form 
of tapioca is a staple article of export. The sap of the bitter 
cassava root contains hydrocyanic acid, and the root, being 
therefore highly poisonous, cannot be eaten in a fresh condition; 
while on the other hand the sweet cassava is perfectly innocuous, 
and is employed as a table vegetable. Exposure to heat dissi- 
pates the poisonous principle, and the concentrated juice is in 
that state used as the basis of cassareep and other sauces. From 
the bitter cassava roots many different food preparations are 
made in Brazil. The roots are preserved for use by being simply 



cleaned, sliced and dried; from such dried slices manioc or 
cassava meal, used for cassava cakes, &c, is prepared by rasping. 
The starch also is separated and used for food under the name 
of Brazilian arrowroot; and this, when agglomerated into pellets 
on hot plates, forms the tapioca {q.v.) of commerce. Cassava 
starch has a stellate hilum, which readily distinguishes it under 
the microscope from other starches. 

CASSEL, a town of northern France in the department of 
Nord, 34 m. N.W. of Lille by rail. Pop. (1906) 1844. It stands 
on an isolated hill (515 ft.) from which portions of France, 
Belgium and England can be seen, with 32 towns and 100 villages, 
including St Omer, Dunkirk, Ypres and Ostend. The former 
hotel de ville (1634), the hotel de la Noble Cour, once the seat of 
the jurisdiction of maritime Flanders, now the town-hall, and 
the hotel des dues d'Halluin are the historic buildings of the 
town. Cassel has a communal college. Its industrial establish- 
ments include tanneries, oil-mills, salt refineries and breweries, 
and there is trade in cattle and butter. 

The town, supposed to occupy the site of Castellum Mena- 
piorum, was a Roman station, as numerous remains of the 
Gallo-Roman period attest, and an important centre of roads. 
It is frequently mentioned in the wars of the middle ages, and 
was the scene of important battles in 107 1, when Robert, count 
of Flanders, vanquished his rival Arnulf; 1328, when Philip 
of Valois defeated the Flemish; and 1677, when William of 
Orange was defeated by Philip, duke of Orleans, brother of 
Louis XIV. General D. R. Vandamme (1770-1830) was born 
in the town. 

CASSEL, or Kassel, a city of Germany, capital of the former 
electorate of Hesse-Cassel, and, since its annexation by Prussia 
in 1866, capital of the province of Hesse-Nassau. Pop. (1885) 
64,083; (1905) 120,446. It is pleasantly situated, in a hilly 
and well-wooded country, on both sides of the river Fulda, 
over which a stone bridge leads to the lower new town, 124 m. 
by rail N.N.E. from Frankfort-on-Main. The river is navigable 
for barges, and railways connect the town with all parts of 
Germany. The streets of the old town are narrow and crooked, 
and contain many picturesque gabled houses, generally of the 
17th century, but those of the upper and lower new town; and 
the three suburbs, are not surpassed by any in Germany. The 
principal streets are the Konigs-strasse (5100 ft. long and 60 
broad), the Schone Aussicht, and the Stande-platz (180 ft. broad 
with four rows of linden trees). The large Friedrichs-platz is 1000 
by 450 ft. in area. In it stands a marble statue of the landgrave 
Frederick II. There is a fine view from the open side. The 
former residence of the electors {Residenzschloss) fronts this 
square, as well as the Museum Fridericianum, with a facade 
of Roman-Ionic columns. The museum contains various 
valuable collections of curiosities, interesting mosaics, coins, 
casts, a library of 230,000 volumes, and valuable manuscripts. 
In the cabinet of curiosities there is a complete collection of 
clocks and watches from the earliest to the present time. Among 
these is the so-called Egg of Nuremberg, a watch made about 
1500 by Peter Henlein. Among other public places and build- 
ings worthy of notice are the Roman Catholic church, with a 
splendid interior; the Konigs-platz, with a remarkable echo; 
the Karls-platz, with the statue of the landgrave Charles; and 
the Martins-platz, with a large church — St Martin's — with 
twin towers, containing the burial-vaults of the Hessian princes. 
The gallery of paintings, housed in a handsome building erected 
in 1880 on the Scheme Aussicht, contains one of the finest small 
collections in Europe, especially rich in the works of Rem- 
brandt, Frans Hals and Van Dyck. 

The town contains numerous educational institutions, includ- 
ing a technical college, a school of painting, a celebrated classical 
school, which the emperor William II. attended, and a military 
academy. The descendants of the French refugees who founded 
the upper new town have a church and hospital of their own. 
There are three Roman Catholic churches, an English church, 
and two synagogues. Music is much cultivated, and there is an 
opera with a first-rate orchestra, of which Ludwig Spohr was 
1 at one time conductor. The opera-house or theatre was built 



458 



CASSELL^CAiSSIANUS 



by Jerome Napoleon, but in 1906 money was voted for a new 
building on the Auetor. A new Rathaus (town-hall) has been 
erected. There are also the Bose Museum, containing collections 
of pictures and antiquities of Hessian origin, museums of natural 
history and ethnography, an industrial exhibition hall, and an 
industrial art school. A handsome Gothic Lutheran church 
was erected in 1892-1897, a post office (Renaissance) in 1881, 
and new administrative offices and law courts in 1876-1880. 
The municipal (or Murhard) library, in the Hanau park, contains 
118,000 volumes. The most noticeable of the modern public 
monuments are those to the emperor William I. (1898), to the 
musician Spohr (1883), and the Lowenbrunnen (1881). In the 
Karlsaue, a favourite public promenade lying just below the 
Schone Aussicht, are the Orangerie and the marble baths. 
Cassel is the headquarters of the XI. German army corps, and 
has a large garrison. It is a favourite residence for foreigners 
and retired officers and government officials. The industries 
embrace engine-building, the manufacture of railway carriages 
and plant, scientific instruments, porcelain, tobacco and cigars, 
lithography, jute-spinning, iron-founding, brewing and gardening. 

On a slope of the Habichtswald Mountains, 3 m. W. of Cassel, 
and approached by an avenue, is the summer palace of Wilhelms- 
hohe, erected in 1787-1794. Napoleon III. resided here, as a 
prisoner of war, after the battle of Sedan. The surrounding 
gardens are adorned with fountains, cascades, lakes and grottos, 
the principal fountain sending up a jet of water 180 ft. high 
and 12 in. in diameter. Here also is an interesting building 
called the Lowenburg, erected in 1 793-1 796 in the style of a 
fortified castle, and containing among other things portraits 
of Tudors and Stuarts. The principal curiosity is the Karlsburg 
cascade, which is placed in a broad ravine, thickly wooded on 
both sides. A staircase of 900 steps leads to the top. On one 
of the landings is a huge rudely-carved stone figure of the giant 
Enceladus, and at the top is an octagon building called the 
Riesenschloss, surmounted by a colossal copper figure of the 
Farnese Hercules, 31 ft. high, whose club alone is sufficiently 
capacious to accommodate from eight to ten persons. In differ- 
ent parts of the park, and especially from the Octagon, charming 
views are obtained. The park was first formed by the landgrave 
Frederick II., the husband of Mary, daughter of George II. of 
England, and was finished by his successor the landgrave William, 
after whom it was named. 

The earliest mention of Cassel is in 913, when it is referred to 
as Cassala. The town passed from the landgraves of Thuringia 
to the landgraves of Hesse in the 13 th century, becoming one 
of the principal residences of the latter house in the 15th century. 
The burghers accepted the reformed doctrines in 1527. The 
fortifications of the town were restored by the landgrave Philip 
the Magnanimous and his son William IV. during the 16th cen- 
tury, and it was greatly improved by the landgrave Charles 
(1654-1730), who welcomed many Huguenots who founded the 
upper new town. In 1762 Cassel was captured by the Germans 
from the French; after this the fortifications were dismantled 
and New Cassel was laid out by the landgrave Frederick II. 
In 1807 it became the capital of the kingdom of Westphalia; in 
1813 it was bombarded and captured by the Russian general 
Chernichev; in 1830, 1831 and 1848 it was the scene of violent 
commotions; from 1850 to 1851 it was occupied by the Prussians, 
the Bavarians and the Austrians; in 1866 it was occupied by the 
Prussians, and in 1867 was made the capital of the newly .formed 
Prussian province of Hesse-Nassau. 

See Piderit, Geschichte derllaupt- und Residenzstadt Kassel (Kassel, 
1882); Fr. Miiller, Kassel seit 70 Jahren (2 vols., 2nd ed., Kassel, 
1893); and Hessler, Die Residenzstadt Kassel und ihre Umgebung 
(Kassel, 1902), 

CASSELL, JOHN (1817-1865), British publisher, was born in 
Manchester on the 23rd of January 181 7. His father was the 
landlord of a public-house, and John was apprenticed to a joiner. 
He was self-educated, gaining by his own efforts a considerable 
acquaintance with English literature and a knowledge of French. 
He came to London in 1836 to work at his trade, but his energies 
at this time were chiefly centred in the cause of temperance, 



for which he was an active worker. In 1847 he established 
himself as a tea and coffee merchant, and soon after started 
a publishing business with the aim of supplying good literature 
to the working classes. From the offices of the firm, which 
became in 1859 Messrs. Cassell, Petter, Galpin & Co., were issued 
the Popular Educator (1852-1855), the Technical Educator 
(1870-1872), the Magazine of Art (1878-1903), CasseWs Magazine 
(from 1852), and numerous editions of standard works. A special 
feature of Cassell's popular books was the illustration. At the 
time of the Crimean War he procured from Paris the cuts used 
in L' Illustration, and by printing them in his Family Paper 
(begun in 1853) secured a large circulation for it. The firm was 
converted in 1883 into a limited liability company, under the 
name of Cassell & Company, Limited. John Cassell died in 
London on the 2nd of April 1865. 

, CASSIA (Lat. cassia, Gr. naaia), the aromatic bark derived 
from Cinnamomum cassia. The greater part of the supply 
coming from China, it is sometimes termed Chinese cinnamon. 
The bark is much thicker than that of true cinnamon; the taste 
is more pungent and the flavour less delicate, though somewhat 
similar to that of cinnamon. The properties of cassia bark 
depend on the presence of a volatile oil — the oil of cassia, which 
is imported in a fairly pure state as an article of commerce from 
Canton. Cassia bark is in much more extensive demand on the 
continent of Europe than in Great Britain, being preferred to 
cinnamon by southern nations. The chief use of both the 
oil and bark is for flavouring liqueurs and chocolate, and in 
cooking generally. When ground as a spice it is difficult to 
distinguish cassia from cinnamon (q.v.), and it is a common 
practice to substitute the cheap common spice for the more 
valuable article. Cassia Buds, which have a pleasing cinnamon 
flavour, are believed to be the immature fruits of the tree which 
yields Chinese cinnamon. They are brought in considerable 
quantities from Canton, and used as a spice and in confectionery. 
Cassia pulp, used as a laxative, is obtained from the pods of 
Cassia fistula, or pudding pipe tree, a native of Africa which is 
cultivated in both the East and West Indies. Some confusion 
occasionally arises from the fact that Cassia is the generic name 
of an extensive genus of leguminous plants, which, in addition 
to various other medicinal products, is the source of the senna 
leaves which form an important article of materia medica. 

CASSIA, VIA, an ancient high-road of Italy, leading from 
Rome through Etruria to Florentia (Florence); at the nth mile 
the Via Clodia (see Clodia, Via) diverged north-north-west, 
while the Via Cassia ran to the east of the Lacus Sabatinus and 
then through the place now called Sette Vene, where a road, 
probably the Via Annia, branched off to Falerii, through Sutrium 
(where the Via Ciminia, running along the east edge of the Lacus 
Ciminius, diverged from it, to rejoin it at Aquae Passeris, north 
of the modern Viterbo 1 ), Forum Cassii, Volsinii, Clusium and 
Arretium, its line being closely followed by the modern high- 
road from Rome to Florence. The date of its construction 
is uncertain: it cannot have been earlier than 187 B.C., 2 when 
the consul C. Flaminius constructed a road from Bononia to 
Arretium (which must have coincided with the portion of the 
later Via Cassia). It is not, it is true, mentioned by any ancient 
authorities before the time of Cicero, who in 45 B.C. speaks of 
the existence of three roads from Rome to Mutina, the Flaminia, 
the Aurelia and the Cassia. A milestone of a.d. 124 mentions 
repairs to the road made by Hadrian from the boundary of the 
territory of Clusium to Florence, a distance of 86 m. 

See Ch. Hiilsen in Pauly-Wissowa, Realencyclopadie, iii. 1669. 

(T. As.) 

CASSIANUS, JOANNES EREMITA, or Joannes Massixiensis 
(?36o-?435), a celebrated recluse, one of the first founders of 
monastic institutions in western Europe, was probably born in 

1 The Via Traiana Nova, or the {viae) tres Traianae, mentioned 
in inscriptions with the Cassia and Clodia as under the same curator, 
are not certainly identifiable. 

2 Having regard to the military importance of Arretium during 
the Punic wars, it is difficult to believe that no direct road existed 
to this point before 187 B.C. 



CASSINI— GASSIODORUS 



459 



Provence about 360, but he spent the early part of his life in the 
monastery of Bethlehem with his friend Germanus, and his 
affinities were always Eastern rather than Western. In company 
with Germanus he visited Egypt, and dwelt for several years 
among the ascetics of the desert near the banks of the Nile. 
In 403 he repaired to Constantinople, where he received ordina- 
tion as deacon at the hands of Chrysostom. At Marseilles 
(after 410) he founded two religious societies — a convent for 
nuns, and the abbey of St Victor, which during his time is said 
to have contained 5000 inmates. In later times his regulations 
enjoyed a high reputation, and were adopted by the monks and 
nuns of Port Royal. He was eventually canonized; and a 
festival in his honour long continued to be celebrated at Marseilles 
on the 25th of July. Cassianus was one of the first and most 
prominent of the Semi-Pelagians, maintaining that while man 
is by nature sinful, he yet has some good remaining in him, 
and that, while the immediate gift of God's grace is necessary 
to salvation, conversion may also be begun by the exercise of 
man's will. He further asserted that God is always willing to 
bestow his grace on all who seek it, though, at the same time, 
it is true that he sometimes bestows it without its being sought. 
These views have been held by a very large part of the church 
from his time, and embrace much of the essence of Arminianism. 
The style of Cassianus is slovenly, and shows no literary polish, 
but its direct simplicity is far superior to the rhetorical affectations 
which disfigure most of the writings of that age. At the request 
of Castor, bishop of Apt, he wrote two monumental and influential 
treatises on the monastic life. The De Institutione Coenobiorum 
(twelve books) describes the dress, the food, the devotional 
exercises, the discipline and the special spiritual dangers of 
monastic life in the East (gluttony, unchastity, avarice, anger, 
gloom, apathy, vanity and pride). The Collationes Patrum, 
a series of dialogues with the pious fathers of Egypt, deal with 
the way in which these dangers (and others, e.g. demons) may 
be avoided or overcome. At the desire of Leo (then arch- 
deacon of Rome) he wrote against Nestorius his De Incarnatione 
Domini in seven books. 

Editions. — Douay (1616) by Alardus Gazaus, with excellent 
notes; Migne's Patrol. Lat. vols. xlix. and 1. ; M. Petschenig in the 
Vienna Corpus Script. Eccles. Lat. (2 vols., 1886-1888). See A. 
Harnack, History of Dogma, v. 246 ff., 253 ff . ; A. Hoch, Die Lehre 
d. Joh. Cassian von Natur und Gnade (Freiburg, 1895) ; W. Moeller, 
History of the Chr. Church, i. 368-370. 

CASSINI, the name of an Italian family of astronomers, four 
generations of whom succeeded each other in official charge of 
the observatory at Paris. 

Giovanni Domenico Cassini (1625-1712), the first of these, 
was born at Perinaldo near Nice on the 8th of June 1625. 
Educated by the Jesuits at Genoa, he was nominated in 1650 
professor of astronomy in the university of Bologna; he observed 
and wrote a treatise on the comet of 1652; was employed by the 
senate of Bologna as hydraulic engineer ; and appointed by 
Pope Alexander VII. inspector of fortifications in 1657, and 
subsequently director of waterways in the papal states. His 
determinations of the rotation-periods of Jupiter, Mars and 
Venus in 1665-1667 enhanced his fame; and Louis XIV. 
applied for his services in 1669 at the stately observatory then 
in course of erection at Paris. The pope (Clement IX.) re- 
luctantly assented, on the understanding that the appointment 
was to be temporary; but it proved to be irrevocable. Cassini 
was naturalized as a French subject in 1673, having begun work 
at the observatory in September 167 1. Between 167 1 and 1684 
he discovered four Saturnian satellites, and in 1675 the division 
in Saturn's ring (see Saturn) ; made the earliest sustained 
observations of the zodiacal light, and published, in Les Elements 
de I'astronomie verifies (1684), an account of Jean Richer's 
(1630-1696) geodetical queries in Cayenne. Certain oval
curves which he proposed to substitute for Kepler's ellipses as 
the paths of the planets were named after him " Cassinians." 
He died at the Paris observatory on the nth of September 171 2. 

A partial autobiography left by Giovanni Domenico Cassini was 
published by his great-grandson, Count Cassini, in his Memoires 
pour servir a I'histoire des sciences (1810). See also C. Wolf, Histoire 



de V observatoire de Paris (1902); Max. Marie, Histoire des sciences, 
t. iv. p. 234; R. Wolf, Geschichte der Astronomie, p. 450, &c. 

Jacques Cassini (1677-1756), son of Domenico Cassini, was 
born at the Paris observatory on the 8th of February 1677. 
Admitted at the age of seventeen to membership of the French 
Academy of Sciences, he was elected in 1696 a fellow of the 
Royal Society of London, and became maitre des comptes in 
1706. Having succeeded to his father's position at the obser- 
vatory in 171 2, he measured in 17 13 the arc of the meridian 
from Dunkirk to Perpignan, and published the results in a 
volume entitled De la grandeur et de la figure de la terre (1720) 
(see Geodesy). He wrote besides Elemens d' astronomie (1740), 
and died on the 18th of April 1756 at Thury, near Clermont. 
The first tables of the satellites of Saturn were supplied by 
him in 1716. 

See C. Wolf, Histoire de V observatoire de Paris; Max. Marie, 
Histoire des sciences, vii. 214; R. Wolf, Geschichte der Astronomie, 
p. 451; J. C. Houzeau, Bibl. astronomique ; J. Delambre, Histoire 
de I'astronomie au XVIII' siecle, pp. 250-275 (unfairly depreciatory) ; 
J. F. Montucla, Hist, des mathematiques , iv. 145, 248. 

Cesar Francois Cassini, or Cassini de Thury (1714-1784), 
son of Jacques Cassini, was born at the observatory of Paris on 
the 17th of June 1714. He succeeded to his father's official 
employments, continued the hereditary surveying queries,
and began in 1744 the construction of a great topographical 
map of France. The post of director of the Paris observatory 
was created for his* benefit in 1771, when the establishment 
ceased to be a dependency of the Academy of Sciences. Cassini 
de Thury died at Thury on the 4th of September 1784. His 
chief works are: — Meridienne de I' observatoire de Paris (1744), 
Description gHometrique de la terre (1775), and Description 
geometrique de la France (1784). 

See C. Wolf, Histoire de V observatoire de Paris, p. 287 ; Max. Marie, 
Histoire des sciences, viii. 158; J. Delambre, Histoire de I'astronomie 
au XVIII" siecle, pp. 275-309; R. Wolf, Geschichte der Astronomie, 
p. 451 ; J. J. de Lalande, Bibliographic astronomique. 

Jacques Dominique Cassini, Count (1748-1845), son of 
Cesar Francois Cassini, was born at the observatory of Paris on 
the 30th of June 1748. He succeeded in 1784 to the directorate 
of the observatory; but his plans for its restoration and re- 
equipment were wrecked in 1793 by the animosity of the 
National Assembly. His position having become intolerable, 
he resigned on the 6th of September, and was thrown into prison 
in 1794, but released after seven months. He then withdrew to 
Thury, where he died, aged ninety-seven, on the 18th of October 
1845. He published in 1770 an account of a voyage to America in 
1768, undertaken as the commissary of the Academy of Sciences 
with a view to testing Pierre Leroy's watches at sea. A memoir in 
which he described the queries superintended by him in 1787
for connecting the observatories of Paris and Greenwich by 
longitude-determinations appeared in 1791. He visited England 
for the purposes of the work, and saw William Herschel at 
Slough. He completed his father's map of France, which was 
published by the Academy of Sciences in 1793. It served as the 
basis for the Atlas National (1791), showing France in depart- 
ments. Count Cassini's Mimoires pour servir a I'histoire de 
I' observatoire de Paris (1810) embodied portions of an exten- 
sive work, the prospectus of which he had submitted to the 
Academy of Sciences in 1774. The volume included his Eloges 
of several academicians, and the autobiography of his great- 
grandfather, the first Cassini. 

See J. F. S. Devic, Histoire de la vie et des travaux de J. D. Cassini 
(j85i); J. Delambre, Histoire de I'astronomie au XVIII' siecle, pp. 
3 9"3 I 3; Phil. Mag. 3rd series, vol. xxviii. p. 412; C. Wolf, Histoire 
de V observatoire de Paris (1902), p. 234 et passim. (A. M. C.) 

CASSIODORUS (not Cassiodorius) , the name of a Syrian 
family settled at Scyllacium (Squillace) in Bruttii, where it held 
an influential position in the 5th century a.d. Its most important 
member was Flavius Magnus Aurelius Cassiodorus Senator 
(c. 490-585), historian, statesman, and monk. " Senator " 
(not a title) is the name used by himself in his official corre- 
spondence. His father held the offices of comes privatarum and 
sacrarum largitionum (controller of the emperor's private revenue 
and the public exchequer) under Odoacer, and subsequently 



460 



CASSIOPEIA— CASSITERITE 



attached himself to Theodoric, by whom he was appointed 
corrector (governor) of Bruttii and Lucania, and praefectus 
praetorio. The son at an early age became consiliarius (legal 
assessor) to his father, and (probably in 507) quaestor, an official 
whose chief duty at that time consisted in acting as the mouth- 
piece of the ruler, and drafting his despatches. In 514 he was 
ordinary consul, and at a later date possibly corrector of his 
native province. At the death of Theodoric (526) he held the 
office of magister officiorum (chief of the civil service). Under 
Athalaric he was praefectus praetorio, a post which he retained 
till about 540, after the triumphal entry of Belisarius into 
Ravenna, when he retired from public life. With the object of 
providing for the transmission of divine and human knowledge 
to later ages, and of securing it against the tide of barbarism 
which threatened to sweep it away, he founded two monasteries — 
Vivarium and Castellum — in his ancestral domains at Squillace 
(others identify the two monasteries). The special duty which 
he enjoined upon the inmates was the acquisition of knowledge, 
both sacred and profane, the latter, however, being subordinated 
to the former. He also collected and emended valuable MSS., 
which his monks were instructed to copy, and superintended 
the translation of various Greek works into Latin. He further 
amused himself with making scientific toys, such as sun-dials 
and water-clocks. As he is stated to have written one of his 
treatises at the age of ninety-three, he must have lived till 
after 580. Whether he belonged to the Benedictine order is 
uncertain. 

The writings of Cassiodorus evince great erudition, ingenuity 
and labour, but are disfigured by incorrectness and an affected 
artificiality, and his Latin partakes much of the corruptions of 
the age. His works are (1) historical and political, (2) theo- 
logical and grammatical. 

1. (a) Variae, the most important of all his writings, in twelve 
books, published in 537. They contain the decrees of Theodoric and 
his successors Amalasuntha, Theodahad and Witigis; the regula- 
tions of the chief offices of state ; the edicts published by Cassiodorus 
himself when praefectus praetorio. It is the best source of our 
knowledge of the Ostrogothic kingdom in Italy (ed. T. Mommsen in 
Monumenta Germaniae Historical Auctores Antiquissimi, xii., 1894; 
condensed English translation by T. Hodgkin, 1886). 

(b) Chronica, written at the request of Theodoric's son-in-law 
Eutharic, during whose consulship (519) it was published. It is a 
dry and inaccurate compilation from various sources, unduly partial 
to the Goths (ed. T. Mommsen in Mon. Germ. Hist.: Auct. Ant. xi. 
pt. i., 1893). 

(c) Panegyrics on Gothic kings and queens (fragments ed. L. 
Traube in Mon. Germ. Hist.: Auct. Ant. xii.). 

2. (a) De Anima, a discussion on the nature of the soul, at the 
conclusion of which the author deplores the quarrel between two 
such great peoples as the Goths and Romans. It seems to have been 
published with the last part of the Variae. 

(b) Institutions divinarun et humanarum litterarum, an encyclo- 
paedia of sacred and profane literature for the monks, and a sketch 
of the seven liberal arts. It further contains instructions for using 
the library, and precepts for daily life. 

(c) A commentary on the Psalms and short notes (complexiones) 
on the Pauline epistles, the Acts, and the Apocalypse. 

(d) De Orthographia, a compilation made by the author in his 
ninety-third year from the works of twelve grammarians, ending 
wjth his contemporary Priscian (ed. H. Keil, Grammatici Latini, vii.). 

The Latin translations of the Antiquities of Josephus and of the 
ecclesiastical histories of Theodoret, Sozomen and Socrates, under 
the title of Historia Tripartita (embracing the years 306-439), were 
carried out under his supervision. 

Of his lost works the most important was the Historia Gothorum, 
written with the object of glorifying the Gothic royal house and 
proving that the Goths and Romans had long been connected by 
ties of friendship. It was published during the reign of Athalaric, 
and appears to have brought the history down to the death of 
Theodoric. His chief authority for Gothic history and legend was 
Ablavius (Ablabius). The work is only known to us in the meagre 
abridgment of Jordanes (ed. T. Mommsen, 1882). 

Complete Works. — ■ Editio princeps, by G. Fornerius (Paris, 
157°); J- Garet (Rouen, 1679; Venice, 1729), reprinted in J. P. 
Migne, Patrologia Latina, lxix., lxx. On Cassiodorus generally ,_ see 
Anecdoton Holder i, excerpts from a treatise of Cassiodorus, edited 
by H. Usener (Bonn, 1877), which throws light on questions connected 
with his biography; T. Mommsen, preface to his edition of the 
Variae; monographs by A. Thorbecke (Heidelberg, 1867) and A. 
Fianz (Breslau, 1872); T. Hodgkin, Italy and her Invaders, iii. 
p. 280, iv. p. 348; A. Ebert, Allgemeine Geschichte. der Litteratur des 



Mittelalters, i. ; Teuffel-Schwabe, Hist, of Roman Literature (Eng 
trans.), § 483; G. A. Simcox, Hist, of Latin Literature (1884); W. 
Ramsay in Smith's Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography; 
J. B. Bury's edition of Gibbon's Decline and Fall, iv. 180, 522; 
R. W. Church in the Church Quarterly Review, x. (1880); J. E. 
Sandys in Hist, of Classical Scholarship (2nd ed., 1906); A. Olleris, 
Cassiodore, conservateur des livtes de I'antiquite latine (Paris, 1891); 
G. Minasi, M. A. Cassiodoro . . . ricerche storico-critiche (Naples, 
1895) ; and C. Cipolla in Memorie delta r. Accademia delle scienze di 
Torino (2nd ser. xliii. pt. 2, 1893); L. M. Hartmann in Pauly- 
Wissowa's Realencyclopadie, iii. pt. 2 (1899), with note on the 
musical section of Cassiodorus' Institutiones by C. von Jan. 

CASSIOPEIA, in Greek mythology, the wife of Cepheus, and 
mother of Andromeda; in astronomy, a constellation of the 
northern hemisphere, mentioned by Eudoxus (4th century B.C.) 
and Aratus (3rd century B.C.). Ptolemy catalogued 13 stars in 
this constellation, Tycho Brahe 46, and Hevelius 37. Its most 
interesting stars are: — Nova Cassiopeiae, a " new " star, which 
burst out with extraordinary brilliancy in 1572, when it was 
observed by Tycho Brahe, but gradually diminished in brightness, 
ultimately vanishing in about eighteen months; a-Cassiopeiae 
and R-Cassiopeiae are variable stars, the former irregular, the 
latter having a long period; -q-Cassiopeiae, a binary star, 
having components of magnitudes 3! and 75; a-Cassiopeiae, 
a double star, one being white and of magnitude 5, the other 
blue and of magnitude 75. 

CASSITERIDES (from the Gr. Kaaalrepos, tin, i.e. " Tin- 
islands "), in ancient geography the name of islands regarded as 
being situated somewhere near the west coasts of Europe. Hero- 
dotus (430 B.C.) had dimly heard of them. Later writers, 
Posidonius, Diodorus, Strabo and others, call them smallish 
islands off (Strabo says, some way off) the north-west coast of 
Spain, which contained tin mines, or, as Strabo says, tin and 
lead mines — though a passage in Diodorus derives the name 
rather from their nearness to the tin districts of north-west 
Spain. While geographical knowledge of the west was still scanty 
and the secrets of the tin-trade were still successfully guarded 
by the seamen of Gades and others who dealt in the metal, the 
Greeks knew only that tin came to them by sea from the far west, 
and the idea of tin-producing islands easily arose. Later, when 
the west' was better explored, it was found that tin actually came 
from two regions, north-west Spain and Cornwall. Neither of 
these could be called " small islands " or described as off the 
north-west coast of Spain, and so the Cassiterides were not 
identified with either by the Greek and Roman geographers. 
Instead, they became a third, ill-understood source of tin, 
conceived of as distinct from Spain or Britain. Modern writers 
have perpetuated the error that the Cassiterides were definite 
spots, and have made many attempts to identify them. Small 
islands off the coast of north-west Spain, the headlands of that 
same coast, the SciUies, Cornwall, the British Isles as a whole, 
have all in turn been suggested. But none suits the conditions. 
Neither the Spanish islands nor the SciUies contain tin, at least 
in serious quantities. Neither Britain nor Spain can be called 
" small islands off the north-west of Spain." . It seems most 
probable, therefore, that the name Cassiterides represents the 
first vague knowledge of the Greeks that tin was found overseas 
somewhere in or off western Europe. 

Authorities. — Herodotus iii. 115; Diodorus v. 21, 22, 38; 
Strabo ii. 5, iii. 2, 5, v. 11; Pliny, Nat. Hist, iv. 119, vii. 197, 
xxxiv. 156-158, are the chief references in ancient literature. T. R. 
Holmes, Ancient Britain (1907), appendix, identifies the Cassiterides 
with the British Isles. (F. J. H.) 

CASSITERITE (from the Gr. Kcurmrepos, tin), the minera- 
logical name for tin-stone, the common ore of tin. It con- 
sists of tin dioxide, or stannic oxide (Sn0 2 ), and crystallizes 
in the tetragonal system. The crystals are usually 4-sided or 
8-sided prisms, striated vertically, and terminated by pyramids 
(fig. 1). Twins, with characteristic re-entrant angles, such as 
figs. 2 and 3, are common. Certain slender prismatic crystals, 
with an acute 8-sided pyramid, are known in Cornwall as " spar- 
able tin," in allusion to their resemblance to sparable nails, 
whilst very slender crystals are termed needle-tin. Occasionally 
the mineral occurs in fibrous forms, which pass under the name ©f 



CASSIUS FAMILY 



461 



" wood-tin," and these, though not unknown in the matrix, 
are generally found as rolled pebbles. By the disintegration of 
tin-bearing rocks and vein-stones, the cassiterite passes into the 
beds of streams as rolled fragments and 
grains, or even sand, and is then known 
as stream tin or alluvial tin. This detrital 
tin-ore was probably used as a source of 
the metal before the primitive miners 
had learnt to attack the solid tin-bearing 
rocks. 

Pure cassiterite may be colourless, or 
white, as seen in certain specimens from 
the Malay Peninsula; but usually the 
mineral is brown or even black, the 
colour being referred to the presence of 
ferric oxide or other impurity. Occasionally the tin-stone is 
red. In microscopic sections the colour is often seen to be dis- 
posed in zones, following the contour of the crystal. A brown 
variety, with rather resinous lustre, is termed " rosin tin." 
The usual lustre of crystals of cassiterite is remarkably splendent, 
even adamantine. The mineral has a high refractive index, 
and strong bi-refringence. Certain transparent yellow and brown 
specimens, cut as gem-stones, exhibit considerable brilliancy. 




Fig. 1. 




s\ 


s. 




<tfr- 


^ 


I. 


/ 




K: . 




J-. 


/ ! 5.. 


-^* 


i'~ 



Fig. 2. Fig. 3. 

The hardness of cassiterite is 6-5, so that it cannot be scratched 
with a knife, and is nearly as hard as quartz. Its specific gravity 
is about 7; and in consequence of this high density, the tin- 
stone is readily separated during the process of dressing, from all 
the associated minerals, except wolframite, which may, however, 
be removed by magnetic separators. 

Cassiterite usually occurs as veins or impregnations in granitic 
rocks, and is especially associated with the quartz-mica rock 
called greisen. The usual associates of the tin-stone are quartz, 
tourmaline, apatite, topaz, beryl, fluorite, lithia-mica, wolframite, 
chalcopyrite, &c. The presence of fluorine in many of these 
minerals has led to the opinion that the tin has been derived 
in many cases from an acid or granitic magma by the action of 
fluorine-bearing vapours, and that cassiterite may have been 
formed by the interaction of tin fluoride and water vapour. 
Cassiterite occurs as a pseudomorph after orthoclase felspar in 
some of the altered granite of Cornwall, and it has occasionally 
been found as a cementing material in certain brecciated lodes. 

Among the localities yielding cassiterite may be mentioned 
Cornwall, Saxony, Bohemia, Brittany, Galicia in Spain; the 
Malay peninsula, and the islands of Banca and Billiton; New 
South Wales, Queensland and Tasmania. Fine examples of 
wood-tin, occurring with topaz, are found in Durango in Mexico. 
Deposits of cassiterite under rather exceptional conditions are 
worked on a large scale in Bolivia; and it is notable that cassi- 
terite is found in Liassic limestone near Campiglia Marittima in 
Tuscany. Cassiterite has been worked in the York region, 
Alaska. (F. W. R.*) 

CASSIUS, the name of a distinguished ancient Roman family, 
originally patrician. Its most important members are the 
following. 

1. Spurius Cassius, surnamed Vecellinus (Vicellinus, Viscel- 
lintis), Roman soldier and statesman, three times consul, 
and author of the first agrarian law. In his first consulate 
(502 B.C.) he defeated the Sabines; in his second (493) he renewed 
the league with the Latins, and dedicated the temple of Ceres 



in the Circus; in his third (486) he made a treaty with the 
conquered Hernici. The account of his agrarian law is confused 
and contradictory; it is clear, however, that it was intended to 
benefit the needy plebeians (see Agrarian Laws). As such it 
was violently opposed both by the patricians and by the wealthy 
plebeians. Cassius was condemned by the people as aiming at 
kingly power, and hurled from the Tarpeian rock. Another 
account says he was tried by the family council and put to death 
by his own father, who considered his proposal prejudicial 
to the patrician interest. According to Livy, his proposal 
to bestow a share of the land upon the Latins was regarded 
with great suspicion. According to Mommsen (Romische For- 
schungen, ii.), the whole story is an invention of a later age, 
founded upon the proposals of the Gracchi and M. Livius Drusus, 
to which period belongs the idea of sharing public land with the 
Latins. J 

See Livy ii. 33, 41; Dion Halic. v. 49, viii. 69-80; Cicero, Pro 
Balbo, 23 (53), De Republica, ii. 27 (49), 35 (60) ; Val. Max. v. 8. 2. 

The following Cassii are all plebeians. It is suggested that the 
sons of Spurius Cassius either were expelled from, or voluntarily 
left, the patrician order, in consequence of their father's 
execution. 

2. Gaius Cassius Longinus, consul 73 b.c. With his 
colleague, Terentius Varro Lucullus, he passed a law {lex Terentia 
Cassia) , the object of which was to give authority for the purchase 
of corn at the public expense, to be retailed at a fixed price at 
Rome. It is doubtful "whether this Cassius (who is often called 
by the additional name Varus) is identical with the Varus who 
was proscribed by the triumvirs, and put to death at Minturnae 
(43). According to Orosius he was killed at the battle of Mutina. 

See Cicero, In Verrem, iii. 70, 75, y. 21; Livy, Epit. 96; Appian, 
Bell. Civ. iv. 28 ; Orosius v. 24. , 

3. Gaius Cassius Longinus, prime mover in the conspiracy 
against Julius Caesar. Little is known of his early life. In 
53 B.C. he served in the Parthian campaign under M. Licinius 
Crassus, saved the remnants of the army after the defeat at 
Carrhae, and for two years successfully repelled the enemy. 
In 49 B.C. he became tribune of the plebs. The outbreak of the 
civil war saved him from being brought to trial for extortion 
in Syria. He at first sided with Pompey, and as commander 
of part of his fleet rendered considerable service in the Medi- 
terranean. After Pharsalus he became reconciled to Caesar, who 
made him one of his legates. In 44 B.C. he became praetor 
peregrinus with the promise of the Syrian province for the 
ensuing year. The appointment of his junior, M. Junius Brutus, 
as praetor urbanus deeply offended him, and he was one of the 
busiest conspirators against Caesar, taking an active part in the 
actual assassination. He then left Italy for Syria, raised a con- 
siderable army, and defeated P. Cornelius Dolabella, to whom 
the province had been assigned by the senate. On the formation 
of the triumvirate, Brutus and he, with their combined armies, 
crossed the Hellespont, marched through Thrace, and encamped 
near Philippi in Macedonia. Their intention was to starve out 
the enemy, but they were forced into an engagement. Brutus 
was successful against Octavian, but Cassius, defeated by M. 
Antonius (Mark Antony), gave up all for lost, and ordered his 
freedman to slay him. He was lamented by Brutus as " the 
last of the Romans," and buried at Thasos. A man of consider- 
able ability, he was a good soldier, and took an interest in litera- 
ture, but in politics he was actuated by vanity and ambition. 
His portrait in Shakespeare's Julius Caesar, though vivid, is 
scarcely historical. 

See Plutarch, Brutus, passim, Crassus, 27, 29, Caesar, 62, 69; 
Dio Cassius xl. 28, xlii. 13, xliv. 14, xlvii. 20; Veil. Pat. ii. 46, 56, 
58, 69, 70, 87; Cicero, Philippics, xi. 13, 14, ad Alt. v. 21, xiv. 21, 
ad Fam. xi. 3, 15, 16; Appian, Bell. Civ. ii. 111, 113, iii. 2, 8, iv. 
60-62, 87, 90, 111-113, I 3 2 '> Caesar, Bell Civ. iii. 101. 

4. Quintus Cassius Longinus, the brother or cousin of 
the murderer of Caesar, quaestor of Pompey in Further Spain 
in 54 B.C. In 49, as tribune of the people, he strongly supported 
the cause of Caesar, by whom he was made governor of Further 
Spain. He treated the provincials with great cruelty, and his 



462 



CASSIUS, AVIDIUS— CASSOCK 



appointment (48) to take the field against Juba, king of Numidia, 
gave him an excuse for. fresh oppression. The result was an 
unsuccessful insurrection at Corduba. Cassius punished the 
leaders with merciless severity, and made the lot of the provincials 
harder than ever. At last some of his troops revolted under the 
quaestor M. Marcellus, who was proclaimed governor of the 
province. Cassius was surrounded by Marcellus in Ulia. Bogud, 
king of Mauretania, and M. Lepidus, proconsul of Hither Spain, 
to whom Cassius had applied for assistance, negotiated an arrange- 
ment with Marcellus whereby Cassius was to be allowed to go 
free with the legions that remained loyal to him. Cassius sent his 
troops into winter quarters, hastened on board ship at Malaca 
with his ill-gotten gains, but was wrecked in a storm at the mouth 
of the Iberus (Ebro). His tyrannical government of Spain had 
greatly injured the cause of Caesar. 

See Dio Cassius xli. 15, 24, xlii. 15, 16, xliii. 29; Livy, Epit. 
Ill; Appian, B.C. ii. 33, 43; Bellum Alexandrinum, 48-64. 

5. Gaius Cassius Longinus (1st century a.d.), Roman jurist, 
consul in 30, proconsul of Asia 40-41, and governor of Syria under 
Claudius 45-5°- On his return to Rome his wealth and high 
character secured him considerable influence. He was banished 
by Nero (65) to Sardinia, because among the images of his 
ancestors he had preserved that of the murderer of Caesar. He 
was recalled by Vespasian, and died at an advanced age. As he 
was consul in 30, he must have been born at the latest in the year 
3 B.C. Cassius was a pupil of Masurius Sabinus, with whom he 
founded a legal school, the followers of which were called Cassiani. 
His chief work was the Libri Juris Civilis in ten books, which was 
used by the compilers of the Digest of Justinian. 

See tacitus, Annals, xvi. 7-9; Suetonius, Nero, 37; Dio Cassius 
lix. 29; Teuffel-Schwabe, Hist, of Roman Literature, § 298, 3. 

CASSIUS, AVIDIUS (d. a.d. 175), Roman general, a Syrian 
by birth, lived during the reign of Marcus Aurelius. He especially 
distinguished himself during the Parthian War (a.d. 162-165), 
at the conclusion of which he was apparently appointed military 
governor of Asia, though the actual extent of his jurisdiction 
is doubtful. In 172 he was sent to Egypt, where he put down a 
dangerous rising of the Bucolici, the robber herdsmen of the 
delta of the Nile, after which he returned to Syria. In 175 the 
emperor Aurelius fell ill, and his wife Faustina, to secure her 
position in case of his death, offered her hand and the throne 
to the successful general. A rumour of Aurelius's death having 
reached Syria, Cassius, without waiting for confirmation, pro- 
claimed himself emperor; when the report proved false, it was 
too late for him to draw back, and he accordingly prepared 
for war. The senate declared him a public enemy, although 
Aurelius even then expressed the hope that he might have the 
opportunity of pardoning him. Deploring the necessity for 
taking up arms against his trusted officer, Aurelius set out for 
the east. While in Illyria, he received the news that Cassius 
had been slain by his own officers. The murderers offered his 
head to Aurelius, who refused to admit them, and ordered its 

immediate burial. 

See Dio Cassius lxxi. 2-4, 17, 22-28, 30, 31; Fronto, Letters, 1. 6; 
Lives of Marcus Aurelius, Verus and Comraodus in the Scrip tores 
Historiae Augustae, and the special biography of Avidius Cassius in 
the same by Vulcacius Gallicanus. The various letters and docu- 
ments in the last-named are generally considered spurious, and the 
portions of the narrative founded on them consequently untrust- 
worthy. See also article in Pauly-Wissowa's Realencyclopadie, ii. 
pt. 2 (1896). 

CASSIUS, GAIUS, Latin poet, general and politician, called 
Parmensisfrom his birthplace Parma, was one of the murderers of 
Julius Caesar, and after his death joined the party of Brutus 
and his namesake Cassius the conspirator. In 43 B.C. he was in 
command of the fleet on the coast of Asia, but after the battle 
of Philippi joined Sextus Pompeius in Sicily. When Pompeius, 
having been defeated in a naval engagement at Naulochus by 
the fleet of Octavian under Agrippa, fled to Asia, Cassius went 
over to Antony, and took part in the battle of Actium (31). 
He afterwards fled to Athens, where he was soon put to death 
by Octavian, whom he had offended by writing an abusive letter 
(Suetonius, Augustus, 4) . Cassius is credited with satires, elegies, 
epigrams and tragedies. Some hexameters with the title Cassii 



Orpheus are by Antonius Thylesius,an Italian of the 17 th century. 
Horace appears to have thought well of Cassius as a poet, for 
he asks Tibullus whether he intends to compete with the opuscula 
(probably the elegies) of Cassius {Epistles, i. 4. 3). The story in 
the Horace scholia, that L. Varius Rufus published his famous 
tragedy Thyestes from an MS. which he found amongst the papers 
of Cassius after his death, is due to a confusion of Cassius's 
murderer, Q. Attius Varus, with the tragedian (Appian, B.C. v. 
2, 139; Cicero, ad Fam. xii. 13; Veil. Pat. ii. 87; Orosius, vi. 
19; see also the diffuse treatise of A. Weichert, Be L. Varii et 
Cassii Parmensis Vita et Carminibus, 1836). Cassius Parmensis 
must not be confused with Cassius Etruscus (Horace, Satires, i. 
10. 60), an improviser, who is said to have used enough paper to 
furnish his funeral pyre. 

CASSIVELAUNUS, or Cassivellaunus, a British chieftain, 
ruler of the country north of the Thames, who led the native tribes 
against Julius Caesar on his second expedition (54 B.C.) (see 
Britain). After several indecisive engagements, Caesar took 
the camp of Cassivelaunus, who was obliged to make peace on 
condition of paying tribute and giving hostages. But these 
promises were not meant to be kept, and it appears certain that 
the tribute was never paid. According to Bede {Hist. Eccles. i. 2) , 
the remains of Cassivelaunus's entrenchment were visible seven 
or eight centuries later. 

See Caesar, B.G. v. 11-22; Dio Cassius xl. 2, 3; Orosius vi. 9. 
6; Eutropius vi. 17; Polyaenus, Strategemata, viii. 23. For the 
etymology of the name (which is Celtic in origin, and appears later 
as Caswallon) see J. Rhys, Celtic Britain, pp. 289-290 (1904); C. I. 
Elton, Origins of English History (1890) ; and Stock's edition of 
Caesar, De Bello Gallico (1898). 

CASSOCK (Fr. casaque, a military cloak), a long-sleeved, close- 
fitting robe worn by the clergy and others engaged in ecclesi- 
astical functions. The name was originally specially applied 
to the dress worn by soldiers and horsemen, and later to the 
long garment worn in civil life by both men and women. As 
an ecclesiastical term the word " cassock " came into use some- 
what late (as a translation of the old names of subtanea, vestis 
talaris, toga talaris, or tunica talaris), being mentioned in canon 
74 of 1604; and it is in this sense alone that it now survives. 
The origin of the word has been the subject of much specu- 
lation. It is derived through the French from the Italian 
casacca, which Florio {Q. Anna's New World of Words, 1611) 
translates as " a frock, a horseman's cote, a long cote; also a 
habitation or dwelling," and it is usually held that this in turn 
is derived from casa, a house (cf. the derivation of " chasuble," 
q.v.). This, however, though possible is uncertain. A Slav 
origin for the word has been suggested (Hatzfeld and Darme- 
steter, Die. gen. de la languefranqaise) , and the Cossack horseman 
may have given to the West both the garment and the name. 
Or again, it may be derived from casequin (Ital. casecchino) , rather 
than vice versa, and this in turn from an Arabic kazayand 
(Pers. kashayand), a padded jerkin; the word kasagdn occurring 
in Mid. High Ger. for a riding-cloak, and gasygan in O. Fr. 
for a padded jerkin (Lagarde in Gbtt. gelehrte Anzeiger, April 15, 
1887, p. 238). 

The cassock, though part of the canonical costume of the 
clergy, is not a liturgical vestment. It was originally the out- 
of-doors and domestic dress of lay-people as well as clergy, and 
its survival among the latter when the secular fashions had 
changed is merely the outcome of ecclesiastical conservatism. 
In mild weather it was the outer garment; in cold weather it 
was worn under the tabard or chimere {q.v.) ; sometimes in the 
middle ages the name " chimere " was given to it as well as to the 
sleeveless upper robe. In winter the cassock was often lined 
with furs varying in costliness with the rank of the wearer, and 
its colour also varied in the middle ages with his ecclesiastical 
or academic status. In the Roman Catholic Church the sub- 
tanea (Fr. soutane, Ital. sottana) must be worn by the clergy 
whenever they appear, both in ordinary life (except in 
Protestant countries) and under their vestments in church. 
It varies in colour with the wearer's rank: white for the pope, 
red (or black edged with red) for cardinals, purple for bishops, 
black for the lesser ranks: members of religious orders, however, 



CASSONE— CASTALIA 



463 



whatever their rank, wear the colour of their religious habit. 
In the Church of England the cassock, which with the gown is 
prescribed by the above-mentioned canon of 1604 as the canonical 
dress of the clergy, has been continuously, though not univer- 
sally, worn by the clergy since the Reformation. It has long 
ceased, however, to be their every-day walking dress and is 
now usually only worn in church, at home, or more rarely by 
clergy within the precincts of their own parishes. The custom 
of wearing the cassock under the vestments is traceable in 
England to about the year 1400. 

The old form of English cassock was a double-breasted robe 
fastened at the shoulder and probably girdled. The continental, 
single-breasted cassock, with a long row of small buttons from 
neck to hem, is said to have been first introduced into England 
by Bishop Harris of Llandaff (1720-1738). The shortened form 
of cassock which survives in the bishop's " apron " was formerly 
widely used also by the continental clergy. Its use was for- 
bidden in Roman Catholic countries by Pope Pius IX., but it 
is still worn by Roman Catholic dignitaries as part of their 
out-of-door dress in certain Protestant countries. 

See the Report of the sub-committee of Convocation on the Orna- 
ments 0} the Church and its Ministers (London, 1908), and authorities 
there cited. 

CASSONE, in furniture, the Italian name for a marriage coffer. 
The ancient and once almost universal European custom of 
providing a bride with a chest or coffer to contain the household 
linen, which often formed the major part of her dowry, produced 
in Italy a special type of chest of monumental size and artistic 
magnificence. The cassoni of the people, although always large 
in size, were simple as regards ornament; but those of the nobles 
and the well-to-do mercantile classes were usually imposing as 
regards size, and adorned with extreme richness. The cassone 
was almost invariably much longer than the English chest, and 
even at a relatively early period it assumed an artistic finish 
such as was never reached by the chests of northern Europe, 
except in the case of a few of the royal corbeilles de mariage 
made by such artists as Boulle for members of the house of 
France. Many of the earlier examples were carved in panels 
of geometrical tracery, but their characteristic ornament was 
either intarsia or gesso, or a mixture of the two. Bold and 
massive feet, usually shaped as claws, lioncels, or other animals 
are also exceedingly characteristic of cassoni, most of which are 
of massive and sarcophagus-like proportions with moulded lids, 
while many of them are adorned at their corners with figures 
sculptured in high relief. The scroll-work inlay is commonly 
simple and graceful, consisting of floral or geometrical motives, or 
arabesques. The examples coated with gilded gesso or blazoned 
with paintings are, however, the most magnificent. They were 
often made of chestnut, and decorated with flowers and foliage 
in a relief which, low at first, became after the Renaissance very 
high and sharp. The panels of the painted cassoni frequently 
bore representations of scriptural and mythological subjects, 
or incidents derived from the legends of chivalry. Nor was 
heraldry forgotten, the arms of the family for which the chest 
■was made being perhaps emblazoned upon the front. These 
chests rarely bear dates or initials, but it is often possible to 
determine their history from their armorial bearings. 

CASSOWARY {Casuarius), a genus of struthious birds, only 
inferior in size to the emeu and ostrich, and, according to Sir R. 
Owen, approximating more closely than any other living birds 
to the extinct moas of New Zealand. The species are all character- 
ized by short rudimentary wings, bearing four or five barbless 
shafts, a few inches long, and apparently useless for purposes of 
flight, of running, or of defence; and by loosely webbed feathers, 
short on the neck, but of great length on the rump and back, 
whence they descend over the body forming a thick hair-like 
covering. They possess stout limbs, with which they kick in 
front, and have the inner toe armed with a long powerful claw. 
The common cassowary {Casuarius galeatus) stands 5 ft. high, 
and has a horny, helmet-like protuberance on the crown of its 
head; the front of the neck is naked and provided with two 
brightly-coloured wattles. It is a native of the Island of Ceram, 



where it is said to live in pairs, feeding on fruits and herbs, and 
occasionally on small animals. The mooruk, or Bennett's 
cassowary {Casuarius Bennettii), is a shorter and more robust 
bird, approaching in the thickness of its legs to the moas. It 
differs further from the preceding species in having its head 
crowned with a horny plate instead of a helmet. It has only 
been found in New Britain, where the natives are said to regard 
it with some degree of veneration. When captured by them 
shortly after being hatched, and reared by the hand, it soon 
becomes tame and familiar; all the specimens which have 
reached Europe alive have been thus domesticated by the natives. 
The adult bird in the wild state is exceedingly shy and difficult 
of approach, and, owing to its great fleetness and strength, is 
rarely if ever caught. It eats voraciously, and, like the ostrich, 
will swallow whatever comes in its way. (See Emeu.) 

CAST (from the verb meaning " to throw "; the word is Scand. 
in origin, cf. Dan. kaste, and Swed. kasta; " cast " in Middle 
Eng. took the place of the A.S. weorpan, cf. Ger. werfen), a throw, 
or that which is thrown, or that into which something is thrown. 
From these three meanings come the main uses of the word; for 
the throwing of dice, with the figurative sense of a chance or 
opportunity, as in " at the last cast "; for the throwing of a 
fisherman's line in fly-fishing; for hounds spreading out in 
search of a lost scent ; or, with the further meaning of a twisted 
throw or turn, for a slight squint in the eye. " Cast " is applied 
to a measure of herrings or other fish, being the amount taken in 
two hands to be thrown into a vessel, and similarly to a potter's 
measure for a certain quantity of clay; in fishing, to the casting 
line of gut with fly attached; to the hard refuse thrown out of the 
crop of a bird of prey, and to the coils of earth thrown up by 
earth-worms. From the old method, in making calculations, of 
using counters, which were thus " thrown " up into a heap, is 
probably derived the meaning of " cast " for the " casting up " 
of figures in an account. Further, the Word is found for a mould 
for the casting of metals, and more particularly for the copy of 
an original statue or relief taken from a mould; similarly, of 
fossils, for the mineral filling of the empty mould left by the 
organism. Special uses of the word are also found in the 
theatrical term for the assignment of particular parts to the 
actors and actresses in a play, and in the many figurative senses 
of a type or stamp, as of features or characters. 

CASTAGNO, ANDREA DEL (1390-1457), Italian painter of the 
Florentine school, was born in 1390, probably at Castagno, in 
the district of Mugello, and died in August 1457. He imitated 
Masaccio and the naturalists of his time in boldness of attitude, 
but was deficient in grace and colouring. His name was for about 
four centuries burdened with the heinous charge of murder; it 
was said that he treacherously assassinated his colleague, 
Domenico Veneziano, in order to monopolize the then recent 
secret of oil painting as practised in Flanders by the Van Eycks. 
This charge has, however, been proved to be an untruth; 
Domenico died four years after Andrea. The latter is commonly 
called " Andrea (or Andreino) degP Impiccati " (of the Hanged 
Men); this was in consequence of his being commissioned in 
1435 to paint, in the Palazzo del Podesta. in Florence, the fallen 
leaders of the Peruzzi and Albizzi — not (as currently said) the 
men of the Pazzi conspiracy, an event which did not occur until 
1478, long after this painter's death. One of his principal works 
now extant (most of them have perished) is the equestrian figure 
of Nicola di Tolentino, in the cathedral of Florence. 

CASTALIA, or Fons Castalius, a celebrated fountain in 
Greece, now -called the Fountain of St John, which rises in a 
chasm of Mount Parnassus, in the neighbourhood of Delphi. 
It was sacred to Apollo and the Muses, and its water was used in 
the religious purifications of the " Pythian Pilgrims." From its 
connexion with the Muses it is sometimes 1 referred to by late 
Greek writers {e.g. Lucian, Jup. Trag. 30) and Latin poets {e.-g. 
Ovid, Am.L 15. 36) as a source of inspiration, and this has passed 
into a commonplace of modern literature. According to some 
authorities the nymph Castalia was the daughter of Achelous; 
according to others the water of the spring was derived from the 
Boeotian Cephissus. 



4 6 4 



CASTANETS— CASTE 



CASTANETS (Fr. castagnettes, Ger. Kastagnetten, Span. 
castanuelas) , instruments of percussion, introduced through the 
Moors by way of Spain into Europe from the East, used for 
marking the rhythm in dancing. Castanets, always used in 
pairs, one in each hand, consist of two pear or mussel-shaped 
bowls of hard wood, hinged together by a silk cord, the loop 
being passed over the thumb and first finger. The two halves 
are then struck against each other by the other fingers in single, 
double or triple beats, giving out series of hollow clicks of 
indefinite musical pitch. When intended for use in the orchestra 
the pair of castanets is mounted one at each end of a wooden 
stick about 8 in. long, which facilitates the playing. Castanets 
are also sometimes used in military bands and are then specially 
constructed. The two halves are kept open by a slight spring 
fixed to a frame attached to the hoop of a side drum, and the 
instrument is worked by the drummer with an ordinary drum- 
stick. An instance of the use of castanets in opera occurs in the 
Habanera in Carmen. A quaint description of castinatts is 
given in Harleian MS. 2034 (f. 208) at the British Museum 
(before 1688) with a pencil sketch which tallies very well with 
the above. The MS. is by Randle Holme and forms part of the 
Academy of Armoury. Castanets (/cporaXa) were used by the 
ancient Greeks, and also by the Romans (Lat. crotalum, crotala) 
to accompany the dances in the Dionysiac and Bacchanalian 
rites. 

CASTE (through the Fr. from Span, and Port, casta, lineage, 
Lat. castus, pure). There are not many forms of social organiza- 
tion on a large scale to which the name " caste " has not been 
applied in a good or in a bad sense. Its Portuguese origin 
simply suggests the idea of family; but before the word came 
to be extensively used in modern European languages, it had 
been for some time identified with the Brahmanic division of 
Hindu society into classes. The corresponding Hindu word is 
varna, or colour, and the words gati, kula, gotra, pravara and 
karana are also used with different shades of meaning. Wherever, 
therefore, a writer has seen something which reminds him of any 
part of the extremely indeterminate notion, Indian caste, he has 
used the word, without regard to any particular age, race, 
locality or set of social institutions. Thus Palgrave 1 maintains 
that the colleges of operatives, which inscriptions prove to have 
existed in Britain during the Roman period, were practically 
castes, because by the Theodosian code the son was compelled 
to follow the father's employment, and marriage into a family 
involved adoption of the family employment. But these 
collegia opificum seem to be just the forerunners of the voluntary 
associations for the regulation of industry and trade, the frith- 
gilds, and craft-gilds of later times, in which, no doubt, sons had 
great advantages as apprentices, but which admitted qualified 
strangers, and for which intermarriage was a matter of social 
feeling. The history of the formation of gilds shows, in fact, 
that they were really protests against the authoritative regulation 
of life from without and above. In the Saxon period, at any 
rate, there was nothing resembling caste in the strict sense. 
" The ceorl who had thriven so well as to have five hides of land 
rose to the rank of a thegn; his wergild became 1200 shillings; 
the value of his oath and the penalty of trespass against him 
increased in proportion; his descendants in the third generation 
became gesithcund. Nor was the character of the thriving 
defined; it might, so far as the terms of the custom went, be 
either purchase, or inheritance, or the receipt of royal bounty. 
The successful merchant might also thrive to thegn-right. The 
thegn himself might also rise to the rank, the estimation and 
status of an earl." 2 It has been said that early German history 
is, as regards this matter, in contrast with English, and that true 
castes are to be found in the military associations (Genossen- 
schafteti) which arose from the older class of Dienstmannen, and 
in which every member — page, squire or knight — must prove 
his knightly descent; the Bauernstand, or rural non-military 
population; the Biirgerstand, or merchant-class. The ministry 
of the Catholic Church in the West, was, however, never restricted 

1 History of Rise and Progress of the English Constitution, i. 332. 

2 Stubbs' Constitutional History of England, i. p. 162. 



by blood relation. There is no doubt that at some time or other 
professions were in most countries hereditary. Thus Prescott' 
tells us that in Peru, notwithstanding the general rule that every 
man should make himself acquainted with the various arts, 
" there were certain individuals carefully trained to those 
occupations which minister to the wants of the more opulent 
classes. These occupations, like every other calling and office 
in Peru, always descended from father to son. The division of 
castes was in this particular as precise as that which existed in 
Hindustan or Egypt." Again, Zurita 4 says that in Mexico no 
one could carry on trade except by right of inheritance, or by 
public permission. The Fiji carpenters form a separate caste, 
and in the Tonga Islands all the trades, except tattoo-markers, 
barbers and club-carvers are hereditary, — the separate classes 
being named matabooles, mooas and tooas. Nothing is more 
natural than that a father should teach his son his handicraft, 
especially if there be no organized system of public instruction; 
it gives the father help at a cheap rate, it is the easiest introduc- 
tion to life for the son, and the custom or reputation of the 
father as a craftsman is often the most important legacy he has 
to leave. The value of transmitted skill in the simple crafts 
was very great; and what was once universal in communities 
still survives in outlying portions of communities which have 
not been brought within the general market of exchange. But 
so long as this process remains natural, there can be no question 
of caste, which implies that the adoption of a new profession is 
not merely unusual, but wrong and punishable. Then, the word 
caste has been applied to sacred corporations. A family or a 
tribe is consecrated to the service of a particular altar, or all 
the altars of a particular god. Or a semi-sacred class, such as the 
Brehons or the Bards, is formed, and these, and perhaps some 
specially dignified professions, become hereditary, the others 
remaining free. Thus in Peru, the priests of the Sun at Cuzco 
transmitted their office to their sons; so did the Quipu-camayoc*, 
or public registrars, and the amantas and haravecs, the learned 
men and singers. 6 In many countries political considerations, 
or distinctions of race, have prevented intermarriage between 
classes. Take, for example, the patricians and the plebeians at 
Rome, or the Sxaprtarat, Acucawes or xepioucoi, and the 
EtXcoTSS at Sparta. In Guatemala it was the law that if any 
noble married a plebeian woman he should be degraded to the 
caste of mazequal, or plebeian, and be subject to the duties and 
services imposed on that class, and that the bulk of his estate 
should be sequestered to the king. 6 In Madagascar marriage 
is strictly forbidden between the four classes of Nobles, Hovas, 
Zarahovas and Andevos, — the lowest of whom, however, are 
apparently mere slaves. In a sense slavery might be called the 
lowest of castes, because in most of its forms it does permit some 
small customary rights to the slave. In a sense, too, the survival 
in European royalty of the idea of " equality of birth " (Ebenbiir- 
tigkeit) is that of a caste conception, and the marriage of one of 
the members of a European royal family with a person not of 
royal blood might be described as an infraction of caste rule. 

Caste in India is a question of more than historical interest. 
It is the great obstacle to government in accordance with modern 

3 History of Peru, 1. 143. 

4 Rapport sur les differentes classes de chefs dans la nouvelle Espagne 
(1840), p. 223. 

6 Something like this is to be found in the Russian notion of chin, 
or status according to official hierarchy of ranks, as modified by the 
custom of myestnichestvo, by which no one entering the public service 
could be placed beneath a person who had been subject to his father's 
orders. Hereditary nobility at one time belonged to every servant, 
military or civil, above a certain rank, and a family remaining out of 
office for two generations lost its rights of nobility; but in 1854 the 
privilege was confined to army colonels and state councillors of the 
4th class. At one time, therefore, the razryadniya knighi, or special 
registers, superseded by Peter the Great's barkhatnaya kniga, or 
Velvet Book, contained a complete code of social privilege and pre- 
cedence. Peter's " tabel rangakh " contained fourteen classes. The 
subject is treated of in the 1600 articles of the ninth volume of the 
Russian Code Svod Zakonov. The Russian Nobility, though de- 
prived of their exemptions from conscription, personal taxation and 
corporal punishment, still retain many advantages in the public 
service. 

6 Juarros, Hist, of Guatemala, Tr. (London, 1823). 



CASTE 



465 



ideas, and to the work of native religious reformers as well as of 
Christian missionaries. By some writers caste has been regarded 
as the great safeguard of social tranquillity, and therefore as the 
indispensable condition of the progress in certain arts and 
industries which the Hindus have made. Others, such as James 
Mill, have denounced it as fatal to the principle of free competi- 
tion and opposed to individual happiness. The latter view 
assumes a state of facts which was denied by Colebrooke, one of 
the highest authorities on Indian matters. Writing in 1798 he 
says, 1 after pointing out that any person unable to earn a sub- 
sistence by the exercise of his profession may follow the trade of 
a lower caste or even of a higher: " Daily observation shows even 
Brahmans exercising the menial profession of a Sudra. We are 
aware that every caste forms itself into clubs or lodges, consisting 
of the several individuals of that caste residing within a small 
distance, and that these clubs or lodges govern themselves 
by particular rules or customs or by-laws. But though some 
restrictions and limitations, not founded on religious prejudices, 
are found among their by-laws, it may be received as a general 
maxim that the occupation appointed for each tribe is entitled 
merely to a preference. Every profession, with few exceptions, 
is open to every description of persons; and the discouragement 
arising from religious prejudices is not greater than what exists 
in Great Britain from the effects of municipal and corporation 
laws. In Bengal the numbers of people actually willing to apply 
to any particular occupation are sufficient for the unlimited 
extension of any manufacture." This was corroborated by 
Elphinstone, 2 who states that, during a long experience of India, 
he never heard of a single case of degradation from caste; and it 
is illustrated by the experience of the Indian army, in which men 
of all castes unite. 3 

The ordinary notion of modern caste is that it involves certain 
restrictions on marriage, on profession, and on social intercourse, 
especially that implied in eating and drinking together. How 
far intermarriage is permitted, what are the effects of a marriage 
permitted but looked on as irregular, what are the penalties of a 
marriage forbidden, whether the rules protecting trades and 
occupations are in effect more than a kind of unionism grown 
inveterate through custom, by what means caste is lost, and in 
what circumstances it may be regained, — these are questions on 
which very little real or definite knowledge exists. Sir H. Risley 
regards the absolute prohibition of mixed marriages as now the 
essential and most prominent characteristic. It is very remark- 
able that the Vedas, on which the whole structure of Brahmanic 
faith and morals professes to rest, give no countenance to the 
later regulations of caste. The only passage bearing on the 
subject is in the Purusha Sukta, the 90th Hymn of the 10th Book 
of the Rigveda Samhita. " When they divided man, how many 
did they make him? What was his mouth? what his arms? 
what are called his thighs and feet? The Brahmana was his 
mouth, the Raganya was made his arms, the Vaisya became his 
thighs, the Sudra was born from his feet." Martin Haug finds in 
this a subtle allegory that the Brahmans were teachers, the 
Kshatriyas the warriors of mankind. But this is opposed to the 
simple and direct language of the Vedic hymns, and to the fact 
that in the accounts of creation there the origin of many things 
besides classes of men is attributed in the same fanciful manner 
to parts of the divine person. It is in the Puranas and the Laws 
of Manu, neither of which claims direct inspiration, where they 

1 Life and Essays of H. T. Colebrooke, i. p. 104. 

2 History of India. 

3 "The crudities and cruelties of the caste system need not blind 
us to its other aspects. There is no doubt that it is the main cause 
of the fundamental stability and contentment by which Indian 
society has been braced up for centuries against the shocks of 
politics and the cataclysms of Nature. It provides every man with 
his place, his career, his occupation, his circle of friends. It makes 
him, at the outset, a member of a corporate body: it protects him 
through life from the canker of social jealousy and unfulfilled 
aspirations; it ensures him companionship and a sense of com- 
munity with others in like case with himself. The caste organization 
is to the Hindu his club, his trade union, his benefit society, his 
philanthropic society. An Indian without caste, as things stand at 
present, is not quite easy to imagine." (Sidney Low, Vision of India, 
1906, ch. xv. p. 263). 



differ from the letter of the Veda, that the texts are to be found 
on which all that is objectionable in caste has been based. Even 
in the Vishnu Purana, however, the legend of caste speaks of the 
four classes as being at first " perfectly inclined to conduct 
springing from religious faith." It is not till after the whole 
human race has fallen into sin that separate social duties are 
assigned to the classes. The same hymn speaks of the evolution 
of qualities of Brahma. Sattva, or goodness, sprang from the 
mouth of Brahma; Rajas, or passion, came from his breast; 
Tamas, or darkness, from his thighs; others he created from his 
feet. For each one of these gunas, dr primitive differences of 
quality, a thousand couples, male and female, have been created, 
to which the distinct heavens, or places of perfection of Prajapati, 
Indra, Maruts and Gandharvas are assigned. To the gunas are 
related the yugas, or ages: 1st, the Krita, or glorious age of 
truth and piety, in which apparently no distinctions, at least no 
grades of excellence were known; 2nd, the Treta, or period of 
knowledge; 3rd, the Dvapara, or period of sacrifice; 4th, the 
Kali, or period of darkness. Bunsen supposes there may be an 
historical element in the legend that Pururava, a great conqueror 
of the Treta age, founded caste. The yugas are hardly periods of 
historical chronology, but there is no doubt that the Vayu 
Purana assigns the definite origin of caste to the Treta period. 
" The perfect beings of the first age, some tranquil, some fiery, 
some active and some distressed, were again born in the Treta, 
as Brahmans, &c, governed by the good and bad actions per- 
formed in former births." The same hymn proceeds to explain 
that the first arrangement did not work well, and that a second 
was made, by which force, criminal justice and war were declared 
to be the business of the Kshatriyas; officiating at sacrifices, 
sacred study and the receipt of presents to belong to the 
Brahmans; traffic, cattle and agriculture to the Vaisyas; the 
mechanical arts and service to the Sudras. The Ramayana hymn 
suggests that in the fourgreatperiodsthecastessuccessivelyarrive 
at the state of dharma or righteousness. Thus, a Sudra cannot, 
even by the most rigorous self-mortification, become righteous in 
the period proper to the salvation of the Vaisyas. As the hymn 
speaks in the Dvapara age, it speaks of the salvation of Sudras 
as future, and not yet possible. Wholly in opposition to the story 
of a fourfold birth from Brahma is the legend that the castes 
sprang from Manu himself, who is removed by several generations 
of gods and demi-gods from Brahma. Then, again, the Santi- 
parvan alleges that the world, at first entirely Brahmanic, was 
separated into castes merely by the evil works of man. Castehood 
consists in the exercise of certain virtues or vices. Munis, or 
persons born indiscriminately, frequently rise to the caste of 
Brahmans, and the offspring of Brahmans sink to a lower level. 
The serpent observes: " If a man is regarded by you as being a 
Brahman only in consequence of his conduct, then birth is vain, 
until action is shown." But this change of caste takes place only 
through a second, birth, and not during the life which is spent in 
virtue. Another poetical conception of caste birth is expressed 
in the Harivamsa. The Brahmans were formed from an imperish- 
able element (Akshara), the Kshatriyas from a perishable 
element (Kshara), the Vaisyas from alteration, and the. Sudras 
from a modification of smoke. 

The general result of the foregoing texts is that several contra- 
dictory accounts have been given of the origin of caste, and that 
these are for the most part unintelligible. Caste is described as 
a late episode in creation, and as born from different parts of 
different gods, from the mortal Manu, from abstract principles, 
and from non-entity. It is also described as coeval with creation, 
as existing in perfection during the Krita period, and subsequently 
falling into sin. It is also said that only Brahmans existed at first, 
the others only at later periods. Then the rationalistic theories of 
the Santiparvan upse* the very foundation of caste,viz. hereditary 
transmission of the caste character. 4 It seems clear that when 
the Vedas were composed, many persons who were not Brahmans 
acted as priests, and saints, the " preceptors of gods," by their 
" austere fervour," rose from a lower rank to the dignity of 
Brahmanhood. Originally, indeed, access to the gods by prayer 
' Muir's Sanskrit Texts, vol. i. (1868). 



4 66 



CASTE 



and sacrifice was open to all classes of the community. As the 
Brahmans grow in political importance, they make religion an 
exclusive and sacred business. We find them deciding questions 
of succession to the throne, and enforcing their decisions. While 
in the earlier literature there are several instances of Brahmans 
receiving instruction from the hands of Kshatriyas, in the Puranas 
and Manu death is made to overtake Kshatriyas who are not 
submissive to the Brahmans; and in one case Visvamitra, the 
son of Gadhi, actually obtains Brahmanhood as a reward for his 
submission. It seems certain that many of the ancient myths 
were expressly manufactured by the Brahmans to show their 
superiority in birth and in the favour of Heaven to the Kshatriyas 
— a poetical effect which is sometimes spoiled by their claiming 
descent from their rivals. This brings us to a consideration of 
the theories which have been started to account for the appear- 
ance of Brahmanic caste, as it is stereotyped in the Laws of Manu. 
James Mill, who invariably underestimated the influence on 
history of " previous states of society," suggested that the 
original division must have been the work of some inspired 
individual, a legislator or a social reformer, who perceived the 
advantages which would result from a systematic division of 
labour. The subordination of castes he accounts for by the 
superstitious terror and the designing lust of power which have 
so frequently been invoked to explain the natural supremacy of 
the religious class. Because the ravages of war were dreaded 
most after the calamities sent by heaven, he finds that the 
military class properly occupy the second place. This arrange- 
ment he apparently contemplates as at no time either necessary 
or wholesome, and as finally destroyed by the selfish jealousies 
of caste, and by the degradations which the multiplication of 
trades made inevitable. Heeren 1 and Klaproth have contended 
that the division into castes is founded on an original diversity 
of race, and that the higher castes are possessed of superior 
beauty. The clear complexion and regular features of the Brah- 
mans are said to distinguish them as completely from the Sudras 
as the Spanish Creoles were distinguished from the Peruvians. 
" The high forehead, stout build, and light copper colour of the 
Brahmins and other castes allied to them, appear in strong con- 
trast with the somewhat low and wide heads, slight make, and 
dark bronze of the low castes" (Stevenson, quoted by Max M tiller, 
Chips, ii. p. 32 7). 2 This explanation is, however, generally 
conjoined with that founded on the tradition of conquest by the 
higher castes. There is no doubt that the three castes of lighter 
colour (traivarnika) , the white Brahmans, the red Kshatriyas, 
the yellow Vaisyas, are, at least in the early hymns and Brah- 
manas, spoken of as the Aryas, the Sanskrit-speaking conquerors, 
in contradistinction to the dark cloud of the Turanian aborigines 
Dasyus. In fact arya, which means noble, is derived from arya, 
which means householder, and was the original name of the 
largest caste, now called Vaisyas. The great Sanscrit scholar, 
Rudolf von Roth (1821-1895), in his Brahma und die Brah- 
manan 3 held that the Vedic people advanced from their home in 
the Punjab, drove the aborigines into the hills, and took possession 
of the country lying between the Ganges, the Jumna and the 
Vindhya range. " In this stage of complication and disturbance," 
he said, " power naturally fell into the hands of those who did 
not possess any direct authority," i.e. the domestic priests of 
the numerous tribal kings. The Sudras he regarded as a con- 
quered race, perhaps a branch of the Aryan stock, which immi- 
grated at an earlier period into India, perhaps an autochthonous 

1 Ideen, i. 610. 

2 The idea of a conquering white race is strangely repeated in the 
later history of India. The Rajputs and Brahmans are succeeded by 
the Mussulmans, the Turks, the Afghans. There was an aristocracy 
of colour under the Mogul dynasty. But under an Indian climate it 
could not last many generations. The Brahmans of southern India 
were as black as the lowest castes; the Chandalas are said to be 
descended from Brahmans. According to Manu the Chandala must 
not dwell within town; his sole wealth must be dogs and asses; his 
clothes must consist of the mantles of deceased persons; his dishes 
must be broken pots. Surely this vituperative description must 
apply to an aboriginal race. 

3 Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenldndischen Gesellschaft, Band i. 
(quoted by Muir, ubi supra). 



Indian tribe. The latter hypothesis is opposed to the fact that, 
while the Sudra is debarred from sharing three important Vedic 
sacrifices, the Bhagasata Purana expressly permits him to 
sacrifice " without mantras," and imposes on him duties with 
reference to Brahmans and cows which one would not expect in 
the case of a nation strange in blood. But unless a previous 
subordination of castes among the conquering race be supposed, 
it seems difficult to see why the warrior-class, who having 
contributed most to the conquest must have been masters of the 
situation, should have consented to degradation below the class 
of Brahmans. The position of the Sudra certainly suggests 
conquest. But are there sound historical reasons for supposing 
that Brahmans and Sudras belonged to different nations, or that 
either class was confined to one nation? The hypothesis was 
held in a somewhat modified form by Meiners,« who supposed 
that instead of one conquest there may have been two successive 
immigrations, — the first immigrants being subdued by the second, 
and then forming an intermediate class between their conquerors 
and the aborigines; or, if there were no aborigines, the mixture 
of the two immigrant races would form an intermediate class. 
In the same way Talboys Wheeler 5 suggested that the Sudra 
may be the original conquerors of the race now represented by 
the Pariahs. Most of these explanations seem rather to describe 
the mode in which the existing institutions of caste might be 
transplanted from one land to another from a motherland to its 
colonies, and altered by its new conditions. Military conquest, 
though it often introduces servitude, does not naturally lead to 
the elevation of the priesthood. It is unscientific to assume large 
historical events, or large ethnological facts, or the existence of 
some creator of social order. 6 

As Benjamin Constant 7 points out, caste rests on the religious 
idea of an indelible stain resting on certain men, and the social 
idea of certain functions being committed to certain classes. 
The idea of physical purity was largely developed under the 
Mosaic legislation; in fact the internal regulations of the 
Essenes (who were divided into four classes) resemble the frivolous 
prohibitions of Brahmanism. As the daily intercourse of men 
in trade and industry presents numberless occasions on which 
the stain of real or fancied impurity might be caught, the power 
of the religious class who define the rules of purity and the 
penalties of their violation becomes very great. Moreover, 
the Hindus are deeply religious, and therefore naturally prepared 
for Purohiti or priest-rule. They were also passionately a ttached 
to their national hymns, some of which had led them to victory, 
while others were associated with the benign influences of nature. 
Only the priest could chant or teach these hymns, and it was 
believed that the smallest mistake in pronunciation would draw 
down the anger of the gods. But however favourable the con- 
ditions of spiritual dominion might be, it seems to have been 
by no more natural process than hard fighting that the Brahmans 
finally asserted their supremacy. We are told that Parasurama, 
the great hero of the Brahmans, " cleared the earth thrice seven 
times of the Kshatriya caste, and filled with their blood the five 
large lakes of Samauta." Wheeler thinks that the substitution 
of blood-sacrifices for offerings of parched grain, clarified butter 
and soma wine marks an adaptation by the Brahmans of the great 
military banquets to the purposes of political supremacy. It 
is not, therefore, till the Brahmanic period of Indian history, 
which ends with the coming of Sakya Muni, in 600 B.C., that we 
find the caste-definitions of Manu realized as facts. These are 
— " To Brahmans he (i.e. Brahma) assigned the duties of reading 

1 De Origine Castarum (Gottingen). 

6 History of India, vol. i. (1867-1871). 

6 For a characteristic appreciation of caste see Comte, Cours de 
philosophie positive, vi. c. 8. He regards the hereditary transmission 
of functions under the rule of a sacerdotal class as a necessary and 
universal stage of social progress, greatly modified by war and 
colonization. The morality of caste was, he contends, an improve- 
ment on what preceded ; but its permanence was impossible, because 
" the political rule of intelligence is hostile to human progress." 
The seclusion of women and the preservation of industrial inventions 
were features of caste ; and the higher priests were also magistrates, 
philosophers, artists, engineers, and physicians. 

6 De la religion, ii. 8. 



CASTE 



467 



the Vedas, of teaching, of sacrificing, of assisting others to sacrifice, 
of giving alms if they be rich, and if indigent of receiving gifts." l 
The duties of the Kshatriya are " to defend the people, to give 
alms, to sacrifice, to read the Veda, to shun the allurements of 
sensual gratification." The duties of a Vaisya are " to keep 
herds of cattle, to bestow largesses, to sacrifice, to read the 
scripture, to carry on trade, to lend at interest, and to cultivate 
land." These three castes (the twice born) wear the sacred 
thread. The one duty of a Sudra is " to serve the before- 
mentioned classes without depreciating their worth." 2 The 
Brahman is entitled by primogeniture to the whole universe; 
he may eat no flesh but that of victims; he has his peculiar 
clothes. He is bound to help military and commercial men in 
distress. He may seize the goods of a Sudra, and whatever 
the latter acquires by labour or succession beyond a certain 
amount. The Sudra is to serve the twice born; and even when 
emancipated cannot be anything but a Sudra. He may not 
learn the Vedas, and in sacrifice he must omit the sacred texts. 
A Sudra in distress may turn to a handicraft; and in the same 
circumstances a Vaisya may stoop to service. Whatever crime 
a Brahman might commit, his person and property were not to 
be injured; but whoever struck a Brahman with a blade of grass 
would become an inferior quadruped during twenty-one trans- 
migrations. In the state the Brahman was above all the 
ministers; he was the raja's priest, exempt from taxation, the 
performer of public sacrifices, the expounder of Manu, and at 
one time the physician of bodies as well as of souls. He is more 
liable than less holy persons to pollution, and his ablutions are 
therefore more frequent. A Kshatriya who slandered a Brahman 
was to be fined 100 panas (a copper weight of 200 grains); a 
Vaisya was fined 200 panas; a Sudra was to be whipped. A 
Brahman slandering any of the lower castes pays 50, 25 or 12 
panas. In ordinary salutations a Brahman is asked whether 
his devotion has prospered ; a Kshatriya, whether he has suffered 
from his wounds; a Vaisya whether his health is secure; a 
Sudra whether he is in good health. 3 In administering oaths 
a Brahman is asked to swear by his veracity; a Kshatriya by 
his weapons, house or elephant; a Vaisya by his kine, grain 
or goods; a Sudra by all the most frightful penalties of perjury. 
The Hindu mind is fertile in oaths; before the caste assembly 
the Dhurm, or caste custom, is sometimes appealed to, or the 
feet of Brahma, or some cow or god or sacred river, or the bel 
(the sacred creeper), or the roots of the turmeric plant. The 
castes are also distinguished by their modes of marriage. Those 
peculiar to Brahmans seem to be — 1st, Brahma, when a daughter, 
clothed only with a single robe, is given to a man learned in the 
Veda whom her father has voluntarily invited and respectfully 
receives; 2nd, Devas or Daiva, when a daughter, in gay attire 
is given, when the sacrifice is already begun, to the officiating 

1 The great mass of the Brahmans were in reality mendicants, who 
lived on the festivals of birth, marriage, and death, and oh the fines 
exacted for infractions of caste rule. Others had establishments 
called Muths, endowed with'.Jagir villages. There were two distinct 
orders of officiating priests — the Purohita, or family priest, who 
performed all the domestic rites, and probably gave advice in secular 
matters, and the Guru, who is trie head of a religious sect, making 
tours of superintendence and exaction, and having the power to 
degrade from caste and to restore. In some cases the Guru is recog- 
nized as the Mehitra or officer of the caste assembly, from whom he 
receives Huks, or salary, and an exemption from house and stamp 
taxes, and service as begarree (Steele's Law and Customs of Hindoo 
Castes within the Pekhan Provinces, 1826; later edition, 1868). 
Expulsion from caste follows on a number of moral offences (e.g. 
assault, murder, &c), as well as ceremonial offences (e.g. eating 
prohibited food, eating with persons of lower caste, abstaining from 
funeral rites, having connexion with a low-caste woman). Exclusion 
means that it is not allowed to eat with or enter the houses of the 
members of the caste, the offender being in theory not degraded but 
dead. For some heinous offences, i.e. against the express letter of 
the Shasters, no readmission is possible. , But generally this depends 
on the ability of the out-caste to pay a fine, and to supply the caste 
with an expiatory feast of sweetmeats. He has also to go through 
the Sashtanyam, or prostration of eight members, and to drink the 
Panchakaryam, i.e. drink of the five products of the cow (Description 
of People of India, Abbe J. A. Dubois, Missionary in Mysore, Eng. 
Trans., London, 1817; edition by Pope, Madras, 1862). 

2 Manu. x. 88-90. s Wheeler ii. 533. 



priest. The primitive marriage forms of Rashasas or Rachasa, 
when a maiden is seized by force from home, while she weeps and 
calls for help, is said to be appropriate to Kshatriyas. To the 
two lower castes the ceremony of Asura is open, in which the 
bridegroom, having given as much wealth as he can afford to the 
father and paternal kinsman and to the damsel herself, takes her 
voluntarily as his bride. A Kshatriya woman on her marriage 
with a Brahman must hold an arrow in her hand; a Vaisya 
woman marrying one of the sacerdotal or military classes must 
hold a whip; a Sudra woman marrying one of the upper castes 
must hold the skirt of a mantle. 

How little the system described by Manu applies to the exist- 
ing castes of India may be seen in these facts — (1) that there is 
no artisan caste mentioned by Manu; (2) that eating with 
another caste, or eating food prepared by another caste, is not 
said by him to involve loss of caste, though these are now among 
the most frequent sources of degradation. The system must 
have been profoundly modified by the teaching of Buddha: 
" As the four rivers which fall into the Ganges lose their names 
as soon as they mingle their waters with the holy river, so all 
who believe in Buddha cease to be Brahmans, Kshatriyas, 
Vaisyas, and Sudras." After Buddha, Sudra dynasties ruled 
in many parts of India, and under the Mogul dynasty the Cayets, 
a race of Sudras, had almost a monopoly of public offices. But 
Buddha did not wish to abolish caste. Thus it is related that a 
Brahman Pundit who had embraced the doctrines of Buddha 
nevertheless found it necessary, when his king touched him, to 
wash from head to foot. 4 Alexander the Great found no castes 
in the Punjab, but Megasthenes had left an account of the ryots 
and tradesmen, the military order and the gymnosophists 
(including the Buddhist Germanes) whom he found in the country 
of the Ganges. 5 From his use of the word gymnosophist it is 
probable that Megasthenes confounded the Brahmans with the 
hermits or fakirs; and this explains his statement that any 
Hindu might become a Brahman. Megasthenes spent some time 
at the court of Sandracottus (Chandragupta Maurya), a con- 
temporary of Seleucus Nicator. All the later Greeks 6 follow 
his statement and concur in enumerating seven Indian castes 
— sophists, agriculturists, herdsmen, artisans, warriors, in- 
spectors, councillors. On the revival of Brahmanism it was 
found that the second and third castes had disappeared, and 
that the field was now occupied by the Brahmans, the Sudras, 
and a host of mixed castes, sprung from the original twelve, 
Unulum and Prutilum, left-hand and right-hand, which were 
formed by the crossing of the four original castes. Manu himself 
gives a list of these impure castes, and the Ain-i-Akbari (1556- 
1605) makes the positive statement that there were then 50c 
tribes bearing the name of Kshatriya, while the real caste no 
longer existed. Most of these subdivisions are really trade- 
organizations, many of them living in village-communities, which 
trace descent from a pure caste. Thus in Bengal there are the 
Vaidya or Baidya, the physicians, who, Manu says, originated 
in the marriage of a Brahman father and a Vaisya mother. 

As Colebrooke said, Brahmans and Sudras enter into all trades, 
but Brahmans (who are profoundly ignorant even of their own 
scriptures) have succeeded in- maintaining their monopoly of 
Vedic learning, which really means a superficial acquaintance 
with the Puranas and Manu. Though they have succeeded in 
excluding others from sacred employment, only a portion of the 
caste are actually engaged in religious ceremonies, in sacred study, 
or even in religious begging. Many are privates in the army, 
many water-carriers, many domestic servants. And they have, 
like other castes, many subdivisions which prevent intimate 
association and intermarriage. The ideal Brahman is gone: 
the priest " with his hair and beard clipped, his passions sub- 
dued, his mantle white, his body pure, golden rings in his ear." 
But the hold which caste has on the Hindu minds may, perhaps, 
be most clearly seen in the history of the Christian missions and 
in comparatively recent times. The Jesuits Xavier and Fra dei 

4 Travels of Fah Hian, c. 27. 6 Strabo, Ind. sec. 59. 

6 Arrian, Indie, c. II, 12; Diod. Sic. ii. c. 40, 41; and Strabo 
xv. 1. 



468 



CASTE 



Nobili did everything but become Brahmans in order to convert 
the south of India — they put on a dress of cavy or yellow colour, 
they made frequent ablutions, they lived on vegetables and milk, 
they put on their foreheads the sandalwood paste used by the 
Brahmans — and Gregory XV. published a bull sanctioning 
caste regulations in the Christian churches of India. The 
Danish mission of Tranquebar, the German mission of the heroic 
Schwarz, whose headquarters were Tanjore, also permitted caste 
to be retained by their followers. Even the priests of Buddha, 
whose life was a protest against caste, re-erected the system in 
the island of Ceylon, where the radis or radias were reduced to 
much the same state as the Pariahs. 1 Protestant missions have 
made but little progress, even in recent years. The number 
of native converts to Christianity rose from 1,246,000 in 1872 
to 2,664,000 in 1901; these figures, however, are by themselves 
rather misleading, for Christianity appears to have touched 
the higher classes in India not at all, only the out-castes. 

It is still the general law that to constitute a good marriage 
the parties must belong to the same caste, but to unconnected 
families. Undoubtedly, however, the three higher castes were 
always permitted to intermarry with the caste next below their 
own, the issue taking the lower caste or sometimes forming a new 
class. A Sudra need not marry a wife of the same caste or sect 
as himself. In 187 1 it was decided by the judicial committee 
of the privy council that a marriage between a zemindar (land- 
owner) of the Malavar class, a subdivision of the Sudra caste, 
with a woman of the Vellala class of Sudras is lawful. Generally 
also a woman may not marry beneath her own caste. The feeling 
is not so strong against a man marrying even in the lowest caste, 
for Manu permits the son of a Brahman and a Sudra mother 
to raise his family to the highest caste in the seventh generation. 
The illegitimacy resulting from an invalid marriage does not 
render incapable of caste; at least it does not so disqualify the 
lawful children of the bastard. On a forfeiture of caste by either 
spouse intercourse ceases between the spouses: if the out-caste 
be a sonless woman, she is accounted dead, and funeral rites are 
performed for her; if she have a son, he is bound to maintain 
her. It is remarkable that the professional concubinage of the 
dancing-girl does not involve degradation, if it be with a person 
of the same caste. This suggests that whatever may be the 
function of caste, it is not a safe guardian of public morality. 
The rules as to prohibited degrees in marriage used to be very 
strict, but they are now relaxed. An act of 1856 legalized re- 
marriage by widows in all the castes, with a conditional forfeit- 
ure of the deceased husband's estate, unless the husband has 
expressly sanctioned the second marriage. The later Indian 
Marriage Act was directed against the iniquitous child marriages; 
it requires a minimum age. In many ways the theoretical 
inferiority of the Sudra absolves him from the restraints 
which the letter of the law lays on the higher castes. Thus a 
Sudra may adopt a daughter's or sister's son, though this is 
contrary to the general rule that the adopter should be able to 
marry the mother of the adopted person. The rule requiring the 
person adopted to be of the same caste and gotra or family as the 
adopter is also dispensed with in the case of Sudras. In fact, it is 
only a married person whom a Sudra may not adopt. As regards 
inheritance the Sudra does not come off so well in competition 
with the other castes. " The sons of a Brahamana in the several 
tribes have four shares or three or two or one; the children of 
a Kshatriya have three portions or two or one; and those of 
a Vaisya take two parts or one." This refers to the case per- 
mitted by law, and not unknown in practice, of a Brahman 
having four wives of different castes, a Kshatriya three, and so 
on. But all sons of inferior caste are excluded from property 
coming by gift to the father; and a Sudra son is also excluded 
from land acquired by purchase. It must be recollected, how- 
ever, that under an act of 1850, loss of caste no longer affects 
the capacity to inherit or to be adopted. In cases of succession 
ab intestato on failure of the preceptor, pupil, and fellow-student 
(heirs called by the Hindu law after relatives), a priest, or any 
Brahman, many succeed. Where a Sudra is the only son of a 
1 Irving, Theory and Practice of Caste (London, 1859). 



Brahman, the Sapinda, or next of kin, would take two-thirds 
of the inheritance; where he is the only son of any other twice- 
born father, the Sapinda would take one-half. Possibly, the rule 
of equal division among sons of equal caste did not at first apply 
to Brahmans, who, as the eldest sons of God, would perhaps 
observe the custom of primogeniture among themselves. On the 
other hand it was laid down in the judicial committee in 1869, 
contrary to the collected opinions of the Pundits of the Sudder 
court, that, in default of lawful children, the illegitimate children 
of the Sudra caste inherit their putative father's estate, and, even 
if there be lawful children, are entitled to maintenance out of the 
estate. It had previously been decided by Sir Edward Ryan in 
1857 that the illegitimate children of a Rajput, or of any other 
member of a superior caste, have no right of inheritance even 
under will, but a mere right to maintenance, provided the children 
are docile. It seems then that the Kshatriya and Vaisya castes, 
though in one sense non-existent, still control Hindu succession. 

With regard to Persia the Zend Avesta speaks of a fourfold 
division of the ancient inhabitants of Iran into priests, warriors, 
agriculturists and artificers; and also of a sevenfold division corre- 
sponding to the seven amschespands, or servants of Ormuzd. This 
was no invention of Zoroaster, but a tradition from the golden 
age of Jemshid or Diemschid. The priestly caste of Magi was 
divided into Herbeds or disciples, Mobeds or masters, and Destur 
Mobeds or complete masters. The last-named were alone entitled 
to read the liturgies of Ormuzd; they alone predicted the future 
and carried the sacred costi, or girdle, havan, or cup, and barsom, 
or bunch of twigs. The Zend word baresma is supposed to be 
connected with Brahma, or sacred element, of which the symbol 
was a bunch of kusa grass, generally called veda. The Persian 
and Hindu religions are further connected by the ceremony 
called Homa in the one and Soma in the other. Haug, in his 
Tract on the Origin of Brahmanism (quoted by Muir, ubi supra), 
maintains that the division in the Zend Avesta of the followers 
of Ahura Mazxia into Atharvas, Rathaesvas, and Vastrya was 
precisely equivalent to the three superior Indian castes. He 
also asserts that only the sons of priests (Atharvas) could become 
priests, a rule still in force among the Parsis. The Book of Daniel 
rather suggests that the Magi were an elective body; and as 
regards the secular classes there does not seem to be a trace of 
hereditary employment or religious subordination. There is 
a legend in the Dabistan of a great conqueror, Mahabad, who 
divided the Abyssinians into the usual four castes; and Strabo 
mentions a similar classification of the Iberians into kings, priests, 
soldiers, husbandmen and menials. 

At one time it was the universal opinion that in Egypt there 
were at least two great castes, priests and warriors, the functions 
of which were transmitted from father to son, the minor pro- 
fessions grouped under the great castes being also subject to 
hereditary transmission. This opinion was held by Otfried 
Miiller, 2 Meiners of Gottingen, and others. Doubts were first 
suggested by Rossellini, and after Champollion had deciphered 
the hieroglyphic inscriptions, J. J. Ampere 3 boldly announced 
that there were in Egypt no castes strictly so called; that in 
particular the professions of priest, soldier, judge, &c, were not 
hereditary; and that the division of Egyptian society was merely 
that which is generally found in certain stages of social growth 
between the liberal professions and the mechanical arts and 
trades. No difference of colour, or indeed of any feature, has been 
observed in the monumental pictures of the different Egyptian 
castes. From an inspection of numerous tombs, sarcophagi, 
and funeral stones, which frequently enumerate the names and 
professions of several kinsfolk of the deceased, Ampere concluded 
that sacerdotal and military functions were sometimes united 
in the same person, and might even be combined with civil 
functions; that intermarriage might certainly take place between 
the sacred and military orders; and that the members of the 
same natural family did frequentlyadoptthedifferentoccupations 
which had been supposed to be the exclusive property of the 
castes. The tombs of Bern Hassan show in a striking manner the 

2 Manual of Archaeology. 
3 Revue des deux mondes, 15th September 1848. 



CASTEL— CASTELAR Y RIPOLL 



469 



Egyptian tendency to accumulate, rather than to separate, 
employments. Occasionally families were set apart for the 
worship of a particular divinity. An interesting " section " of 
Egyptian society is afforded by a granite monument preserved 
in the museum at Naples. Nine figures in bas-relief represent 
the deceased, his father, three brothers, a paternal uncle, and the 
father and two brothers of his wife. Another side contains the 
mother, wife, wife's mother and maternal aunts. The deceased 
is described as a military officer and superintendent of buildings; 
his elder brother as a priest and architect; his third brother as a 
provincial governor, and his father as a priest of Ammon. The 
family of the wife is exclusively sacerdotal. Egyptian caste, 
therefore, permitted two brothers to be of different castes, 
and one person to be of more castes than one, and of different 
castes from those to which his father or wife belonged. The lower 
employments, commerce, agriculture, even medicine, are never 
mentioned on the tombs. The absolute statements about caste 
in Egypt, circulated by such writers as Reynier and De Goguet, 
have, no doubt, been founded on passages in Herodotus (ii. 143, 
164), who mentions seven classes, and makes war an hereditary 
profession; in Diodorus Siculus (i. 2-8), who mentions five 
classes and a hereditary priesthood; and in Plato, who, anxious 
to illustrate the principle of compulsory division of labour, on 
which his republic was based, speaks in the Timaeus of a total 
separation of the six classes — priests, soldiers, husbandmen, 
artisans, hunters and shepherds. Heeren (ii. 594) does not 
hesitate to ascribe the formation of Egyptian caste to the meeting 
of different races. According to the chronology constructed 
by Bunsen the division into castes began in the period 10,000- 
9000, and was completed along with the introduction of animal 
worship and the improvement of writing under the third dynasty 
in the 6th or 7th century of the Old Empire. The Scholiast of 
Apollonius Rhodius, on the authority of Dicaearchus, in the 
Second Book of Hellas, mentions a king, Sesonchosis, who, about 
3712 B.C., "enacted that no one should abandon his father's 
trade, for this he considered as leading to avarice." Bunsen 
conjectures that this may refer to Sesostoris, the lawgiver of 
Manetho's third or Memphite dynasty, the eighth from Menes, 
who introduced writing, building with hewn stone, and medicine; 
possibly, also, to Sesostris, who, Aristotle says (Polit. vii. 1), 
introduced caste to Crete. He further observes that in Egypt 
there was never a conquered indigenous race. There was one 
nation with one language and one religion; the public panegyrics 
embraced the, whole people; every Egyptian was the child and 
friend of the gods. The kings were generally warriors, and latterly 
adopted into the sacerdotal caste. Intermarriage was the rule, 
except between the swineherds and all other classes. " Every 
shepherd is an abomination unto the Egyptians " (Gen. xlvi. 34). 
The comprehensive essay by Sir H. H. Risley in the introductory 
volumeof the Indian Census Report for 1901 is the best recent account 
of caste in India. See also, besides the works mentioned in the 
text, Sir Denzil Ibbetson's Report on the Punjab Census (1881); W. 
Crooke, Things Indian (1905) and other books by this author on 
Indian religion and caste; Senart, Les Castes dans I'Inde (1896); 
Jogendra Nath Bhattacharya, Hindu Castes and Sects (1896). There 
is an interesting chapter on the subject in Sidney Low's Vision of 
India (1906). See also India, Indian Law, and Hinduism. 

CASTEL, LOUIS BERTRAND (1688-1757), French mathe- 
matician, was born at Montpellier on the nth of November 
1688, and entered the order of the Jesuits in 1703. Having 
studied literature, he afterwards devoted himself entirely to 
mathematics and natural philosophy. He wrote several scien- 
tific works, that which attracted most attention at the time 
being his Optique des couleurs (1740), or treatise on the melody 
of colours. He endeavoured to illustrate the subject by a 
clavecin oculaire, or ocular harpsichord; but the treatise and 
the illustration were quickly forgotten. He also wrote Mathe- 
matique universelle (1728) and Traite de physique sur la pesanteur 
universelle des corps (1 724). He also published a critical account 
of the system of Sir Isaac Newton in French in 1743. 

CASTELAR Y RIPOLL, EMILIO (1832-1899), Spanish states- 
man, was born at Cadiz on the 8th of September 1832. At the 
age of seven he lost his father, who had taken an active part in 



the progressist agitations during the reign of Ferdinand VII., 
and had passed several years as an exile in England. He at- 
tended a grammar-school at Sax. In 1848 he began to study 
law in Madrid, but soon elected to compete for admittance at 
the school of philosophy and letters, where he took the degree 
of doctor in 1853. He was an obscure republican student when 
the Spanish revolutionary movement of 1854 took place, and the 
young liberals and democrats of that epoch decided to hold a 
meeting in the largest theatre of the capital. On that occasion 
Castelar delivered his maiden speech, which at once placed him 
in the van of the advanced politicians of the reign of Queen 
Isabella. From that moment he took an active part in politics, 
radical journalism, literary and historical pursuits. Castelar 
was compromised in the first rising of June 1866, which was 
concerted by Marshal Prim, and crushed, after much bloodshed, 
in the streets by Marshals O'Donnell and Serrano. A court- 
martial condemned him in contumaciam to death by " garote 
vil," and he had to hide in the house of a friend until he escaped 
to France. There he lived two years until the successful revolu- 
tion of 1868 allowed him to return and enter the Cortes for the 
first time — as deputy for Saragossa. At the same time he re- 
sumed the professorship of history at the Madrid university. 
Castelar soon became famous by his rhetorical speeches in the 
Constituent Cortes of 1869, where he led the republican minority 
in advocating a federal republic as the logical outcome of the 
recent revolution. He thus gave much trouble to men like 
Serrano, Topete and Prim, who had never harboured the idea 
of drifting into advanced democracy, and who had each his own 
scheme for re-establishing the monarchy with certain consti- 
tutional restrictions. Hence arose Castelar's constant and 
vigorous criticisms of the successive plans mooted to place a 
Hohenzollern, a Portuguese, the duke of Montpensier, Espartero 
and finally Amadeus of Savoy on the throne. He attacked with 
relentless vigour the short-lived monarchy of Amadeus, and con- 
tributed to its downfall. • 

The abdication of Amadeus led to the proclamation of the 
federal republic. The senate and congress, very largely composed 
of monarchists, permitted themselves to be dragged along into 
democracy by the republican minority headed by Salmeron, 
Figueras, Pi y Margall and Castelar. The short-lived federal 
republic from the nth of February 1873 to the 3rd of January 
1874 was the culminating point of the career of Castelar, and his 
conduct during those eleven months was much praised by the 
wiser portion of his fellow-countrymen, though it alienated from 
him the sympathies of the majority of his quondam friends in 
the republican ranks. 

Before the revolution of 1868, Castelar had begun to dissent 
from the doctrines of the more advanced republicans, and 
particularly as to the means to be employed for their success. 
He abhorred bloodshed, he disliked mob rule, he did not approve 
of military pronunciamienlos. His idea would have been a 
parliamentary republic on the American lines, with some traits 
of the Swiss constitution to keep in touch with the regionalist 
and provincialist inclinations of many parts of the peninsula. 
He would have placed at the head of his commonwealth a 
president and Cortes freely elected by the people, ruling the 
country in a liberal spirit and with due respect for conservative 
principles, religious traditions and national unity. Such a 
statesman was sure to clash with the doctrinaires, like Salmeron, 
who wanted to imitate French methods; with Pi y Margall, 
who wanted a federal republic after purely Spanish ideas of 
decentralization; and above all with the intransigent and gloomy 
fanatics who became the leaders of the cantonal insurrections at 
Cadiz, Seville, Valencia, Malaga and Cartagena in 1873. 

At first Castelar did his best to work with the other republican 
members of the first government of the federal republic. He 
accepted the post of minister for foreign affairs. He even went 
so far as to side with his colleagues, when serious difficulties 
arose between the new government and the president of the 
Cortes, Senor Martos, who was backed by a very imposing 
commission composed of the most influential conservative 
members of the last parliament of the Savoyard king, which had 



47° 



CaSTELAR y ripoll 



suspended its sittings shortly after proclaiming the federal 
republic. A sharp struggle was carried on for weeks between 
the executive and this commission, at first presided over by 
Martos, and, when he resigned, by Salmeron. In the background 
Marshal Serrano and many politicians and military men steadily 
advocated a coup d'etat in order to avert the triumph of the 
republicans. The adversaries of the executive were prompted 
by the captain-general of Madrid, Pavia, who promised the 
co-operation of the garrison of the capital. The president, 
Salmeron, and Marshal Serrano himself lacked decision at the 
last moment, and lost time and many opportunities by which 
the republican ministers profited. The federal republicans 
became masters of the situation in the last fortnight of April 

1873, and turned the tables on their adversaries by making a 
pacific bloodless pronunciamiento. 

The battalions o,f the militia that had assembled in the bull- 
ring near Marshal Serrano's house to assist the anti-democratic 
movement were disarmed, and their leaders, the politicians 
and generals, were allowed to escape to France or Portugal. 
The Cortes were dissolved, and the federal and constituent 
Cortes of the republic convened, but they only sat during the 
summer of 1873, long enough to show their absolute incapacity, 
and to convince the executive that the safest policy was to 
suspend the session for several months. 

This was the darkest period of the annals of the Spanish 
revolution of 1873-1874. Matters got to such a climax of disorder, 
disturbance and confusion, from the highest to the lowest strata 
of Spanish society, that the president of the executive, Figueras, 
deserted his post and fled the country. Pi y Margall and Sal- 
meron, in successive attempts to govern, found no support in 
the really important and influential elements of Spanish society. 
Salmeron had even to appeal to such well-known reactionary 
generals as Pavia, Sanchez, Bregna and Moriones, to assume 
the command of the armies in the south and in the north of 
Spain. Fortunately these officers responded to the call of the 
executive. In less than five weeks a few thousand men properly 
handled sufficed to quell the cantonal risings in Cordoba, Sevilla, 
Cadiz and Malaga, and the whole of the south might have been 
soon pacified, if the federal republican ministers had not once 
more given way to the pressure of the majority of the Cortes, 
composed of " Intransigentes " and radical republicans. The 
president, Salmeron, after showing much indecision, resigned, 
but not until he had recalled the general in command in Andalusia, 
Pavia. This resignation was not an unfortunate event for the 
country, as the federal Cortes not only made Castelar chief of 
the executive, though his partisans were in a minority in the 
Parliament, but they gave him much liberty to act, 'as they 
decided to suspend the sittings of the house until 2nd January 

1874. This was the turning-point of the Spanish revolution, 
as from that day the tide set in towards the successive develop- 
ments that led to the restoration of the Bourbons. 

On becoming the ruler of Spain at the beginning of September 
1873, Castelar at once devoted his attention to the reorganization 
of the army, whose numbers had dwindled down to about 
70,000 men. This force, though aided by considerable bodies 
of local militia and volunteers in the northern and western 
provinces, was insufficient to cope with the 60,000 Carlists in 
arms, and with the still formidable nucleus of cantonalists around 
Alcoy and Cartagena. To supply the deficiencies Castelar called 
out more than 100,000 conscripts, who joined the colours in less 
than six weeks. He selected his generals without respect of 
politics, sending Moriones to the Basque provinces and Navarre 
at the head of 20,000 men, Martinez Campos to Catalonia with 
several thousand, and Lopez Dominguez, the nephew of Marshal 
Serrano, to begin the land blockade of the last stronghold of the 
cantonal insurgents, Cartagena, where the crews of Spain's only 
fleet had joined the revolt. 

Castelar next turned his attention to the Church. He renewed 
direct relations with the Vatican, and at last induced Pope 
Pius IX. to approve his selection of two dignitaries to occupy 
vacant sees as well as his nominee for the vacant archbishopric 
of Valencia, a prelate who afterwards became archbishop of 



Toledo, and remained to the end a close friend of Castelar. 
He put a stop to all persecutions of the Church and religious 
orders, and enforced respect of Church property. He attempted 
to restore some order in the treasury and administration of 
finance, with a view to obtain ways and means to cover the 
expense of the three civil wars, Carlist, cantonal and Cuban. 
The Cuban insurgents gave him much trouble and anxiety, the 
famous Virginius incident nearly leading to a rupture between 
Spain and the United States. Castelar sent out to Cuba all the 
reinforcements he could spare, and a new governor-general, 
Jovellar, whom he peremptorily instructed to crush the mutinous 
spirit of the Cuban militia, and not allow them to drag Spain 
into a conflict with the United States. Acting upon the instruc- 
tions of Castelar, Jovellar gave up the filibuster vessels, and those 
of the crew and passengers who had not been summarily shot 
by General Bttrriel. Castelar always prided himself on having 
terminated this incident without too much damage to the prestige 
of Spain. 

At the end of 1873 Castelar had reason to be satisfied with 
the results of his efforts, with the military queries in the
peninsula, with the assistance he was getting from the middle 
classes and even from many of the political elements of the 
Spanish revolution that were not republican. On the other 
hand, on the eve of the meeting of the federal Cortes, he could 
indulge in no illusions as to what he had to expect from the bulk 
of the republicans, who openly dissented from his conservative 
and conciliatory policyj and announced that they would reverse 
it on the very day the Cortes met. Warnings came in plenty, and 
no less a personage than the man he had made captain-general of 
Madrid, General Pavia, suggested that, if a conflict arose between 
Castelar and the majority of the Cortes, not only the garrison 
of Madrid and its chief, but all the armies in the field and their 
generals, were disposed to stand by the president. Castelar knew 
too well what such offers meant in the classic land of pronuncia- 
mientos, and he refused so flatly that Pavia did not renew his 
advice. The sequel is soon told. The Cortes met on the 2nd 
of January 1874. The intransigent majority refused to listen to 
a last eloquent appeal that Castelar made to their patriotism 
and common sense, and they passed a vote of censure. Castelar 
resigned. The Cortes went on wrangling for a day and night 
until,' at daybreak on the 3rd of January 1874, General Pavia 
forcibly ejected the deputies, closed and dissolved the Cortes, 
and called up Marshal Serrano to form a provisional government. 

Castelar kept apart from active politics during the twelve 
months that Serrano acted as president of the republic. Another 
pronunciamiento finally put an end to it in the last week of 
December 1874, when Generals Campos at Sagunto, Jovellar 
at Valencia, Primo de Rivera at Madrid, and Laserna at Logrofio, 
proclaimed Alphonso XII. king of Spain. Castelar then went 
into voluntary exile for fifteen months, at the end of which 
he was elected deputy for Barcelona. He sat in all subsequent 
parliaments, and just a month before his death he was elected 
as representative of Murcia. During that period he became 
even more estranged from the majority of the republicans. 
Bitter experience had shown him that their federal doctrines 
and revolutionary methods could lead to nothing in harmony 
with the aspirations of the majority of Spaniards. He elected, 
to use his own words, to defend and to seek the realization of 
the substance of the programme of the Spanish revolution of 
1868 by evolution, and legal, pacific means. Hence the contrast 
between his attitude from 1876 to 1886, during the reign of 
Alphonso XII., when he stood in the front rank of the Opposition, 
to defend the reforms of that revolution against Sefior Canovas, 
and his attitude from 1886 to 1891. In this latter period Castelar 
acted as a sort of independent auxiliary of Sagasta and of the 
Liberal party. As soon as Castelar saw universal suffrage re- 
established he solemnly declared in the Cortes that his task 
was accomplished, his political mission at an end, and that he 
proposed to devote the remainder of his life to those literary, 
historical, philosophical, and economic studies which he had 
never neglected even in the busiest days of his political 
career. Indeed, it was his extraordinary activity and power of 



CASTELFRANCO— CASTELLO, B. 



471 



assimilation in such directions that allowed him to keep his 
fellow-countrymen so well informed of what was going on in 
the outer world. His literary and journalistic labours occupied 
much of his time, and were his chief means of subsistence. 
He left unfinished a history of Europe in the 19th century. 
The most conspicuous of his earlier works were: — A History of 
Civilization in the First Five Centuries of Christianity, Recollec- 
tions of Italy, Life of Lord Byron, The History of the Republican 
Movement in Europe, The Redemption of Slaves, The Religious 
Revolution, Historical Essays on the Middle Ages, The Eastern 
Question, Fra Filippo Lippi, History of the Discovery of America, 
and some historical novels. Castelar died near Murcia on the 
25th of May r8oo, at the age of 66. His funeral at Madrid was 
an imposing demonstration of the sympathy and respect of all 
classes and parties. (A. E. H.) 

CASTELFRANCO NELL' EMILIA, a town of Emilia, Italy, 
in the province of Bologna, 16 m. N.W. by rail from the town 
of Bologna. Pop. (1901) 3163 (town), 13,484 (commune). The 
churches contain some pictures by later Bolognese artists. Just 
outside the town is a massive fort erected by Uijban VIII. in 
1628, on the frontier of the province of Bologna, now used as 
a prison. Castelfranco either occupies or lies near the site of 
the ancient Forum Gallorum, a place on the Via Aemilia 
between Mutina and Bononia, where in 43 B.C. Octavian and 
Hirtius defeated Mark Antony. 

CASTELFRANCO VENETO, a town and episcopal see of 
Venetia, Italy, in the province of Treviso, 16 m. W.' by rail from 
the town of Treviso. Pop. (1901) 5220 (town), 12,551 (com- 
mune). The older part of the town is square, surrounded by 
medieval walls and towers constructed by the people of Treviso 
in 1 2 18 (see Cittadella). It was the birthplace of the painter 
Giorgio Barbarelli (II Giorgione, 1477-1512), and the cathedral 
contains one of his finest works, the Madonna with SS. Francis 
and Liberalis (1504), in the background of which the towers of 
the old town may be seen. 

CASTELL, EDMUND (1606-1685), English orientalist, was 
born in 1606 at Tadlow, in Cambridgeshire. At the age of fifteen 
heentered Emmanuel College, Cambridge, but afterwards changed 
his residence to St John's, on account of the valuable library 
there. His great work was the compiling of his Lexicon Hepta- 
glotton Hebraicum, Chaldaicum, Syriacum, Samaritanum, A ethiopi- 
cum, Arabicum, et Persicum (1669). Over this book he spent 
eighteen years, working (if we may accept his own statement) 
from sixteen to eighteen hours a day; he employed fourteen 
assistants, and by an expenditure of £12,000 brought himself 
to poverty, for his lexicon, though full of the most unusual 
learning, did not find purchasers. He was actually in prison 
in 1667 because he was unable to discharge his brother's debts, 
for which he had made himself liable. A volume of poems 
dedicated to the king brought him preferment. He was made 
prebendary of Canterbury and professor of Arabic at Cambridge. 
Before undertaking the Lexicon Heptaglotton, Castell had helped 
Dr Brian Walton in the preparation of his Polyglott Bible. His 
MSS. he bequeathed to the university of Cambridge. He died 
in 1685 at Higham Gobion, Bedfordshire, where he was rector. 

The Syriac section of the Lexicon was issued separately at Got- 
tingen in 1788 by J. D. Michaelis, who offers a tribute to Castell's 
learning and industry. Trier published the Hebrew section in 
I 790-1 792. 

CASTELLAMMARE DI STABIA (anc. Stabiae), a seaport and 
episcopal see of Campania, Italy, in the province of Naples, 
17 m. S.E. by rail from the town of Naples. Pop. (1901) town, 
26,378; commune, 32,589. It lies in the south-east angle of 
the Bay of Naples, at the beginning of the peninsula of Sorrento, 
and owing to the sea and mineral water baths (12 different 
springs) and its attractive situation, with a splendid view of 
Vesuvius and fine woods on the hills behind, it is a favourite 
resort of foreigners in spring and autumn and of Neapolitans 
in summer. The castle from which it takes its name, on the 
hill to the south of the town, was built by the emperor Frederick 
II. There are three large churches of the late 18th century. 
There are a large royal dockyard and a small-arms factory; 



there are also iron works, cotton, flour and macaroni mills. The 
value of imports (chiefly coal, wheat, scrap-iron and cheese) 
for 1904 was £1,239,048, and the value of exports (chiefly 
macaroni and green fruit) £769,100. There is also a sponge 
trade, but the former coral trade is depressed. The. port was 
cleared by 420 vessels of 477,713 tonnage in 1905. An electric 
tramway along the coast road to Sorrento was opened in 1905. 

CASTELLESI, ADRIANO (c. 1460?-^. 1521?), known also 
as Corneto from his birthplace, Italian cardinal and writer, 
was sent by Innocent VIII. to reconcile James III. of Scotland 
with his subjects. While in England he was appointed (1503), 
by Henry VII., to the see of Hereford, and in the following 
year to the more lucrative diocese of Bath and Wells, but he 
never resided in either. Returning to Rome, he became secre- 
tary to Alexander VI. and was made by him cardinal (May 31, 
1 503) . A man of doubtful reputation, Alexander's confidant and 
favourite, he paid the pope a large sum for his elevation. He 
bought a vigna in the Borgo near the Vatican, and thereon 
erected a sumptuous palace after designs by Bramante; and it 
was here, in the summer of 1503, that he entertained the pope 
and Cesare Borgia at a banquet that went on till nightfall despite 
the unhealthy season of the year, when ague in its most malignant 
form was rife. Of the three, Cardinal Adrian was the first to 
fall ill, the pope succumbing a week after. The story of the 
poisoning of the pope is to be relegated to the realm of fiction. 
Soon after the election of Leo X. the cardinal was implicated 
in the conspiracy of Cardinal Petrucci against the pope, and 
confessed his guilt; but, pardon being offered only on condition 
of the payment of 25,000 ducats, he fled from Rome and was 
subsequently deposed from the cardinalate. As early as 1504 
he had presented his palace (now the Palazzo Giraud-Torlonia) 
to Henry VII. as a residence for the English ambassador to the 
Holy See; and on his flight Henry VIII., who had quarrelled 
with him, gave it to Cardinal Campeggio. Adrian first fled to 
Venice. Of his subsequent history nothing is known for certain. 
It is said that he was murdered by a servant when on his way 
to the conclave that elected Adrian VI. As a writer, he was one 
of the first to restore the Latin tongue to its pristine purity; 
and among his works are De Vera Philosophia ex quatuor docto- 
ribus ecclesiae (Bologna, 1507), De Sermone Latino (Basel, 1513), 
and a poem, De Venatione (Venice, 1534). 

See Polydore Vergil, Anglicae kistoriae, edited by H. Ellis (London, 
1844); and A. Aubery, Histoire generate des cardinaux (Paris, 
1642). (E. Tn.) 

CASTELLI, IGNAZ FRANZ (1781-1862), Austrian dramatist, 
was born at Vienna on the 6th of March 1781. He studied law 
at the university, and then entered the government service. 
During the Napoleonic invasions his patriotism inspired him to 
write stirring war songs, one of which, Kriegslied fiir die oster- 
reichische Jirmee, was printed by order of the archduke Charles 
and distributed in thousands. For this Castelli was proclaimed 
by Napoleon in the Moniteur, and had to seek refuge in Hungary. 
In 1815 he accompanied the allies into France as secretary to 
Count Cavriani, and, after his return to Vienna, resumed his 
official post in connexion with the estates of Lower Austria. 
In 1842 he retired to his property at Lilienfeld, where, sur- 
rounded by his notable collections of pictures and other art 
treasures, he for the rest of his life devoted himself to literature. 
Castelli's dramatic talent was characteristically Austrian; his 
plays were well constructed and effective and satirized unspar- 
ingly the foibles of the Viennese. But his wit was too local 
and ephemeral to appeal to any but his own generation, and if 
he is remembered at all to-day it is by his excellent Gedichte 
in niederosterreichischer Mundart (1828). He died at Lilienfeld 
on the 5 th of February 1862. 

Castelli's Gesammelle Gedichte appeared in 1835 in 6 vols.; a 
selection of his Werke in 1843 in 15 vols. (2nd ed", 1848), followed 
by 6 supplementary volumes in 1858. His autobiography, Memoirer. 
tneincs Lebens, appeared in 1861-1862 in 4 vols. 

CASTELLO, BERNARDO (1557-1629), Genoese portrait and 
historical painter, born at Albaro near Genoa, was the intimate 
friend of Tasso, and took upon himself the task of designing 
the figures of the Gemsalemme Liberata, published in 1592; 



472 



CASTELLO, G. B.— CASTELLON 



some of these subjects were engraved by Agostino Caracci. 
Besides painting a number of works in Genoa, mostly in a rapid 
and superficial style, Castello was employed in Rome and in 
the court of the duke of Savoy. 

CASTELLO, GIOVANNI BATTISTA (1500 ?-i 569?), Italian 
historical painter, was born near Bergamo in 1500 or perhaps 
1 509, and is hence ordinarily termed II Bergamasco. He belongs, 
however, to the school of Genoa, but does not appear to have 
had any family relationship with the other two painters named 
Castello, also noticed here. He was employed to decorate the 
Nunziata di Portoria in Genoa, the saloon of the Lanzi Palace 
at Gorlago, and the Pardo Palace in Spain. His best-known 
works are the " Martyrdom of St Sebastian," and the picture 
of " Christ as Judge of the World " on one of the vaultings of 
the Annunziata. He was an architect and sculptor as well as 
painter. In 1567 he was invited to Madrid by Philip II., and 
there he died, holding the office of architect of the royal palaces. 
The date of death (as of birth) is differently stated as 1569 or 

1579- 

CASTELLO, VALERIO (1625-1659), Italian painter, was the 
youngest son of Bernardo Castello (q.v.). He surpassed his father, 
and particularly excelled in painting battle-scenes. He painted 
the " Rape of the Sabines," now in the Palazzo Brignole, Genoa, 
and decorated the cupola of the church of the Annunziata in the 
same city. In these works he is regarded by his admirers as 
combining the fire of Tintoretto with the general style of Paolo 
Veronese. 

CASTELLO BRANCO, CAMILLO, Visconde de Correia 
Botelho (1825-1890), Portuguese novelist, was born out of 
wedlock and lost his parents in infancy. He spent his early years 
"in a village in Traz-os-Montes. He learnt to love poetry from 
Camoens and Bocage, while Mendes Pinto gave him a lust for 
adventure, but he dreamed more than he read, and grew up 
undisciplined and proud. He studied in Oporto and Coimbra 
with much irregularity, and since his disdain for the intrigues 
and miseries of politics in Portugal debarred him from the chance 
of a government post, he entered the career of letters to gain 
a livelihood. After a spell of journalistic work in Oporto and 
Lisbon he proceeded to the Episcopal seminary in the former 
city with a view of studying for the priesthood, and during this 
period wrote a number of religious works and translated Chateau- 
briand. He actually took minor orders, but his restless nature 
prevented him from following one course for long 'and he soon 
returned to the world, and henceforth kept up a feverish literary 
activity to the end. He was created a viscount in 1885 in 
recognition of his services to letters, and when his health finally 
broke down and he could no longer use his pen, parliament gave 
him a "pension for life. When, having lost his sight, and suffering 
from chronic nervous disease, he died by his own hand in 1890, 
it was generally recognized that Portugal had lost ' the most 
national of her modern writers. 

Apart from his plays and verses, Castello Branco's works may 
be divided into three sections. The first comprises his romances 
of the imagination, of which Os mysterios de Lisboa, in the style 
of Victor Hugo, is a fair example. The second includes his novels 
of manners, a style of which he was the creator and remained 
the chief exponent until the appearance of Crime de Padre 
Amaro of Eca de Queiroz. In these he is partly idealist and 
partly realist, and describes to perfection the domestic and social 
life of Portugal in the early part of the 19th century. The third 
division embraces his writings in the domain of history, bio- 
graphy and literary criticism. Among these may be cited 
Noites de Lamego, Cousas leves e pesadas, Cavar em ruinas, 
Memorias do Bispo do Grao Para and Bohemia do Espirito. 

In all, his publications number about two hundred and sixty, 
belonging to many departments of letters, but he owes his great 
and lasting reputation to his romances. Notwithstanding the 
fact that his slender means obliged him to produce very rapidly 
to the order of publishers, who only paid him from £30 to £60 
a book, he never lost his individuality under the pressure. 
Knowing the life of the people by experience and not from 
books, he was able to fix in his pages a succession of strongly 



marked and national types, such as the brazileiro, the oldfidalgo 
of the north, and the Minho priest, while his lack of personal 
acquaintance with foreign countries and his relative ignorance 
of their literatures preserved him from the temptation, so danger- 
ous to a Portuguese, of imitating the classical writers of the 
larger nations. Among the most notable of his romances are 
Romance de un Homem Rico, his favourite, Retrato de Ricardina, 
Amor de Perdicao, and the magnificent series entitled Novellas 
do Minho. Many of his novels are autobiographical, like Onde 
estd a felicidade, Memorias do Carcere and Vinganca. ■ Castello 
Branco is an admirable story-teller, largely because he was a 
brilliant improvisatore, but he does not attempt character 
study. Nothing can exceed the richness of his vocabulary, and 
no other Portuguese author has shown so profound a knowledge 
of the popular language. Though nature had endowed him with 
the poetic temperament, his verses are mediocre, but his best 
plays are cast in bold lines and contain really dramatic situations, 
while his comedies are a triumph of the grotesque, with a mordant 
vein running through them that recalls Gil Vicente. 

The collected works of Caraillo Castello Branco are published by 
the Companhia Editora of Lisbon, and his most esteemed books 
have had several editions. The Diccionario Bibliographico Portuguez, 
vol. ix. p. 7 et seq., contains a lengthy but incomplete list of his pub- 
lications. See Romance do Romancista, by A. Pimentel, a badly put 
together but informing biography; also a study on the novelist by 
J. Pereira de Sampaio in A Geracao Nova (Oporto, 1886) ; Dr Theo- 
philo Braga, As Modernas Ideias na litteratura Portugueza (Oporto, 
1892); Padre Senna Freitas, Perfil de Camillo Castello Branco (S. 
Paulo, 1887) ; and Paulo Osorio, Camillo, a sua vida, seu genio, a 
sua obra (Oporto, 1908). (E. Pr.) 

CASTELLO BRANCO, an episcopal city and the capital of an 
administrative district formerly included in the province of 
Beira, Portugal; 1560 ft. above the sea, on the Abrantes-Guarda 
railway. Pop. (1900) 7288. Numerous Roman remains bear 
witness to the antiquity of Castello Branco, but its original name 
is unknown. The city is dominated by a ruined castle, and 
partly enclosed by ancient walls; its chief buildings are the 
cathedral and episcopal palace. Cloth is manufactured, and there 
is a flourishing local trade in cork, wine and olive oil. The 
administrative district of Castello Branco, which comprises the 
valleys of the Zezere, Ocreza and Ponsul, right-hand tributaries 
of the Tagus, coincides with the south-eastern part of Beira; 
pop. (1900)^216,608; area, 2582 sq. m. 

CASTELLON DE LA PLANA, a maritime province of eastern 
Spain, formed in 1833 of districts formerly included in Valencia, 
and bounded on the N. by Teruel and Tarragona, E. by the 
Mediterranean Sea, S. by Valencia, and W. by Teruel. Pop. 
(1900) 310,828; area, 2495 sq. m. The surface of the province 
is almost everywhere mountainous, and flat only near the coast 
and along some of the river valleys. Even on the coast the 
Atalayas de Alcala, and the Desierto de las Palmas form two 
well-defined though not lofty ridges. The Mijares or Millares 
is the principal river, flowing east-south-east from the highlands 
of Teruel, between the Sierras of Espina and Espadan towards 
the south, and the peak called Pefia Golosa (5945 ft.) towards 
the north, until it reaches the sea a little south of the capital, 
also called Castellon de la Plana. The Monlleo, a left-hand 
tributary of the Mijares; the Bergantes, which flows inland to 
join the Guadalope in Teruel; the Cenia, which divides Castellon 
from Tarragona; and a variety of lesser streams, render the 
province abundantly fertile. No considerable inlet breaks the 
regularity of the coast-line, and there is no first-class harbour. 
The climate is cold and variable in the hilly districts, temperate 
in winter and very warm in summer in the lowlands. Agricul- 
ture, fruit-growing, and especially the cultivation of the vine 
and olive, employ the majority of the peasantry ; stock-farming 
and sea-fishing are also of importance. Lead, zinc, iron and 
other ores have been discovered in the province; but in 1903, 
out of 1 29 mining concessions registered, only two were worked, 
and their output, lead and zinc, was quite insignificant. The 
local industries are mainly connected with fish-curing, paper, 
porcelain, woollens, cotton, silk, esparto, brandy and oils. 
Wine, oranges and oil are exported to foreign countries and 



CASTELLON— CASTELNAUDARY 



473 



other parts of Spain. The important Barcelona-Valencia 
railway skirts the coast, passing through the capital; and the 
Calatayud-Sagunto line crosses the southern extremity of the 
province. Elsewhere the roads, which are generally indifferent, 
form the sole means of communication. Castellon (29,904), 
Villarreal (16,068), the port of Burriana (12,962), and Peniscola 
(3142), a town of some historical interest, are described in 
separate articles. The other chief towns are Alcala de Chisbert 
(6293), Almazora (7076), Benicarlo (7251), Maella (7335), Onda 
(6595), Segorbe (7045), Vail de Uxo (8643), Villafames (6708) 
and Vinaroz (8625). 

CASTELLON DE LA PLANA, the capital of the province 
described above, on the Barcelona- Valencia railway, 4 m. from 
the Mediterranean Sea. Pop. (1900) 29,904. The broad and 
fertile plain in which Castellon is built is watered artificially by 
a Moorish aqueduct, largely cut through the solid rock, and 
supplied by the estuary of the Mijares, 5 m. south-east. The 
town is partly encircled by ancient walls; and, although most 
of its public buildings are modern, it contains several convents 
of early foundation, a curious old bell- tower, 150 ft. high, and a 
parish church chiefly noteworthy for a painting in the interior 
by Francisco Ribalta, who was born here in the middle of the 
16th century. Castellon has a brisk trade, its manufactures 
comprising porcelain, leather, silk, linen, brandy and cork 
goods. Its harbour, El Grao de Castellon, about 4 m. east, is 
annually entered by some 200 small vessels. A light railway, 
which traverses the numerous and profitable orange plantations 
on the south-west, connects it with the towns of Almazora, 
Villarreal, Burriana and Onda. Under its Moorish rulers 
Castellon occupied a hill to the north of its present site; its 
removal to the plain by James I. of Aragon (1213-1276) gave 
the town itsiull name, " Castellon of the Plain." 

CASTELNAU, MICHEL DE, Sieur de la Mauvissiere 
(c. 1520-1592), French soldier and diplomatist, ambassador to 
Queen Elizabeth, was born in Touraine about 1520. He was 
one of a large family of children, and his grandfather, Pierre de 
Castelnau, was equerry to Louis XII. Endowed with a clear 
and penetrating intellect and remarkable strength of memory, 
he received a careful education, to complete which he travelled 
in Italy and made a long stay at Rome. He then spent some 
time in Malta, afterwards entered the army, and made his first 
acquaintance with war in the campaigns of the French in Italy. 
His abilities and his courage won for him the friendship and pro- 
tection of the cardinal of Lorraine, who took him into his service. 
In 1557 a command in the navy was given to him, and the 
cardinal proposed to get him knighted. This, however, he de- 
clined, and then rejoined the French army in Picardy. Various 
delicate missions requiring tact and discretion were entrusted 
to him by the constable de Montmorency, and these he discharged 
so satisfactorily that he was sent by the king, Henry II., to 
Scotland with despatches for Mary Stuart, then betrothed to 
the dauphin (afterwards Francis II.). From Scotland he passed 
into England, and treated with Queen Elizabeth respecting her 
claims on Calais (1559), a settlement of which was effected at 
the congress of Cateau-Cambresis. He was next sent as am- 
bassador to the princes of Germany, for the purpose of prevailing 
upon them to withdraw their favour from the Protestants. 
This embassy was followed by missions to Margaret of Parma, 
governess of the Netherlands, to Savoy, and then to Rome, to 
ascertain the views of Pope Paul IV. with regard to France. 
Paul having died just before his arrival, Castelnau used his 
influence in favour of the election of Pius IV. Returning to 
France, he once more entered the navy, and served under his 
former patron. It was his good fortune, at Nantes, to discover 
the earliest symptoms of the conspiracy of Amboise, which he 
immediately reported to the government. 

After the death of Francis II. (December 1560) he accom- 
panied the queen, Mary Stuart, to Scotland, and remained with 
her a year, during which time he made several journeys into 
England, and attempted to bring about a reconciliation between 
Mary and Queen Elizabeth. The wise and moderate counsels 
which he offered to the former were unheeded. In 1562, in 



consequence of the civil war in France, he returned there. He 
was employed against the Protestants in Brittany, was taken 
prisoner in an engagement with them and sent to Havre, but 
was soon after exchanged. In the midst of the excited passions 
of his countrymen, Castelnau, who was a sincere Catholic, main- 
tained a wise self-control and moderation, and by his counsels 
rendered valuable service to the government. He served at the 
siege of Rouen, distinguished himself at the battle of Dreux, 
took Tancarville, and contributed in 1563 to the recapture of 
Havre from the English. 

During the next ten years Castelnau was employed in 
various important missions:— first to Queen Elizabeth, to 
negotiate a peace; next to the duke of Alba, the new governor 
of the Netherlands. On this occasion he discovered the 
project formed by the prince of Conde and Admiral Coligny 
to seize and carry off trie royal family at Monceaux (1567). 
After the battle of St Denis he was again sent to Germany 
to solicit aid against the Protestants; and on his return 
he was rewarded for his services with the post of governor of 
Saint-Diziej, and a company of orderlies. At the head of his 
company he took part in the battles of Jarnac and Moncontour. 
In 1572 he was sent to England by Charles IX. to allay the 
excitement created by the massacre of St Bartholomew, and 
the same year he was sent to Germany and Switzerland. Two 
years later he was reappointed by Henry III. ambassador to 
Queen Elizabeth, and he remained at her court for ten years. 
During this period he used his influence to promote the marriage 
of the queen with the duke of Alencon, with a view especially 
to strengthen and maintain the alliance of the two countries. 
But Elizabeth made so many promises only to break them that 
at last he refused to accept them or communicate them to his 
government. On his return to France he found that his chateau 
of La Mauvissiere had been destroyed in the civil war; and as 
he refused to recognize the authority of the League, the duke of 
Guise deprived him of the governorship of Saint-Dizier. He 
was thus brought almost to a state of destitution. But on the 
accession of Henry IV., the king, who knew his worth, and was 
confident that although he was a Catholic he might rely on his 
fidelity, gave him a command in the army, and entrusted him 
with various confidential missions. 

Castelnau died at Joinville in 1592. His MSmoires rank very 
high among the original authorities for the period they cover, 
the eleven years between 1559 and 1570. They were written 
during his last embassy in England for the benefit of his son; 
and they possess the merits of clearness, veracity and im- 
partiality. They were first printed in 1621; again, with 
additions by Le Laboureur, in 2 vols, folio, in 1659; and a third 
time, still further enlarged by Jean Godefroy, 3 vols, folio, in 
1731. Castelnau translated into French the Latin work of 
Ramus, On the Manners and Customs of the Ancient Gauls. 
Various letters of his are preserved in the Cottonian and Harleian 
collections in the British Museum. 

His grandson, Jacques de Castelnau (1620-1658), distin- 
guished himself in the war against Austria and Spain during the 
ministries of Richelieu and Mazarin, and died marshal of France. 

See Hubault, Ambassade de Castelnau en Angleterre (1856); 
Relations politiques de la France . . . avec l'£cosse au seizieme 
siicle, edited by J. B. A. T. Teulet (1862); and De la Ferriere, Les 
Projets de mariage d' Elisabeth (1883). 

CASTELNAUDARY, a town of south-western France, capital 
of an arrondissement in the department of Aude, 22 m. W.N.W. 
of Carcassonne, on the Southern railway between that city 
and Toulouse. Pop. (1906) 6650. It is finely situated on an 
elevation in the midst of a fertile and well-cultivated plain; and 
its commercial facilities are greatly increased by the Canal du 
Midi, which widens out, as it passes the town, into an extensive 
basin surrounded with wharves and warehouses for the timber 
used in the upkeep of the canal. The principal buildings are 
the law court, the hotel de ville, and the church of St Michel, 
dating from the 14th century; none of these offers any feature 
of unusual interest. There are a number of flour-mills, as well 
as manufactories of earthenware, tiles and blankets; an extensive 



474 



CASTELSARRASIN— CASTIGLIONE, G. B. 



trade is maintained in lime, gypsum, timber, grain, fruits, wine, 
wool, cattle and farm implements, and the building of canal 
boats forms an important industry. The public institutions 
include the sub-prefecture, tribunals of first instance and of 
commerce, a communal college and a farm school. 

Castelnaudary probably represents the ancient town of 
Soslomagus, taken during the 5th century by the Visigoths, 
who, it is conjectured, rebuilt the town, calling it Castrum 
Novum Arianorum, whence the present name. Early in the 13th 
century the town was the scene of several struggles during the 
war against the Albigenses, between Simon IV., count of Mont- 
fort, and Raymond VI., count of Toulouse, and their supporters. 
In 1229 it was deprived of its ramparts, and after these had been 
rebuilt, it was captured and burned by the Black Prince in 1355, 
but again rebuilt in 1366. In 1632 it was the scene of a cavalry 
engagement in which the rebel Henry II., duke of Montmorency, 
was defeated and captured by the royal troops. 

CASTELSARRASIN, a town of south-western France, capital 
of an arrondissement in the department of Tarn-et- Garonne, 
12 m. W. of Montauban on the Southern railway. Pop. (1906) 
town, 3189; commune, 7496. Castelsarrasin, situated on the 
- left bank of the lateral canal of the Garonne and about a mile 
from the right bank of that river, is surrounded by promenades 
occupying the site of the old fortifications. Its chief building is 
the brick-built church of St Sauveur, which dates from the 13th 
century. The administrative buildings are modern. The town 
has a sub-prefecture, a tribunal of first instance, and a communal 
college. The principal industrial establishment is the metal- 
foundry of Sainte-Marguerite, where copper, tin and other 
metals are worked; there are also flour-mills, saw- mills and 
dye-works. Trade is in cattle, agricultural produce, wine, 
baskets and game. 

The name Castelsarrasin appears in the 13th century, when 
the village of Villelongue was replaced by the present bastide. 
Castrum Cerrucium, Castel-sur-Azine (from the neighbouring 
stream, Azine) and Castellum Sarracenum are suggested deriva- 
tions, no one of which can be adopted with certainty. 

CASTI, GIOVANNI BATTISTA (1721-1803), Italian poet, was 
born of humble parents at Montefiascone, in the states of the 
church, in 1721. He rose to the dignity of canon in the cathedral 
of his native place, but gave up his chance of church preferment 
to satisfy his gay and restless spirit by visiting most of the capitals 
of Europe. In 1782, on the death of Metastasio, he was appointed 
Poeta Cesario, or poet-laureate of Austria, in which capacity he 
applied himself with great success to the opera bouffe; but in 
1796 he resigned this post, in order that he might not be 
hampered by political relations; and he spent the close of his 
life as a private gentleman at Paris, where he died in 1803. Casti 
is best known as the author of the Novelle galanti, and of Gli 
Animali parlanti, a poetical allegory, over which he spent eight 
years (1794-1802), and which, notwithstanding its tedious length, 
excited so much interest that it was translated into French, 
German and Spanish, and (very freely and with additions) into 
English, in W. S. Rose's Court and Parliament of Beasts (Lond., 
1819). Written during the time of the Revolution in France, it 
was intended to exhibit the feelings and hopes of the people and 
the defects and absurdities of various political systems. The 
Novelle Galanti is a series of poetical tales, in the ottava rima — a 
metre largely used by Italian poets for that class of compositions. 
The sole merit of these poems consists in the harmony and purity 
of the style, and the liveliness and sarcastic power of many 
passages. They are, however, characterized by the grossest 
licentiousness; and there is no originality of plot — that, 
according to the custom of Italian novelists, being taken from 
classical mythology or other ancient legends. Among the other 
works of Casti is the Poema Tartaro, a mock-heroic satire on the 
court of Catherine II., with which he was personally acquainted. 
CASTIGLIONE, BALDASSARE (1478-1529), Italian diplomatist 
and man of letters, was born at Casanatico near Mantua, and was 
educated at Milan under the famous professors Merula and 
Chalcondyles. In 1496 he entered the service of Lodovico Sforza, 
duke of Milan, returning to Mantua in 150" "yhen Lodovico was 



carried prisoner into France. In 1504 he was attached to the 
court of Guidobaldo Malatesta, duke of Urbino, and in 1506 he 
was sent by that prince on a mission to Henry VII. of England, 
who had before conferred on Federigo Malatesta, " the Good 
Duke," the most famous mercenary of his age, the order of the 
Garter. Guidobaldo dying childless in 1508, the duchy of Urbino 
was given to Francesco Maria della Rovere, for whom Castiglione, 
envoy at the court of Leo X. (Medici), obtained the office of 
generalissimo of the Papal troops. Charged with the arrangement 
of the dispute between Clement VII. (Medici) and Charles V., 
Castiglione crossed, in 1524, into Spain, where he was received 
with highest honours, being afterwards naturalized, and made 
bishop of Avila. In 1527, however, Rome was seized and sacked 
by the Imperialists under Bourbon, and in July of the same 
year the surrender of the castle of Sant' Angelo placed Clement 
in their hands. Castiglione had been tricked by the emperor, 
but there were not wanting accusations of treachery against 
himself. He had, however, placed fidelity highest among the 
virtues of his ideal " courtier," and when he died at Toledo in 
iS2grit was said that he had died of grief and shame at the 
imputation. The emperor mourned him as " one of the world's 
best cavaliers." A portrait of him, now at the Louvre, was 
painted by Raphael, who disdained neither his opinion nor his 
advice. 

Castiglione wrote little, but that little is of rare merit. His 
verses, in Latin and Italian, are elegant in the extreme; his 
letters (Padua, 1769-1771) are full of grace and finesse. But the 
book by which he is best remembered is the famous treatise, II 
Cortegiano, written in 1514, published at Venice by Aldus in 
3.528, and translated into English by Thomas Hoby as early as 
1 561. This book, called by the Italians II Libro d'oro, and 
remarkable for its easy force and undemonstrative^ elegance of 
style no less than for the nobility and manliness of its theories 
(see the edition by V. Cian, Florence, 1894), describes the Italian 
gentleman of the Renaissance under his brightest and fairest 
aspect, and gives a charming picture of the court of Guidobaldo 
da Montefeltre, duke of Urbino, " confessedly the purest and 
most elevated court in Italy." In the form of a discussion held 
in the duchess's drawing-room — with Elizabetta Gonzaga, 
Pietro Bembo, Bernardo Bibbiena, Giuliano de' Medici, Emilia 
Pia, and Ceretino the Unique among the speakers — the question, 
What constitutes a perfect courtier? is debated. With but few 
differences, the type determined on is the ideal gentleman of the 
present day. 

See P. L. Ginguene, Histoire litteraire de V Italic, vi., vii. ; J. A. 
Symonds, The Renaissance in Italy (London, 1875) ; C. Hare, 
Courts and Camps of the Italian Renaissance (1908) ; Julia Cart- 
wright, B. Castiglione, the Perfect Courtier (1908), with good biblio- 
graphy. 

CASTIGLIONE, CARLO OTTAVIO, Count (1784-1849), Italian 
philologist, was born at Milan of an ancient family. His principal 
work was done in connexion with the Arabic and other Oriental 
languages, but he also performed good service in several other 
departments. In 1819 he published Monete cufiche del Museo di 
Milano, and assisted Cardinal Mai in his Ulphilae partium 
ineditarum in Ambrosianis palimpsestis repertarum ediiio. A 
learned Memoire geographique et numismatique sur la partie 
orientate de la Barbarie appelee Afrikia par les Arabes appeared 
in 1826, and established his reputation. In 1829 he published 
by himself the Gothic version of the second epistle of Paul to the 
Corinthians ; and this was followed by the Gothic version of the 
epistle to the Romans, the first epistle to the Corinthians, and 
the epistle to the Ephesians in 1834, by Galatians, Philippians, 
and 1 Thessalonians in 1835, and by 2 Thessalonians in 1839. 
He died at Genoa oh the 10th of April 1849. 

His Life, by Biondelli, appeared at Milan in 1856. 

CASTIGLIONE, GIOVANNI BENEDETTO (1616-1670), called 
in Italy II Grechetto, and in France Le Benedette, Italian 
painter of the Genoese school, was born in Genoa, and studied 
for some time under Vandyck. He painted portraits, historical 
pieces and landscapes, but chiefly excelled in fairs, markets and 
rural scenes with animals. Noah and the animals entering the 



CASTIGLIONE DELLE STIVIERE— CASTILE 



475 



Ark was a favourite subject of his. His paintings are to be found 
in Rome, Venice, Naples, Florence, and more especially Genoa 
and Mantua. He also executed a number of etchings, which 
are spirited, free and full of taste; "Diogenes searching for 
a Man " is one of the principal of these. The etchings are 
remarkable for light and shade, and have even earned for Cas- 
tiglione the name of " a second Rembrandt." The Presepio 
(Nativity of Jesus) in the church of San Luca, Genoa, ranks 
among his most celebrated paintings, and the Louvre contains 
eight characteristic examples. In his closing years he lived in 
Mantua, painting for the court; here he received his name of 
" Grechetto," from the classic air of his pastorals, and here he 
died of gout in 1670. His brother Salvatore and his son Fran- 
cesco excelled in the same subjects; and it is thought that many 
paintings which are ascribed to Benedetto are only copies after 
him, or perhaps originals by his son or brother. 

CASTIGLIONE DELLE STIVIERE, a town of Lombardy, 
Italy, in the province of Mantua, 20 m. N.W. of Mantua by 
road. Pop. (1901) 4122 (town), 5940 (commune). It has an 
old castle, much altered and restored, especially by the Gonzaga 
family of Mantua in the 16th century. During the War of the 
Spanish Succession, the French under the duke of Vendome 
occupied it; and during the siege of Mantua in 1796, the 
Austrians under Wurmser were defeated here by the French 
under Augereau, who was later created by Napoleon duke of 
Castiglione. 

CASTIGLIONE OLONA, a town of Lombardy, Italy, in the 
province of Como, 27 m. N.E. of Milan by rail. Pop. (1901) 
1806. The choir of the collegiate church, erected about 1428 
by Cardinal Branda Castiglione, contains fine frescoes by 
Masolino of Florence: there are other works by the same 
master in the baptistery. The tomb of the cardinal (1443) is 
good. The church of S. Sepolcro, in the lower part of the town, 
has two large stone figures of saints on its facade (of the end 
of the 13th century) and, within, painted wooden figures and 
the tomb of Guido Castiglione (d. 1485) with fine sculptures 
of the school of Amadeo. The palace erected by Cardinal 
Castiglione has good terra-cotta decorations. 

CASTILE, or Castiixe {Castillo), an ancient kingdom of Spain, 
occupying the central districts of the Iberian Peninsula; and 
bounded on the N. by the Bay of Biscay, N.E. by the Basque 
Provinces and Navarre, E. by Aragon, S.E. by Valencia and 
Murcia, S. by Andalusia, W. by Estremadura and Leon, and 
N.W. by Asturias. Pop. (1900) 3,708,713; area, 55,307 sq. m. 
The name Castile is commonly said to be derived from the 
numerous frontier forts (caslillos) erected in the middle ages 
as a defence against the Moors. The northern part of the 
kingdom, which was first freed from Moorish rule, is called 
Old Castile (Castilla la Vieja); the southern, acquired later, 
is called New Castile (Castilla la Nueva). These two divisions, 
with a third known as North Castile, now rank as military 
districts or captaincies-general; but the term " North Castile," 
which covers the northern extremity of Old Castile, is not 
generally used. In 1833 Old Castile was divided into the pro- 
vinces of Avila, Burgos, Logrono, Palencia, Santander, Segovia, 
Soria and Valladolid; while New Castile was similarly divided 
into Ciudad Real, Cuenca, Guadalajara, Madrid and Toledo. 
The modern progress of commerce, communications, &c. in 
these thirteen provinces is described in the separate articles upon 
each of them. 

Castile extends for about 300 m. from north to south, and 
160 m. from east to west. It consists of a vast central plateau, 
with an average altitude of about 2500 ft. This plateau has 
a natural frontier of high mountains on all sides, except on the 
borders of Leon and Murcia; it is also bisected by the Sierra 
de Guadarrama and Sierra de Gredos, which extend in a south- 
westerly direction across the central districts, and form the 
dividing line between Old and New Castile. Geographically 
it includes also the high plains of Leon, towards the north-west, 
and of Murcia on the south-east. The existing frontier is marked 
on the north by the Cantabrian Mountains (q.v.); on the east 
by the Sierra de la Demanda with its offshoots, and by the 



Serrania de Cuenca; on the south by the Sierra Morena; and 
on the west by various minor, ranges which link together the 
three more or less parallel chains of the Sierra de Gredos, Sierra 
de Guadalupe and Sierra Morena. Three great rivers, the 
Douro, which traverses Old Castile, with the Tagus and Guadiana, 
which respectively drain the central and southern regions of 
New Castile, flow westward into Portugal, and finally reach the 
Atlantic; while the Ebro, which rises in the north of the king- 
dom, skirts the north-eastern frontier on its way to the Medi- 
terranean. These rivers are described under their own names. 

The climate of Old Castile is healthy, but liable to severe cold 
and heat. Snow falls early and lies late in the mountains, and 
there is a heavy rainfall in the north-west. Nev/ Castile has a 
still more rigorous climate, for although the mean annual tem- 
perature is about 59 Fahr., the summer heat in the valleys is 
peculiarly oppressive, and the highlands are swept by scorching 
or icy gales, laden with dust. The rainfall rarely exceeds 10 in. in 
a year. 

In both the Castiles the central plateau has a naturally fertile 
soil, for after rain a luxuriant vegetation appears; but drought 
is common, owing to the insufficient volume of the rivers, and 
the failure of the Spaniards to extend the fine system of irrigation 
which the Moors originated. Certain districts, indeed, in which 
a layer of heavy loam underlies the porous and friable surface, 
are able to retain the moisture which elsewhere is absorbed. 
Such land is found in Palencia, and in the Mesa de Ocafia, where 
it yields abundant crops; and many of the northern mountains 
are well wooded. But vast tracts of land are useless except as 
pasture for sheep, and even the sheep are driven by the severe 
winters to migrate yearly into Estremadura (q.v.). The normal 
Castilian landscape is an arid and sterile steppe, with scarcely 
a tree or spring of water; and many even of the villages afford 
no relief to the eye, for they are built of sunburnt unbaked 
bricks, which share the dusty brownish-grey tint of the soil. 
Especially characteristic is the great plain of La Mancha (q.v.), 

The transformation of Castile from a small county in the north 
of what is now Old Castile into an independent monarchy, was 
one of the decisive events in the reconquest of Spain from the 
Moors. The successful resistance offered by Asturias to the 
invaders had been followed by the liberation of Galicia and Leon, 
when Ferdinand I. of Castile (1035-1065), by his marriage 
with Sancha, widow of the last king of Leon, was enabled to 
unite Leon and Castile in a single kingdom, with its capital at 
Burgos. New territories were annexed on the south, until, after 
the capture of Toledo in 1085, and the consequent formation 
of a New Castile, the kingdom comprised the whole of central 
Spain. Thenceforward its history is inseparable from that of 
the whole country; and it is therefore described in full, together 
with the language and literature of Castile, under Spain (q.v.). 

Castilian, which is the literary language of Spain, and with 
certain differences, of Spanish America, is spoken in Old and 
New Castile, Aragon, Estremadura, and the greater part of 
Leon; in Andalusia it is subject to various modifications of 
accent and pronunciation. As there is little, if any, difference 
of racial origin, character and physical type, among the in- 
habitants of this region, except in Andalusia, and, to a less extent, 
in Estremadura, the Castilian is justly regarded as the typical 
Spaniard. Among the Castilian peasantry, where education 
and foreign influence have never penetrated deeply, the national 
character can best be studied. Its intense pride, its fatalistic 
indolence and ignorance, its honesty and its bigotry, tempered 
by a keen sense of humour, are well-known characteristics. 
Apart from the peasant class, Castilians have contributed more 
to the development of Spanish art and literature than the in- 
habitants of any other region except, perhaps, Andalusia, which 
claims to be regarded as supreme in architecture and painting. 
Of the two great Spanish universities, Alcala de Henares belonged 
in all respects to Castile, and Salamanca rose to equality with 
Paris, Oxford or Bologna, under the purely Castilian influence 
of Alphonso X. (1252-1284). 

For a general description of Castile and its inhabitants, antiquities, 
commerce, &c., see Castilla la Nueva, three illustrated volumes in 



476 



CASTILHO— CASTLE 



the series Espana, by T. M. Quadrado and V. de la Fuente (Barcelona, 
1885-1886), and the Quia del antiguo reino de Castilla, by E.Valverde 
y Alvarez (Madrid, 1886), which deals with the provinces of Burgos, 
Santander, Logrono, Soria, Avila and Segovia. For the history, 
see in addition to the works cited under Spain (section History), 
Cronicas de los reyes de Castilla, by C. Rosell (Madrid, 1875-1877, 
2 vols.) ; Coleccion de las cronicas y memorias de los reyes de Castilla 
(Madrid, 1779-1787, 7 vols.); and Historia de las communidades de 
Castilla (Madrid, 1897). 

CASTILHO, ANTONIO FELICIANO DE (1800-1875), Portu- 
guese man of letters, was born at Lisbon. He lost his sight 
at the age of six, but the devotion of his brother Augusto, aided 
by a retentive memory, enabled him to go through his school 
and university course with success; and he acquired an almost 
complete mastery of the Latin language and literature. His 
first work of importance, the Cartas de Echo e Narciso (1821), 
belongs to the pseudo-classical school in which he had been 
brought up, but his romantic leanings became apparent in the 
Primavera (1822) and in Amor e Melancholia (1823), two volumes 
of honeyed and prolix bucolic poetry. In the poetic legends 
A noite de Castello (1836) and Cuimes do bardo (1838) Castilho 
appeared as a full-blown Romanticist. These books exhibit 
the defects and qualities of all his work, in which lack of ideas 
and of creative imagination and an atmosphere of artificiality 
are ill compensated for by a certain emotional charm, great 
purity of diction and melodious versification. Belonging to the 
didactic and descriptive school, Castilho saw nature as all 
sweetness, pleasure and beauty, and he lived in a dreamland 
of his imagination. A fulsome epic on the succession of King 
John VI. brought him an office of profit at Coimbra. On his 
return from a stay in Madeira, he founded the Revista Universal 
Lisbonense, in imitation of Herculano's Panorama, and his 
profound knowledge of the Portuguese classics served him well 
in the introduction and notes to a very useful publication, the 
Livraria Classica Portugueza (1845-1847, 25 vols.), while two 
years later he established the " Society of the Friends of Letters 
and the Arts." A study on Camoens and treatises on metri- 
fication and mnemonics followed from his pen. His praise- 
worthy zeal for popular instruction led him to take up the study 
of pedagogy, and in 1850 he brought out his Leitura Repentina, 
a method of reading which was named after him, and he became 
government commissary of the schools which were destined 
to put it into practice. Going to Brazil in 1854, he there wrote 
his famous " Letter to the Empress." Though Castilho's lack 
of strong individuality and his over-great respect for authority 
prevented him from achieving original work of real merit, yet 
his translations of Anacreon, Ovid and Virgil and the Chave do 
Enigma, explaining the romantic incidents that led to his first 
marriage with D. Maria de Baena, a niece of the satirical poet 
Tolentino, and a descendant of Antonio Ferreira, reveal him 
as a master of form and a purist in language. His versions of 
Goethe's Faust and Shakespeare's Midsummer Night's Dream, 
made without a knowledge of German and English, scarcely added 
to his reputation. When the Coimbra question arose in 1865, 
Garrett was dead and Herculano had ceased to write, leaving 
Castilho supreme, for the moment, in the realm of letters. 
But the youthful Anthero de Quental withstood his claim to 
direct the rising generation and attacked his superannuated 
leadership, and after a fierce war of pamphlets Castilho was 
dethroned. The rise of Joao de Deus reduced him to a secondary 
position in the Portuguese Parnassus, and when he died ten years 
later much of his former fame had preceded him to the tomb. 

See also " Memorias de Castilho" in the Institute of Coimbra; 
•Innocencio da Silva in Diccionario bibliographico Portuguez, i. 130 
and viii. 132 : Latino Coelho's study in the Revista contemporanea 
de Portugal e Brazil, vols. i. and ii. ; Dr Theophilo Braga, Historia do 
Romantismo (Lisbon, 1880). (E. Pr.) 

CASTILLEJO, CRIST6BAL DE (1490-1556), Spanish poet, 
was born at Ciudad Rodrigo in 1490. In 1518 he left Spain 
with Ferdinand of Austria, afterwards emperor, whose private 
secretary he eventually became. While residing at Vienna in 
1 5 28-1 530 he wrote the Historia de Piramo y Tisbe, and dedi- 
cated it to Anna von Schaumberg, with whom he had a platonic 
love-affair. He seems to have visited Venice, to have been 



neglected by his patron, to have fallen ill in 1540, and to have 
passed his last years in poverty. He died on the 12 th of June 
1556, and was buried at Vienna. Castillejo's poems are inter- 
esting, not merely because of their intrinsic excellence, but also as 
being the most powerful protest against the metrical innova- 
tions imported from Italy by Boscan and Garcilaso de la 
Vega. He adheres to the native quintillas or to the coplas de 
pie quebrado, and only abandons these traditional forms when 
he indulges in caustic parody of the new school — as in the lines 
Contra los que dejan los metros castellanos. He excels by virtue 
of his charming simplicity and his ingenious wit, always keen, 
sometimes licentious, never brutal. The urbane gaiety of his 
occasional poems is delightfully spontaneous, and the cynical 
humour which informs the Dialogo de las condiciones de las 
mujeres and the Didlogo de la vida de la corte is impregnated with 
the Renaissance spirit. Castillejo is the Clement Marot of 
Spain. His plays are lost; the best text of his verses is that 
printed at Madrid in 1792. 

CASTILLO S0L6RZAN0, ALONSO DE (is8 4 ?-i647?), Spanish 
novelist and playwright, is stated to have been baptized at 
Tordesillas near Valladolid on 1st October 1584. Nothing is 
known of his youth, and he is next heard of at Madrid in 
1619 as a man of literary tastes. While in the service of the 
marquis de Villar, he issued his first work, Donaires del Parnaso 
(1624-1625), two volumes of humorous poems; his Tardes 
entretenidas (1625) and Jornadas alegres (1626) proved that he 
was a novelist by vocation. Shortly afterwards he joined the 
household of the marquis ds los Velez, viceroy of Valencia, and 
published in quick succession three clever picaresque novels: 
La Nina de los embustes, Teresa de Manzanares (1634), Las 
Aventuras del Bachiller Trapaza (1637), and a continuation 
entitled La Garduna ds Sevilla y Anzuelo de las bolsas (1642). 
To these shrewd cynical stories he owes his reputation. He 
followed the marquis de los Velez in his disastrous campaign 
in Catalonia, and accompanied him to Rome, where the defeated 
general was sent as ambassador. Castillo Solorzano's death 
occurred (probably at Palermo) before 1648, but the exact date 
is uncertain. His prolonged absence from Madrid prevented 
him from writing as copiously for the stage as he would other- 
wise have done; but he was popular as a playwright both at 
home and abroad. His Marques del Cigarral and El Mayorazgo 
figurdn are the sources respectively of Scarron's Don Jophet 
d'Armenie and L'Hiritier ridicule. Among his numerous remain- 
ing works may be mentioned Las Harpias en Madrid (1633), 
Fiestas del Jar din (1634), Los Alivios de Casandra (1640) and the 
posthumous Quinta de Laurel (1649); the witty observation of 
these books forms a singular contrast to the prim devotion of 
his Sagrario de Valencia (1635). His versatility and graceful 
style deserve the highest praise. (J. F.-K.) 

CASTLE (Lat. castellum, a fort, diminutive of castra, a camp; 
Fr. chateau and chdtel), a small self-contained fortress, usually 
of the middle ages, though the term is sometimes used of pre- 
historic earthworks (e.g. Hollingbury Castle, Maiden Castle), 
and sometimes of citadels (e.g. the castles of Badajoz and Burgos) 
and small detached forts d' arret in modern times. It is also often 
applied to the principal mansion of a prince or nobleman, and 
in France (as chateau) to any country seat, this use being a relic 
of the feudal age. Under its twofold aspect of a fortress and a 
residence, the medieval castle is inseparably connected with the 
subjects of fortification (see Fortification and Siegecraft) 
and architecture (q.v.). An account of Roman and pre-Roman 
castella in Britain will be found under Britain. 

The word " castle " (caslel) was introduced into English 
shortly before the Norman Conquest to denote a type of fortress, 
then new to the country, brought in by the Norman knights 
whom Edward the Confessor had sent for to defend Hereford- 
shire against the inroads of the Welsh. Richard's castle, of 
which the earthworks remain and which has given its name 
to a parish, was erected at this period on the border of Hereford- 
shire and Shropshire by Richard Fitz Scrob. The essential 
feature of this type was a circular mound of earth surrounded 
by a dry ditch and flattened at the top. Around the crest of 



CASTLE 



477 




8fS 






Section 

From Clark's Medieval Military Architecture, 
permission of Bernard Quaritch. 

Fig. i. — Plan of Laughton en-le 
Morthen. 



its summit was placed a timber palisade. This moated mound 
was styled in French molte (latinized mota), a word still common 
in French place-names. It is clearly depicted at the time of 
the Conquest in the Bayeux tapestry, and was then familiar 
on the mainland of western Europe. A description of this earlier 
castle is given in the life of John, bishop of Terouanne {Acta 
Sanctorum, quoted by G. T. Clark, Medieval Mil. Architecture): — 
" The rich and the noble of that region being much given to 
feuds and bloodshed, fortify themselves . . . and by these 
strongholds subdue their equals and oppress their inferiors. They 
heap up a mound as high as they are able, and dig round it as 
broad a ditch as they can. . . . Round the summit of the mound 
they construct a palisade of timber to act as a wall. . . . 

Inside the palisade they 
erect a house, or rather 
a citadel, which looks 
down on the whole 
neighbourhood." St 
John, bishop of Terou- 
anne, died in 1130, and 
this castle of Merchem, 
built by " a lord of the 
town many years be- 
fore " may be taken as 
typical of the practice of 
the nth century. But 
in addition to the mound, 
the citadel of the for- 
tress, there was usually 
appended to it a bailey 
or basecourt (and some- 
times two) of semilunar 
b y or horseshoe shape, so 
that the mound stood d 
cheval on the line of the 
enceinte. The rapidity 
and ease with which it was possible to construct castles of this 
type made them characteristic of the Conquest period in England 
and of the Anglo-Norman settlements in Wales, Ireland and 
the Scottish lowlands. In later days a stone wall replaced the 
timber palisade and produced what is known as the shell-keep, 
the type met with in the extant castles of Berkeley, Alnwick and 
Windsor. 

But the Normans introduced also two other types of castle. 
The one was adopted where they found a natural rock strong- 
hold which, only needed adaptation, as at Clifford, Ludlow, the 
Peak and Exeter, to produce a citadel; the other was a type 
wholly distinct, the high rectangular tower of masonry, of which 
the Tower of London is the best-known example, though that of 
Colchester was probably constructed in the nth century also. 
But the latter type belongs rather to the more settled conditions 
of the 1 2th century when haste was not a necessity, and in 
the first half of which the fine extant keeps of Hedingham 
and Rochester were erected. These towers were originally sur- 
rounded by palisades, usually on earthen ramparts, which were 
replaced later by stone walls. The whole fortress thus formed 
was styled a castle, but sometimes more precisely " tower and 
castle," the former being the citadel, and the latter the walled 
enclosure, which preserved more strictly the meaning of the 
Roman castellum. 

Reliance was placed by the engineers of that time simply and 
solely on the inherent strength of the structure, the walls of 
which defied the battering-ram, and could only be undermined 
at the cost of much time and labour, while the narrow apertures 
were constructed to exclude arrows or flaming brands. 

At this stage the crusades, and the consequent opportunities, 
afforded to western engineers of studying the solid fortresses 
of the Byzantine empire, revolutionized the art of castle- 
building, which henceforward follows recognized principles. 
Many castles were built in the Holy Land by the crusaders of 
the 1 2th century, and it has been shown (Oman, Art of War: 
the Middle Ages, p. 529) that the designers realized, first, that a 



second line of defences should be built within the main enceinte, 
and a third line or keep inside the second line; and secondly, that 
a wall must be flanked by projecting towers. From the Byzan- 




Fig. 2. — Vertical section of rectangular Norman Keep 
(Tower of London). 

tine engineers, through the crusaders, we derive, therefore, the 
cardinal principle of the mutual defence of all the parts of a 
fortress. The donjon of western Europe was regarded as the 
fortress, the outer walls 



as accesspry defences; in 
the East each envelope 
was a fortress in itself, and 
the keep became merely 
the last refuge of the 
garrison, used only when 
all else had been captured. 
Indeed the keep, in several 
crusader castles, is no 
more than a tower, larger 
than the rest, built into 
the enceinte and serving 
with the rest for its 



"°S!r 




From Oman's History of the Art of War, by 
permission of Methuen & Co. 



Fig- 3-" 



-Berkeley Castle, late Norman 
Shell-Keep. 



iSss* v 



flanking defence, while the fortress was made strongest on the 
most exposed front. The idea of the flanking towers (which 
were of a type very different from the slight projections of the 
shell-keep and rectangular tower) soon penetrated to Europe, 
and Alnwick Castle ,'MTi/'. \'Crfi«>v;'--. 



(1140-1150) shows the 
influence of the new 
system. But the finest 
of all castles of the 
middle ages was Richard 
Cceur de Lion's fortress 
of Chateau Gaillard 
(1197) on the Seine near 
Les Andelys. Here the 
innermost ward was 
protected by an elabor- 
ate system of strong 
appended defences, 
which included a strong 




From Oman's History of the Art of War. 
Fig. 4. — Krak-des-Chevaliers : Plan. 

tete-de-pont covering the Seine bridge (see Clark, i. 384, and Oman, 
P- 533)- The castle stood upon high ground and consisted of 
three distinct enceintes or wards besides the keep, which was 
in this case merely a strong tower forming part of the inner- 
most ward. The donjon was rarely defended a outrance, and it 



47 8 



CASTLE 



gradually sank in importance as the outer " wards " grew stronger. 
Round instead of rectangular towers were now becoming usual, 
the finest examples of their employment as keeps being at 
Conisborough in England and at Coucy in France. Against 




Fig. 5. — Krak-des-Chevaliers : View. 

the relatively feeble siege artillery of the 13th century a well- 
built fortress was almost proof, but the mines and the battering 
ram of the attack were more formidable, and it was realized that 
corners in the stonework of the fortress were more vulnerable 
than a uniform curved surface. Chateau Gaillard fell to Philip 
Augustus in 1204 after a strenuous defence, and the success of 
the assailants was largely due to the wise and skilful employ- 




A. High Angle Tower K. Entrance Gale 

D.B Smaller Side Towers L The Counterscarp 

C.C. D.D. Corner Towers M The Keep 

li OuterEnocinte.orLowerCourt N The Escarpment 

f. The Well O. Postern Tower 

CTl.BuUtlingsinthelouierCwrt V PosternGcle 

L The Moat R.H Parapet Wat's 



S. Gale from the Escarpment 
T T, Flanking Towers 

V Outer Tower 

X Connecting Wall 

V TheStockodeintheWuer 
22 The Great Ditches 



Fig. 6. — Chateau Gaillard. 

ment of mines. An angle of the noble keep of Rochester was 
undermined and brought down by John in 1215. 

The next development was the extension of the principle of 
successive lines of defence to form what is called the " con- 
centric " castle, in which each ward was placed wholly within 
another which enveloped it; places thus built on a flat side 
(e.g. Caerphilly Castle) became for the first time more formidable 



than strongholds perched upon rocks and hills such as Chateau 
Gaillard, where the more exposed parts indeed possessed many 
successive lines of defence, but at other points, for want of 
room, it was impossible to build more than one or, at most, two 
walls. In these cases, the fall of the inner ward by surprise, 
escalade, vive force, or even 
by regular siege (as was 
sometimes feasible), en- 
tailed the fall of the whole 
castle. 

The adoption of the con- 
centric system precluded 
any such mischance, and 
thus, even though siege- 
engines improved during 
the 13th and 14th cen- 
turies, the defence, by the 
massive strength of the 
concentric castle in some 
cases, by natural inaccessi- 
bility of position in others, 
maintained itself superior 
to the attack during the 
latter middle ages. Its 
final fall was due to the 
introduction of gunpowder 
as a propellant. " In the 
14th century the change 

begins, in the 15th it is fully developed, in the 16th the feudal 
fastness has become an anachronism." 

The general adoption of cannon placed in the hands of the 
central power a force which ruined the baronial fortifications in 
a few days of firing. The possessors of cannon were usually 
private individuals of the middle classes, from whom the prince 
hired the mat-Oriel and the technical workmen. A typical case 
will be found in the history of Brandenburg and Prussia (Carlyle, 
Frederick the Great, bk. iii. ch. i.), the impregnable castle of 
Friesack, held by an intractable feudal noble, Dietrich von 




Fig. 7. — Coucy: Plan. 




Coucy 



Quitzow, being reduced in two days by the elector Frederick I, 
with " Heavy Peg " (Faule Crete) and other guns hired and 
borrowed (February 1414). The beginnings of orderly govern- 
ment in Brandenburg thus depended upon the guns, and the 
taking of Friesack is, in Carlyle's phrase, " a fact memorable to 
every Prussian man." In England, the earl of Warwick in 1464 



CASTLE 



479 



reduced the strong fortress of Bamborough in a week, and in 
Germany, Franz von Sickingen's stronghold of Landstuhl, 
formerly impregnable on its heights, was ruined in one day by 
the artillery of Philip of Hesse (1523). Very heavy artillery was 
used for such work, of course, and against lighter natures, somp 
castles and even fortified country-houses or castellated mansions 

managed to make a stout stand 



g W C^^~ ""V 





Great 



From Clark's Med. Mil. Arch. 

Fig. 9. — Beaumaris Castle: Plan. 



t\*r-^**"^ ^*'^* t *^5 even as late as the 

j"L ^| ^| ^^ \ Rebellion in England. 

/ CkMTI t"'i'^jr V T ne castle thus ceases to be 

(t ^g (f* ■"*. I| y ^jj e foj-fj-ess { small and ill- 
governing local magnates, and 
its later history is merged in 
that of modern fortification. 
But an interesting transitional 
type between the medieval 
stronghold and the modern 
fortress is found in the coast 
castles erected by Henry VIII., 
especially those at Deal, San- 
down and Walmer (c. 1540), 
which played some part in the 
events of the 17th century, and 
of which Walmer Castle is still 
the official residence of the lord 
warden of the Cinque Ports. Viollet-le-Duc, in his Annals of a 
Fortress (English trans.), gives a full and interesting account of 
the repeated renovations of the fortress on his imaginary site in 
the valley of the Doubs, the construction by Charles the Bold of 
artillery towers at the angles of the castle, the protection of the 
masonry by earthen outworks, boulevards and demi-boulevards, 
and, in the 17th century, the final service of the medieval walls 
and towers as a pure enceinte de surete. Here and there we find 
old castles serving as forts d' arret or block-houses in mountain 
passes and defiles, and in some few cases, as at Dover, they 
formed the nucleus of purely military places of arms, but normally 
the castle falls into ruins, becomes a peaceful mansion, or is 
merged in the fortifications of the town which has grown up 
around it. In the Annals of a Fortress the site of the feudal 
castle is occupied by the citadel of the walled town, for once 
again, with the development of the middle class and of commerce, 
and industry, the art of the engineer came to be displayed chiefly 
in the fortification . of cities. The baronial "castle" assumes 
pari passu the form of a mansion, retaining indeed for long some 
capacity for defence, but in the end losing all military character- 
istics save a few which survived as ornaments. Examples .of 
such castellated mansions are seen in Wingfield Manor,Derbyshire, 
and Hurstmonceaux, Sussex, erected in the 15 th century, and 



themselves from the resentment of the despoiled natives, built 
strongholds and castles on their estates, and these were multiplied 
so rapidly during the troubled reign of King Stephen that the 
" adulterine " (i.e. un- 
authorized) castles are 
said by one writer to have 
amounted to n 15. 

In the first instance, 
when the interest of the 
king and of his barons 
was identical, the former 
had only retained in his 
hands the castles in the 
chief towns of the shires, 
which were entrusted to 
his sheriffs or constables. 
But the great feudal re- 
volts under the Conqueror 
and his sons showed how 
formidable an obstacle to 
the ruleof the king was the 
existenceof such fortresses 




From Oman's History of the Art of War. 
Fig. 11. — Caerphilly Castle: 



Plan. 



in private hands, while the people hated them from the first for the 
oppressions connected with their erection and maintenance. It 
was, therefore, the settled policy of the crown to strengthen the 
royal castles and increase their number, while jealously keeping in 
check those of the barons. But in the struggle between Stephen 
and the empress Maud for the crown, which became largely a war 
of sieges, the royal power was relaxed and there was an outburst 
of castle-building, without permission, by the barons. These in 
many cases acted as petty sovereigns, and such was their tyranny 
that the native chronicler describes the castles as " filled with 
devils and evil men." These excesses paved the way for the 
pacification at the close of the reign, when it was provided that all 
unauthorized castles constructed during its course should be 
destroyed. Henry II., in spite of his power, was warned by the 
great revolt against him that he must still rely on castles, and the 
massive keeps of Newcastle and of Dover date from this period. 

Under his sons the importance of the chief castles was recog- 
nized as so great that the struggle for their control was in the 
forefront of every contest. When Richard made vast grants at 
his accession to his brother John, he was careful to reserve the 
possession of certain castles, and when John rose against the 
king's minister, Longchamp, in 1 191, the custody of castles was the 
chief point of dispute throughout their negotiations, and Lincoln 
was besieged on the king's behalf, as were Tickhill, Windsor and 
Marlborough subsequently, while the siege of Nottingham had to 




From Clark's Med. Mil. Arch. 

Fig. 10. — Beaumaris Castle: 

nearly all older castles which survived were continually improved 
and altered to serve as residences. (C. F. A.) 

Influence of Castles in English History. — Such strongholds as 
existed in England at the time of the Norman Conquest seem to 
have offered but little resistance to William the Norman, who, 
in order effectually to guard against invasions from without as 
well as to awe his newly-acquired subjects, immediately began 
to erect castles all over the kingdom, and likewise to repair and 
augment the old ones. Besides, as he had parcelled out the 
lands of the English amongst his followers, they, to protect 



From CKrk's Med. Mil. Arch. 

Fig. 12. — Caerphilly Castle: View. 

be completed by Richard himself on his arrival. To John, in 
turn, as king, the fall of Chateau Gaillard meant the loss of Rouen 
and of Normandy with it, and when he endeavoured to repudiate 
the newly-granted Great Charter, his first step was to prepare 
the royal castles against attack and make them his centres of 
resistance. The barons, who had begun their revolt by besieging 
that of Northampton, now ascailed that of Oxford as well and 



480 



CASTLEBAR— CASTLE-GUARD 



seized that of Rochester. The king recovered Rochester after a 
severe struggle and captured Tonbridge, but thenceforth there 
was a war of sieges between John with his mercenaries and Louis 
of France with his Frenchmen and the barons, which was specially 
notable for the great defence of Dover Castle by Hubert de Burgh 
against Louis. On the final triumph of the royal cause, after 
John's death, at the battle of Lincoln, the general pacification 
was accompanied by a fresh issue of the Great Charter in the 
autumn of 1217, in which the precedent of Stephen's reign was 
followed and a special clause inserted that all " adulterine " 
castles, namely those which had been constructed or rebuilt since 
the breaking out of war between John and the barons, should be 
immediately destroyed. And special stress was laid on this in 
the writs addressed to the sheriffs. 

In 1223 Hubert de Burgh, as regent, demanded the surrender 
to the crown of all royal castles not in official custody, and though 
he succeeded in this, Falkes de Breaute, John's mercenary, burst 
into revolt next year, and it cost a great national effort and a 
siege of nearly two months to reduce Bedford Castle, which he had 
held. Towards the close of Henry's reign castles again asserted, 
in the Baron's War, their importance. The Provisions of Oxford 
included a list of the chief royal castles and of their appointed 
castellans with the oath that they were to take; but the alien 
favourites refused to make way for them till they were forcibly 
ejected. When war broke out it was Rochester Castle that 
successfully held Simon de Montfort at bay in 1264, and in 
Pevensey Castle that the fugitives from the rout of Lewes were 
able to defy his power. Finally, after his fall at Evesham, it was 
in Kenilworth Castle that the remnant of his followers made 
their last stand, holding out nearly five months against all the 
forces of the crown, till their provisions failed them at the close of 
1266. 

Thus for two centuries after the Norman Conquest castles had 
proved of primary consequence in English political struggles, 
revolts and warfare. And, although, when the country was 
again torn by civil strife, their military importance was of small 
account, the crown's historic jealousy of private fortification was 
still seen in the need to obtain the king's licence to " crenellate " 
(i.e. embattle) the country mansion. 

Bibliography. — G. T. Clark, Medieval Military Architecture in 
England (2 vols.), includes a few French castles and is the standard 
work on the subject, but inaccurate and superseded on some points 
by recent research; Professor Oman's Art of War in the Middle 
Ages is a wide survey of the subject, but follows Clark in some of 
his errors; Mackenzie, The Castles of England (1897), valuable for 
illustrations; Deville, Histoire du Chateau-Gaillard (1829) and 
Chdteau d' Argues (1839); Viollet-le-Duc's Essay on the Military 
Architecture of the Middle Ages was translated by M. Macdermott in 
i860. More recent studies will be found in J. H. Round's Geoffrey 
de Mandeville (1891); "English Castles" (Quarterly Review, July 
1894); and " Castles of the Conquest " (Archeologia, lviii., 1902); 
St John Hope's " English Castles of the 10th and nth Centuries " 
(Archaeol. Journal, lx., 1902); Mrs Armitage's "Early Norman 
Castles of England " (Eng. Hist. Review, xix. 1904), and her papers 
in Scot. Soc. Ant. Proc. xxxiv., and The Antiquary, July, August, 
1906; G. Neilson's " The Motes in Norman Scotland " (Scottish 
Review, lxiv., 1898); G. H. Orpen, " Motes and Norman Castles in 
Ireland " (Eng. Hist. Review, xxi., xxii., 1906-1907). (J. H. R.) 

CASTLEBAR, a market town and the county town of Co. Mayo, 
Ireland, in the west parliamentary division, on the river and near 
the lough of the same name, on the Manulla and Westport branch 
of the Midland Great Western railway. Pop. of urban district 
(1901) 3585. The county court buildings and other public 
offices occupy a square, and there is a pleasant mall shaded by 
fine trees. There are some breweries, and trade in linens and 
agricultural produce. The castle, which gives its name to the 
town, was a fortress of the De Burgh family; but the town 
itself was founded in the reign of James I., and received a charter 
from him in 16 13. In 164 1 the castle was held for the parliament 
by Sir Henry Bingham, but he was forced to surrender to Lord 
Mayo, and fell a victim, with all his garrison, to the fury and 
treachery of the besiegers. The massacre was afterwards 
avenged in 1653 by the execution of Sir Theobald Burke (by 
that time Lord Mayo), who had been in command along with 
his father at the siege. In 1798 the town was occupied for some 



weeks by the French under General J. J. Humbert, who had 
defeated the English under Luke Hutchison in a conflict which 
is jocularly styled the " Castlebar Races." The town returned 
two members to the Irish parliament until the Union. Four 
miles N.E. of Castlebar is Turlough, with a round tower 70 ft. 
high and 57 ft. in circumference, and other remains. 

CASTLECONNELL, a village of Co. Limerick, Ireland, on 
the left bank of the Shannon, 8 m. N.E. of Limerick on the 
Great Southern & Western railway. It possesses a spa which 
was once considerably frequented, but is famous as a centre for 
the salmon fishing on the lower Shannon. Castleconnell is so 
intimately connected with this sport that it has given its name 
to a favourite pattern of fly-rod, in which a movable splice takes 
the place of the usual metal joint. The beautiful rapids of 
Doonas (avoided by a canal) are in the neighbourhood, and the 
surrounding scenery is generally attractive. There are remains 
of a castle from which the town took its name, which was the 
seat of the kings of Thomond, and was blown up by General 
Ginkel at the time of the siege of Limerick (1690). 

CASTLE DONINGTON, a town in the Loughborough parlia- 
mentary division of Leicestershire, England, 123 J m. N.N.W. 
from London, on the Trent Junction and Western branch of the 
Midland railway. Pop. (1901) 2514. It lies on the flank of the 
hills overlooking the Trent and Soar valleys. There are slight 
remains of the castle. The church of St Luke is a fine building 
of Early English and later date. Donington Park, a neighbour- 
ing mansion, was offered to refugees during the French Revolu- 
tion in 1830, and Charles X. availed himself of this retreat. 
Hosiery, silk and baskets are manufactured. Castle Donington 
is 2f m. west of Kegworth station on the Midland main line. 
Kegworth (pop. 2078), on the Soar, has a hosiery and knitting 
industry. 

CASTLE DOUGLAS, a burgh of barony and police burgh of 
Kirkcudbrightshire, Scotland. Pop. (1901) 3018. It is situated 
on Carlingwark Loch, 195 m. S.W. of Dumfries by the Glas- 
gow & South- Western railway. Its auction marts for sheep and 
cattle sales are the largest in the south-west of Scotland; at 
an autumn sale as many as 15,000 sheep and 1400 cattle are 
disposed of in one day. The leading industries comprise the 
making of agricultural implements and mineral waters, besides 
tanning. The Macmillan Free Church perpetuates the memory 
of John Macmillan (d. 1753), the Cameronian, who helped to 
found the Reformed Presbyterian Church. He had been chaplain 
to Murray of Broughton, and afterwards became minister of 
Balmaghie, about 3J m. N.W. of Castle Douglas. The town 
is the chief centre of business in East Galloway, and it is also 
resorted to in midsummer for its beautiful scenery and excellent 
fishing. Till 1765 it was only a village under the name of 
Causewayhead, but the discovery of marl in the lake brought it 
some prosperity, and it was purchased in 1792 by Sir William 
Douglas and called after him. Since then its progress has been 
continuous. Carlingwark Loch contains several islets, on one 
of which is a crannog, or ancient lake dwelling. 

CASTLEFORD, an urban district in the Osgoldcross parlia- 
mentary division of the West Riding of Yorkshire, England, on 
the river Aire near its junction with the Calder, 9 m. S.E. 
of Leeds, on the North-Eastern and Lancashire & Yorkshire 
railways. Pop. (1901) 17,386. Large glass-bottle and earthen- 
ware-jar works, chemical works, and neighbouring collieries 
employ the inhabitants. Here was the Roman village or fort of 
Lagecium or Legeolium; and though visible remains are wanting, 
a number of relics have been discovered. 

CASTLE-GUARD, an arrangement under the feudal system, 
by which the duty of finding knights to guard royal castles was 
imposed on certain baronies, and divided among their knight's 
fees. The greater barons provided for the guard of their castles 
by exacting a similar duty from their knights. In both cases the 
obligation was commuted very early for a fixed money payment, 
which, as " castle-guard rent " lasted on to modern times. 

See J. H. Round, " Castle-Guard," in Archaeological Journal, 
vol. lix., and " Castle-ward and Coinage," in The Commune of 
London. (J. H. R.) 



CASTLEMAINE— CASTOR AND POLLUX 



481 



CASTLEMAINE, a town of Talbot county, Victoria, Australia, 
78 m. by rail N.N.W. of Melbourne. Pop. (1001) 5704. The 
gold-mines here were among the first discovered in the colony, 
and dredging for gold is carried on in Barker's and Forrest creeks, 
at the junction of which the town stands. Slate and flagstone 
are largely quarried in the district, which also produces wine and 
much fruit, especially apples. Castlemaine has a reputation as 
a health resort in cases of pulmonary complaints. 

CASTLE RISING, a village of Norfolk, England, 4 m. by 
road N.E. of King's Lynn. The Norman castle for which it is 
famous stands on slightly elevated ground overlooking, to the 
west, the low marshy coast of the Wash. Its site is enclosed by 
artificial ramparts of earth and a dyke which is crossed by an 
ancient bridge. The keep is square and massive, and fairly 
perfect, and it is not difficult to reconstruct the arrangement of 
the rooms. In some parts, especially the entrance, the Norman 
carving is very rich. The foundations of a small chapel with 
apsidal eastern termination have been discovered outside the 
castle. The village of Castle Rising is the decayed remnant of a 
town of no little importance. Its church of St Laurence is late 
Norman, with much rich ornamentation; it shows traces of 
considerable alterations in the Early English period, but is an 
admirable example of the earlier style. 

It is a matter of dispute whether Rising was or was not an 
early Saxon settlement; in Domesday Book the manor is given 
as having belonged to Archbishop Stigand, from whom it had 
passed to Odo of Bayeux, whose estates were confiscated in 1088. 
Granted to William de Albini, whose son built Rising Castle, it 
passed first to Robert de Montalt, and then by sale to Isabel, 
queen of England, in 1332, remaining in the possession of the 
crown until Henry VIII. exchanged it for other lands with the 
duke of Norfolk. In 1269 an inquisition found that the lord had 
the return of all writs. In 1275 Robert de Montalt died seised 
of the manor and vill with the assize of bread and ale. An 
inquisition of 1379, although it makes no mention of the borough, 
states that the lord has the rents of assizes, and perquisites of 
the courts with view of frank-pledge. A mayor is first mentioned 
in 1343, and a borough existed in the 15th century. A survey of 
1589-1590 declared that Castle Rising was an ancient borough by 
prescription according to the grant made to Hugh de Albini by 
Henry III. In 1 589-1 590 the recorder was chosen by the lord 
of the manor. The mayor, the only member of the corporation, 
whose sole duty was the holding of the assize of bread and ale, 
was chosen by the burgesses and presented at the court leet for 
confirmation. Castle Rising became a parliamentary borough 
in 1558, but was disfranchised in 1832 and the corporation 
abolished in 1835, although a mayor was elected for special 
purposes until 1883. Having no manufactures, the trade of the 
town depended entirely on its fairs and markets; but these have 
been long obsolete. 

CASTLETON, a village in the High Peak parliamentary 
division of Derbyshire, England, 17 m. W.S.W. of Sheffield, and 
2 m. from Hope station on a branch of the Midland railway. 
Pop. (1901) 547. Lying itself at an elevation of about 600 ft., 
it is surrounded on the north, west and south by hills from 1400 
to 1700 ft. in height, rising sharply, and in parts precipitously. 
The village is celebrated for its situation in the midst of the wild 
Peak country, for the caves and mines in the neighbourhood, and 
for the Castle of the Peak, the ruins of which are strongly placed 
on a cliff immediately above the village. The Peak Cavern or 
Devil's Hole, penetrating this cliff, is the most magnificent in 
Derbyshire. For many generations the entrance to this cave 
has served as a workshop, held free of rent, to families employed 
in rope and twine making. Speedwell Cavern is not far distant, 
at the entrance to the fine pass of Winnats, by which Castleton 
and the Vale of Hope are approached from the west. The 
beauties of this cavern, in which occurs the so-called bottomless 
pit, are in part readily accessible by boat, but the approach to 
the inner or Cliff cavern is so difficult that it has rarely been 
explored. Among several other caves is that known as the 
Blue John Mine, from the decorative fluorspar called " Blue 
John " which is obtained here. The church of St Edmund, 
v. 16 



Castleton, retains a fine Norman chancel arch, and the vestry 
Gontains a valuable library. At Brough near Castleton was a 
Roman fort, established to hold in check the hillmen of the Peak. 
It was connected by roads with Buxton, Manchester and Rother- 
ham. The Castle of the Peak, or Peveril Castle, is famous 
through Sir Walter Scott's novel Peveril of the Peak. Early 
earthworks, which, extending from below the castle in a semi- 
circle, enclosed the town, can still in great part be traced. 
Before the Conquest the site was held by Gernebern and Hundinc, 
and was granted by the Conqueror to William Peverell, by whom 
the castle was built. On the forfeiture of William Peverell, 
grandson of the first holder, it was granted by Henry II. to 
Prince John who, in 1204, made Hugh Nevill governor of the 
castle. In 1216 William Ferrers, earl of Derby, took it from 
the rebellious barons, and was made governor by Henry III., 
who in 1223 granted a charter for a weekly market at the town. 
In 1328 the castle was given to John of Gaunt on his marriage 
with Blanche of Lancaster, and thus became parcel of the duchy 
of Lancaster. The castle has often been used as a prison, and 
from its position was almost impregnable. 

CASTLETOWN (Manx, Bully Cashtel), a town of the Isle 
of Man, 10 m. S.W. of Douglas, by the Isle of Man railway. 
Pop. (1901) 1975. It is picturesquely situated on both sides of 
a small harbour formed by the outflow of the Silver Burn into 
Castletown Bay. It was the legal capital of the island until 
1862. In the centre of the town stands Castle Rushen, which 
is said to owe its foundation to the Danish chief, Guthred, in 
947-960, though the existing building, which is remarkably well 
preserved, probably dates from the 14th century. Until the 
1 8th century it was the residence of the lords of Man, and until 
1 89 1 served as a prison. The massive keep is square, and is 
surrounded by an outer wall, with towers and a moat. The 
council chamber and court-house were built in 1644. In the 
neighbourhood of the castle is the old House of Keys, where the 
members of the Manx parliament held their sessions until the 
removal of the seat of government to Douglas. A lofty Doric 
column commemorates Cornelius Smelt, lieutenant-governor 
of the island (d. 1832), near which there is a remarkable sun-dial 
with thirteen faces, dating from 1720. King William's College, 
situated a mile to the north-east of the town, was opened in 
1833; but a complete restoration was rendered necessary by 
fire in 1844, and it was subsequently enlarged. It is the chief 
educational establishment in the island. At Hango Hill near 
the town William Christian, receiver-general, who had sur- 
rendered the castle, and with it the island, to the parliamentary 
forces in 1651, was executed in 1663 at the instance of the 
countess of Derby, who had undertaken to defend it for the 
king. A small shipping trade is maintained. 

CASTOR and POLLUX (Gr. UoXvSevKtis) , in Greek and 
Roman mythology, the twin sons of Leda, and brothers of Helen 
and Clytaemnestra. They were also known under the name 
of Dioscuri (AuxxKopoi, later AioaKovpoi, children of Zeus), for, 
according to later tradition, they were the children of Zeus and 
Leda, whose love the god had won under the form of a swan. 
In some versions Leda is represented as having brought forth 
two eggs, from one of which were born Castor and Pollux, from 
the other Helen. In another account, Zeus is the father of 
Pollux and Helen, Tyndareus (king of Sparta) of Castor and 
Clytaemnestra. In Homer, Castor, Pollux and Clytaemnestra 
are said to be the children of Tyndareus and Leda, Helen the 
daughter of Leda by Zeus. The Dioscuri were specially rever- 
enced among people of Dorian race, and were said to have 
reigned at Sparta, where also they were buried. They were 
also worshipped, especially in Athens, as lords and protectors 
(ii.va.Kes, avaKTes). Sailors in a storm prayed to them (Horace, 
Odes, i. 3) and sacrificed a white lamb, whereupon they were 
wont to appear in the form of fire at the masthead (probably 
referring to the phenomenon of St Elmo's fire), and the storm 
ceased. Later, they were confounded with the Samothracian 
Cabeiri. In battle they appeared riding on white horses and 
