church of Annaberg, in which capacity he had to decide, in 
accordance with the canon law of Saxony, many matters belong- 
ing to the department of ecclesiastical law. But the climate 
did not agree with him, and his official duties interfered with his 
theological studies. With a view to a change he took the degree 
of doctor of theology in Wittenberg in August 1812. In 1816 
he was appointed general superintendent at Gotha, where he 
remained until his death in 1848. This was the great period of 
his literary activity. 

In 1820 was published his treatise on the gospel of St John, 
entitled Probabilia de Evangelii ei Epistolarum Joannis Apostoli 
indole et origine, which attracted much attention. In it he 
collected with great fulness and discussed with marked modera- 
tion the arguments against Johannine authorship. This called 
forth a number of replies. To the astonishment of every one, 
Bretschneider announced in the preface to the second edition 
of his Dogmatik in 1822, that he had never doubted the authen- 
ticity of the gospel, and had published his Probabilia only to 
draw attention to the subject, and to call forth a more complete 
defence of its genuineness. Bretschneider remarks in his auto- 
biography that the publication of this work had the effect of 
preventing his appointment as successor to Karl C. Tittmann 
in Dresden, the minister Detlev von Einsiedel (1773-1861) 
denouncing him as the " slanderer of John " (J ' ohannisschdnder) . 
His greatest contribution to the science of exegesis was his 
Lexicon Manuale Graeco-Latinum in libros Novi Testamenti 
(1824, 3rd ed. 1840). This work was valuable for the use which 
its author made of the Greek of the Septuagint, of the Old and 
New Testament Apocrypha, of Josephus, and of the apostolic 
fathers, in illustration of the language of the New Testament. 
In 1826 he published Apologieder neuern Theologie des evangeli- 
schen Deutschlands. Hugh James Rose had published in England 
(1825) a volume of sermons on the rationalist movement (The 
State of the Protestant Religion in Germany) , in which he classed 
Bretschneider with the rationalists; and Bretschneider contended 
that he himself was not a rationalist in the ordinary sense of the 
term, but a " rational supernaturalist." Some of his numerous 
dogmatic writings passed through several editions. An English 
translation of his Manual of the Religion and History of the 
Christian Church appeared in 1857. His dogmatic position 
seems to be intermediate between the extreme school of natural- 
ists, such as Heinrich Paulus, J. F. Rbhr and Julius Wegscheider 
on the one hand, and D. F. Strauss and F. C. Baur on the other. 
Recognizing a supernatural element in the Bible, he nevertheless 
allowed to the full the critical exercise of reason in the interpreta- 
tion of its dogmas (cp. Otto Pffciderer, Development of Theology, 
pp. 89 ff.). 

See his autobiography, Aus meinem Leben: Selbstbiographie von 
K. G. Bretschneider (Gotha, 1851), of which a translation, with notes, 
by Professor George E. Day, appeared in the Bibliotheca Sacra and 
American Biblical Repository, Nos. 36 and 38 (1852, 1853); Neu- 
decker in Die allgemeine Kirchenzeitung (1848), No. 38 ; Wiistemann, 
Bretschneideri Memoria (1848) ; A. G. Farrar, Critical History of 
Free Thought (Bampton Lectures, 1862); Herzog-Hauck, Real- 
encyklopddie (ed. 1897). 

BRETTEN, a town of Germany, in the grand duchy of Baden, 
on the Saalbach, 9 m. S.E. of Bruchsal by rail. Pop. (1900) 
4781. It has some manufactories of machinery and japanned 
goods, and a considerable trade in timber and live stock. Bretten 
was the birthplace of Melanchthon (1497), and in addition to a 



BRETWALDA— BREVIARY 



503 



statue of him by Drake, a memorial hall, containing a collection 
of his writings and busts and pictures of his famous contem- 
poraries, has been erected. 

BRETWALDA, a word used in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle 
under the date 827, and also in a charter of /Ethelstan, king of 
the English. It appears in several variant forms (brytenwalda, 
bretenanwealda, &c), and means most probably " lord of the 
Britons" or "lord of Britain"; for although the derivation 
of the word is uncertain, its earlier syllable seems to be cognate 
with the words Briton and Britannia. In the Chronicle the title 
is given to Ecgbert, king of the English, " the eighth king that 
was Bretwalda," and retrospectively to seven kings who ruled 
over one or other of the English kingdoms. The seven names 
are copied from Bede's Historia Ecclesiastica, and it is interesting 
to note that the last king named, Oswiu of Northumbria, lived 
150 years before Ecgbert. It has been assumed that these seven 
kings exercised a certain superiority over a large part of England, 
but if such superiority existed it is certain that it was extremely 
vague and was unaccompanied by any unity of organization. 
Another theory is that Bretwalda refers to a war-leadership, 
or imperium, over the English south of the Humber, and has 
nothing to do with Britons or Britannia. In support of this 
explanation it is urged that the title is given in the Chronicle 
to Ecgbert in the year in which he " conquered the kingdom of 
the Mercians and all that was south of the Humber." Less 
likely is the theory of Palgrave that the Bretwaldas were the 
successors of the pseudo-emperors, Maximus and Carausius, and 
claimed to share the imperial dignity of Rome; or that of 
Kemble, who derives Bretwalda from the British word breotan, 
to distribute, and translates it " widely ruling." With regard to 
Ecgbert the word is doubtless given as a title in imitation of its 
earlier use, and the same remark applies to its use in ^Ethelstan's 
charter. 

See E. A. Freeman, History of the Norman Conquest, vol. i. (Oxford, 
1877); W. Stubbs, Constitutional History, vol. i. (Oxford, 1897); 
J. R. Green, The Making of England, vol. ii. (London, 1897); F. 
Palgrave, The Rise and Progress of the English Commonwealth 
(London, 1832) ; J. M. Kemble, The Saxons in England (London, 
1876); J. Rhys, Celtic Britain (London, 1884). 

BREUGHEL (or Brueghel), PIETER, Flemish painter, was the 
son of a peasant residing in the village of Breughel near Breda. 
After receiving instruction in painting from Koek, whose 
daughter he married, he spent some time in France and Italy, 
and then went to Antwerp, where he was elected into the Academy 
in 1 551. He finally settled at Brussels and died there. The 
subjects of his pictures are chiefly humorous figures, like those 
of D. Teniers; and if he wants the delicate touch and silvery 
clearness of that master, he has abundant spirit and comic power. 
He is said to have died about the year 1570 at the age of 
sixty; other accounts give 1590 as the date of his death. 

His son Pieter, the younger (1564-1637), known as " Hell " 
Breughel, was born in Brussels and died at Antwerp, where his 
" Christ bearing the Cross " is in the museum. 

Another son Jan (c. 1569-1642), known as " Velvet " Breughel, 
was born at Brussels. He first applied himself to painting flowers 
and fruits, and afterwards acquired considerable reputation by 
his landscapes and sea-pieces. After residing long at Cologne 
he travelled into Italy, where his landscapes, adorned with small 
figures, were greatly admired. He left a large number of pictures, 
chiefly landscapes, which are executed with great skill. Rubens 
made use of Breughel's hand in the landscape part of several 
of his small pictures — such as his " Vertumnus and Pomona," 
the " Satyr viewing the Sleeping Nymph," and the " Terrestrial 
Paradise." 

BREVET (a diminutive of the Fr. href), a short writing, 
originally an official writing or letter, with the particular meaning 
of a papal indulgence. The use of the word is mainly confined 
to a commission, or official document, giving to an officer in the 
army a permanent, as opposed to a local and temporary, rank 
in the service higher than that he holds substantively in his 
corps. In the British army " brevet rank " exists only above 
the rank of captain, but in the United States army it is possible 
to obtain a brevet as first lieutenant. In France the term 



brevets is particularly used with respect to the General Staff, 
to express the equivalent of the English " passed Staff College " 
(p.s.c). 

BREVIARY (Lat. breviarium, abridgment, epitome), the book 
which contains the offices for the canonical hours, i.e. the daily 
service of the Roman Catholic Church. As compared with the 
Anglican Book of Common Prayer it is both more and less com- 
prehensive; more, in that it includes lessons and hymns for 
every day in the year; less, because it excludes the Eucharistic 
office (contained in the Missal), and the special offices connected 
with baptism, marriage, burial, ordination, &c, which are found 
in the Ritual or the Pontifical. In the early days of Christian 
worship, when Jewish custom was followed, the Bible furnished 
all that was thought necessary, containing as it did the books from 
which the lessons were read and the psalms that were recited. 
The first step in the evolution of the Breviary was the separation 
of the Psalter into a choir-book. At first the president of the 
local church (bishop) or the leader of the choir chose a particular 
psalm as he thought appropriate. From about the 4th century 
certain psalms began to be grouped together, a process that was 
furthered by the monastic practice of daily reciting the 150 
psalms. This took so much time that the monks began to spread 
it over a week, dividing each day into hours, and allotting to 
each hour its portion of the Psalter. St Benedict in the 6th 
century drew up such an arrangement, probably, though not 
certainly, on the basis of an older Roman division which, though 
not so skilful, is the one in general use. Gradually there were 
added to these psalter choir-books additions in the form of 
antiphons, responses, collects or short prayers, for the use of 
those not skilful at improvisation and metrical compositions. 
Jean Beleth, a 12th-century liturgical author, gives the following:' 
list of books necessary for the right conduct of the canonical 
office: — the Antiphonarium, the Old and New Testaments, the 
Passionarius {liber) and the Legendarius (dealing respectively, 
with martyrs and saints), the Homiliarius (homilies on the 
Gospels), the Sermologus (collection of sermons) and the works 
of the Fathers, besides, of course, the Psalterium and the Collec- 
tarium. To overcome the inconvenience of using such a library 
the Breviary came into existence and use. Already in the 8th 
century Prudentius, bishop of Troyes, had in a Breviarium 
Psalterii made an abridgment of the Psalter for the laity, giving 
a few psalms for each day, and Alcuin had rendered a similar 
service by including a prayer for each day and some other 
prayers, but no lessons or homilies. The Breviary rightly so called, 
however, only dates from the nth century; the earliest MS. 
containing the whole canonical office is of the year 1099 and is 
in the Mazarin library. Gregory VII. (pope 1073-1085), too, 
simplified the liturgy as performed at the Roman court, and gave 
his abridgment the name of Breviary, which thus came to denote 
a work which from another point of view might be called a 
Plenary, involving as it did the collection of several works into 
one. There are several extant specimens of 12th-century Brevi- 
aries, all Benedictine, but under Innocent III. (pope 1198-1216) 
their use was extended, especially by the newly founded and 
active Franciscan order. These preaching friars, with the author- 
ization of Gregory IX., adopted (with some modifications, e.g. 
the substitution of the " Gallican " for the " Roman " version of 
the Psalter) the Breviary hitherto used exclusively by the Roman 
court, and with it gradually swept out of Europe all the earlier 
partial books (Legendaries, Responsories), &c, and to some extent 
the local Breviaries, like that of Sarum. Finally, Nicholas III. 
(pope 1277-1280) adopted this version both for the curia and for 
the basilicas of Rome, and thus made its position secure. The 
Benedictines and Dominicans have Breviaries of their own. 
The only other types that merit notice are: — (1) the Mozarabic 
Breviary, once in use throughout all Spain, but now confined to a 
single foundation at Toledo; it is remarkable for the number 
and length of its hymns, and for the fact that the majority of its 
collects are addressed to God the Son; (2) the Ambrosian, now 
confined to Milan, where it owes its retention to the attachment 
of the clergy and people to their traditionary rites, which they 
derive from St Ambrose (see Liturgy). 



5°4 



BREVIARY 



Till the council of Trent every bishop had full power to regulate 
the Breviary of his own diocese; and this was acted upon almost 
everywhere. Each monastic community, also, had one of its 
own. Pius V. (pope 1566-1572), however, while sanctioning 
those which could show at least 200 years of existence, made the 
Roman obligatory in all other places. But the influence of the 
court of Rome has gradually gone much beyond this, and has 
superseded almost all the local " uses." The Roman has thus 
become nearly universal, with the allowance only of additional 
offices for saints specially venerated in each particular diocese. 
The Roman Breviary has undergone several revisions: The 
most remarkable of these is that by Francis Quignonez, cardinal 
of Santa Croce in Gerusalemme (1536), which, though not accepted 
by Rome, 1 formed the model for the still more thorough reform 
made in 1549 by the Church of England, whose daily morning and 
evening services are but a condensation and simplification of the 
Breviary offices. Some parts of the prefaces at the beginning 
of the English Prayer-Book are free translations of those of 
Quignonez. The Pian Breviary was again altered by Sixtus V. 
in 1588, who introduced the revised Vulgate text; by Clement 
VIII. in 1602 (through Baronius and Bellarmine), especially as 
concerns the rubrics; and by Urban VIII. (1623-1644), a purist 
who unfortunately tampered with the text of the hymns, injuring 
both their literary charm and their historic worth. 

In the 17th and 18th centuries a movement of revision took 
place in France, and succeeded in modifying about half the 
Breviaries of that country. Historically, this proceeded from 
the labours of Jean de Launoy (1603-1678), " le denicheur 
des saints," and Louis Sebastien le Nain de Tillemont, who had 
shown the falsity of numerous lives of the saints; while theo- 
logically it was produced by the Port Royal school, which led 
men to dwell more on communion with God as contrasted with 
the invocation of the saints. This was mainly carried out by the 
adoption of a rule that all antiphons and responses should be in 
the exact words of Scripture, which, of course, cut out the whole 
class of appeals to created beings. The services were at the same 
time simplified and shortened, and the use of the whole Psalter 
every week (which had become a mere theory in the Roman 
Breviary, owing to its frequent supersession by saints' day 
services) was made a reality. These reformed French Brevi- 
aries — e.g. the Paris Breviary of 1680 by Archbishop Francois 
de Harlay (1625-1693) and that of 1736 by Archbishop Charles 
Gaspard Guillaume de Vintimille (1655-1746) — show a deep 
knowledge of Holy Scripture, and much careful adaptation of 
different texts; but during the pontificate of Pius IX. a strong 
Ultramontane movement arose against them. This v/as inau- 
gurated by Montalembert, but its literary advocates were chiefly 
Dom Gueranger, a learned Benedictine monk, abbot of Solesmes, 
and Louis Francois Veuillot (1813-1883) of the Univers; and it 
succeeded in suppressing them everywhere, the last diocese to 
surrender being Orleans in 1875. The Jansenist and Gallican 
influence was also strongly felt in Italy and in Germany, where 
Breviaries based on the French models were published at Cologne, 
Munster, Mainz and other towns. Meanwhile, under the direction 
of Benedict XIV. (pope 1740-17 58), a special congregation col- 
lected many materials for an official revision, but nothing was 
published. Subsequent changes have been very few and minute. 
In 1902, under Leo XIII., a commission under the presidency 
of Monsignor Louis Duchesne was appointed to consider the 
Breviary, the Missal, the Pontifical and the Ritual. 

The beauty and value of many of the Latin Breviaries were 
brought to the notice of English churchmen by one of the 
numbers of the Oxford Tracts for the Times, since which time 
they have been much more studied, both for their own sake and 
for the light they throw upon the English Prayer-Book. 

From a bibliographical point of view some of the early printed 
Breviaries are among the rarest of literary curiosities, being 
merely local. The copies were not spread far, and were soon 

1 It was approved by Clement VII. and Paul III., and permitted 
as a substitute for the unrevised Breviary, until Pius V. in 1568 
excluded it as too short and too modern, and issued a reformed 
edition {Breviarium Planum, Pian Breviary) of the old Breviary. 



worn out by the daily use made of them. Doubtless many 
editions have perished without leaving a trace of their existence, 
while others are known by unique copies. In Scotland the only 
one which has survived the convulsions of the 16th century is 
that of Aberdeen, a Scottish form of the Sarum Office, 2 revised 
by William Elphinstone (bishop 1483-1514), and printed at 
Edinburgh by Walter Chapman and Andrew Myllar in 1 509-1 510. 
Four copies have been preserved of it, of which only one is com- 
plete; but it was reprinted in facsimile in 1854 for the Bannatyne 
Club by the munificence of the duke of Buccleuch. It is par- 
ticularly valuable for the trustworthy notices of the early history 
of Scotland which are embedded in the lives of the national 
saints. Though enjoined by royal mandate in 1501 for general 
use within the realm of Scotland, it was probably never widely 
adopted. The new Scottish Proprium sanctioned for the Roman 
Catholic province of St Andrews in 1903 contains many of the 
old Aberdeen collects and antiphons. 

The Sarum or Salisbury Breviary itself was very widely used. 
The first edition was printed at Venice in 1483 by Raynald de 
Novimagio in folio; the latest at Paris, 1556, 1557. While 
modern Breviaries are nearly always printed in four volumes, 
one for each season of the year, the editions of the Sarum never 
exceeded two parts. 

Contents of the Roman Breviary. — At the beginning stands the 
usual introductory matter, such as the tables for determining 
the date of Easter, the calendar, and the general rubrics. The 
Breviary itself is divided into four seasonal parts— winter, 
spring, summer, autumn — and comprises under each part (1) 
the Psalter; (2) Proprium de Tempore (the special office of the 
season); (3) Proprium Sanctorum (special offices of saints); 
(4) Commune Sanctorum (general offices for saints); (5) Extra 
Services. These parts are often published separately. 

1. The Psalter. — This is the very backbone of the Breviary, the 
groundwork of the Catholic prayer-book ; out of it have grown the 
antiphons, responsorics and versicles. In the Breviary the psalms 
are arranged according to a disposition dating from the 8th century, 
as follows. Psalms i.-cviii., with some omissions, are recited at 
Matins, twelve each day from Monday to Saturday, and eighteen on 
Sunday. _ The omissions are said at Lauds, Prime and Compline. 
Psalms cix.-cxlvii. (except cxvii., cxviii. and cxlii.) are said at Vespers, 
five each day. Psalms cxlviii.-cl. are always used at Lauds, and 
give that hour its name. The text of this Psalter is that commonly 
known as the Gallican. The name is misleading, for it is simply 
the second revision (a.d. 392) made by Jerome of the old Itala 
version originally used in Rome. Jerome's first revision of the Itala 
(a.d. 383), known as the Roman, is still used at St Peter's in Rome, 
but the " Gallican," thanks especially to St Gregory of Tours, who 
introduced it into Gaul in the 6th century, has ousted it everywhere 
else. The Antiphonary of Bangor proves that Ireland accepted 
the Gallican version in the 7th century, and the English Church did 
so in the 10th. 

2. The Proprium de Tempore contains the office of the seasons 
of the Christian year (Advent to Trinity), a conception that only 
gradually grew up. There is here given the whole service for every 
Sunday and week-day, the proper antiphons, responsories, hymns, 
and especially the course of daily Scripture-reading, averaging about 
twenty verses a day, and (roughly) arranged thus: for Advent, 
Isaiah; Epiphany to Septuagesima, Pauline Epistles; Lent, 
patristic homilies (Genesis on Sundays); Passion-tide, Jeremiah; 
Easter to Whitsun, Acts, Catholic epistles and Apocalypse ; Whitsun 
to August, Samuel and Kings; August to Advent, Wisdom books, 
Maccabees, Prophets. The extracts are often scrappy and torn out 
of their context. 

3. The Proprium Sanctorum contains the lessons, psalms and 
liturgical formularies for saints' festivals, and depends on the days 
of the secular month. Most of the material here is hagiological 
biography, occasionally revised as by Leo XIII. in view of archaeo- 
logical and other discoveries, but still largely uncritical. Covering a 
great stretch of time and space, they do for the worshipper in the 
field of church history what the Scripture readings do in that of 
biblical history. As something like 90 % of the days in the year 
have, during the course of centuries, been allotted to some saint or 
other, it is easy to see how this section of the Breviary has encroached 
upon the Proprium de Tempore, and this is the chief problem that 
confronts any who are concerned for a revision of the Breviary. 

4. The Commune Sanctorum comprises psalms, antiphons, lessons, 
&c. , for feasts of various groups or classes (twelve in all) ; e.g. apostles, 
martyrs, confessors, virgins, and the Blessed Virgin Mary. These 
offices are of very ancient date, and many of them were probably 

2 The Sarum Rite was much favoured in Scotland as a kind of 
protest against the jurisdiction claimed by the church of York. 



BREVIARY OF ALARIC— BREWER 



505 



in origin proper to individual saints. They contain passages of 
great literary beauty. The lessons read at the third nocturn are 
patristic homilies on the Gospels, and together form a rough summary 
of theological instruction. 

5. Extra Services. — Here are found the Little Office of the Blessed 
Virgin Mary, the Office of the Dead (obligatory on All Souls' Day), 
and offices peculiar to each diocese. 

It has already been indicated, by reference to Matins, Lauds, &c, 
that not only each day, but each part of the day, has its own office, 
the day being divided into liturgical " hours." A detailed account 
of these will be found in the article Hours, Canonical. Each of the 
hours of the office is composed of the same elements, and something 
must be said now of the nature of these constituent parts, of which 
mention has here and there been already made. They are : psalms 
(including canticles), antiphons, responsories, hymns, lessons, little 
chapters, versicles and collects. 

The psalms have already been dealt with, but it may be noted 
again how the multiplication of saints' festivals, with practically 
the same special psalms, tends in practice to constant repetition of 
about one-third of the Psalter, and correspondingly rare recital of 
the remaining two-thirds, whereas the Proprium de Tempore, could 
it be adhered to, would provide equal opportunities for every psalm. 
As in the Greek usage and in the Benedictine, certain canticles like 
the Song of Moses (Exodus xv.), the Song of Hannah (1 Sam. ii.), 
the prayer of Habakkuk (iii.), the prayer of Hezekiah (Isaiah xxxviii.) 
and other similar Old Testament passages, and, from the New 
Testament, the Magnificat, the Benedictus and the Nunc dimittis, 
are admitted as psalms. 

The antiphons are short liturgical forms, sometimes of biblical, 
sometimes of patristic origin, used to introduce a psalm. The term 
originally signified a chant by alternate choirs, but has quite lost 
this meaning in the Breviary. 

The responsories are similar in form to the antiphons, but come 
at the end of the psalm, being originally the reply of the choir or 
congregation to the precentor who recited the psalm. 

The hymns are short poems going back in part to the days of 
Prudentius, Synesius, Gregory of Nazianzus and Ambrose (4th and 
5th centuries), but mainly the work of medieval authors. Together 
they make a fine collection, and it is a pity that Urban VIII. in his 
mistaken humanistic zeal tried to improve them. 

The lessons, as has been seen, are drawn variously from the Bible, 
the Acts of the Saints and the Fathers of the Church. In the primi- 
tive church, books afterwards excluded from the canon were often 
read, e.g. the letters of Clement of Rome and the Shepherd of Hernias. 
In later days the churches of Africa, having rich memorials of 
martyrdom, used them to supplement the reading of Scripture. 
Monastic influence accounts for the practice of adding to the reading 
of a biblical passage some patristic commentary or exposition. 
Books of homilies were compiled from the writings of SS. Augustine, 
Hilary, Athanasius, Isidore, Gregory the Great and others, and 
formed part of the library of which the Breviary was the ultimate 
compendium. In the lessons, as in the psalms, the order for special 
days breaks in upon the normal order of ferial offices and dislocates 
the scheme for consecutive reading. The lessons are read at Matins 
(which is subdivided into three nocturns). 

The little chapters are very short lessons read at the other " hours." 
The versicles are short responsories used after the little chapters. 
The collects come at the close of the office and are short prayers 
summing up the supplications of the congregation. They arise out 
of a primitive practice on the part of the bishop (local president), 
examples of which are found in the Didache (Teaching of the Apostles) 
and in the letters of Clement of Rome and Cyprian. With the 
crystallization of church order improvisation in prayer largely gave 
place to set forms, and collections of prayers were made which later 
developed into Sacramentaries and Orationals. The collects of the 
Breviary are largely drawn from the Gelasian and other Sacra- 
mentaries, and they are used to sum up the dominant idea of the 
festival in connexion with which they happen to be used. 

The difficulty of harmonizing the Proprium de Tempore and the 
Proprium Sanctorum,^ to which reference has been made, is only 
partly met in the thirty-seven chapters of general rubrics. Addi- 
tional help is given by a kind of Catholic Churchman's Almanack, 
called the Ordo Recitandi Divini Officii, published in different coun- 
tries and dioceses, and giving, under every day, minute directions 
for proper reading. 

Every clerk in orders and every member of a religious order must 
publicly join in or privately read aloud (i.e. using the lips as well as 
the eyes — it takes about two hours in this way) the whole of the 
Breviary services allotted for each day. In large churches the 
services are usually grouped; e.g. Matins and Lauds (about 7.30 
a.m.); Prime, Terce (High Mass), Sext, and None (about 10 a.m.); 
Vespers and Compline (4 p.m.) ; and from four to eight hours (depend- 
ing on the amount of music and the number of high masses) are thus 
spent in choir. Laymen do not use the Breviary as a manual of 
devotion to any great extent. 

The Roman Breviary has been translated into English (by the 
marquess of Bute in 1879; new ed. with a trans, of the Martyr- 
ology, 1908), French and German. The English version is note- 
worthy for its inclusion of the skilful renderings of the ancient hymns 
by J. H. Newman, J. M. Neale and others. 



Authorities. — F. Cabrol, Introduction aux etudes liturgiques; 
Probst, Kirchenlex. ii., s.v. " Brevier " ; Baumer, Geschichte des 
Breviers (Freiburg, 1895) ; P. Batiffol, L'Histoire du breviaire remain 
(Paris, 1893; Eng. ti\); Baudot, Le Breviaire romain (1907). A 
complete bibliography is appended to the article by F. Cabrol in 
the Catholic Encyclopaedia, vol. ii. (1908). 

BREVIARY OF ALARIC (Breviarium Alaricanum) , a collection 
of Roman law, compiled by order of Alaric II., king of the 
Visigoths, with the advice of his bishops and nobles, in the 
twenty-second year of his reign (a.d. 506). It comprises sixteen 
books of the Theodosian code; the Novels of Theodosius II., 
Valcrrtinian III., Marcian, Majorianus and Severus; the 
Institutes of Gaius; five books of the Sententiae Receptae of 
Julius Paulus; thirteen titles of the Gregorian code; two titles 
of the Hermogenian code; and a fragment of the first book of 
the Responsa Papiniani. It is termed a code (codex), in the 
certificate of Anianus, the king's referendary, but unlike the code 
of Justinian, from which the writings of jurists were excluded, 
it comprises both imperial constitutions (leges) and juridical 
treatises (jura). From the circumstance that the Breviarium 
has prefixed to it a royal rescript (commonitorium) directing that 
copies of it, certified under the hand of Anianus, should be 
received exclusively as law throughout the kingdom of the 
Visigoths, the compilation of the code has been attributed to 
Anianus by many writers, and it is frequently designated the 
Breviary of Anianus (Breviarium Aniani). The code, however, 
appears to have been known amongst the Visigoths by the title 
of " Lex Romana," or " Lex Theodosii," and it was not until 
the 16th century that the title of " Breviarium " was introduced 
to distinguish it from a recast of the code, which was introduced 
into northern Italy in the 9th century for the use of the Romans 
in Lombardy. This recast of the Visigothic code has been 
preserved in a MS. known as the Codex Utinensis, which was 
formerly kept in the archives of the cathedral of Udine, but is 
now lost; and it was published in the 18th century for the first 
time by P. Canciani in his collection of ancient laws entitled 
Barbarorum Leges Antiquae. Another MS. of this Lombard 
recast of the Visigothic code was discovered by Hanel in the 
library of St Gall. The chief value of the Visigothic code 
consists in the fact that it is the only collection of Roman 
Law in which the five first books of the Theodosian code and 
five books of the Sententiae Receptae of Julius Paulus have 
been preserved, and until the discovery of a MS. in the chapter 
library in Verona, which contained the greater part of the 
Institutes of Gaius, it was the only work in which any portion 
of the institutional writings of that great jurist had come 
down to us. 

The most complete edition of the Breviarium will be found in 
the collection of Roman law published under the title of Jus Civile 
Ante- Jus tinianum. (Berlin, 1815). See also G. Hanel's Lex Romana 
Visigothorum (Berlin, 1847-1849). 

BREWER, JOHN SHERREN (i8io-t879), English historian, 
was born in Norwich in 1810, the son of a Baptist schoolmaster. 
He was educated at Queen's College, Oxford, was ordained in 
the Church of England in 1837, and became chaplain to a central 
London workhouse. In 1839 he was appointed lecturer in 
classical literature at King's College, London, and in 1855 he 
became professor of English language and literature and lecturer 
in modern history, succeeding F. D. Maurice. Meanwhile from 
1854 onwards he was also engaged in journalistic work on the 
Morning Herald, Morning Post and Standard. In 1856 he was 
commissioned by the master of the rolls to prepare a calendar 
of the state papers of Henry VIII., a work demanding a vast 
amount of research. He was also made reader at the Rolls, 
and subsequently preacher. In 1877 Disraeli secured for him 
the crown living of Toppesfield, Essex. There he had time to 
continue his task of preparing his Letters and Papers of the Reign 
of King Henry VIII., the Introductions to which (published 
separately, under the title The Reign of Henry VIII., in 1884) 
form a scholarly and authoritative history of Henry VIII. 's 
reign. New editions of several standard historical works were 
also produced under Brewer's direction. He died at Toppesfield 
in February 1879. 



506 



BREWING 



BREWING, in the modern acceptation of the term, a series 
of operations the object of which is to prepare an alcoholic 
beverage of a certain kind — to wit, beer — mainly from cereals 
(chiefly malted barley), hops and water. Although the art of 
preparing beer (q.v.) or ale is a very ancient one, there is very 
little information in the literature of the subject as to the 
apparatus and methods employed in early times. It seems fairly 
certain, however, that up to the 18th century these were of the 
most primitive kind. With regard to materials, we know that 
prior to the general introduction of the hop (see Ale) as a 
preservative and astringent, a number of other bitter and 
aromatic plants had been employed with this end in view. 
Thus J. L. Baker (The Brewing Industry) points out that the 
Cimbri used the Tamarix germanica, the Scandinavians the 
fruit of the sweet gale (Myrica gale), the Cauchi the fruit and the 
twigs of the chaste tree (Vitex agrius castus), and the Icelanders 
the yarrow (Achilloea millefolium). 

The preparation of beer on anything approaching to a manu- 
facturing scale appears, until about the 12th or 13th century, 
to have been carried on. in England chiefly in the monasteries; 
but as the brewers of London combined to form an association 
in the reign of Henry IV., and were granted a charter in 1445, 
it is evident that brewing as a special trade or industry must 
have developed with some rapidity. After the Reformation the 
ranks of the trade brewers were swelled by numbers of monks 
from the expropriated monasteries. Until the 18th century 
the professional brewers, or brewers for sale, as they are now 
called, brewed chiefly for the masses, the wealthier classes pre- 
paring their own beer, but it then became gradually apparent 
to the latter (owing no doubt to improved methods of brewing, 
and for others reasons) that it was more economical and less 
troublesome to have their beer brewed for them at a regular 
brewery. The usual charge was 30s. per barrel for bitter ale, 
and 8s. or so for small beer. This tendency to centralize brewing 
operations became more and more marked with each succeeding 
decade. Thus during 1895-1905 the number of private brewers 
declined from 17,041 to 9930. Of the private brewers still exist- 
ing, about four-fifths were in the class exempted from beer duty, 
i.e. farmers occupying houses not exceeding £10 annual value 
who brew for their labourers, and other persons occupying 
houses not exceeding £15 annual value. The private houses 
subject to both beer and licence duty produced less than 20,000 
barrels annually. There are no official figures as to the number 
of " cottage brewers," that is, occupiers of dwellings not exceeding 
£8 annual value; but taking everything into consideration it 
is probable that more than 99 % of the beer produced in the 
United Kingdom is brewed by public brewers (brewers for sale) . 
The disappearance of the smaller public brewers or their absorp- 
tion by the larger concerns has gone hand-in-hand with the 
gradual extinction of the private brewer. In the year 1894-189 5 
8863 licences were issued to brewers for sale, and by 1904-1905 
this number had been reduced to 5164. There are numerous 
reasons for these changes in the constitution of the brewing 
industry, chief among them being (a) the increasing, difficulty, 
owing partly to lincensing legislation and its administration, and 
partly to the competition of the great breweries, of obtaining an 
adequate outlet for retail sale in the shape of licensed houses; 
and (b) the fact that brewing has continuously become a more 
scientific and specialized industry, requiring costly and com- 
plicated plant and expert manipulation. It is only by employing 
the most up-to-date machinery and expert knowledge that the 
modern brewer can hope to produce good beer in the short time 
which competition and high taxation, &c, have forced upon him. 
Under these conditions the small brewer tends to extinction, 
and the public are ultimately the gainers. The relatively non- 
alcoholic, lightly hopped and bright modern beers, which the 
small brewer has not the means of producing, are a great advance 
on the muddy, highly hopped and alcoholized beverages to 
which our ancestors were accustomed. 

The brewing trade has reached vast proportions in the United 
Kingdom. The maximum production was 37,090,986 barrels 
in 1900, and while there has been a steady decline since that 



year, the figures for 1905-1906 — 34,109,263 barrels — were in 
excess of those for any year preceding 1897. It is interesting 
in this connexion to note that the writer of the article on Brewing 
in the 9th edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica was of the 
opinion that the brewing industry — which was then (1875) 
producing, roughly, 25,000,000 barrels — had attained its maxi- 
mum development. In the year ending 30th September 190.5 
the beer duty received by the exchequer amounted to £13, 1 56,053. 
The number of brewers for sale was 5180. Of these one firm, 
namely,Messrs Guinness, owning the largest brewery in the world, 
brewed upwards of two million barrels, paying a sum of, roughly, 
one million sterling to the revenue. Three other firms brewed 
close on a million barrels or upwards. The quantity of malt 
used was 51,818,697 bushels; of unmalted corn, 125,671 bushels; 
of rice, flaked maize and similar materials, 1,348,558 cwt.; of 
sugar, 2,746,615 cwt.; of hops, 62,360,817 lb; and of hop sub- 
stitutes, 49,202 lb. The average specific gravity of the beer 
produced in 1905-1906 was 1053-24. The quantity of beer 
exported was 520,826; of beer imported, 57,194 barrels. It is 
curious to note that the figures for exports and imports had 
remained almost stationary for the last thirty years. By far 
the greater part of the beer brewed is consumed in England. 
Thus of the total quantity retained for consumption in 1905-1906, 
28,590,563 barrels were consumed in England, 1,648,463 in 
Scotland, and 3,265,084 in Ireland. In 1871 it was calculated 
by Professor Leone Levi that the capital invested in the liquor 
trade in the United Kingdom was £117,000,000. In 1908 this 
figure might be safely doubled. A writer in the Brewers' 
Almanack for 1906 placed the capital invested in limited liability 
breweries alone at £185,000,000. If we allow for over-capitaliza- 
tion, it seems fairly safe to say that, prior to the introduction 
of the Licensing Bill of 1908, the market value of the breweries 
in the United Kingdom, together with their licensed property, 
was in the neighbourhood of £120,000,000, to which might be 
added another £20,000,000 for the value of licences not included 
in the above calculation; the total capital actually sunk in the 
whole liquor trade (including the wine and spirit industries and 
trades) being probably not far short of £250,000,000, and the 
number of persons directly engaged in or dependent on the 
liquor trade being under-estimated at 2,000,000. (For compara- 
tive production and consumption see Beer.) 

Taxation and Regulations. — The development of the brewing 
industry in England is intimately interwoven with the history of its 
taxation, and the regulations which have from time to time been 
formed for the safeguarding of the revenue. The first duty on beer 
in the United Kingdom was imposed in the reign of Charles II. 
(1660), namely 2S. 6d. per barrel on strong and 6d. per barrel on 
weak beer. This was gradually increased, amounting to 4s. 9d. on 
strong and is. 3d. on weak beer in the last decade of the 17th century, 
and to 8s. to 10s. in the year 1800, at which rate it continued until 
the repeal of the beer duty in 1830. A duty on malt was first 
imposed in the reign of William III. (1697), and from that date 
until 1830 both beer duty and malt tax were charged. The rate at 
first was under 7d. per bushel, but this was increased up to 2s. 7d. 
prior to the first repeal of the beer duty (1830), and to 4s. 6d. after 
the repeal. In 1829 the joint beer and malt taxes amounted to no 
less than 13s. 8d. per barrel, or 4|d. per gallon, as against 2jd. at 
the present day. From 1856 until the abolition of the malt tax, 
the latter remained constant at a fraction under 2s. 8Jd. A hop 
duty varying from id. to 2jd. per pound was in existence between 
1 71 1 and 1862. One of the main reasons for the abolition of the hop 
duty was the fact that, owing to the uncertainty of the crop, the 
amount paid to the revenue was subject to wide fluctuations. Thus 
in 1855 the revenue from this source amounted to £728,183, in 1861 
to only £149,700. 

It was not until 1847 that the use of sugar in brewing was per- 
mitted, and in 1850 the first sugar tax, amounting to Is. 4d. per cwt., 
was imposed. It varied from this figure up to 6s. 6d. in 1854, an d in 
1874, when the general duty on sugar was repealed, it was raised 
to lis. 6d., at which rate it remained until 1880, when it was repealed 
simultaneously with the malt duty. In 1901 a general sugar tax of 
4s. 2d. and under (according to the percentage of actual sugar con- 
tained) was imposed, but no drawback was allowed to brewers using 
sugar, and therefore — and this obtains at the present day — sugar 
used in brewing pays the general tax and also the beer duty. 

By the Free Mash-Tun Act of 1880, the duty was taken off the 
malt and placed on the beer, or, more properly speaking, on the wort ; 
maltsters' and brewers' licences were repealed, and in lieu thereof an 
annual licence duty of £1 payable by every brewer for sale was 



BREWING 



507 



imposed. The chief feature of this act was that, on and after the 
1st of October 1880, a beer duty was imposed in lieu of the old 
malt tax, at the rate of 6s. 3d. per barrel of 36 gallons, at a specific 
gravity of 1-057, an d the regulations for charging the duty were so 
framed as to leave the brewer practically unrestricted as to the 
description of malt or corn and sugar, or other description of sac- 
charine substitutes (other than deleterious articles or drugs), which 
he might use in the manufacture or colouring of beer. This 
freedom in the choice of materials has continued down to the present 
time, except that the use of " saccharin " (a product derived from 
coal-tar) was prohibited in 1888, the reason being that this substance 
gives an apparent palate-fulness to beer equal to roughly 4° in excess 
of its real gravity, the revenue suffering thereby. In 1889 the duty 
on beer was increased by a reduction in the standard of gravity 
from 1-057 to 1-055, an d in 1894 a further 6d. per barrel was added. 
The duty thus became 6s. 9d. per barrel, at a gravity of 1-055, which 
was further increased to 7s. 9d. per barrel by the war budget of 1900, 
at which figure it stood in 1909. (See also Liquor Laws.) 

Prior to 1896, rice, flaked maize (see below), and other similar 
preparations had been classed as malt or corn in reference to their 
wort-producing powers, but after that date they were deemed sugar ' 
in that regard. By the new act (1880) 42 lb weight of corn, or 28 lb 
weight of sugar, were to be deemed the equivalent of a bushel of 
malt, and a brewer was expected by one of the modes of charge to 
have brewed at least a barrel (36 gallons) of worts (less 4 % allowed 
for wastage) at the standard gravity for every two bushels of malt 
(or its equivalents) used by him in brewing; but where, owing to 
lack of skill or inferior machinery, a brewer cannot obtain the 
standard quantity of wort from the standard equivalent of material, 
the charge is made not on the wort, but directly on the material. 
By the new act, licences at the annual duty of £1 on brewers for sale, 
and of 6s. (subsequently modified by 44 Vict. c. 12, and 48 and 49 
Vict. c. 5, &c, to 4s.) or 9s., as the case might be, on any other 
brewers, were required. The regulations dealing with the mashing 
operations are very stringent. Twenty-four hours at least before 
mashing the brewer must enter in his brewing book (provided by the 
Inland Revenue) the day and hour for commencing to mash malt, 
corn, &c, or to dissolve sugar; and the date of making such entry; 
and also, two hours at least before the notice hour for mashing, 
the quantity of malt, corn, &c, and sugar to be used, and the day 
and hour when all the worts will be drawn off the grains in the 
mash-tun. The worts of each brewing much be collected within 
twelve hours of the commencement of the collection, and the brewer 
must within a given time enter in his book the quantity and gravity 
of the worts before fermentation, the number and name of the vessel, 
and the date of the entry. The worts must remain in the same vessel 
undisturbed for twelve hours after being collected, unless previously 
taken account of by the officer. There are other regulations, e.g. those 
prohibiting the mixing of worts of different brewings unless account 
has been taken of each separately, the alteration of the size or 
shape of any gauged vessel without notice, and so on. 

Taxation of Beer in Foreign Countries. — The following table shows 
the nature of the tax and the amount of the same calculated to 
English barrels. 



ing a certain proportion of chlorides is required. The presence 
or absence of certain mineral substances as such in the finished 
beer is not, apparently, a matter of any moment as regards 
flavour or appearance, but the importance of the role played 
by these substances in the brewing process is due to the influence 
which they exert on the solvent action of the water on the 
various constituents of the malt, and possibly of the hops. The 
excellent quality of the Burton ales was long ago surmised to 
be due mainly to the well water obtainable in that town. On 
analysing Burton water it was found to contain a considerable 
quantity of calcium sulphate — gypsum — and of other calcium 
and magnesium salts, and it is now a well-known fact that 
good bitter ales cannot be brewed except with waters containing 
these substances in sufficient quantities. Similarly, good mild 
ale waters should contain a certain quantity of sodium chloride, 
and waters for stout very little mineral matter, excepting 
perhaps the carbonates of the alkaline earths, which are pre- 
cipitated on boiling. 

The following analyses (from W. J. Sykes, The Principles and 
Practice of Brewing) are fairly illustrative of typical brewing 
waters. 

Burton Water (Pale Ale). 

Grains per Gallon. 
• 3-90 



Sodium Chloride . 
Potassium Sulphate 
Sodium Nitrate 
Calcium Sulphate . 
Calcium Carbonate 
Magnesium Carbonate 
Silica and Alumina 

Dublin Water (Stout) 
Sodium Chloride . 
Calcium Sulphate . 
Calcium Carbonate 
Magnesium Carbonate 
Iron Oxide and Alumina 
Silica 



Mild Ale Water. 
Sodium Chloride .... 
Calcium Chloride .... 
Calcium Sulphate .... 
Calcium Carbonate 
Iron Oxide and Alumina 
Silica 



1-59 
1-97 

77-87 
7-62 

21-31 
0-98 

1-83 
4-45 
14-21 
0-90 
0-24 
0-26 



35-H 
3-88 
6-23 
4-01 
0-24 

0-22 









Amount per English Barrel 


Country. 




Nature of Tax. 


(round numbers). 


United States . 




Beer Tax 


5s. 9d. 


Germany — 








N. German Customs Union 


Malt Tax 


is. 6d. 


Bavaria 




Malt Tax 


3s. 5d. to 4s. 8d., according to 
quantity produced 


Belgium 




Malt Tax 


2s. c)d. 


France 




On Wort 


4s. id. 


Holland . 




On cubic contents of 


About is. 9d. to 3s. 3d., 






Mash-Tun or on Malt 


according to quality 


Austro-Hungarian Empire 


On Wort 


6s. 8d. 


Russia 




Malt Tax 


5s. to 6s. 8d. 



Materials used in Brewing. — These are water, malt 
(q.v.), hops (q.v.), various substitutes for the two latter, and 
preservatives. 

Water. — A satisfactory supply of water — which, it may here 
be mentioned, is always called liquor in the brewery — is a matter 
of great importance to the brewer. Certain waters, for instance, 
those contaminated to any extent with organic matter, cannot 
be used at all in brewing, as they give rise to unsatisfactory 
fermentation, cloudiness and abnormal flavour. Others again, 
although suited to the production of one type of beer, are quite 
unfit for the brewing of another. For black beers a soft water 
is a desideratum, for ales of the Burton type a hard water is a 
necessity. For the brewing of mild ales, again, a water contain- 

1 They were classified at 28ft in 1896, but since 1897 the standard 
has been at the rate of 32 lb to the bushel. 



Our knowledge of the essential chemical constituents of brewing 
waters enables brewers in many cases to treat an unsatisfactory 
supply artificially in such a manner as to 
modify its character in a favourable sense. 
Thus, if a soft water only is to hand, and it is 
desired to brew a bitter ale, all that is neces- 
sary is to add a sufficiency of gypsum, mag- 
nesium sulphate and calcium chloride. If 
it is desired to convert a soft water lacking 
in chlorides into a satisfactory mild ale 
liquor, the addition of 30-40 grains of sodium 
chloride will be necessary. On the other 
hand, to convert a hard water into a soft 
supply is scarcely feasible for brewing pur- 
poses. To the substances used for treating 
brewing liquors already mentioned we may 
add kainite, a naturally deposited composite 
salt containing potassium and magnesium 
sulphates and magnesium chloride. 

Malt Substitutes. — Prior to the repeal of the Malt Acts, 
the only substitute for malt allowed in the United Kingdom 
was sugar. The quantity of the latter employed was 295,865 
cwt. in 1870, 1,136,434 cwt. in 1880, and 2,746,615 cwt. 
in 1905; that is to say, that the quantity used had been 
practically trebled during the last twenty-five years, although 
the quantity of malt employed had not materially increased. 
At the same time other substitutes, such as unmalted 
corn and preparations of rice and maize, had come into 
favour, the quantity of these substances used being in 1905 
125,671 bushels of unmalted corn and 1,348,558 cwt. of rice, 
maize, &c. 

The following statistics with regard to the use of malt 
substitutes in the United Kingdom are not without 
interest. 



5 o8 



BREWING 



Year. 


Quantities of 

Malt and Corn 

used in Brewing. 


Quantities of Sugar, 
Rice, Maize, &c. 
used in Brewing. 


Percentage of 
Substitutes to 
Total Material. 


1878 
1883 
1890 
1895 
1905 


Bushels. 
59,388,905 
51,331,451 ' 
55.359,964' 
53.731.177 
51,942,368 


Bushels. 

3.825,148 

4,503,680 2 

7,904,70s 2 

io,754,5io 

15,706,413 


6-05 

8-06 

12-48 

16-66 

23-22 



The causes which have led to the largely increased use of 
substitutes in the United Kingdom are of a somewhat complex 
nature. In the first place, it was not until the malt tax was 
repealed that the brewer was able to avail himself of the surplus 
diastatic energy present in malt, for the purpose of transforming 
starch (other than that in malted grain) into sugar. The diastatic 
enzyme or ferment (see below, under Mashing) of malted barley 
is present in that material in great excess, and a part of this 
surplus energy may be usefully employed in converting the 
starch of unmalted grain into sugar. The brewer has found 
also that brewing operations are simplified and accelerated by 
the use of a certain proportion of substitutes, and that he is 
thereby enabled appreciably to increase his turn-over, i.e. he can 
make more beer in a given time from the same plant. Certain 
classes of substitutes, too, are somewhat cheaper than malt, 
and in view of the keenness of modern competition it is not to 
be wondered at that the brewer should resort to every legitimate 
means at his disposal to keep down costs. It has been contended, 
and apparently with much reason, that if the use of substitutes 
were prohibited this would not lead to an increased use of 
domestic barley, inasmuch as the supply of home barley suitable 
for malting purposes is of a limited nature. A return to the 
policy of " malt and hops only " would therefore lead to an 
increased use of foreign barley, and to a diminution in the 
demand for home barley, inasmuch as sugar and prepared 
cereals, containing as they do less nitrogen, &c. than even the 
well-cured, sun-dried foreign barleys, are better diluents than 
the latter. At the same time, it is an undoubted fact that an 
excessive use of substitutes leads to the production of beer of 
poor quality. The better class of brewer rarely uses more than 
15-20%, knowing that beyond that point the loss of flavour and 
quality will in the long run become a more serious item than 
any increased profits which he might temporarily gain. 

With regard to the nature of the substitutes or adjuncts for 
barley malt more generally employed, raw grain (unmalted 
barley, wheat, rice, maize, &c.) is not used extensively in Great 
Britain, but in America brewers employ as much as 50%, and 
even more, of maize, rice or similar materials. The maize and rice 
preparations mostly used in England are practically starch pure 
and simple, substantially the whole of the oil, water, and other 
subsidiary constituents of the grain being removed. The germ 
of maize contains a considerable proportion of an oil of somewhat 
unpleasant flavour, which has to be eliminated before the 
material is fit for use in the mash-tun. After degerming, the 
maize is unhusked, wetted, submitted to a temperature sufficient 
to rupture the starch cells, dried, and finally rolled out in a 
flaky condition. Rice is similarly treated. 

The sugars used are chiefly cane sugar, glucose and invert 
sugar — the latter commonly known as " saccharum." Cane 
sugar is mostly used for the preparation of heavy mild ales and 
stouts, as it gives a peculiarly sweet and full flavour to the beer, 
to which, no doubt, the popularity of this class of beverage is 
largely due. Invert sugar is prepared by the action either of acid 
or of yeast on cane sugar. The chemical equation representing 
the conversion (or inversion) of cane sugar is: — 

Ci 2 H 22 0n + H 2 = C H 12 O 6 + C 6 H 12 6 . 
cane sugar water glucose fructose 



invert sugar 



Invert sugar is so called because the mixture of glucose and 
fructose which forms the "invert" is laevo-rotatory, whereas 
1 Inclusive of rice and maize. 2 Exclusive of rice and maize. 



cane sugar is dextro-rotatory to the plane of polarized light. 
The preparation of invert sugar by the' acid process consists 
in treating the cane sugar in solution with a little mineral acid, 
removing the excess of the latter by means of chalk, and con- 
centrating to a thick syrup. The yeast process (Tompson's), 
which makes use of the inverting power of one of the enzymes 
(invcrtase) contained in ordinary yeast, is interesting. The cane 
sugar solution is pitched with yeast at about 55 C, and at this 
comparatively high temperature the inversion proceeds rapidly, 
and fermentation is practically impossible. When this operation 
is completed, the whole liquid (including the yeast) is run into 
the boiling contents of the copper. This method is more suited 
to the preparation of invert in the brewery itself than the acid 
process, which is almost exclusively used in special sugar works. 
Glucose, which is one of the constituents of invert sugar, is largely 
used by itself in brewing. It is, however, never prepared from 
invert sugar for this purpose, but directly from starch by means 
of acid. By the action of dilute boiling acid on starch the latter is 
rapidly converted first into a mixture of dextrine and maltose 
and then into glucose. The proportions of glucose, dextrine and 
maltose present in a commercial glucose depend very much on 
the duration of the boiling, the strength of the acid, and the 
extent of the pressure at which the starch is converted. In 
England the materials from which glucose is manufactured are 
generally sago, rice and purified maize. In Germany potatoes 
form the most common raw material, and in America purified 
Indian corn is ordinarily employed. 

Hop substitutes, as a rule, are very little used. They mostly 
consist of quassia, gentian and camomile, and these substitutes 
are quite harmless per se, but impart an unpleasantly rough and 
bitter taste to the beer. 

Preservatives. — These are generally, in fact almost universally, 
employed nowadays for draught ales; to a smaller extent for 
stock ales. The light beers in vogue to-day are less alcoholic, 
more lightly hopped, and more quickly brewed than the beers 
of the last generation, and in this respect are somewhat less 
stable and more likely to deteriorate than the latter were. The 
preservative in part replaces the alcohol and the hop extract, 
and shortens the brewing time. The preservatives mostly used 
are the bisulphites of lime and potash, and these, when employed 
in small quantities, are generally held to be harmless. 

Brewing Operations. — The general scheme of operations in an 
English brewery will be readily understood if reference be made 
to fig. 1, which represents an 8-quarter brewery on the gravitation 
system, the principle of which is that all materials to be employed 
are pumped or hoisted to the highest point required, to start with, 
and that subsequently no further pumping or hoisting is required, 
the materials (in the shape of water, malt, wort or hops, &c.) 
being conveyed from one point to another by the force of gravity. 

The malt, which is hoisted to the top floor, after cleaning and 
grading is conveyed to the Malt Mill, where it is crushed. Thence 
the ground malt, or " grist " as it is now called, passes to the 
Grist Hopper, and from the latter to the Mashing Machine, in 
which it is intimately mixed with hot water from the Hot Liquor 
Vessel. From the mashing machine the mixed grist and " liquor " 
pass to the Mash-Tun, where the starch of the malt is rendered 
soluble. From the mash-tun the clear wort passes to the Copper, 
where it is boiled with hops. From the copper the boiled wort 
passes to the Hop Back, where the insoluble hop constituents 
are separated from the wort. From the hop back the wort 
passes to the Cooler, from the latter to the Refrigerator, thence 
(for the purpose of enabling the revenue officers to assess the 
duty) to the Collecting Vessel? and finally to the Fermenting 
Vessels, in which the wort is transformed into " green " beer. 
The latter is then cleansed, and finally racked and stored. 

_ It will be seen from the above that brewing consists of seven 
distinct main processes, which may be classed as follows: (1) 
Grinding; (2) Mashing; (3) Boiling; (4) Cooling; (5) Fermenting; 
(6) Cleansing; (7) Racking and Storing. 

Grinding. — In most modern breweries the malt passes, on its way 



3 As a rule there is no separate 
assessed in the fermenting vessels. 



collecting vessel," duty being 



BREWING 



509 



from the bins to the mill, through a cleaning and grading apparatus, 
and then through an automatic measuring machine. The mills, 
which exist in a variety of designs, are of the smooth roller type, and 
are so arranged that the malt is crushed rather than ground. If the 

malt is ground too fine, difficulties 
arise in regard to efficient drain- 
age in the mash-tun and subse- 
quent clarification. On the other 
hand, if the crushing istoo coarse 
the subsequent extraction of sol- 
uble matter in the mash-tun is 
incomplete, and an inadequate 
yield results. 

Mashing is a process which 

consists mainly in extracting, by 

means of water at an adequate 

temperature, the soluble matters 

pre-existent in 

and 




Cooler 



f * » K 1- \ 



t-j Longitudinal Section. 



Fig. 1. — An 8-quarter Brewery (Messrs L. Lumley & Co., Ltd.). 

the insoluble starch and a great part of the insoluble nitro- 
genous compounds into soluble and partly fermentable products. 
Mashing is, without a doubt, the most important of the brewing 
processes, for it is largely in the mash-tun that the character 




Fig. 2.^Mash-tun with mashing machine. 



of the beer to be brewed is determined. In modern practice 
the malt and the mashing " liquor " (i.e. water) are introduced 
into the mash-tun simultaneously, by means of the mashing 
machine (fig. 2, A). This is generally a cylindrical metal vessel, 
commanding the mash-tun and provided with a central shaft 
md screw. The grist (as the crushed malt is called) enters the 
mashing machine from the grist case above, and the liquor is intro- 
duced at the back. The screw is rotated rapidly, and so a thorough 
mixture of the grist and liquor takes place as they travel along the 
mashing machine. The mash-tun (fig. 2) is a large metal or wooden 
vessel, fitted with a false bottom composed of plates perforated with 
numerous small holes or slits (C). This arrangement is necessary in 
order to obtain a proper separation of the " wort " (as the liquid 
portion of the finished mash is called) from the spent grains. The 
mash-tun is also provided with a stirring apparatus (the rakes) so 
that the grist and liquor may be intimately mixed (D), and an auto- 
matic sprinkler, the sparger (fig. 2, B, and fig. 3), which is employed 



in order to wash out the wort remaining in the grains. The sparger 
consists of a number of hollow arms radiating from a common centre 
and pierced by a number of small perforations. The common central 
vessel from which the sparge-arms radiate is mounted in such a 
manner that it rotates automatically when a- stream of water is 
admitted, so that a constant fine spray covers the whole tun when 
the sparger is in operation. There are also pipes for admitting 
" liquor " to the bottom of the tun, and for carrying the wort from 
the latter to the " underback " or " copper." 

The grist and liquor having been introduced into the tun (either 
by means of the mashing machine or separately), the rakes are set 
going, so that the mash may become thoroughly homogeneous, and 
after a short time the rakes are stopped and the mash allowed to 
rest, usually for a period of about two hours. After this, " taps 
are set " — i.e. communication is established between the mash-tun 
and the vessel into which the wort runs — and the sparger is started. 
In this manner the whole of the wort or extract is separated from 
the grains. The quantity of water employed is, in all, from two to 
three barrels to the quarter (336 lb) of malt. 

In considering the process of mashing, one might almost say the 
process of brewing, it is essential to remember 
that the type and quality of the beer to be 
produced (see Malt) depends almost entirely 
(a) on the kind of malt employed, and (6) on 
the mashing temperature. In other words, 
quality may be controlled on the kiln or in the 
mash-tun, or both. Viewed in this light, the 
following theoretical methods for preparing 
different types of beer are possible: — (1) high 
kiln heats and high mashing temperatures; (2) 
high kiln heats and low mashing temperatures; 
(3) low kiln heats and high mashing tempera- 
tures; and (4) low kiln heats and low mashing 
temperatures. In practice all these combina- 
tions, together with many intermediate ones, 
are met with, and it is not too much to say 
that the whole science of modern brewing is 
based upon them. It is plain, then, that the 
mashing temperature will depend on the kind 
of beer that is to be produced, and on the kind 
of malt employed. For stouts and black beers 
generally, a mashing temperature of 148 to 
150° F. is most usual; for pale or stock ales, 
150° to 154° F. ; and for mild running beers, 
154 to 149 F. The range of temperatures 
employed in brewing English beers is a very 
limited one as compared with foreign mashing 
methods, and does not range further, practically 
speaking, than from 140 to 160 F. The effect of higher tempera- 
tures is chiefly to cripple the enzyme or " ferment " diastase, which, 
as already said, is the agent which converts the insoluble starch 
into soluble dextrin, sugar and intermediate products. The higher 
the mashing temperature, the more the diastase will be crippled in its 
action, and the more dextrinous (non-fermentable) matter as com- 
pared with maltose (fermentable sugar) will be formed. A pale or 
stock ale, which is a type of beer that must be " dry " and that 
will keep, requires to contain a relatively high proportion of dextrin 
and little maltose, and, in its preparation, therefore, a high mashing 
temperature will be employed. On the other hand, a mild running 
ale, which is a full, sweet beer, intended for rapid consumption, 



Z3 




Sparger. 



will be obtained by means of low mashing temperatures, which pro- 
duce relatively little dextrin, but a good deal of maltose, i.e. sweet 
and readily fermentable matter. 

Diastase is not the only enzyme present in malt. There is also a 
ferment which renders a part of the nitrogenous matter soluble. 
This again is affected by temperature in much the same way 
as diastase. Low heats tend to produce much non-coagulable 



5io 



BREWING 



nitrogenous matter, which is undesirable in a stock beer, as it tends 
to produce fret and side fermentations. With regard to the kind 
of malt and other materials employed in producing various types of 
beer, pale ales are made either from pale malt (generally a mixture of 
English and fine foreign, such as Smyrna, California) only, or from 
pale malt and a little flaked maize, rice, invert sugar or glucose. 
Running beers (mild ale) are made from a mixture of pale and amber 
malts, sugar and" flaked goods; stout, from a mixture of pale, 
amber and roasted (black) malts only, or with the addition of a little 
sugar or flaked maize. 

When raw grain is employed, the process of mashing is slightly 
modified. The maize, rice or other grain is usually gelatinized in 
a vessel (called a converter or cooker) entirely separated from the 
mash-tun, by means of steam at a relatively high temperature, 
mostly with, but occasionally without, the addition of some malt 
meal. After about half an hour the gelatinized mass is mixed with 
the main mash, and this takes place shortly before taps are set. 
This is possible inasmuch as the starch, being already in a highly 
disintegrated condition, is very rapidly converted. By working on 
the limited-decoction system (see below), it is possible to make use 
of a fair percentage of raw grain in the mash-tun proper, thus doing 
away with the " converter " entirely. 

The Filter Press Process. — The ordinary mash-tun process, as 
described above, possesses the disadvantage that only coarse grists 
can be employed. This entails loss of extract in several ways. To 
begin with, the sparging process is at best a somewhat inefficient 
method for washing out the last portions of the wort, and again, 
when the malt is at all hard or " steely," starch conversion is by no 
means complete. These disadvantages are overcome by the filter 
press process, which was first introduced into Great Britain by the 
Belgian engineer P. Meura. The malt, in this method of brewing, is 
ground quite fine, and although an ordinary mash-tun may be used 
for mashing, the separation of the clear wort from the solid matter 
takes place in the filter press, which retains the very finest particles 
with ease. It is also a simple matter to wash out the wort from the 
filter cake in the presses, and experience has shown that markedly 
increased yields are thus obtained. In the writer's opinion, there 
is little doubt that in the future this, or a similar process, will find a 
very wide application. 

Boiling. — From the mash-tun the wort passes to the copper. If 
it is not possible to arrange the plant so that the coppers are situated 
beneath the mash-tuns (as is the case in breweries arranged on the 
gravitation system), an intermediate collecting vessel (the underback) 
is interposed, and from this the wort is pumped into the copper. 
The latter is a large copper vessel heated by direct fire or steam. 
Modern coppers are generally closed in with a dome-shaped head, but 
many old-fashioned open coppers are still to be met with, in fact 
pale-ale brewers prefer open coppers. In the closed type the wort is 
frequently boiled under slight pressure. When the wort has been 
raised to the boil, the hops or a part thereof are added, and the 
boiling is continued generally from an hour to three hours, according 
to the type of beer. The objects of boiling, briefly put, are: (i) 
sterilization of the wort; (2) extraction from the hops of substances 
that give flavour and aroma to the beer; (3) the coagulation and 
precipitation of a part of the nitrogenous matter (the coagulable 
albuminoids), which, if left in, would cause cloudiness and fret, &c, 
in the finished beer; (4) the concentration of the wort. At least 
three distinct substances are extracted from the hops in boiling. 
First, the hop tannin, which, combining with a part of the proteids 
derived from the malt, precipitates them; second, the hop resin, 
which acts as a preservative and bitter; third, the hop oil, to which 
much of the fine aroma of beer is due. The latter is volatile, and it is 
customary, therefore, not to add the whole of the hops to the wort 
when it commences to boil, but to reserve about a third until near 
the end of the copper stage. The quantity of hops employed varies 
according to the type of beer, from about 3 lb to 15 lb per quarter 
(336 lb) of malt. For mild ales and porters about 3 to 4 lb, for light 
pale ales and light stouts 6 to 10 lb, and for strong ales and stouts 
9 to 15 lb of hops are employed. 

Cooling. — When the wort has boiled the necessary time, it is 
turned into the hop back to settle. A hop back is a wooden or metal 
vessel, fitted with a false bottom of perforated plates; the latter 
retain the spent hops, the wort being drawn off into the coolers. 
After resting for a brief period in the hop back, the bright wort is 
run into the coolers. The cooler is a very shallow vessel of great area, 
and the result of the exposure of the hot wort to a comparatively 
large volume of air is that a part of the hop constituents and other 
substances contained in the wort are rendered insoluble and are 
precipitated. It was formerly considered absolutely essential that 
this hot aeration should take place, but in many breweries nowadays 
coolers are not used, the wort being run 'direct from the hop back 
to the refrigerator. There is much to be said for this procedure, as 
the exposure of hot wort in the cooler is attended with much danger 
of bacterial and wild yeast infection, but it is still a moot point 
whether the cooler or its equivalent can be entirely dispensed with 
for all classes of beers. A rational alteration would appear to be to 
place the cooler in an air-tight chamber supplied with purified and 
sterilized air. This principle has already been applied to the re- 
frigerator, and apparently with success. In America the cooler is 
frequently replaced by a cooling tank, an enclosed vessel of some 



depth, capable of artificial aeration. It is not practicable, in any 
case, to cool the wort sufficiently on the cooler to bring it to the 
proper temperature for the fermentation stage, and for this purpose, 
therefore, the refrigerator is employed. There are several kinds of 
refrigerators, the main distinction being that some are vertical, 
others horizontal ; but the principle in each case is much the same, 
and consists in allowing a thin film or stream of wort to trickle over 
a series of pipes through which cold water circulates. Fig. 5, 
Plate I., shows refrigerators, employed in Messrs Allsopp's lager beer 
brewery, at work. 

Fermenting. — By the process of fermentation the wort is converted 
into beer. By the action of living yeast cells (see Fermentation) 
the sugar contained in the wort is split up into alcohol and carbonic 
acid, and a number of subsidiary reactions occur. There are two 
main systems of fermentation, the top fermentation system, which is 
that employed in the United Kingdom, and the bottom fermentation 
system, which is that used for the production of beers of the conti- 
nental (" lager ") type. The wort, generally at a temperature of 
about 6o° F. (this applies to all the systems excepting B [see below], 
in which the temperature is higher), is " pitched " with liquid yeast 
(or " barm," as it is often called) at the rate of, according to the type 
and strength of the beer to be made, 1 to 4 lb to the barrel. After 
a few hours a slight froth or scum makes its appearance on the surface 
of the liquid. At the end of a further short period this develops 
into a light curly mass (cauliflower or curly head), which gradually 
becomes lighter and more solid in appearance, and is then known as 
rocky head. This in its turn shrinks to a compact mass — the yeasty 
head — which emits great bubbles of gas with a hissing sound. At this 
point the cleansing of the beer — i.e. the separation of the yeast from 
the liquid — has fairly commenced, and it is let down (except in tjie 
skimming and Yorkshire systems [see below]) into the pontos or 
unions, as the case may be. During fermentation the temperature 
rises considerably, and in order to prevent an excessive temperature 
being obtained (70-75 ° F. should be the maximum) the fermenting 
vessels are fitted with " attemperators," i.e. a system of pipes through 
which cold water may be run. 

Cleansing. — In England the methods of applying the top fermenta- 
tion system may be classified as follows : (A) The Cleansing System : 
(a) Skimming System, (b) Dropping System (pontos or ordinary 
dropping system), (c) Burton Union System. (B) The Yorkshire 
Stone Square System. 

(A) In (a) the Skimming System the fermentation from start 
to finish takes place in wooden vessels (termed " squares " or 
" rounds "), fitted with an attemperator and a parachute or other 
similar skimming device for removing or " skimming " the yeast 
at the end of the fermentation (fig. 4). The principle of (b) the 
Dropping System is that the beer undergoes only the main fermenta- 
tion in the " round " 
or "square," and is 
then dropped down 
into a second vessel ' 
or vessels, in which 
fermentation and 
cleansing are com- 
pleted. The ponto 
system of dropping, 
which is now some- 
what old-fashioned, 
consists in discharg- 
ing the beer into a 
series of vat-like 
vessels, fitted with 
a peculiarly-shaped 
overflow lip. The 
yeast works its way 
out of the vessel 
over the lip, and 
then flows into a 
gutter and is col- 
lected. The pontos 
are kept filled with 
beer by means of 
a vessel placed at a 
higher level. In the' 
ordinary dropping 
system the partly 
fermented beer is 
let down from the 
" squares " and " rounds " into large vessels, termed dropping or skim- 
ming " backs." These are fitted with attemperators, and parachutes 
for the removal of yeast, in much the same way as in the skimming 
system. As a rule the parachute covers the whole width of the back, 
(c) The Burton Union System is really an improved ponto system. 
A series of casks, supplied with beer at the cleansing stage from a 
feed vessel, are mounted so that they may rotate axially. Each 
cask is fitted with an attemperator, a pipe and cock at the base for 
the removal of the finished beer and " bottoms," and lastly with a 
swan neck fitting through a bung-hole and commanding a common 
gutter. This system yields excellent results for certain classes of 
beers, and many Burton brewers think it is essential for obtaining 




Fig. 4. — Fermenting Round. 
A, Skimmer; B, Parachute; C, Attemperator. 



BREWING 



5" 



the Burton character. Fig. 6 (Plate II.) shows the process in opera- 
tion in Messrs Allsopp's brewery. 

(B) The Stone Square System, which is only used to a certain 
extent (exclusively in the north of England), practically consists in 
pumping the fermenting wort from one to the other of two super- 
imposed square vessels, connected with one another by means of a 
man-hole and a valve. These squares are built of stone and kept 
very cool. At the end of the fermentation the yeast (after closing 
the man-hole) is removed from the top square. 

Racking, &c. — After the fermentation and cleansing operations 
are completed, the beer is racked off (sometimes after passing a few 
hours in a settling tank) into storage vessels or trade casks. The 
finest " stock " and " pale " ales are stored from ,six weeks to three 
months prior to going out, but " running " beers (mild ales, &c.) 
are frequently sent out of the brewery within a week or ten days of 
mashing. It is usual to add some hops in cask (this is called dry 
hopping) in the case of many of the better beers. Running beers, 
which must be put into condition rapidly, or beers that have become 
flat, are generally primed. Priming consists in adding a small 
quantity of sugar solution to the beer in cask. This rapidly ferments 
and so produces " condition." 

Fining. — As a very light article is desired nowadays, and this has 
to be provided in a short time, artificial means must be resorted to, 
in order to replace the natural fining or brightening which storage 
brings about. Finings generally consist of a solution or semi- 
solution of isinglass in sour beer, or in a solution of tartaric acid or of 
sulphurous acid. After the finings are added to the beer and the 
barrels have been well rolled, the finings slowly precipitate (or work 
out through the bung-hole) and carry with them the matter which 
would otherwise render the beer turbid. 

Bottling. — Formerly it was the general custom to brew a special 
beer for bottling, and this practice is still continued by some brewers. 
It is generally admitted that the special brew, matured by storage 
and an adequate secondary fermentation, produces the best beer for 
bottling, but the modern taste for a very light and bright bottled 
beer at a low cost has necessitated the introduction of new methods. 
The most interesting among these is the " chilling " and " carbonat- 
ing " system. In this the beer, when it is ripe for racking, is first 
" chilled," that is, cooled to a very low temperature. As a result, 
there is an immediate deposition of much matter which otherwise 
would require prolonged time to settle. The beer is then filtered 
and so rendered quite blight, and finally, in order to produce im- 
mediate " condition," is " carbonated," i.e. impregnated under 
pressure with carbon dioxide (carbonic acid gas). 

Foreign Brewing and Beers. — The system of brewing 
which differs most widely from the English infusion and top 
fermentation method is the decoction and bottom fermentation 
system, so widely employed, chiefly on the continent of Europe, 
for the production of beers of the " lager " type. 

The method pursued in the decoction system is broadly as 
follows : — After the grist has been mashed with cold water until 
a homogeneous mixture ensues, sufficient hot water is introduced 
into the mash-tun to raise the temperature to 85-100 F., accord- 
ing to circumstances. Thereupon, about one-third of the mash 
(including the " goods ") is transferred to the Maisch Kessel 
(mash copper), in which it is gradually brought to a temperature 
of (about) 165 F., and this heat is maintained until the mash 
becomes transparent. The Dickmaische, as this portion is called, 
is then raised to the boil, and the ebullition sustained between a 
quarter and three-quarters of an hour. Just sufficient of the 
Dickmaische is returned to the mash-tun proper to raise the 
temperature of the whole to 111-125° F., an d a f ter a * ew minutes 
a third is again withdrawn and treated as before, to form the 
second " thick mash." When the latter has been returned to 
the mash-tun the whole is thoroughly worked up, allowed to 
stand in order that the solids may deposit, and then another 
third (called the Lautermaische or " clear mash ") is withdrawn, 
boiled until the coagulable albuminoids are precipitated, and 
finally reconveyed to the mash-tun, where the mashing is con- 
tinued for some time, the final heat being rather over 160° F. 
The wort, after boiling with hops and cooling, much as in the 
English system, is subjected to the peculiar system of fermenta- 
tion called bottom fermentation. In this system the " pitching " 
and fermentation take place at a very low temperature and, 
compared with the English system, in very small vessels. The 
fermenting cellars are maintained at a temperature of about 
37-38° F., and the temperature of the fermenting wort does not 
rise above 50° F. The yeast, which is of a different type from that 
employed in the English system, remains at the bottom of the 
fermenting tun, and hence is derived the name of " bottom 



fermentation " (see Fermentation). The primary fermentation 
lasts about eleven to twelve days (as compared with three days 
on the English system) , and the beer is then run into store (lager ) 
casks where it remains at a temperature approaching the freezing- 
point of water for six weeks to six months, according to the time 
of the year and the class of the beer. As to the relative character 
and stability of decoction and infusion beers, the latter are, as 
a rule, more alcoholic; but the former contain more unfermented 
malt extract, and are therefore, broadly speaking, more nutritive. 
Beers of the German type are less heavily hopped and more 
peptonized than English beers, and more highly charged with 
carbonic acid, which, owing to the low fermentation and storing 
temperatures, is retained for a comparatively long time and keeps 
the beer in condition. On the other hand, infusion beers are of a 
more stable and stimulating character. It is impossible to keep 
" lager " beer on draught in the ordinary sense of the term in 
England. It will not keep unless placed on ice, and, as a matter 
of fact, the " condition " of lager is dependent to a far greater 
extent on the methods of distribution and storage than is the 
case with infusion beers. If a cask is opened it must be rapidly 
consumed; indeed it becomes undrinkable within a very few 
hours. The gas escapes rapidly when the pressure is released, 
the temperature rises, and the beer becomes flat and mawkish. 
In Germany every publican is bound to have an efficient supply 
of Ice, the latter frequently being delivered by the brewery 
together with the beer. 

In America the common system of brewing is one of infusion 
mashing combined with bottom fermentation. The method of 
mashing, however, though on infusion lines, differs appreciably 
from the English process. A very low initial heat — about 100° F. 
— at which the mash remains for about an hour, is employed. 
After this the temperature is rapidly raised to 153-156° F. by 
running in the boiling " cooker mash," i.e. raw grain wort from 
the converter. After a period the temperature is gradually- 
increased to about 165° F. The very low initial heat, and the 
employment of relatively large quantities of readily transform- 
able malt adjuncts, enable the American brewer to make use of 
a class of malt which would be considered quite unfit for brewing 
in an English brewery. The system of fermentation is very 
similar to the continental " lager " system, and the beer obtained 
bears some resemblance to the German product. To the English' 
palate it is somewhat flavourless, but it is always retailed in 
exceedingly brilliant condition and at a proper temperature. 
There can be little doubt that every nation evolves a type of 
beer most suited to its climate and the temperament of the 
people, and in this respect the modern American beer is no 
exception. In regard to plant and mechanical arrangements 
generally, the modern American breweries may serve as an 
object-lesson to the European brewer, although there are certainly 
a number of breweries in the United Kingdom which need not 
fear comparison with the best American plants. 

It is a sign of the times and further evidence as to the growing 
taste for a lighter type of beer, that lager brewing in its most 
modern form has now fairly taken root in Great Britain, and in 
this connexion the process introduced by Messrs Allsopp exhibits 
many features of interest. The following is a brief description 
of the plant and the methods employed: — The wort is prepared 
on infusion lines, and is then cooled by means of refrigerated 
brine before passing to a temporary store tank, which serves as 
a gauging vessel. From the latter the wort passes directly to 
the fermenting tuns, huge closed cylindrical vessels made of 
sheet-steel and coated with glass enamel. There the wort 
ferments under reduced pressure, the carbonic acid generated 
being removed by means of a vacuum pump, and the gas thus 
withdrawn is replaced by the introduction of cool sterilized air. 
The fermenting cellars are kept at 40° F. The yeast employed 
is a pure culture (see Fermentation) bottom yeast, but the 
withdrawal of the products of yeast metabolism and the constant 
supply of pure fresh air cause the fermentation to proceed far 
more rapidly than is the case with lager beer brewed on ordinary 
lines. It is, in fact, finished in about six days. Thereupon the 
air-supply is cut off, the green beer again cooled to 40° F. and 



5*2 



BREWING 



then conveyed by means of filtered air pressure to the store tanks, 
where secondary fermentation, lasting three weeks, takes place. 
The gases evolved are allowed to collect under pressure, so that 
the beer is thoroughly charged with the carbonic acid necessary 
to give it condition. Finally the beer is again cooled, filtered, 
racked and bottled, the whole of these operations taking place 
under counter pressure, so that no gas can escape; indeed, from 
the time the wort leaves the copper to the moment when it is 
bottled in the shape of beer, it does not come into contact with 
the outer air. 

The preparation of the Japanese beer sake (q.v.) is of interest. 
The first stage consists in the preparation of Koji, which is 
obtained by treating steamed rice with a culture of Aspergillus 
oryzae. This micro-organism converts the starch into sugar. 
The Koji is converted into moto by adding it to a thin paste of 
fresh-boiled starch in a vat. Fermentation is set up and lasts 
for 30 to 40 days. The third stage consists in adding more rice 
and Koji to the moto, together with some water. A secondary 
fermentation, lasting from 8 to 10 days, ensues. Subsequently 
the whole is filtered, heated and run into casks, and is then known 
as sake. The interest of this process consists in the fact that a 
single micro-organism — a mould — is able to exercise the com- 
bined functions of saccharification and fermentation. It replaces 
the diastase of malted grain and also the yeast of a European 
brewery. Another liquid of interest is Weissbier. This, which 
is largely produced in Berlin (and in some respects resembles 
the wheat-beer produced in parts of England), is generally prepared 
from a mash of three parts of wheat malt and one part of barley 
malt. The fermentation is of a symbiotic nature, two organisms, 
namely a yeast and a fission fungus (the lactic acid bacillus) 
taking part in it. The preparation of this peculiar double fer- 
ment is assisted by the addition of a certain quantity of white 
wine to the yeast prior to fermentation. 

Brewing Chemistry. — The principles of brewing technology 
belong for the most part to physiological chemistry, whilst those 
of the cognate industry, malting, are governed exclusively by 
that branch of knowledge. Alike in following the growth of 
barley in field, its harvesting, maturing and conversion into 
malt, as well as the operations of mashing malt, fermenting 
wort, and conditioning beer, physiological chemistry is needed. 
On the other hand, the consideration of the saline matter in 
waters, the composition of the extract of worts and beers, and 
the analysis of brewing materials and products generally, belong 
to the domain of pure chemistry. Since the extractive matters 
contained in wort and beer consist for the most part of the 
transformation products of starch, it is only natural that these 
should have received special attention at the hands of scientific 
men associated with the brewing industry. It was formerly 
believed that by the action of diastase on starch the latter is 
first converted into a gummy substance termed dextrin, which 
is then subsequently transformed into a sugar — glucose. F. A. 
Musculus, however, in i860, showed that sugar and dextrin are 
simultaneously produced, and between the years 1872 and 
1876 Cornelius O'Sullivan definitely proved that the sugar pro- 
duced was maltose. When starch-paste, the jelly formed by 
treating starch with boiling water, is mixed with iodine solution, 
a deep blue coloration results. The first product of starch 
degradation by either acids or diastase, namely soluble starch, 
also exhibits the same coloration when treated with iodine. 
As degradation proceeds, and the products become more and 
more soluble and diffusible, the blue reaction with iodine gives 
place first to a purple, then to a reddish colour, and finally the 
coloration ceases altogether. In the same way, the optical 
rotating power decreases, and the cupric reducing power (towards 
Fehling's solution) increases, as the process of hydrolysis proceeds. 
C. O'Sullivan was the first to point out definitely the influence 
of the temperature of the mash on the character of the products. 
The work of Horace T. Brown (with J. Heron) extended that of 
O'Sullivan, and (with G. H. Morris) established the presence of 
an intermediate product between the higher dextrins and 
maltose. This product was termed maltodextrin, and Brown 
and Morris were led to, believe that a large number of these sub- 



stances existed in malt wort. They proposed for these substances 
the generic name " amyloins." Although according to their 
view they were compounds of maltose and dextrin, they had the 
properties of mixtures of these two substances. On the assump- 
tion of the existence of these compounds, Brown and his colleagues 
formulated what is known as the maltodextrin or amyloin 
hypothesis of starch degradation. C. J. Lintner, in 1891 , claimed 
to have separated a sugar, isomeric with maltose, which is termed 
isomaltose, from the products of starch hydrolysis. A. R. Ling 
and J. L. Baker, as well as Brown and Morris, in 1895, proved 
that this isomaltose was not a homogeneous substance, and evi- 
dence tending to the same conclusion was subsequently brought 
forward by continental workers. Ling and Baker, in 1897, 
isolated the following compounds from the products of starch 
hydrolysis — maltodextrin-a, C36H62O31, and maltodextrin-|3, 
C24H42O21 (previously named by Prior, achroodextrin III.) . They 
also separated a substance, C12H22O11, isomeric with maltose, 
which had, however, the characteristics of a dextrin. This is 
probably identical with the so-called dextrinose isolated by 
V. Syniewski in 1902, which yields a phenylosazone melting at 
82-83° C. It has been proved by H. Ost that the so-called 
isomaltose of Lintner is a mixture of maltose and another 
substance, maltodextrin, isomeric with Ling and Baker's malto- 
dextrin-/?. 

The theory of Brown and Morris of the degradation of starch, 
although based on experimental evidence of some weight, is by no 
means universally accepted. Nevertheless it is of considerable 
interest, as it offers a rational and consistent explanation of the 
phenomena known to accompany the transformation of starch by 
diastase, and even if not strictly correct it has, at any rate, proved 
itself to be a practical working hypothesis, by which the mashing 
and fermenting operations may be regulated and controlled. Accord- 
ing to Brown and Morris, the starch molecule consists of five amylin 
groups, each of which corresponds to the molecular formula 
(Cr2H 20 Oio)2o. Four of these amylin radicles are grouped centrally 
round the fifth, thus : — 

(Ci2H2 Oi ) 20 ^,,, „ ~ ^ (Cl 2 H 2 oOlo)20 

(C 12 H 2 „O 10 ) 2 „ -> H-u*l»Oio)» < ( Cl2 H 20 O 1 „) 20 

By the action of diastase, this complex molecule is split up, 
undergoing hydrolysis into four groups of amyloins, the fifth or 
central group remaining unchanged (and under brewing conditions 
unchangeable), forming the substance known as stable dextrin. 
When diastase acts on starch-paste, hydrolysis proceeds as far as the 
reaction represented by the following equation : — 

5(Ci2H 20 O I0 ) 2 „-j-8o H 2 = 8o C^HbOh+CChHmO,,,)*,, 
starch. water. maltose. stable dextrin. 

The amyloins are substances containing varying numbers of 
amylin (original starch or dextrin) groups in conjunction with a 
proportional number of maltose groups. They are not separable into 
maltose and dextrin by any of the ordinary means, but exhibit the 
properties of mixtures of these substances. As the process of hydro- 
lysis proceeds, the amyloins become gradually poorer in amylin- 
and relatively richer in maltose-groups. The final products ofj 
transformation, according to Brown and J. H. Millar, are maltose 1 
and glucose, which latter is derived from the hydrolysis of the stable 
dextrin. This theory may be applied in practical brewing in the 
following manner. If it is desired to obtain a beer of a stable char- 
acter — that is to say, one containing a considerable proportion of 
high-type amyloins — it is necessary to restrict the action of the 
diastase in the mash-tun accordingly. On the other hand, for mild 
running ales, which are to "condition" rapidly, it is necessary to 
provide for the presence of sufficient maltodextrin of a low type. 
Investigation has shown that the type of maltodextrin can be 
regulated, not only jn the mash-tun but also on the malt-kiln. A 
higher type is obtained by low kiln and high mashing temperatures 
than by high kiln and low mashing heats, and it is possible therefore 
to regulate, on scientific lines, not only the quality but also the type 
of amyloins which are suitable for a particular beer. 

The chemistry of the nitrogenous constituents of malt is equally 
important with that of starch and its transformations. Without 
nitrogenous compounds of the proper type, vigorous fermentations 
are not possible. It may be remembered that yeast assimilates 
nitrogenous compounds in some of their simpler forms — amides 
and the like. One of the aims of the maltster is, therefore, to break 
down the protein substances present in barley to such a degree that 
the wort has a maximum nutritive value for the yeast. Further, 
it is necessary for the production of stable beer to eliminate a large 
proportion of nitrogenous matter, and this is only done by the yeast 
when the proteins are degraded. There is also some evidence that 
the presence of albumoses assists in producing the foaming properties 
of beer. It has now been established definitely, by the work ot 



BREWING 




Fig. 5.— REFRIGERATORS IN "LAGER" BREWERY OF MESSRS. ALLSOPP 

The hot wort trickles over the outside of the series of pipes, and is cooled by the cold water which circulates in them 

f rom the shallow collecting trays the cooled wort is conducted to the fermenting backs. 



IV. 111. 



Plate II. 



BREWING 



p. 

o 

en 
►J 
_> 
< 



o 



<7 * 

S3 

O 0>" 

PS M 

D ° 

C 



BREWSTER, SIR D. 



5i3 



A. Fernbach, W. Windisch, F.Weiss and P. Schidrowitz, that finished 
malt contains at least two proteolytic enzymes (a peptic and a 
pancreatic enzyme). 

The presence of different types of phosphates in malt, and the 
important influence which, according to their nature, they exercise 
in the brewing process by way of the enzymes affected by them, 
have been made the subject of research mainly by Fernbach and 
A. Hubert, and by P. E. Petit and G. Labourasse. The number of 
enzymes which are now known to take part in the brewing process is 
very large. They may with utility be grouped as follows: — 

Name. 
Cytase 



In the malt 
or mash-tun. 



Diastase A . . . 
Diastase B . . . 

Proteolytic Enzymes 

Catalase .... 



In ferment- f Invertase 
ing wort and<j Glucase . 
yeast. [ Zymase . 



Role or Nature. 
Dissolves cell walls of starch 

granules. 
Liquefies starch. 
Saccharifies starch. 

(1) Peptic. 

(2) Pancreatic. 
Splits peroxides. 
Inverts cane sugar. 
Splits maltose into glucose. 
Splits sugar into alcohol 

and carbonic acid. 
Bibliography. — W. J. Sykes, Principles and Practice of Brewing 
(London, 1897); Moritz and Morris, A Text-book of the Science of 
Brewing (London, 1891); H. E. Wright, A Handy Book for Brewers 
(London, 1897); Frank Thatcher, Brewing and Malting (London, 
1898); Julian L. Baker, The Brewing Industry (London, 1905); 
E. J. Lintner, Grundriss der Bierbrauerei (Berlin, 1904); J. E. 
Thausing, Die Theorie und Praxis der Malzbereitung und Bier- 
fo.brika.tion (Leipzig, 1898) ; E. Michel, Lehrbuch der Bierbrauerei 
(Augsburg, 1900) ; E. Prior, Chemie u. Physiologie des Maizes und 
des Bieres (Leipzig, 1896). Technical journals: The Journal of the 
Institute of Brewing (London) ; The Brewing Trade Review (London) ; 
The Brewers' Journal (London) ; The Brewers' Journal (New York) ; 
Wochenschrift fiir Brauerei (Berlin) ; Zeitsckrift fur das gesammte 
Brauwesen (Munich). (P. S.) 

BREWSTER, SIR DAVID (1 781-1868), Scottish natural 
philosopher, was born on the 1 ith of December 1 781 at Jedburgh, 
where his father, a teacher of high reputation, was rector of the 
grammar school. At the early age of twelve he was sent to the 
university of Edinburgh, being intended for the clerical profession. 
Even before this, however, he had shown a strong inclination for 
natural science, and this had been fostered by his intimacy with 
a " self-taught philosopher, astronomer and mathematician," 
as Sir Walter Scott called him, of great local fame — James 
Veitch of Inchbonny, who was particularly skilful in making 
telescopes. Though he duly finished his theological course and 
was licensed to preach, Brewster's preference for other pursuits 
prevented him from engaging in the active duties. of his pro- 
fession. In 1799 he was induced by his fellow-student, Henry 
Brougham, to study the diffraction of light. The results of his 
investigations were communicated from time to time in papers 
to the Philosophical Transactions of London and other scientific 
journals, and were admirably and impartially summarized by 
James D. Forbes in his preliminary dissertation to the eighth 
edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica. The fact that other 
philosophers, notably Etienne Louis Malus and Augustin Fresnel, 
were pursuing the same investigations contemporaneously in 
France does not invalidate Brewster's claim to independent 
discovery, even though in one or two cases the priority must be 
assigned to others. 

The most important subjects of his inquiries are enumerated 
by Forbes under the following five heads: — (1) The laws of 
polarization by reflection and refraction, and other quantitative 
laws of phenomena; (2) The discovery of the polarizing structure 
induced by heat and pressure; (3) The discovery of crystals 
with two axes of double refraction, and many of the laws of their 
phenomena, including the connexion of optical structure and 
crystalline forms; (4) The laws of metallic reflection; (5) Experi- 
ments on the absorption of light. In this line of investigation 
the prime importance belongs to the discovery (1) of the con- 
nexion between the refractive index and the polarizing angle, 
(2) of biaxial crystals, and (3) of the production of double 
refraction by irregular heating. These discoveries were promptly 
recognized. So early as the year 1807 the degree of LL.D. was 
conferred upon Brewster by Marischal College, Aberdeen; in 
18 1 5 he was made a member of the Royal Society of London, 
and received the Copley medal; in 1818 he received the Rumford 
IV. 17 



medal of the society; and in 1816 the French Institute awarded 
him one-half of the prize of three thousand francs for the two 
most important discoveries in physical science made in Europe 
during the two preceding years. Among the non-scientific 
public his fame was spread more effectually by his rediscovery 
about 181 5 of the kaleidoscope, for which there was a great 
demand in both England and America. An instrument of 
higher interest, the stereoscope, which, though of much later 
date (1849-1850), may be mentioned here, since along with the 
kaleidoscope it did more than anything else to popularize his 
name, was not, as has often been asserted, the invention of 
Brewster. Sir Charles Wheatstone discovered its principle and 
applied it as early as 1838 to the construction of a cumbrous 
but effective instrument, in which the binocular pictures were 
made to combine by means of mirrors. To Brewster is due the 
merit of suggesting the use of lenses for the purpose of uniting 
the dissimilar pictures; and accordingly the lenticular stereo- 
scope may fairly be said to be his invention. A much more 
valuable practical result of Brewster's optical researches was 
the improvement of the British lighthouse system. It is true 
that the dioptric apparatus was perfected independently by 
Fresnel, who had also the satisfaction of being the first to put 
it into operation. But it is indisputable that Brewster was 
earlier in the field than Fresnel; that he described the dioptric 
apparatus in 1812; that he pressed its adoption on those in 
authority at least as early as 1820, two years before Fresnel 
suggested it; and that it was finally introduced into British 
lighthouses mainly by his persistent efforts. 

Brewster's own discoveries, important though they were, 
were not his only, perhaps not even his chief, service to science. 
He began literary work in 1799 as a regular contributor to the 
Edinburgh Magazine, of which he acted as editor at the age of 
twenty. In 1807 he undertook the editorship of the newly 
projected Edinburgh Encyclopaedia, of which the first part 
appeared in 1808, and the last not until 1830. The work was 
strongest in the scientific department, and many of its most 
valuable articles were from the pen of the editor. At a later 
period he was one of the leading contributors to the Encyclo- 
paedia Britannica (seventh and eighth editions), the articles 
on Electricity, Hydrodynamics, Magnetism, Microscope, Optics, 
Stereoscope, Voltaic Electricity, &c, being from his pen. In 
1819 Brewster undertook further editorial work by establishing, 
in conjunction with Robert Jameson (1774-1854), the Edinburgh 
Philosophical Journal, which took the place of the Edinburgh 
Magazine. The first ten volumes (1810-1824) were published 
under the joint editorship of Brewster and Jameson, the remain- 
ing four volumes (1825-1826) being edited by Jameson alone. 
After parting company with Jameson, Brewster started the 
Edinburgh Journal of Science in 1824, sixteen volumes of which 
appeared under his editorship during the years 1824-1832, with 
very many articles from his own pen. To the transactions of 
various learned societies he contributed from first to last between 
three and four hundred papers, and few of his contemporaries 
wrote so much for the various reviews. In the North British 
Review alone seventy-five articles of his appeared. A list of his 
larger separate works will be found below. Special mention, 
however, must be made of the most important of them all — his 
biography of Sir Isaac Newton. In 183 1 he published a short 
popular account of the philosopher's life in. Murray's Family 
Library; but it was not until 1855 that he was able to issue the 
much fuller Memoirs of the Life, Writings and Discoveries of Sir 
Isaac Newton, a work which embodied the results of more than 
twenty years' patient investigation of original manuscripts and 
all other available sources. 

Brewster's relations as editor brought him into frequent 
communication with the most eminent scientific men, and he was 
naturally among the first to recognize the benefit that would 
accrue from regular intercourse among workers in the field of 
science. In an article in the Quarterly Review he threw out a 
suggestion for " an association of our nobility, clergy, gentry and 
philosophers," which was taken up by others and found speedy 
realization in the British Association for the Advancement of 



5 J 4 



BREWSTER, W.— BRfcZ£ 



Science. Its first meeting was held at York in 183 1 ; and Brewster, 
along with Charles Babbage and Sir John F. W. Herschel, had 
the chief part in shaping its constitution. In the same year in 
which the British Association held its first meeting, Brewster 
received the honour of knighthood and the decoration of the 
Guelphic order of Hanover. In 1838 he was appointed principal 
of the united colleges of St Salvator and St Leonard, St Andrews. 
In 1849 he acted as president of the British Association and was 
elected one of the eight foreign associates of the Institute of 
France in succession to J. J. Berzelius; and ten years later he 
accepted the office of principal of the university of Edinburgh, 
the duties of which he discharged until within a few months 
of his death, which took place at Allerly, Melrose, on the 10th 
of February 1868. 

In estimating Brewster's place among scientific discoverers 
the chief thing to be borne in mind is that the bent of his 
genius was not characteristically mathematical. His method 
was empirical, and the laws which he established were generally 
the result of repeated experiment. To the ultimate explanation 
of the phenomena with which he dealt he contributed nothing, 
and it is noteworthy in this connexion that if he did not maintain 
to the end of his life the corpuscular theory he never explicitly 
adopted the undulatory theory of light. Few will be inclined 
to dispute the verdict of Forbes: — " His scientific glory is 
different in kind from that of Young and Fresnel; but the dis- 
coverer of the law of polarization of biaxial crystals, of optical 
mineralogy, and of double refraction by compression, will always 
occupy a foremost rank in the intellectual history of the age." 
In addition to the various works of Brewster already noticed, 
the following may be mentioned: — Notes and Introduction to 
Carlyle's translation of Legendre's Elements of Geometry (1824); 
Treatise on Optics (1831); Letters on Natural Magic, addressed to 
Sir Walter Scott (1831); The Martyrs of Science, or the Lives 
of Galileo, Tycho Brake, and Kepler (1841); More Worlds than 
Owe (1854). 

See The Home Life of Sir David Brewster, by his daughter Mrs 
Gordon. 

BREWSTER, WILLIAM (c. 1 566-1644), American colonist, 
one of the leaders of the " Pilgrims," was born at Scrooby, in 
Nottinghamshire, England, about 1566. After studying for a 
short time at Cambridge, he was from 1584 to 1587 in the service 
of William Davison (? 1541-1608), who in 1585 went to the Low 
Countries to negotiate an alliance with the states-general and 
in 1586 became assistant to Walsingham, Queen Elizabeth's 
secretary of state. Upon the disgrace of Davison, Brewster 
removed to Scrooby, where from 1590 until September 1607 
he held the position of " Post," or postmaster responsible for 
the relays of horses on the post road, having previously, for a 
short time, assisted his father in that office. About 1602 his 
neighbours began to assemble for worship at his home, the 
Scrooby manor house, and in 1606 he joined them in organizing 
the Separatist church of Scrooby. After an unsuccessful attempt 
in 1607 (for which he was imprisoned for a short time), he, with 
other Separatists, removed to Holland in 1608 to obtain greater 
freedom of worship. At Leiden in 1609 he was chosen ruling 
elder of the Congregation. In Holland he supported himself first 
by teaching English and afterwards in 1616-1619, as the partner 
of one Thomas Brewer, by secretly printing, for sale in England, 
books proscribed by the English government, thus, says Bradford, 
having " imploymente inough." In 1619 their types were seized 
and Brewer was arrested by the authorities of the university of 
Leiden, acting on the instance of the British ambassador, Sir 
Dudley Carleton. Brewster, however, escaped, and in the same 
year, with Robert Cushman (c. 1580-1625), obtained in London, 
on behalf of his associates, a land patent from the Virginia 
Company. In i62oheemigratedto Americaonthe "Mayflower," 
and was one of the founders of the Plymouth Colony. Here 
besides continuing until his death to act as ruling elder, he was 
also — regularly until the arrival of the first pastor, Ralph Smith 
(d. 1661), in 1629 and irregularly afterward — a "teacher," 
preaching " both powerfully and profitably to ye great con- 
tentment of ye hearers and their comfortable edification." 



By many he is regarded as pre-eminently the leader of the 
" Pilgrims." He died, probably on the 10th of April 1644. 

See Ashbel Steele's Chief of the Pilgrims; or the Life and Time of 
William Brewster (Philadelphia, 1857); and a sketch in William 
Bradiord'sHistory of the Plimouth Plantation (newed., Boston, 1898). 

BREZ£, the name of a noble Angevin family, the most 
famous member of which was Pierre de Breze (c. 1410-1465), 
one of the trusted soldiers and statesmen of Charles VII. He 
had made his name as a soldier in the English wars when in 1433 
he joined with Yolande, queen of Sicily, the constable Rich- 
mond and others, in chasing from power Charles VII. 's minister 
La Tremoille. He was knighted by Charles of Anjou in 1434, 
and presently entered the royal council. In 1437 he became 
seneschal of Anjou, and in 1440 of Poitou. During the Praguerie 
he rendered great service to the royal cause against the dauphin 
Louis and the revolted nobles, a service which was remembered 
against him after Louis's accession to the throne. He fought 
against the English in Normandy in 1440-1441, and in Guienne 
in 1442. In the next year he became chamberlain to Charles VII., 
and gained the chief power in the state through the influence of 
Agnes Sorel, superseding his early allies Richmond and Charles 
of Anjou. The six years (1444-1450) of his ascendancy were the 
most prosperous period of the reign of Charles VII. His most 
dangerous opponent was the dauphin Louis, who in 1448 brought 
against him accusations which led to a formal trial resulting in 
a complete exoneration of Breze and his restoration to favour. 
He fought in Normandy in 1450-1451, and became seneschal of 
the province after the death of Agnes Sorel and the consequent 
decline of his influence at court. He made an ineffective descent 
on the English coast at Sandwich in 1457, and was preparing 
an expedition in favour of Margaret of Anjou when the accession 
of Louis XL brought him disgrace and a short imprisonment. 
In 1462, however, his son Jacques married Louis's half-sister, 
Charlotte de Valois, daughter of Agnes Sorel. In 1462 he accom- 
panied Margaret to Scotland with a force of 2000 men, and after 
the battle of Hexham he brought her back to Flanders. On his 
return he was reappointed seneschal of Normandy, and fell in 
the battle of Montlhery on the 16th of July 1465. He was 
succeeded as seneschal of Normandy by his eldest son Jacques 
de Breze (c. 1440-1490), count of Maulevrier; and by his 
grandson, husband of the famous Diane de Poitiers, Louis de 
Breze (d. 1531), whose tomb in Rouen cathedral, attributed to 
Jean Goujon and Jean Cousin, is a splendid example of French 
Renaissance work. 

The lordship of Breze passed eventually to Claire Clemence 
de Maill6, princess of Conde, by whom it was sold to Thomas 
Dreux, who took the name of Dreux Breze, when it was erected 
into a marquisate. Henri Evrard, marquis de Dreux-Breze 
(1762-1829), succeeded his father as master of the ceremonies 
to Louis XVI. in 1781. On the meeting of the states-general 
in 1789 it fell to him to regulate the questions of etiquette and 
precedence between the three estates. That as the immediate 
representative of the crown he should wound the susceptibilities 
of the deputies was perhaps inevitable, but little attempt was 
made to adapt traditional etiquette to changed circumstances. 
Breze did not formally intimate to President Bailly the pro- 
clamation of the royal seance until the 20th of June, when the 
carpenters were about to enter the hall to prepare for the event, 
thus provoking the session in the tennis court. After the royal 
seance Breze was sent to reiterate Louis's orders that the estates 
should meet separately, when Mirabeau replied that the hall 
could not be cleared except by force. After the fall of the 
Tuileries Breze emigrated for a short time, but though he returned 
to France he was spared during the Terror. At the Restoration 
he was made a peer of France, and resumed his functions as 
guardian of an antiquated ceremonial. He died on the 27th of 
January 1829, when he was succeeded in the peerage and at. 
court by his son Scipion (1793-1845). 

The best contemporary account of Pierre de Breze is given in the 
Chroniques of the Burgundian chronicler, Georges Chastellain, whu 
had been his secretary. Chastellain addressed a Deprecation v. 
Louis XI. on his behalf at the time of his disgrace. 



BRIALMONT^-BRIAND 



5i5 



BRIALMONT, HENRI ALEXIS (1821-1903), Belgian general 
and military engineer, son of General Laurent Mathieu Brialmont 
(d. 1885), was born at Venlo in Limburg on the 25th of May 1821. 
Educated at the Brussels military school, he entered the army 
as sub-lieutenant of engineers in 1843, and became lieutenant in 
1847. From 1847 to 1850 he was private secretary to the war 
minister, General Baron Chazal. In 1855 he entered the staff 
corps, became major in 1861, lieutenant-colonel 1864, colonel in 
1868 and major-general 1874. In this rank he held at first the 
position of director of fortifications in the Antwerp district 
(December 1874), and nine months later he became inspector- 
general of fortifications and of the corps of engineers. In 1877 
he became lieutenant-general. His far-reaching schemes for 
the fortification of the Belgian places met with no little opposi- 
tion, and Brialmont seems to have felt much disappointment in 
this; at any rate he went in 1883 to Rumania to advise as to the 
fortification works required for the defence of the country, and 
presided over the elaboration of the scheme by which Bucharest 
was to be made a first-class fortress. He was thereupon placed 
en disponibUite in his own service, as having undertaken the 
Bucharest works without the authorization of his sovereign. 
This was due in part to the suggestion of Austria, which power 
regarded the Bucharest works as a menace to herself. His 
services were, however, too valuable to be lost, and on his return 
to Belgium in 1884 he resumed his command of the Antwerp 
military district. He had, further, while in eastern Europe, 
prepared at the request of the Hellenic government, a scheme 
for the defence of Greece. He retired in 1886, but continued to 
supervise the Rumanian defences. He died on the 21st of 
September 1903. 

In the first stage of his career as an engineer Brialmont's 
plans followed with but slight modification the ideas of Vauban; 
and his original scheme for fortifying Antwerp provided for 
both enceinte and forts being on a bastioned trace. But in 1859, 
when the great entrenched camp at Antwerp was finally taken 
in hand, he had already gone over to the school of polygonal 
fortification and the ideas of Montalembert. About twenty 
years later Brialmont's own types and plans began to stand out 
amidst the general confusion of ideas on fortification which 
naturally resulted from the introduction of long-range guns, and 
from the events of 1870-71. The extreme detached forts of 
the Antwerp region and the fortifications on the Meuse at Liege 
and Namur were constructed in accordance with Brialmont's 
final principles, viz. the lavish use of armour to protect the 
artillery inside the forts, the suppression of all artillery positions 
open to overhead fire, and the multiplication of intermediate 
batteries (see Fortification and Siegecraet). In h'is capacity 
of inspector-general Brialmont drafted and carried out the 
whole scheme for the defences of Belgium. He was an inde- 
fatigable writer, and produced, besides essays, reviews and 
other papers in the journals, twenty-three important works 
and forty-nine pamphlets. In 1850 he originated the Journal 
de I'armee Beige. His most important publications were La 
Fortification du temps present (Brussels, 1885); Influence du tir 
plongeant et des obus-torpilles sur la fortification (Brussels, 1888) ; 
Les Rigions fortifiees (Brussels, 1890); La Defense des etats et la 
fortification a la fin du XIX C siecle (Brussels, 1895); Progres de 
la dlfense des Stats et de la fortification permanente depuis Vauban 
(Brussels, 1898). 

BRIAN (926-1014), king of Ireland, known as Brian Boru, 
Boroma, or Boroimhe (from boroma, an Irish word for tribute), 
was a son of a certain Kennedy or Cenneide (d. 951)- He 
passed his youth in fighting against the Danes, who were con- 
stantly ravaging Munster, the northern part of which district 
was the home of Brian's tribe, and won much fame in these 
encounters. In 976 his brother, Mathgamhain or Mahon, who 
had become king of Thomond about 951 and afterwards king 
of Munster, was murdered; Brian avenged this deed, became 
himself king of Munster in 978, and set out upon his career of 
conquest. He forced the tribes of Munster and then those 
of Leinster to own his sovereignty, defeated the Danes, who 
were established around Dublin, in Wicklow, and marched into 



Dublin, and after several reverses compelled Malachy (Maelsech- 
lainn), the chief king of Ireland, who ruled in Meath, to bow 
before him in 1002. Connaught was his next objective. Here 
and also in Ulster he was successful, everywhere he received 
hostages and tribute, and he was generally recognized as the 
ardri, or chief king of Ireland. After a period of comparative 
quiet Brian was again at war with the Danes of Dublin, and on 
the 23rd of April 1014 his forces gained a great victory over 
them at Clontarf. After this battle, however, the old king was 
slain in his tent, and was buried at Armagh. Brian has enjoyed 
a great and not undeserved reputation. One of his charters 
is still preserved in Trinity College, Dublin. 

See E. A. D'Alton, History of Ireland, vol. i. (1903). 

BRIAN^ON, a strongly fortified town in the department of 
Hautes-Alpes in S.E. France. It is built at a height of 4334 ft. 
on a plateau which dominates the junction of the Durance with 
the Guisane. The town itself is formed of very steep and 
narrow, though picturesque streets. As it lies at the foot of the 
descent from the Mont Genevre Pass, giving access to Turin, a 
great number of fortifications have been constructed on the 
heights around Briancon, especially towards the east. The 
Fort Janus is no less than 4000 ft. above the town. The parish 
church, with its two towers, was built 1703-17 26, and occupies a 
very conspicuous position. The Pont d'Asfeld, E. of the town, 
was built in 1734, and forms an arch of 131 ft. span, thrown at 
a height of 184 ft. across the Durance. The modern town 
extends in the plain at the S.W. foot of the plateau on which 
the old town is built and forms the suburb of Ste Catherine, 
with the railway station, and an important silk-weaving factory. 
Briancon is 51^ m. by rail from Gap. The commune had a 
civil population in 1906 of 4883 (urban population 3130), while 
the permanent garrison was 2641 — in all 7524 inhabitants. 

Briancon was the Brigantium of the Romans and formed part 
of the kingdom of King Cottius. About 1040 it came into the 
hands of the counts of Albon (later dauphins of the Viennois) 
and thenceforth shared the fate of the Dauphine. The Brian- 
connais included not merely the upper valley of the Durance 
(with those of its affluents, the Gyronde and the Guil), but also 
the valley of the Dora Riparia (Cesanne, Oulx, Bardonneche 
and Exilles), and that of the Chisone (Fenestrelles, Perouse> 
Pragelas) — these glens all lying on the eastern slope of the chain 
of the Alps. But by the treaty of Utrecht (1713) all these 
valleys were handed over to Savoy in exchange for that of 
Barcelonnette, on the west slope of the Alps. In 1815 Briancon 
successfully withstood a siege of three months at the hands of 
the Allies, a feat which is commemorated by an inscription on 
one of its gates, Le passe repond de I'avenir. (W. A. B. C.) 

BRIAND, ARISTIDE (1862- ), French statesman, was 
born at Nantes, of a bourgeois family. He studied law, and 
while still young took to politics, associating himself with the 
most advanced movements, writing articles for the anarchist 
journal Le Peuple, and directing the Lanterne for some time. 
From this he passed to the Petite Ripublique, leaving it to found, 
with Jean Jaures, L'Humanite. At the same time he was pro- 
minent in the movement for the formation of labour unions, 
and at the congress of working men at Nantes in 1894 he secured 
the adoption of the labour union idea against the adherents of 
Jules Guesde. From that time, Briand became one of the 
leaders of the French Socialist party. In 1902, after several 
unsuccessful attempts, he was elected deputy. He declared 
himself a strong partisan of the union of the Left in what is 
known as the Bloc, in order to check the reactionary deputies 
of the Right. From the beginning of his career in the chamber 
of deputies, Briand was occupied with the question of the 
separation of church and state. He was appointed reporter 
of the commission charged with the preparation of the law, 
and his masterly report at once marked him out as one of the 
coming leaders. He succeeded in carrying his project through 
with but slight modifications, and without dividing the parties 
upon whose support he relied. He was the principal author of 
the law of separation, but, not content with preparing it, he 
wished to apply it as well, especially as the existing Rouvier 



S'6 



BRIANZA— BRIBERY 



ministry allowed disturbances to occur during the taking of 
inventories of church property, a clause of the law for which 
Briand was not responsible. Consequently he accepted the 
portfolio of public instruction and worship in the Sarrien ministry 
(1906). So far as the chamber was concerned his success was 
complete. But the acceptance of a portfolio in a bourgeois 
ministry led to his exclusion from the Unified Socialist party 
(March 1906). As opposed to Jaures, he contended that the 
Socialists should co-operate actively with the Radicals in all 
matters of reform, and not stand aloof to await the complete 
fulfilment of their ideals. 

BRIANZA, a district of Lombardy, Italy, forming the south 
part of the province of Como, between the two southern arms 
of the lake of that name. . It is thickly populated and remark- 
able for its fertility; and being hilly is a favourite summer resort 
of the Milanese. 

BRIARE, a town of north-central France in the department 
of Loiret on the right bank of the Loire, 45^ m. S.E. of Orleans 
on the railway to Nevers. Pop. (1906) 4613. Briare, the 
Brivodorum of the Romans, is situated at the extremity of the 
Canal of Briare, which unites the Loire and its lateral canal with 
the Loing and so with the Seine. The canal of Briare was con- 
structed from 1605 to 1642 and is about 36 m. long. The indus- 
tries include the manufacture of fine pottery, and of so-called 
porcelain buttons made of felspar and milk by a special process; 
its inventor, Bapterosses, has a bust in the town. The canal 
traffic is in wood, iron, coal, building materials, &c. A modern 
hospital and church, and the hotel de ville installed in an old 
moated chateau, are the chief buildings. The lateral canal of 
the Loire crosses the Loire near Briare by a fine canal-bridge 
720 yds. in length. 

BRIAREUS, or Aegaeon, in Greek mythology, one of the 
three hundred-armed, fifty-headed Hecatoncheires, brother of 
Cottus and Gyges (or Gyes). According to Homer {Iliad i. 403) 
he was called Aegaeon by men, and Briareus by the gods. He 
was the son of Poseidon (or Uranus) and Gaea. The legends 
regarding him and his brothers' are various and somewhat 
contradictory. According to the most widely spread myth, 
Briareus and his brothers were called by Zeus to his assistance 
when the Titans were making war upon Olympus. The gigantic 
enemies were defeated and consigned to Tartarus, at the gates 
of which the three brothers were placed (Hesiod, Theog. 624, 
639, 714). Other accounts make Briareus one of the assailants of 
Olympus, who, after his defeat, was buried under Mount Aetna 
(Callimachus, Hymn to Delos, 141). Homer mentions him as 
assisting Zeus when the other Olympian deities were plotting 
against the king of gods and men (Iliad i. 398). Another 
tradition makes him a giant of the sea, ruler of the fabulous 
Aegaea in Euboea, an enemy of Poseidon and the inventor of 
warships (Schol. on Apoll. Rhod. i. 1165). It would be difficult 
to determine exactly what natural phenomena are symbolized 
by the Hecatoncheires. They may represent the gigantic forces 
of nature which appear in earthquakes and other convulsions, or 
the multitudinous motion of the sea waves (Mayer, Die Giganten 
und Titanen, 1887). 

BRIBERY (from the O. Fr. briberie, begging or vagrancy, 
bribe, Mid. Lat. briba, signifying a piece of bread given to beggars; 
the Eng. " bribe " has passed through the meanings of alms, 
blackmail and extortion, to gifts received or given in order 
to influence corruptly). The public offence of bribery may be 
defined as the offering or giving of payment in some shape or 
form that it may be a motive in the performance of functions for 
which the proper motive ought to be a conscientious sense of duty. 
When this is superseded by the sordid impulses created by the 
bribe, a person is said to be corrupted, and thus corruption is a 
term sometimes keld equivalent to bribery. The offence may 
be divided into two great classes — the one where a person in- 
vested with power is induced by payment to use it unjustly; the 
other, where power is obtained by purchasing the suffrages of 
those who can impart it. It is a natural propensity, removable 
only by civilization or some powerful counteracting influence, to 
feel that every element of power is to be employed as much as 



possible for the owner's own behoof, and that its benefits should 
be conferred not on those who best deserve them, but on those 
who will pay most for them. Hence judicial corruption is an 
inveterate vice of imperfect civilization. There is, perhaps no 
other crime on which the force of law, if unaided by public opinion 
and morals, can have so little influence; for in other crimes, 
such as violence or fraud, there is generally some person immedi- 
ately injured by the act, who can give his aid in the detection of 
the offender, but in the perpetration of the offence of bribery 
all the immediate parties obtain what they desire, and are 
satisfied. 

The purification of the bench from judicial bribery has been 
gradual in most of the European countries. In France it received 
an impulse in the 16th century from the high-minded chancellor, 
Michel de L'H6pital. In England judicial corruption has been 
a crime of remarkable rarity. Indeed, with the exception of a 
statute of 1384 (repealed by the Statute Law Revision Act 188 1) 
there has been no legislation relating to judicial bribery. The 
earliest recorded case was that of Sir William Thorpe, who in 
13 5 1 was fined and removed from office for accepting bribes. 
Other celebrated cases were those of Michael de la Pole, chancellor 
of England, in 1387; Lord Chancellor Bacon in 1621; Lionel 
Cranfield, earl of Middlesex, in 1624; and Sir Thomas Parker, 
1st earl of Macclesfield, in 1725. In Scotland for some years 
after the Revolution the bench was not without a suspicion 
of interested partiality; but since the beginning of the 19th 
century, at least, there has been in all parts of the empire a perfect 
reliance on its purity. The same may be said of the higher class 
of ministerial officers. There is no doubt that in the period from 
the Revolution to the end of Queen Anne's reign, when a speaker 
of the House of Commons was expelled for bribery, and the 
great Marlborough could not clear his character from pecuniary 
dishonesty, there was much corruption in the highest official 
quarters. The level of the offence of official bribery has gradually 
descended, until it has become an extremely rare thing for the 
humbler officers connected with the revenue to be charged with 
it. It has had a more lingering existence with those who, 
because their power is more of a constitutional than an 
official character, have been deemed less responsible to the public. 
During Walpole's administration there is no doubt that members 
of parliament were paid in cash for votes; and the memorable 
saying, that every man has his price, has been preserved as a 
characteristic indication of his method of government. One 
of the forms in which administrative corruption is most difficult 
of eradication is the appointment to office. It is sometimes 
maintained that the purity which characterizes the administra- 
tion of justice is here unattainable, because in giving a judgment 
there is but one form in which it can be justly given, but when 
an office has to be filled many people may be equally fitted for 
it, and personal motives must influence a choice. It very rarely 
happens, however, that direct bribery is supposed to influence 
such appointments. It does not appear that bribery was con- 
spicuous in England until, in the early part of the 18th century, 
constituencies had thrown off the feudal dependence which 
lingered among them; and, indeed, it is often said, that bribery 
is essentially the defect of a free people, since it is the sale of 
that which is taken from others without payment. 

In English law bribery of a privy councillor or a juryman 
(see Embracery) is punishable as a misdemeanour, as is the 
taking of a bribe by any judicial or ministerial officer. The 
buying and selling of public offices is also regarded at common 
law as a form of bribery. B y the Customs Consolidation Act 1876, 
any officer in the customs service is liable to instant dismissal 
and a penalty of £500 for taking a bribe, and any person offering 
or promising a bribe or reward to an officer to neglect his duty 
or conceal or connive at any act by which the customs may be 
evaded shall forfeit the sum of £200. Under the Inland Revenue 
Regulations Act 1890, the bribery of commissioners, collectors, 
officers or other persons employed in relation to the Inland 
Revenue involves a fine of £500. The Merchant Shipping Act 
1894, ss. 112 and 398, makes provision for certain offences in 
the nature of bribery. Bribery is, by the Extradition Act 1906, 



BRIC A BRAC— BRICK 



5*7 



an extraditable offence* Administrative corruption was dealt 
with in the Public Bodies' Corrupt Practices Act 1889. The 
public bodies concerned are county councils, town or borough 
councils, boards, commissioners, select vestries and other 
bodies having local government, public health or poor law 
powers, and having for those purposes, to administer rates raised 
under public general acts. The giving or receiving, promising, 
offering, soliciting or agreeing to receive any gift, fee, loan or 
advantage by any person as an inducement for any act or for- 
bearance by a member, officer or servant of a public body in 
regard to the affairs of that body is made a misdemeanour in 
England and Ireland and a crime and offence in Scotland. Pro- 
secution under the act requires the consent of the attorney- or 
solicitor-general in England or Ireland and of the lord advocate 
in Scotland. Conviction renders liable to imprisonment with or 
without hard labour for a term not exceeding two years, and to 
a fine not exceeding £500, in addition to or in lieu of imprison- 
ment. The offender may also be ordered to pay to the public 
body concerned any bribe received by him; he may be adjudged 
incapable for seven years of holding public office, i.e. the position 
of member, officer or servant of a public body; and if already 
an officer or servant, besides forfeiting his place, he is liable at the 
discretion of the court to forfeit his right to compensation or 
pension. On a second conviction he may be adjudged forever 
incapable of holding public office, and for seven years incapable 
of being registered or of voting as a parliamentary elector, or 
as an elector of members of a public body. An offence under 
the act may be prosecuted and punished under any other act 
applicable thereto, or at common law; but no person is to be 
punished twice for the same offence. Bribery at political 
elections was at common law punishable by indictment or 
information, but numerous statutes have been passed deal- 
ing with it as a " corrupt practice." In this sense, the word is 
elastic in meaning and may embrace any method of corruptly 
influencing another for the purpose of securing his vote (see 
Corrupt Practices). Bribery at elections of fellows, scholars, 
officers and other persons in colleges, cathedral and collegiate 
churches, hospitals and other societies was prohibited ini 588-1 589 
by statute (31 Eliz. c. 6). If a member receives any money, 
fee, reward or other profit for giving his vote in favour of any 
candidate, he forfeits his own place; if for any such consideration 
he resigns to make room for a candidate, he forfeits double 
the amount of the bribe, and the candidate by or on whose 
behalf a bribe is given or promised is incapable of being elected 
on that occasion. The act is to be read at every election of 
fellows, &c, under a penalty of £40 in case of default. By 
the same act any person for corrupt consideration presenting, 
instituting or inducting to an ecclesiastical benefice or dignity 
forfeits two years' value of the benefice or dignity; the corrupt 
presentation is void, and the right to present lapses for that tum 
to the crown, and the corrupt presentee is disabled from there- 
after holding the same benefice or dignity; a corrupt institution 
or induction is void, and the patron may present. For a corrupt 
resignation or exchange of a benefice the giver and taker of a 
bribe forfeit each double the amount of the bribe. Any person 
corruptly procuring the ordaining of ministers or granting of 
licenses to preach forfeits £40, and the person so ordained forfeits 
£10 and for seven years is incapacitated from holding any 
ecclesiastical benefice or promotion. 

In the United States the offence of bribery is very severely 
dealt with. In many states, bribery or the attempt to bribe is 
made a felony, and is punishable with varying terms of imprison- 
ment, in some jurisdictions it may be with a period not exceeding 
ten years. The offence of bribery at elections is dealt with on 
much the same lines as in England, voiding the election and dis- 
qualifying the offender from holding any office. 

Bribery may also take the form of a secret commission (q.v.), 
a profit made by an agent, in the course of his employment, 
without the knowledge of his principal. 

BRIC A BRAC (a French word, formed by a kind of onomato- 
poeia, meaning a heterogeneous collection of odds and ends; cf. 
\de brie et de broc, corresponding to our " by hook or by crook "; 



or by reduplication from brack, refuse), objects of " virtu," a 
collection of old furniture, china, plate and curiosities. 

BRICK (derived according to some etymologists from the 
Teutonic bricke, a disk or plate; but more authoritatively, 
through the French brique, originally a " broken piece," applied 
especially to bread, and so to clay, from the Teutonic brikan, to 
break) , a kind of artificial stone generally made of burnt clay, 
and largely used as a building material. 

History. — The art of making bricks dates from very early times, 
and was practised by all the civilized nations of antiquity. The 
earliest burnt bricks known are those found on the sites of the 
ancient cities of Babylonia, and it seems probable that the method 
of making strong and durable bricks, by burning blocks of dried 
clay, was discovered in this corner of Asia. We know at least 
that well-burnt bricks were made by the Babylonians more than 
6000 years ago, and that they were extensively used in the time 
of Sargon of Akkad (c. 3800 B.C.). The site of the ancient city of 
Babylon is still marked by huge mounds of bricks, the ruins of 
its great walls, towers and palaces, although it has been the 
custom for centuries to carry away from these heaps the bricks 
required for the building of the modern towns in the surrounding 
country. The Babylonians and Assyrians attained to a high 
degree of proficiency in brickmaking, notably in the manufacture 
of bricks having a coating of coloured glaze or enamel, which they 
largely used for wall decoration. The Chinese claim great 
antiquity for their clay industries, but it is not improbable that 
the knowledge of brickmaking travelled eastwards from Babylonia 
across the whole of Asia. It is believed that the art of making 
glazed bricks, so highly developed afterwards by the Chinese, 
found its way across Asia from the west, through Persia and 
northern India, to China. The great wall of China was con- 
structed partly of brick, both burnt and unbumt; but this was 
built at a comparatively late period (c. 210 B.C.), and there is 
nothing to show that the Chinese had any knowledge of burnt 
bricks when the art flourished in Babylonia. 

Brickmaking formed the chief occupation of the Israelites 
during their bondage in Egypt, but in this case the bricks were 
probably sun-dried only, and not burnt. These bricks were made 
of a mixture of clay and chopped straw or reeds, worked into a 
stiff paste with water. The clay was the river mud from the 
banks of the Nile, and as this had not sufficient cohesion in itself, 
the chopped straw (or reeds) was added as a binding material. 
The addition of such substances increases the plasticity of wet 
clay, especially if the mixture is allowed to stand for some days 
before use; so that the action of the chopped straw was twofold; 
a fact possibly known to the Egyptians. These sun-dried bricks, 
or " adobes," are still made, as of old, on the banks of the Nile 
by the following method: — A shallow pit or bed is prepared, 
into which are thrown the mud, chopped straw and water in 
suitable proportions, and the whole mass is tramped on until it is 
thoroughly mixed and of the proper consistence. This mixture 
is removed in lumps and shaped into bricks, in moulds or by 
hand, the bricks being simply sun-dried. 

Pliny mentions that three kinds of bricks were made by the 
Greeks, but there is no indication that they were used to any great 
extent, and probably the walls of Athens on the side towards 
Mount Hymettus were the most important brick-structures in 
ancient Greece. The Romans became masters of the brick- 
maker's art, though they probably acquired much of their know- 
ledge in the East, during their occupation of Egypt and Greece. 
In any case they revived and extended the manufacture of bricks 
about the beginning of the Christian era; exercising great care in 
the selection and preparation of their clay, and introducing the 
method of burning bricks in kilns. They carried their knowledge 
and their methods throughout western Europe, and there is 
abundant evidence that they made bricks extensively in Germany 
and in Britain. 

Although brickmaking was thus introduced into Britain 
nearly 2000 years ago, the art seems to have been lost when the 
Romans withdrew from the country, and it is doubtful whether 
any burnt bricks were made in England from that time until 
the 13th century. Such bricks as were us^d during this long 



5 i8 



BRICK 



period were generally taken from the remains of Roman buildings, 
as at Colchester and St Albans Abbey. One of the earliest exist- 
ing brick buildings, erected after the revival of brickmaking in 
England, is Little Wenham Hall, in Suffolk, built about a. d. 
i 210; but it was not until the 15th century that bricks came 
into general use again, and then only for important edifices. 
During the reign of Henry VIII. brickmaking was brought to 
great perfection, probably by workmen brought from Flanders, 
and the older portions of St James's Palace and Hampton Court 
Palace remain to testify to the skill then attained. In the 16th 
century bricks were increasingly used, but down to the Great 
Fire of London, in 1666, the smaller buildings, shops and dwelling- 
houses, were constructed of timber framework filled in with lath 
and plaster. In the rebuilding of London after the fire, bricks 
were largely used, and from the end of the 17th century to the 
present day they have been almost exclusively used in all ordi- 
nary buildings throughout the country, except in those districts 
where building stone is plentiful and good brick-clay is not readily 
procurable. The bricks made in England before 1625 were of 
many sizes, there being no recognized standard; but in that 
year the sizes were regulated by statute, and the present standard 
size was adopted, viz. 9X41X3 in. In 1784 a tax was levied 
on bricks, which was not repealed until 1850. The tax averaged 
ahout 4s. 7d. per thousand on ordinary bricks, and special bricks 
were still more heavily taxed. 

The first brick buildings in America were erected on Manhattan 
Island in the year 1633 by a governor of the Dutch West India 
Company. These bricks were made in Holland, where the 
industry had long reached great excellence; and for many 
years bricks were imported into America from Holland and 
from England. In America burnt bricks were first made at 
New Haven about 1650, and the manufacture slowly spread 
through the New England states; but for many years the home- 
made article was inferior to that imported from Europe. 

The Dutch and the Germans were the great brickmakers of 
Europe during the middle ages, although the Italians, from the 
14th to the 15th century, revived and developed the art of 
decorative brick-work or terra-cotta, and discovered the method 
of applying coloured enamels to these materials. Under the 
Delia Robbias, in the 15th century, some of the finest work of 
this class that the world has seen was executed, but it can 
scarcely be included under brickwork. 

Brick Clays. — All clays are the result of the denudation and 
decomposition of felspathic and siliceous rocks, and consist of 
the fine insoluble particles which have been carried in suspension 
in water and deposited in geologic basins according to their 
specific gravity and degree of fineness (see Clay) . These deposits 
have been formed in all geologic epochs from the " Recent " 
to the " Cambrian," and they vary in hardness from the soft and 
plastic " alluvial " clays to the hard and rock-like shales and 
slates of the older formations. The alluvial and drift clays 
(which were alone used for brickmaking until modern times) are 
found near the surface, are readily worked and require little 
preparation, whereas the older sedimentary deposits are often 
difficult to work and necessitate the use of heavy machinery. 
These older shales, or rocky clays, may be brought into plastic 
condition by long weathering {i.e. by exposure to rain, frost and 
sun) or by crushing and grinding in water, and they then resemble 
ordinary alluvial clays in every respect. 

The clays or earths from which burnt bricks are made may be 
divided into two principal types, according to chemical com- 
position: (1) Clays or shales containing only a small percentage 
of carbonate of lime and consisting chiefly of hydrated aluminium 
silicates (the " true clay substance ") with more or less sand, 
undecomposed grains of felspar, and oxide or carbonate of iron; 
these clays usually burn to a buff, salmon or red colour; (2) 
Clays containing a considerable percentage of carbonate of lime 
in addition to the substances above mentioned. These latter 
clay deposits are known as "marls," 1 and may contain as much 

1 The term " marl " has been wrongly applied to many fire-clays. 
It should be restricted to natural mixtures of clay and chalk such 
as those of the Paris ahd London basins. 



as 40% of chalk. They burn to a sulphur-yellow colour which 
is quite distinctive. 

Brick clays of class (1) are very widely distributed, and have a 
more extensive geological range than the marls, which are found 
in connexion with chalk or limestone formations only. These 
ordinary brick clays vary considerably in composition, and 
many clays, as they are found in nature, are unsuitable for 
brickmaking without the addition of some other kind of clay or 
sand. The strongest brick clays, i.e. those possessing the greatest 
plasticity and tensile strength, are usually those which contain 
the highest percentage of the hydrated aluminium silicates, 
although the exact relation of plasticity to chemical composition 
has not yet been determined. This statement cannot be applied 
indiscriminately to all clays, but may be taken as fairly applicable 
to clays of one general type (see Clay) . All clays contain more 
or less free silica in the form of sand, and usually a small percent- 
age of undecomposed felspar. The most important ingredient, 
after the clay-substance and the sand, is oxide of iron; 
for the colour, and, to a less extent, the hardness and 
durability of the burnt bricks depend on its presence. The 
amount of oxide of iron in these clays varies from about 2 to 
10%, and the colour of the bricks varies accordingly from light 
buff to chocolate; although the colour developed by a given 
percentage of oxide of iron is influenced by the other substances 
present and also by the method of firing. A clay containing 
from s to 8 % of oxide of iron will, under ordinary conditions of 
firing, produce a red brick; but if the clay contains 3 to 4% 
of alkalis, or the brick is fired too hard, the colour will be darker 
and more purple. The actions of the alkalis and of increased 
temperature are probably closely related, for in either case the 
clay is brought nearer to its fusion point, and ferruginous clays 
generally become darker in colour as they approach to fusion. 
Alumina acts in the opposite direction, an excess of this com- 
pound tending to make the colour lighter and brighter. It is 
impossible to give a typical composition for such clays, as the 
percentages of the different constituents vary through such wide 
ranges. The clay substance may vary from 1 5 to 80 %, the free 
silica or sand from 5 to 80%, the oxide of iron from 1 to 10%, 
the carbonates of lime and magnesia together, from 1 to 5%, 
and the alkalis from 1 to 4%. Organic matter is always present, 
and other impurities which frequently occur are the sulphates 
of lime and magnesia, the chlorides and nitrates of soda and 
potash, and iron-pyrites. The presence of organic matter gives 
the wet clay a greater plasticity, probably because it forms a 
kind of mucilage which adds a certain viscosity and adhesiveness 
to the natural plasticity of the clay. In some of the coal- 
measure shales the amount of organic matter is very considerable, 
and may render the clay useless for brickmaking. The other 
impurities, all of which, except the pyrites, are soluble in water, 
are undesirable, as they give rise to " scum," which produces 
patchy colour and pitted faces on the bricks. The commonest 
soluble impurity is calcium sulphate, which produces a whitish 
scum on the face of the brick in drying, and as the sCum becomes 
permanently fixed in burning, such bricks are of little use except 
for common work. This question of "scumming" is very im- 
portant to the maker of high-class facing and moulded bricks, 
and where a clay containing calcium sulphate must be used, a 
certain percentage of barium carbonate is nowadays added to 
the wet clay. By this means the calcium sulphate is converted 
into calcium carbonate which is insoluble in water, so that it 
remains distributed throughout the mass of the brick instead of 
being deposited on the surface. The presence of magnesium 
salts is also very objectionable, as these generally remain in the 
burnt brick as magnesium sulphate, which gives rise to an 
efflorescence of fine white crystals after the bricks are built into 
position. Clays which are strong or plastic are known as " fat " 
clays, and they always contain a high percentage of true " clay 
substance," and, consequently, a low percentage of sand. Such 
clays take up a considerable amount of water in "tempering"; 
they dry slowly, shrink greatly, and so become liable to lose 
their shape and develop cracks in drying and firing. " Fat " 
clays are greatly improved by the addition of coarse sharp sand, 



BRICK 



519 



which reduces the time of drying and the shrinkage, and makes 
the brick more rigid during the firing. Coarse sand, unlike 
clay-substance, is practically unaffected during the drying and 
firing, and is a desirable if not a necessary ingredient of all brick 
clays. The best brick-clays feel gritty between the fingers; 
they should, of course, be free from pebbles, sufficiently plastic to 
be moulded into shape and strong enough when dry to be safely 
handled. All clays are greatly improved by being turned over 
and exposed to the weather, or by standing for some months in a 
wet condition. This "weathering" and "ageing" of clay is par- 
ticularly important where bricks are made from tempered clay , i.e. 
clay in the wet or plastic state; where bricks are made from shale, 
in the semi-plastic condition, weathering is still of importance. 

The lime clays or "marls" of class (2), which contain essentially 
a high percentage of chalk or limestone, are not so widely 
distributed as the ordinary brick-clays, and in England the 
natural deposits of these clays have been largely exhausted. 
A very fine chalk-clay, or " malm " as it was locally called, 
was formerly obtained from the alluvium in the vicinity of 
London; but the available supply of this has been used up, and 
at the present time an artificial " malm " is prepared by mixing 
an ordinary brick-clay with ground chalk. For the best London 
facing-bricks the clay and chalk are mixed in water. The chalk 
is ground on grinding-pans, and the clay is mixed with water 
and worked about until the mixture has the consistence of cream. 
The mixture of these " pulps " is run through a grating or coarse 
sieve on to a drying-kiln or " bed," where it is allowed to stand 
until stiff enough to walk on. A layer of fine ashes is then spread 
over the clay, and the mass is turned over and mixed by spade, 
and tempered by the addition of water. In other districts, where 
clays containing limestone are used, the marl is mixed with water 
on a wash-pan and the resulting creamy fluid passed through 
coarse sieves on to a drying-bed. If necessary, coarse sand is 
added to the clay in the wash-pan, and such addition is often 
advisable because the washed clays are generally very fine in 
grain. Another method of treating these marls, when they are 
in the plastic condition, is to squeeze them by machinery through 
iron gratings, which arrest and remove the pebbles. In other 
cases the marl is passed through a grinding-mill having a solid 
bottom and heavy iron rollers, by which means the limestone 
pebbles are crushed sufficiently and mixed through the whole 
mass. The removal of limestone pebbles from the clay is of 
great importance, as during the firing they would be converted 
into quicklime, which has a tendency to shatter the brick 
on exposure to the weather. As before stated, these marls 
(which usually contain from 1 5 to 30 % of calcium carbonate) 
burn to a yellow colour which is quite distinctive, although in 
some cases, where the percentage of limestone is very high, 
over 40%, the colour is grey or a very pale buff. The action 
of lime in bleaching the ferric oxide and producing a yellow 
instead of a red brick, has not been thoroughly investigated, 
but it seems probable that some compound is produced, between 
the lime and the oxide of iron, or between these two oxides and 
the free silica, entirely different from that produced by oxide of 
iron in the absence of lime. Such marls require a harder fire than 
the ordinary brick-clays in order to bring about the reaction 
between the lime and the other ingredients. Magnesia may 
replace lime to some extent in such marls, but the firing tempera- 
ture must be higher when magnesia is present. Marls usually 
contract very little, if at all, in the burning, and generally 
produce a strong, square brick of fine texture and good colour. 
When under-fired, marl bricks are very liable to disintegrate 
under the action of the weather, and great care must be exercised 
in burning them at a sufficiently high temperature. 

Brick-making. — Bricks made of tempered clay may be made 
by hand or by machine, and the machines may be worked by 
hand or by mechanical power. Bricks made of semi-plastic 
clay {i.e. ground clay or shale sufficiently damp to adhere under 
pressure) are generally machine-made throughout. The method 
of making bricks by hand is the same, with slight variation, the 
world over. The tempered clay is pressed by hand into a 
wooden or metal mould or four-sided case (without top or 



I bottom) Which is of the desired shape and size, allowance being 
I made for the shrinkage of the brick in drying and firing. The 
moulder stands at the bench or table, dips the mould in water, 
or water and then sand, to prevent the clay from sticking, takes 
a rudely shaped piece of clay from an assistant, and dashes this 
into the mould which rests on the moulding bench. He then 
presses the clay into the corners of the mould with his fingers, 
scrapes off any surplus clay and levels the top by means of a 
strip of wood called a " strike," and then turns the brick out of 
the mould on to a board, to be carried away by another assistant 
to the drying-ground. The mould may be placed on a special 
piece, of wood, called the stock-board, provided with an elevated 
tongue of wood in the centre, which produces the hollow or " frog " 
in the bottom of the brick. 

Machine-made bricks may be diyided into two kinds, plastic and 
semi-plastic, although the same type of machine is often used for 
both kinds. 

The machine-made plastic bricks are made of tempered clay, but 
generally the. tempering and working of the clay are effected by 
the use of machinery, especially when the harder clays and shales 
are used. The. machines used in the preparation of such clays are 
grinding-mills and pug-mills. The grinding-mills are either a series 
of rollers with graduated spaces between, through which the clay 
or shale is passed, or are of the ordinary " mortar pan " type, having 
a solid or perforated iron bottom on which the clay or shale is 
crushed by heavy rollers. Shales are sometimes passed through a 
gnnding-mill before they are exposed to the action of the weather, 
as the disintegration of the hard lumps of shale greatly accelerates 
the weathering." In the case of ordinary brick-clay, in the plastic 
condition, grinding-mills are only used when pebbles more than a 
quarter of an inch in diameter are present, as otherwise the clay 
may be passed directly through the pug-mill, a process which may be 
repeated if necessary. The pug-mill consists of a box or trough 
having a feed hole at one end and a delivery hole or nose at the other 
end, and provided with a central shaft which carries knives and 
cutters so arranged that when the shaft revolves they cut and knead 
the clay, and at the same time force it towards and through the 
delivery nose. The cross section of this nose of the pug-mill is 
approximately the same as that of the required brick (9 in. X 4j in. 
plus contraction, for ordinary bricks), so that the pug delivers a 
solid or continuous mass of clay from which bricks may be made by 
merely making a series of square cuts at the proper distances apart. 
In practice, the clay is pushed from the pug along a smooth iron 
plate, which is provided with a wire cutting frame having a number 
of tightly stretched wires placed at certain distances apart, arranged 
so that they can be brought down upon, and through, the clay 
and so many bricks cut off at intervals. The frame is sometimes in 
the form of a skeleton cylinder, the wires being arranged radially 
(or the wires may be replaced by metal disks) ; but in all cases bricks 
thus made are known as " wire-cuts." In order to obtain a better- 
shaped and more compact brick, these wire-cuts may be placed 
under a brick press and there squeezed into iron moulds under great 
pressure. These two processes are now generally performed by one 
machine, consisting of pug-mill and brick press combined. The pug 
delivers the clay, downwards, into the mould ; the proper amount of 
clay is cut off ; and the mould is made to travel into position under 
the ram of the press, which squeezes the clay into a solid mass. 

There are many forms of brick press, a few for hand power, but 
the most adapted for belt-driving; although in recent years hydraulic 
presses have come more and more into use, especially in Germany 
and America. The essential parts of a brick press are: (1) a box or 
frame in which the clay is moulded; (2) a plunger or die carried 
on the end of a ram, which gives the necessary pressure ; (3) an 
arrangement for pushing the pressed brick out of the moulding box. 
Such presses are generally made of iron throughout, although other 
metals are used, occasionally, for the moulds and dies. The greatest 
variations found in brick presses are in the means adopted for actuat- 
ing the ram; and many ingenious mechanical devices have been, 
applied to this end, each claiming some particular advantage over 
its predecessors. In many recent presses, especially where semi- 
plastic clay is used, the brick is pressed simultaneously from top and; 
bottom, a second ram, working upwards from beneath, giving the 
additional pressure. 

Although the best bricks are still pressed from tempered or plastic 
clay, there has recently been a great development in the manufacture 
of semi-plastic or dust-made bricks, especially in those districts 
where shales are used for brickmaking. These semi-plastic bricks are 
stamped out of ground shale that has been sufficiently moistened 
with water to enable it to bind together. The hard-clay, or shale, 
is crushed under heavy rollers in an iron grinding-pan having a 
perforated bottom through which the crushed clay passes, when 
sufficiently fine, into a small compartment underneath. This clay 
powder is then delivered, by an elevator, into a sieve or screen, 
which retains the coarser particles for regrinding. Sets of rollers 
may also be used for crushing shales that are only moderately hard, 
the ground material being sifted as before. The material, as fed 



520 



BRICK 



into the mould of the press, is a coarse, damp powder which becomes 
adhesive under pressure, producing a so-called " semi-plastic" 
brick. The presses used are similar to those employed for plastic 
clay, but they are generally more strongly and heavily built, and 
are capable of applying a greater pressure. 

The semi-plastic method has many advantages where shales are 
used, although the bricks are not as strong nor as perfect as the best 
" plastic " bricks. The method, however, enables the brickmaker 
to make use of certain kinds of clay-rock, or shale, that would be 
impracticable for plastic bricks; and the weathering, tempering 
and " ageing " may be largely or entirely dispensed with. The 
plant required is heavier and more costly, but the brickyard becomes 
more compact, and the processes are simpler than with the " plastic " 
method. 

The drying of bricks, which was formerly done in the open, is 
now, in most cases, conducted in a special shed heated by flues along 
which the heated gases from the kilns pass on their way to the 
chimney. It is important that the atmosphere of the drying-shed 
should be fairly dry, to which end suitable means of ventilation 
must be arranged (by fans or otherwise). If the atmosphere is too 
moist the surface of the brick remains damp for a considerable time, 
and the moisture from the interior passes to the surface as Water, 
carrying with it the soluble salts, which are deposited on the surface 
as the water slowly evaporates. This deposit produces the " scum " 
already referred to. When the drying is done in a dry atmosphere 
the surface quickly dries and hardens, and the moisture from the 
interior passes to the surface as vapour, the soluble salts being left 
distributed through the whole mass, and consequently no " scum " is 
produced. Plastic bricks take much longer to dry than semi-plastic ; 
they shrink more and have a greater tendency to warp or twist. 

The burning or firing of bricks is the most important factor in 
their production; for their strength and durability depend very 
largely on the character and degree of the firing to which they have 
been subjected. The action of the heat brings about certain chemical 
decompositions and re-combinations which entirely alter the physical 
character of the dry clay. It is important, therefore, that the firing 
should be carefully conducted and that it should be under proper 
control. For ordinary bricks the firing atmosphere should be 
oxidizing, and the finishing temperature should be adjusted to the 
nature of the clay, the object being to produce a hard strong brick, 
of good shape, that will not be too porous and will withstand the 
action of frost. The finishing temperature ranges from 900° C. to 
1250° C, the usual temperature being about 1050° C. for ordinary 
bricks. As before mentioned, lime-clays require a higher firing 
temperature (usually about 1 150° C. to 1200 C.) in order to bring the 
lime into chemical combination with the other substances present. 

It is evident that the best method of firing bricks is to place them 
in permanent kilns, but although such kilns were used by the Romans 
some 2000 years ago, the older method of firing in " clamps " is still 
employed in the smaller brickfields, in every country where bricks 
are made. These clamps are formed by arranging the unfired bricks 
in a series of rows or walls, placed fairly closely together, so as to 
form a rectangular stack. A certain number of channels, or fire- 
mouths, are formed in the bottom of the clamp; and fine coal is 
spread in horizontal layers between the bricks during the building 
up of the stack. F'res are kindled in the fire-mouths, and the clamp 
is allowed to go on burning until the fuel is consumed throughout. 
The clamp is then allowed to cool, after which it is taken down, 
and the bricks sorted; those that are under-fired being built up 
again in the next clamp for refiring. Sometimes the clamp takes the 
form of a temporary kiln, the outside being built of burnt bricks 
which are plastered over with clay, and the fire-mouths being larger 
and more carefully formed. There are many other local modifica- 
tions in the manner of building up the clamps, all with the object of 
producing a large percentage of well-fired bricks. Clarrfp-flring is 
slow, and also uneconomical, because irregular and not sufficiently 
under control ; and it is now only employed where bricks are made 
on a small scale. 

Brick-kilns are of many forms, but they can all be grouped undet 
two main types — Intermittent kilns and Continuous kilns. The 
intermittent kiln is usually circular in plan, being in the form of 
a vertical cylinder with a domed top. It consists of a single firing- 
chamber in which the unfired bricks are placed, and in the walls of 
which are contrived a number of fire-mouths where wood or coal is 
burned. In the older forms known as up-draught kilns, the products 
of combustion pass from the fire-mouth, through flues, into the 
bottom of the firing-chamber, and thence directly upwards and out 
at the top. The modern plan is to introduce the products of com- 
bustion near the top, or crown, of the kiln, and to draw them down- 
wards through holes in the bottom which lead to flues connected 
with an independent chimney. • These down-draught kilns have short 
chimneys or " bags " built round the inside 'wall in connexion with 
the fire-mouths, which conduct the flames to the upper part of the 
firing-chamber, where they are reverberated and passed down through 
the bricks in obedience to the pull of the chimney. The " bags " 
may be joined together, forming an inner circular wall entirely 
round the firing-chamber, except at the doorway; and a number of 
kilns may be built in a row or group having their bottom flues 
connected with the same tall chimney. Down-draught kilns usually 
give a more regular fire and a higher percentage of well-fired bricks ; 



and they are more economical in fuel consumption than up-draught 
kilns, while the hot gases, as they pass from the kiln, may be utilized 
for drying purposes, being conducted through flues under the fl6or 
of the drying-shed, on their way to the chimney. The method of 
using one tall chimney to work a group of down-draught kilns 
naturally led to the invention of the " continuous " kiln, which is 
really made up of a number of separate kilns or firing-chambers, 
built in series and connected up to the main flue of the chimney in 
such a manner that the products of combustion from one kiln may 
be made to pass through a number of other kilns before entering the 
flue. The earliest form of continuous kiln was invented by Friedrich 
Hoffman, and all kilns of this type are built on the Hoffman principle, 
although there are a great number of modifications of the original 
Hoffman construction. The great principle of" continuous "firing 
is the utilization of the waste heat from one kiln or section of a kiln 
in heating up another kiln or section, direct firing being applied only 
to finish the burning. In practice a number of kilns or firing- 
chambers, usually rectangular in plan, are built side by side in two 
parallel lines, which are connected at the ends by other kilns so as 
to make a complete circuit. The original form of the complete 
series was elliptical in plan, but the tendency in recent years has been 
to flatten the sides of the ellipse and bring them together, thus giving 
two parallel rows joined at the ends by a chamber or passage at right 
angles. Coal or gas is burnt in the chamber or section that is being 
fired-up, the air necessary for the combustion being heated on its 
passage through the kilns that are cooling down, and the products of 
combustion, before entering the chimney flue, are drawn through a 
number of other kilns or chambers containing unfired bricks, which 
are thus gradually heated up by the otherwise waste-heat from the 
sections being fired. Continuous kilns produce a more evenly fired 
product than the intermittent kilns usually do, and, of course, at 
much less cost for fuel. Gas firing is now being extensively applied 
to continuous kilns, natural gas in some instances being used in the 
United States of America; and the methods of construction and 
of firing are carried out with greater care and intelligence, the prime 
objects being economy of fuel and perfect control of firing. Pyro- 
meters are coming into use for the control of the firing temperature, 
with the result that a constant and trustworthy product is turned 
out. The introduction of machinery greatly helped the brickmaking 
industry in opening up new sources of supply of raw material in the 
shales and hardened clays of the sedimentary deposits of the older 
geologic formations, and, with the extended use of continuous firing 
plants, it has led to the establishment of large concerns where every- 
thing is co-ordinated for the production of enormous quantities of 
bricks at a minimum cost. In the United Kingdom, and still more 
in Germany and the United States of America, great improvements 
have been made in machinery, firing-plant and organization, so 
that the whole manufacture is now being conducted on more Scientific 
lines, to the great advantage of the industry. 

Blue Brick is a very strong vitreous brick of dark, slaty-blue 
colour, used in engineering works where great strength or imperme- 
ability is desirable. These bricks are made of clay containing from 
7 to 10% of oxide of iron, and their manufacture is carried out in 
the ordinary way until the later stages of the firing process, when 
they are subjected to the strongly reducing action of a smoky 
atmosphere, which is produced by throwing small bituminous coal 
upon the fire-mouths and damping down the admission of air. ; The 
smoke thus produced reduces the red ferric oxide to blue-green 
ferrous oxide, or to metallic iron, which combines with the silica 
present to form a fusible ferrous silicate. This fusible "slag" 
partly combines with the other silicates present, and partly fills up 
the pores, and so produces a vitreous impermeable layer varying in 
thickness according to the duration and character of the smoking, 
the finishing temperature of the kiln and the texture of the brick. 
Particles of carbon penetrate the surface during the early stages 
of the smoking, and a small quantity of carbon probably enters into 
combination, tending to produce a harder surface and darker colour. 

Floating Bricks were first mentioned by Strabo, the Greek geo- 
grapher, and afterwards by Pliny as being made at Pitane in the 
Troad. The secret of their manufacture was lost for many centuries, 
but was rediscovered in 1791 by Fabroni, an Italian, who made 
them from the fossil meal (diatomaceous earth) found in Tuscany. 
These bricks are very light, fairly strong, and being poor conductors 
of heat, have been employed for the construction of powder-magazines 
on board ship, &c. 

Mortar Bricks belong to the class of unburnt bricks, and are, 
strictly speaking, blocks of artificial stone made in brick moulds. 
These bricks have been made for many years by moulding a mixture 
of sand and slaked lime and allowing the blocks thus made to harden 
in the air. This hardening is brought about partly by evaporation 
of the water, but chiefly by the conversion of the calcium hydrate, 
or slaked lime, into calcium carbonate by the action of the carbonic 
acid in the atmosphere. A sraall proportion of the lime enters into 
combination with the silica and water present to form hydrated 
calcium silicate, and probably a little hydrated basic carbonate of lime 
is also formed, both of which substances are in the nature of cement. 
This process of natural hardening by exposure to the air was a very 
long one, occupying from six to eighteen months, and many improve- 
ments were introduced during the latter half of the 19th century to 
improve the strength of the bricks and to hasten the hardening. 



BRICKFIELDER— BRICKWORK 



52i 



Mixtures of sand, lime and cement (and of certain ground blast- 
furnace slags and lime) were introduced; the moulding was done 
under hydraulic presses and the bricks afterwards treated with carbon 
dioxide under pressure, with or without the application of mild heat. 
Some of these mixtures and methods are still in use, but a new type 
of mortar brick has come into use during recent years which has 
practically superseded the old mortar brick. 

Sand-lime Bricks. — In the early 'eighties of the 19th century, Dr 
Michaelis of Berlin patented a new process for hardening blocks 
made of a mixture of sand and lime by treating them with high-' 
pressure steam for a few hours, and the so-called sand-lime bricks 
are now made On a very extensive scale in many countries. There 
are many differences of detail in the manufacture, but the general 
method is in all cases the same. Dry sand is intimately mixed with 
about one-tenth of its weight of powdered slaked lime, the mixture 
is then slightly moistened with water and afterwards moulded into 
bricks under powerful presses, capable of exerting a pressure of about 
60 tons per sq. in. After removal from the press the bricks are 
immediately placed in huge steel cylinders usually 60 to 80 ft. long 
and about 7 ft. in diameter, and are there subjected to the action of 
high-pressure steam (120 lb to 150 lb per sq. in.) for from ten to 
fifteen hours. The proportion of slaked lime to sand varies according 
to the nature of the lime and the purity and character of the sand, 
one of lime to ten of sand being a fair average. The following is an 
analysis of a typical German sand-lime brick: silica (Si0 2 ), 84%; 
lime (CaO), 7%; alumina andoxide of iron, 2%; water, magnesia 
and alkalis, 7 %• Under the action of the high-pressure steam the 
lime attacks the particles of sand, and a chemical compound of water, 
lime and silica is produced which forms a strong bond between the 
larger particles of sand. This bond of hydrated calcium silicate is 
evidently different from, and of better type than, the filling of 
calcium carbonate produced in the mortar-brick, and the sand-lime 
brick is consequently much stronger than the ordinary mortar-brick, 
however the latter may be made. The sand-lime brick is simple in 
manufacture, and with reasonable care is of constant quality. It is 
usually of a light-grey colour, but may be stained by the addition of 
suitable colouring oxides or pigments unaffected by lime and the 
conditions of manufacture. 

Strength of Brick. — The following figures indicate the crushing load 
for bricks of various types in tons per sq. in. : — 

Common hand-made. . . . . from 04 to 0-9 
,, machine-made . . . . „ 0-9 ,, 1-2 

London stock „ 0-7,, 1-3 

Staffordshire blue 2-8,, 3-3 

Sand-lime ,, 2-9 ,, 3-4 

See also Brickwork. (J. B.*; W. B.*) 

BRICKFIELDER, a term used in Australia for a hot scorching 
wind blowing from the interior, where the sandy wastes, bare 
of vegetation in summer, are intensely heated by the sun. This 
hot wind blows strongly, often for several days at a time, defying 
all attempts to keep the dust down, and parching all vegetation. 
It is in one sense a healthy wind, as, being exceedingly dry and 
hot, it destroys many injurious germs of disease. The northern 
brickfielder is almost invariably followed by a strong " southerly 
buster," cloudy and cool from the ocean. The two winds are 
due to the same cause, viz. a cyclonic system over the Australian 
Bight. 'These systems frequently extend inland as a narrow 
V-shaped depression (the apex northward), bringing the winds 
from the north on their eastern sides and from the south on 
their western. Hence as the narrow system passes eastward 
the wind suddenly changes from north to south, and the ther- 
mometer has been known to fall fifteen degrees in twenty minutes. 

BRICKWORK, in building, the term applied to constructions 
made of bricks. The tools and implements employed by the 
bricklayer are: — the trowel for spreading the mortar; the plumb- 
rule to keep the work perpendicular, or in the case of an inclined 
or battering wall, to a regular batter, for the plumb-rule may be 
made to suit any required inclination; the spirit-level to keep 
the work horizontal, often used in conjunction with a straight- 
edge in order to test a greater length; and the gauge-rod with 
the brick-courses marked on it. The quoins or angles are first 
built up with the aid of the gauge-rod, and the intermediate 
work is kept regular by means of the line and line pins fixed in 
the joints. The raker, jointer, pointing rule and Frenchman 
are used in pointing joints, the pointing staff being held on a 
small board called the hawk. For roughly cutting bricks the 
large trowel is used; for neater work such as facings, the bolster 
and club-hammer; the cold chisel is for general cutting away, 
and for chases and holes. When bricks require to be cut, the 
work is set out with the square, bevel and compasses, If the 



brick to be shaped is a > hard one it is placed on a V-shaped 
cutting block, an incision made where desired with the tin saw, 
and after the' bolster and club-hammer have removed the portion 
of the brick, the scutch, really a small axe, is used to hack off 
the rough parts'. For cutting soft bricks, such as rubbers and 
malms, a frame saw with a blade of soft iron wire is used, and 
the face is brought to a true surfaceon the rubbing' stone, a slab 
of Yorkshire stone. 

In ordinary practice a scaffold is carried up with the walls 
and made to rest on them. Having built up as high as he can 
reach from the ground, the scaff older erects a scaffold with 
standards, ledgers and putlogs to carry the : scaffold boards (see 
Scaffold, Scaffolding). Bricks are carried to the scaffold on 
a hod which holds twenty, bricks, or they may be hoisted in 
baskets or boxes by means of a pulley and fall, or may be raised 
in larger numbers by a crane. The mortar is taken up in a hod 
or hoisted in pails and deposited on ledged boards about 3 ft. 
square, placed on the scaffold at convenient distances apart along 
the line of work. The bricks are piled on the scaffold between 
the mortar boards, leaving a clear way against the wall for the 
bricklayers to move along. The workman, beginning at the 
extreme left of his section, or at a quoin, advances to the right, 
carefully keeping to his line and frequently testing his work 
with the plumb-rule, spirit-level and straight-edge, until he 
reaches another angle, or the end of his section. The pointing 
is sometimes finished off as the work proceeds, but in other cases 
the joints are left open until the completion, when the work is 
pointed down; perhaps in a different mortar. When the wall 
has reached a height from the scaffold beyond which the work- 
man cannot conveniently reach, the scaffolding is raised and 
the work continued in this manner from the new level. 

It is most important that the brickwork be kept perfectly 
plumb, and that every course be perfectly horizontal or level, 
both longitudinally and transversely. Strictest attention should 
be paid to the levelling of the lowest course of footings of a wall, 
for any irregularity will necessitate the inequality being made up 
with mortar in the courses above, thus inducing a liability for 
the wall to settle unequally, and so perpetuate the infirmity. 
To save the trouble of keeping the plumb-rule and level con- 
stantly in his hands and yet ensure correct work, the bricklayer, 
on clearing the footings of a wall, builds up six or eight courses 
of bricks' at the external angles (see fig. 1), which he carefully 
plumbs and levels across. These form a gauge for the intervening 




Fig. 1. 

work, a line being tightly strained between and fixed with steel 
pins to each angle at a level with the top of the next course to 
be laid, and with this he makes his work range. If /however, the 
length between the quoins be great, the line will of course sag, 
and it must, therefore, be carefully supported at intervals to the 
proper level. Care must be taken to keep the "perpends," 
or vertical joints, one immediately over the other. Having been 
carried up three or four courses to a level with the guidance of 
the line which is raised course by course, the work should be 
proved with the level and plumb-rule, particularly with the latter 
at the quoins and reveals, as well as over the face. A smart tap 
with the end of the handle of the trowel will suffice to make 
a brick yield what little it may be out of truth, while the work 
is green, and not injure it. The work of an efficient craftsman, 
however, will need but little adjustment. 

For every Wall of more than one brick (9 in.) thick, two men 
should be employed at the same time, one on the outside and the 



522 



BRICKWORK 



other inside; one man cannot do justice from one side to even 
a 14-in. wall. When the wall can be approached from one side 
only, the work is said to be executed " overhand." In work 
circular on plan, besides the level and plumb-rule, a gauge mould 
or template, or a ranging trammel — a rod working on a pivot 
at the centre of the curve, and in length equalling the radius— > 
must be used for every course, as it is evident that the line and 
pins cannot be applied to this in the manner just described. 

Bricks should not be merely laid, but each should be placed 
frog upwards, and rubbed and pressed firmly down in such a 
manner as to secure absolute adhesion, and force the mortar into 
joints. Every brick should be well wetted before it is laid, 
especially in hot dry weather, in order to wash off the dust from 
its surface, and to obtain more complete adhesion, and prevent 
it from absorbing water from the mortar in which it is bedded. 
The bricks are wetted either by the bricklayer dipping them in 
water as he uses them, or by water being thrown or sprinkled 
on them as they lie piled on the scaffold. In bricklaying with 
quick-setting cements an ample use of water is of even more 
importance. 

AH the walls of a building that are to sustain the same floors 
and the same roof, should be carried up simultaneously; in no 
circumstances should more be done in one part than can be 
reached from the same scaffold, until all the walls are brought 
up to the same height. Where it is necessary for any reason to 
leave a portion of the wall at a certain level while carrying up 
the adjoining work the latter should be racked back, i.e. left in 
steps as shown in fig. 7, and not carried up vertically with merely 
the toothing necessary for the bond. 

Buildings in exposed situations are frequently built with cavity- 
walls, consisting of 'the inside or main walls with an outer skin 
h lino, usually half a brick thick, separated from the former by a 
walls cavit y of 2 or 3 in. (fig. 2) . The two walls are tied together 

at frequent intervals by iron or stoneware ties, each 
having a bend or twist in the centre, which prevents the transmission 
of water to the inner wall. All water, therefore, which penetrates 
the outer wall drops to the base of the cavity, and trickles out through 
gratings provided for the purpose a few inches above the ground 
level. The base of the cavity should be taken down a course or two 
below the level of the damp-proof course. The ties are placed about 
3 ft. apart horizontally, with 12 or 18 in. vertical intervals; they are 
about 8 in. long and | in. wide. It is considered preferable by some 
architects and builders to place the thicker wall on the outside. 
This course, however, allows the main wall to be attacked by the 
Weather, whereas the former method provides for its protection by a 
screen of brickwork. Where door and window frames occur in hollow 
walls, it is of the utmost importance that a proper lead or other 
flashing be built in, shaped so as to throw off on each side, clear of 
the frames and main wall, the water which may penetrate the outer 
shell. While building the wall it is very essential to ensure that the 
cavity and ties be kept clean and free from rubbish or mortar, and 
for this purpose a wisp of straw or a narrow board, is laid on the ties 
where the bricklayer is working, to catch any material that may 
be inadvertently dropped, this protection being raised as the work 
proceeds. A hollow wall tends to keep the building dry internally 
and the temperature equable, but it has the disadvantage of harbour- 
ing vermin, unless care be taken to ensure their exclusion. The top 
of the wall is usually sealed with brickwork to prevent vermin or 
rubbish finding its way into the cavity. Air gratings should be intro- 
duced here to allow of air circulating through the cavity ; they also 
facilitate drying out after rain. 

Hollow walls are not much used in London for two reasons, the 
first being that, owing to the protection from the weather afforded 
by surrounding buildings, one of the main reasons for their use is 
gone, and the other that the expense is greatly increased, owing to 
the authorities ignoring the outer shell and requiring the main wall 
to be of the full thickness stipulated in schedule I. of LondonBuilding 
Act 1894. Many English provincial authorities in determining the 
thickness of a cavity-wall, take the outer portion into consideration. 

In London and the surrounding counties, brickwork is measured 
by the rod of 16 i ft. square, i| bricks in thickness. A rod of brick- 
Matertals work gauged four courses to a foot with bricks 8J in. long, 
and 4* in - wide - and 2 i m thick . a,ld joints \ in. in thickness, 

labour. w '" require 4356 bricks, and the number will vary as the 
bricks are above or below the average size, and as the 
joints are made thinner or thicker. The quantity of mortar, also, 
will evidently be affected by the latter consideration, but in London 
it is generally reckoned at 50 cub. ft. for a f-in. joint, to 72 cub. ft. 
for a joint f in. thick. To these figures must be added an allowance 
of about II cub. ft. if the bricks are formed with frogs or hollows. 
Bricks weigh about 7 lb each ; they are bought and sold by the 
thousand, which quantity weighs about 62 cwt. The weight of a 
rod of brickwork is 13 J— 15 tons, work in cement mortar being heavier 



than that executed in lime. Seven bricks are required to face 
a sq. ft.; I ft. of reduced brickwork — I J bricks thick — will 
require 16 bricks. The number of bricks laid by a workman in a day 
of eight hours varies considerably with the description of work, 
but on straight walling a man will lay an average of 500 in a day. 

The absorbent properties of bricks vary considerably with the 
kind of brick. The ordinary London stock of good quality should 
not have absorbed, after twenty-four hours' soaking, more varieties 
than one-fifth of its bulk. Inferior bricks will absorb as ot bricks. 
much as a third. The Romans were great users of 
bricks, both burnt and sun-dried. At the decline of the Roman 
empire, the art of brickmaking fell into disuse, but after 
the lapse of some 
centuries it was re- 
vived, and the 
ancient architecture 
of Italy shows many 
fine examples of 
brick and terra- 
cotta work. The 
scarcity of stone in 
the Netherlands led 
to the development 
of a brick archi- 
tecture, and fine 
examples of brick- 
work abound in the 
Low Countries. The 
Romans seem to 
have introduced 
brickmaking into 
England, and speci- 
mens of the large 
thin bricks, which 
they used chiefly as 
a bond for rubble 
masonry, may be 
seen in the many 
remains of Roman 
buildings scattered 
about that country. 
During the reigns 
of the early Tudor 
kings the art 
of brickmaking 
arrived -at great 
perfection, and 
some of the finest 
known specimens of 
ornamental brick- 
work are tobefound 
among the work of 
this period. The 
rebuilding of Lon- 
don after the Great 
Fire of 1666 gave 
considerable im- 
petus to brickmak- 
ing, most of the 
new buildings being 
of brick, and a 
statute was passed 
regulating the num- 
ber of bricks in the 
thickness of the 
walls of the several 
rates of dwelling- 
houses. 

The many names 
given to the differ- 
ent qualities of 
bricks in various 
parts of Great 
Britain are most 
confusing, but the 
following are those 
generally in use:— 

Stocks, hard, sound, well-burnt bricks, used for all ordinary 
purposes. 

Hard Stocks, sound but over-burnt, used in footings to walls and 
other positions where good appearance is not required. 

Skippers, sound, hard-burnt bricks of imperfect shape. Obtain 
their name from being much used as ballast for ships. 

Rubbers or Cutlers, sandy in composition and suitable for cutting 
with a wire saw and rubbing to shape on the sfone slab. 

Grkzles, sound and of fair shape, but under-burnt; used for 
inferior work, and in cases where they arc not liable to be heavily 
loaded. 

Place-bricks, under-burnt and defective; used for temporary work. 

Chuffs, cracked and defective in shape and badly burnt. 




BRICKWORK 



523 



ofbrick- 
work. 



Burrs, lumps which have vitrified or run together in the burning; 
used for rough walling, garden work, &c. 

Pressed bricks, moulded under hydraulic pressure, and much used 
for facing work. They usually have a deep frog or hollow on one or 
both horizontal faces, which reduces the weight of the brick and forms 
an excellent key for the mortar. 

Blue bricks, chiefly made in South Staffordshire and North Wales. 
They are used in engineering work, and where great compressional 
resistance is needed, as they are vitrified throughout, hard, heavy, 
impervious and very durable. Blue bricks of special shape may be 
had for paving, channelling and coping. 

Fire-bricks, withstanding great heat, used in connexion with 
furnaces. They should always be laid with fire-clay in place of lime 
or cement mortar. 

Glazed bricks, either salt-glazed or enamelled. The former, brown 
in colour, are glazed by throwing salt on the bricks in the kiln. 
The latter are dipped into a slip of the required colour before being 
burnt, and are used for decorative and sanitary purposes, and where 
reflected light is required. 

Moulded bricks, for cornices, string courses, plinths, labels and 
copings. They are made in the different classes to many patterns; 
and on account of their greater durability, and the saving of the 
labour of cutting, are preferable in many cases to rubbers. For 
sewer work and arches, bricks shaped as voussoirs are supplied. 

The strength of brickwork varies very considerably according to 
the kind of brick used, the position in Which it is used, the kind and 
quality of the lime or cement mortar, and above all the 
Strength q Ua ljty of the workmanship. The results of experiments 
with short walls carried out in 1 896-1 897 by the Royal 
Institute of British Architects to determine the average 
loads per sq. ft. at which crushing took place, may be briefly sum- 
marized as follows : Stock brickwork in lime mortar crushed Under 
a pressure of 18-63 tons per sq. ft., and in cement mortar under 
39-29 tons per sq. ft: Gault brickwork in lime mortar crushed at 
31-14 tons, and in cement mortar at 51-34 tons. Fletton brickwork 
in lime crushed under a load of 30-68 tons, in cement under 56-25 
tons. Leicester red brickwork in lime mortar crushed at 45-36 tons 
per sq. ft., in cement mortar at 83-36 tons. Staffordshire blue brick 
work in lime mortar crushed at 114-34 tons, and in cement mortar 
at 135-43. tons. _ 

The height of a brick pier should not exceed twelve times its least 
width. The London Building Act in the first schedule prescribes 
that in buildings not public, or of the warehouse class, in no storey 
shall any external or party walls exceed in height sixteen times the 
thickness. In buildings of the warehouse class, the height of these 
walls shall not exceed fourteen times the thickness. 

In exposed situations it is necessary to strengthen the buildings by 
increasing the thickness of walls and parapets, and to provide 
heavier copings and flashings. Special precautions, too, must be 
observed in the fixing of copings, chimney pots, ridges and hips. 
The greatest wind pressure experienced in England may be taken at 
56 lb on a sq. ft., but this is only in the most exposed positions in 
the country or on a sea front. Forty pounds is a sufficient allowance 
in most cases, and where there is protection by surrounding trees or 
buildings 28 lb per sq. ft. is all that needs to be provided against. 

In mixing mortar, particular attention must be paid to the sand 
with which. the lime or cement is mixed. The best sand is that 
Mortar. obtained from the pit, being sharp and angular. It is, 
however, liable to be mixed with clay or earth, which 
must be washed away before the sand is used. Gravel found mixed 
with it must be removed by screening or sifting. River sand is 
frequently used, but is not so good as pit sand on account of the 
particles being rubbed smooth by attrition. Sea sand is objection- 
able for two reasons; it cannot be altogether freed from a saline 
taint, and if it is used the salt attracts moisture and is liable to keep 
the brickwork permanently damp. The particles, moreover, are 
generally rounded by attrition, caused by the movement of the sea, 
which makes it less efficient for mortar than if they retained their 
original angular forms. Blue or black mortar, often used for pointing 
the joints of external brickwork on account of its greater durability, 
is made by using foundry sand or smith's ashes instead of ordinary 
sand. There are many other substitutes for the ordinary sand. 
As an example, fine stone grit may be used with advantage. 
Thoroughly burnt clay or ballast, old bricks, clinkers and cinders, 
ground to a uniform size and screened from dust, also make excellent 
substitutes. 

Fat limes (that is, limes which are pure, as opposed to " hydraulic" 
limes which arc burnt from limestone containing some clay) should 
not be used for mortar; they are slow-setting, and there is a liability 
for- some of the mortar, where there is not a free access of air to 
assist the setting, remaining soft for some considerable period, often 
months, thus causing unequal settlement and possibly failure. Grey 
stone lime is feebly hydraulic, and makes a good mortar for ordinary 
work. It, however, decays under the influence of the weather, and 
it is, therefore, advisable to point the external face of the work in 
blue ash or cement mortar, in order to obtain greater durability. 
It should never be used in foundation work, or where exposed to wet. 
Lias lime is hydraulic, that is, it will set firm. under water. It should 
be used in all good class work, where Portland cement is not desired. 

Of the various cements used in building, it is necessary only to 



mention three as being applicable to use for mortar. The first of 
these is Portland -cement, which has sprung into very general use, 
not only for work where extra strength and durability are required, 
and for underground work, but also in general building where a small 
extra cost is not objected to. Ordinary lime mortar may have its 
strength considerably enhanced by the addition of a small proportion 
of Portland cement. Roman cement is rarely used for mortar, but 
is useful in some cases on account of the rapidity with which it sets, 
usually becoming hard about fifteen minutes after mixing. It is 
useful in tidal work and embankments, and constructions under 
water. It has about one-third of the strength of Portland cement, 
by which it is now almost entirely supplanted. Selenitic cement or 
lime, invented by Major-General H. Y. D. Scott (i822-'i883), is lias 
lime, to Which a small proportion of plaster of Paris has been added 
with the object of suppressing the action of slaking and inducing 
quicker setting. If carefully mixed in accordance with the in- 
structions issued by the manufacturers, it will take a much larger 
proportion of sand than ordinary lime. 

Lime should be slaked before being made into mortar. The 
lime is measured out, deposited in a heap on a wooden " bank " or 
platform, and after being well watered is covered with the correct 
proportion of sand. This retains the heat and moisture necessary 
to thorough slaking ; the time required for this operation depends 
on the variety of the lime, but usually it is from a few hours to one 
and a half days. If the mixing is to be done by hand the materials 
must be screened to remove any unslaked lumps of lime. The 
occurrence of these may be prevented by grinding the lime shortly 
before use. The mass should then be well " larried," i.e. mixed 
together with the aid of«a long-handled rake called the " larry." 
Lime mortar should be tempered for at least two days, roughly 
covered up with sacks or other material. Before being used it must 
be again turned over and well mixed together. Portland and Roman 
cement mortars must be mixed as required on account of their quick- 
setting properties. In the case of Portland cement mortar, a quantity 
sufficient only for the day's use should be " knocked up," but with 
Roman cement fresh mixtures must be made several times a day, 
as near as possible to the place of using. Cement mortars should 
never be worked up after setting has taken place. Care should be 
taken to obtain the proper consistency, which is a stiff paste. If the 
mortar be too thick, extra labour is involved in its use, and much 
time wasted. If it be so thin as to run easily from the trowel, a 
longer time is taken in setting, and the wall is liable to settle ; also 
there is danger that the lime or cement will be killed by the excess of 
water, or at least have its binding power affected. It is not advisable 
to carry out work when the temperature is below freezing point, 
but in urgent cases bricklaying may be successfully done by using 
unslaked lime mortar. The mortar must be prepared in small 
quantities immediately before being used, so that binding action 
takes place before it cools. When the wall is left at night time the 
top course should be covered up to prevent the penetration of rain 
into the work, which would then be destroyed by the action of frost. 
Bricks used during frosty weather should be quite dry, and those 
that have been exposed to rain or frost should never be employed. 
The question whether there is any limit to bricklayers' work in frost 
is still an open one. Among the members of the Norwegian Society 
of Engineers and Architects, at'whose meetings the subject has been 
frequently discussed, that limit is variously estimated at between 
-6° to -8° Reaumur (i8i° to 14 Fahr.) and -12° to -15 Reaumur 
(5° above to 1 1° below zero Fahr.). It has been proved by hydraulic 
tests that good bricklayers' work can be executed at the latter 
minimum. The conviction is held that the variations in the opinions 
held on this subject are attributable to the degree of care bestowed 
on the preparation of the mortar. It is generally agreed, however, 
that from a practical point of view, bricklaying should not be carried 
on at temperatures lower than -8° to -io° Reaumur (14 to 
9;-° Fahr.), for as the thermometer falls the expense of building is 
greatly increased, owing to a larger proportion of lime being required. 

For grey lime mortar the usual proportion is one part of lime to 
two or three parts of sand ; lias lime mortar is mixed in similar 
proportions, except for work below ground, when equal quantities 
of lime and sand should be used. Portland cement mortar is usually 
in the proportions of one to three, or five, of sand ; good results are 
obtained with lime mortar fortified with cement as follows : — one 
part slaked lime, one part Portland cement, and seven parts sand, 
Roman cement mortar should consist of one or one and a half parts 
of cement to one part of sand. Selenitic lime mortar is usually in 
the proportions of one to four or five, and must be mixed in a 
particular manner, the lime being first ground in water in the mortar- 
mill, and the sand gradually added. Blue or black mortar contains 
equal parts of foundry ashes and lime; but is improved by the 
addition of a proportion of cement. For setting fire-bricks fire-clay 
is always used. Pargetting for rendering inside chimney flues is 
made of one part of lime with three parts of cow dung free from straw 
or litter. No efficient substitute has been found for this mixture, 
which should be used fresh. A mortar that has found approval for 
tall chimney shafts is composed by grinding in a mortar-mill one 
part of blue lias lime with one part each of sand and foundry ashes. 
In the external walls of the Albert Hall the mortar used was one part 
Portland cement, one part grey Burham lime and six parts pit 
sand. The lime was slaked twenty-four hours, and after being mixed 



5H 



BRICRWORK 



with the sand for ten minutes the cement was added and the whole 
ground for one minute; the stuff was prepared in quantities only 
sufficient for immediate use. The by-laws dated 1891, made by the 
London County Council under section 16 of the Metropolis Manage- 
ment and Building Acts Amendment Act 1878, require the pro- 
portions of lime mortar to be one to three of sand or grit, and for 
cement mortar one to four. Clean soft water only should be used 
for the purpose of/ making mortar. 

Grotd is thin liquid mortar, and is legitimately used in gauged 
arches and other work when fine joints are desired. In ordinary 
work it is sometimes used every four or five courses to fill up any 
spaces that may have been inadvertently left between the bricks. 
This a,t the best is but doing with grout what should be done with 
mortar in the operation of laying the bricks; and filling or flushing 
up every course with mortar requires but little additional exertion 
and is far preferable. The use of grout is, therefore, a sign of in- 
efficient workmanship, • and should not be countenanced in good 
work. It is liable, moreover, to ooze out and stain the face of the 
brickwork. 

Lime putty is pure slaked lime. It is prepared or " run," as it is 
termed, in a wooden tub or bin, and should be made as long a time 
as possible before being used; at least three weeks should elapse 
between preparation and use. 

,The pointing of a wall, as previously mentioned, is done either 
with the bricklaying or at the completion of the work. If the 
Pplntlpg. pointing is to be of the same mortar as the rest of the work, 
it would i probably greatly facilitate matters to finish off 
the work at. one operation with the bricklaying, but where, as in 
many cases, the pointing is required to be executed in a more durable 
mortar, this would be done as the scaffold is taken down at the 
completion of the building, the joints being raked out by the brick- 
; layer to a depth of } or f in. 

By the latter method the whole 
face of the work is kept uniform 
in appearance. The different 
forms of joints in general use 
are clearly shown in fig. 3. Flat 
or flush joints (A) are formed 
by pressing the protruding 
mortar back flush with the 
face of the brickwork, This 
joint is commonly used for 
walls intended to be coated 
with distemper or limewhite. 
The flat joint jointed (two 
forms, B and C) is a develop- 
ment of the flush joint. In 
order to increase the density 
and thereby enhance the dura- 
bility of the mortar, a semi- 
circular groove is formed along 
the centre, or one on each side 
of the joint, with an iron jointer 
and straight-edge. Another 
form, rarely used, is the keyed 
joint shown at D, the whole 
width of the joint in this case 
being treated with the curved 
key. Struck or bevelled, or weathered, joints have the upper portion 
pressed back with the trowel to form a sloping surface, which throws 
off the wet. The lower edge is cut off with the trowel to a straight 
edge. This joint is in very common use for new work. Ignorant 
workmen frequently make the slope in the opposite direction (F), 
thus forming a ledge on the brick; this catches the water, which on 
being frozen rapidly causes the disintegration of the upper portion 
of the brick and of the joint itself. With recessed jointing, not 
much used, a deep shadow may be obtained. This form of joint, 
illustrated in G, is open to very serious objections, for it encourages 
the soaking of the brick with rain instead of throwing off the wet, 
as it seems the natural function of good pointing, and this, besides 
causing undue dampness in the wall, renders it liable to damage by 
frost. It also leaves the arrises of the bricks unprotected and 
liable to be damaged, and from its deep recessed form does not make 
for stability in the work. Gauged work has very thin joints, as shown 
at H, formed by dipping the side of the brick in white lime putty. 
The sketch I shows a joint raked out and filled in with pointing 
mortar to form a flush joint, or it may be finished in any of the 
preceding forms. Where the wall is to be plastered the joints are 
either left open or raked out, or the superfluous mortar may be left 
protruding as shown at J. By either method an excellent key is 
obtained, to which the rendering firmly adheres. In tuck pointing 
(K) the joints are raked out and stopped, i.e. filled in flush with 
mortar coloured to match the brickwork. The face of the wall is 
then rubbed over with a soft brick of the same colour, or the work 
may be coloured with pigment. A narrow groove is then cut in the 
joints, and the mortar allowed to set. White lime putty is next 
filled into the groove, being pressed on with a jointing tool, leaving 
a white joint i to J in. wide, and with a projection of about ^ in. 
beyond the face of the work. This method is not a good or a 
durable one, and should onky be adopted in old work when the 




Fig. 3. — Forms of Joints. 



edges of the bricks are broken or irregular. In bastard tuck point- 
ing (L), the ridge, instead of being in white lime putty, is formed of 
the stopping mortar itself. 

Footings, as will be seen on reference to fig. I, are the wide courses 
of brickwork at the base or foot of a wall. They serve to spread 
the pressure over a larger area of ground, offsets 2\ in. _ 
wide being made on each side of the wall until a width FooW *WS- 
equal to double the thickness of the wall is reached. Thus in a wall 
131 in. (ii bricks) thick, this bottom course would be 2 ft. 3 in, 
(3 bricks) wide. It is preferable for greater strength to double the 
lowest course. The foundation bed of concrete then spreading out 
an additional 6 in. on each side brings the width of the surface 
bearing on the ground to 3 ft. 3 in. The London Building Act- 
requires the projection of concrete on each side of the brickwork to 
be only 4 in., but a projection of 6 in. is generally made to allow 




Fig. 4. — Diagram of Bonding., 
for easy working. Footings should be built with hard bricks laid 
principally as headers; stretchers, if necessary, should be placed in 
the middle of the wall. 

Bond in brickwork is the arrangement by which the bricks of 
every course cover the joints of those in the course below it, and so 
tend to make the whole mass or combination of bricks 
act as much together, or as dependently one upon another, Boad > n &- 
as possible. The workmen should be strictly supervised as they 
proceed with the work, for many failures are due to their ignorance 
or carelessness in this particular. The object of bonding will be 
understood by reference to fig. 4. Here it is evident from the 
arrangement of the bricks that any weight placed on the topmost 
brick (a) is carried down and borne alike in every course; in this 
way the weight on each brick is distributed over an area increasing 
with every course. But this forms a longitudinal bond only, which 
cannot extend its influence beyond the width of the brick; and a 
wall of one brick and a half, or two bricks, thick, built in this manner, 
would in effect consist of three or four half brick thick walls acting 
independently of each other. If the bricks were turned so as to 
show their short sides or ends in front instead of their long ones, 
certainly a compact wall of a whole brick thick, instead of half a 
brick, would be produced, and while the thickness of the wall would 
be double, the longitudinal bond would be shortened by one-half: 
a wall of any great thickness built in this manner would necessarily 
be composed of so many independent one-brick walls. To produce 
a transverse and yet preserve a true longitudinal bond, the bricks 
are laid in a definite arrangement of stretchers and headers. In 
English bond " (fig. 5), rightly considered the most perfect in use, 
the bricks are laid in alternate courses of headers and stretchers, 
thus combining the advantages of the two previous modes of arrange- 
ment. A reference to fig. 5 will show how the process of bonding is 
pursued in a wall one and a half bricks in thickness, and how the 
quoins are formed. In walls which are a multiple of a whole brick, 
the appearance of the same course 
is similar on the elevations of the 
front and back faces, but in walls 
where an odd half brick must be, 
used to make up the thickness, as ] 
is the case in the illustration, the 
appearance of the opposite sides 
of a course is inverted. The ex- 
ample illustrates the principle of 
English bond; thicker walls are 
constructed in the same manner 
by an extension of the same 
methods. It will be observed that 
portions of a brick have to be 
inserted near a vertical end or a 
quoin, in order to start the regular 
bond. These portions equal a half 
header in width, and are called 
queen closers; they are placed 
next to the first header. A three- 
quarter brick is obviously as 
available for this purpose as a 
header and closer combined, but 
the latter method is preferred 
because by the use of it uniformity 
of appearance is preserved, and 
whole bricks are retained on the returns. King closers are used 
at rebated openings formed in walls in Flemish bond, and by 
reason of the greater width of the back or " tail," add 
strength to the work. They are cut on the splay so that the 
front end is half the width of a header and one side half the 
length of the brick. An example of their use will be seen in 
fig. 15. In walls of almost all thicknesses above 9 in., except in the 



-headers 




In this and following illustrations of 
bond in brickwork the position of bricks 
in the second course is indicated by dotted 
lines. 

Fig. 5. — English Bond. 



BRICKWORK 



525 




Fig. 6. — Flemish Bond. 



English bond, to preserve the transverse and yet not destroy the 
longitudinal bond, it is frequently necessary to use half bricks. It 
may be taken as a general rule that a brick should never be cut if it 
can be worked in whole, for a new joint is thereby created in a 
construction, the difficulty of which consists in obvkting the debility 
arising from the constant recurrence of joints. Great insistence 
must be laid on this point, especially at the junctions of walls, 

where the admission of 
closers, already constitutes 
a weakness which would 
only be increased by the 
use of other bats or frag- 
ments of bricks. 

Another method of 
bonding brickwork, in- 
stead of placing the bricks 
in alternate courses of 
headers and stretchers, 
places them alternately as 
headers and stretchers in 
the same course, the ap- 

Eearance of the course 
eing the same on each 
face. This is called 
" Flemish bond." Closers 
are necessary to this 
variety of bond. From 
fig. 6 it will be seen that, 
owing to the compara- 
tive weakness of the 
transverse tie, and the numbers of half bricks required to be 
used and the thereby increased number of joints, this bond is not so 
perfect nor so strong as English. The arrangements of the face 
joints, however, presenting in Flemish bond a neater appearance 
than in English bond, it is generally selected for the external walls of 
domestic and other buildings where good effect is desirable. In 
buildings erected for manufacturing and similar purposes, and in 
engineering works where the greatest degree of strength and compact- 
ness is considered of the highest importance, English bond should 
have the preference. 

A compromise is sometimes made between the two above-men- 
tioned bonds. For the sake of appearance the bricks are laid td form 
Flemish bond on the face, while the backing is of English bond, 
the object being to combine the best features oi the two bonds. 
Undoubtedly the result is an improvement on Flemish bond, obviat- 
ing as it does the use of bats in the interior of the wall. This method 
of bonding is termed " single Flemish bond," and is shown in fig. 7. 
In stretching bond, which should only be used for walls half a 
brick in thickness, all the bricks are laid as stretchers, a half brick 
being used in alternate courses to start the bond. In work curved 
too sharply on plan to admit of the use of stretchers, and for footings., 
projecting mouldings and corbels, the bricks are all laid as headers, 
ue. with their ends to the front, and their length across the thickness 
of the wall. This is termed "heading bond." 

In thick walls, three bricks thick and upwards, a saving of labour 
is effected without loss of strength, by the adoption of "herring 
bone " or " diagonal bond " in the interior of the wall, the outer 
faces of the wall being built in English and Flemish bond. This 
mode should not be had recourse to for walls of a less thickness 



tackmg IwcH 




Fig. 7. — Single Flemish Bond. 

than 27 in., even that being almost too thin to admit of any great 
advantage from it. 

Hoop-iron, about 1^ in, wide and -^ in. thick, either galvanized 
or well tarred and sanded to retard rusting, is used in order to obtain 
additional longitudinal tie. The customary practice is to use one 
strip of iron for each half-brick in thickness of the wall. Joints 
at the angles, and where necessary in the length, are formed by 




bending the ends of the strips so as to hook together. A patent 
stabbed iron now on the market is perforated to provide a key for the 
mortar. 

A difficulty often arises in bonding when facing work with bricks 
of a slightly different size from those used in " backing," as it is 
technically termed. As it is, of course, necessary to keep all brickwork 
in properly levelled courses, a difference has to be made in the thick- 
ness of the mortar joints. Apart from the extra labour involved, 
this obviously is detrimental to the stability of the wall, and is apt 
to produce unequal settlement and cracking. Too muchcare cannot 
be taken to obtain both facing and backing bricks of equal size. 

Dishonest bricklayers do not hesitate, when using for the face of a 
wall bricks of a quality superior to those used for the interior, to use 
" snapped headers," that is 
cutting the heading bricks; in 
halves, one brick thus serving 
the purposes of two as regards 
outward appearance. This is a 
most pernicious practice, un- 
worthy of adoption by any 
craftsman of repute, for a skin 
of brickwork 4I in. thick is thus 
carried up with a straight 
mortar joint behind it, the 
proper bonding with the back of 
the wall by means of headers 
being destroyed. 

American building acts de- 
scribe the kind of bond to be 
used for ordinary walls, and the 
kind for faced walls. Tie courses 
also require an extra thickness 
where walls are perforated with 
oyer 30 % of flues. 

The importance for sanitary 
and other reasons of keeping 
walls dry is admitted by all who 
have observed the deleterious 
action of damp upon a building. 

Walls are liable to become damp, (1) by wet rising up the wall 
from the earth ; (2) by water soaking down from the top of the 
wall; (3) by rain being driven on to the face by wind. ftvveoflon 
Dampness from the first cause may be prevented by the otdam ~ 
introduction of damp-proof courses or the construction 
of dry areas; from the second by means of a coping of stone, 
cement or other non-porous material; and from the third by 
covering the exterior with impervious materials or by the adoption 
of hollow walls. 

After the footings have been laid and the wall has been brought 
up to not less than 6 in. above the finished surface of the ground, 
and previous to fixing the 
plate carrying the ground 
floor, there should always 
be introduced a course of 
some damp-proof material 
to prevent the rise of mois- 
ture from the soil. There 
are several forms of damp- 
proof course. A very usual 
one is a double layer of 
roofing slates laid in neat 
Portland cement (fig. 8), 
the joints being well lapped. 
A course or two of Stafford- 
shire blue bricks in cement 
is excellent where heavy 
weights have to be con- 
sidered. Glazed stoneware 
perforated slabs about 2 in. 
thick are specially made for ^ 
use as damp-proof courses. 
Asphalt (fig. 9) recently has 
come into great favour with 
architects ; a layer J or f in. 
thick is a good protection 
against damp, and not 
likely to crack should a settlement occur, 



■ffoor of wood 
btecVsAc&din. 
dcunp DK3PririCB>bC 




Fig. 9. 



but in hot weather it 
is liable to squeeze out at the joints under heavy weights. Felt 
covered with bitumen is an excellent substitute for asphalt, and 
is not liable to crack or squeeze out. Sheet lead is efficient, 
but very costly and also somewhat liable to squeezing. A damp- 
proof course has been introduced consisting of a thin sheet of lead 
sandwiched between layers of asphalt. Basement storeys to be 
kept dry require, besides the damp-proof course horizontally in 
the wall, a horizontal course, usually of asphalt, in the thickness of 
the floor, and also a Vertical damp-proof course from a level below 
that of the floor to about 6 in. above the level of the ground, either 
built in the thickness of the wall or rendered on the outside between 
the wall and the surrounding earth (fig. 10). 

By means of dry areas or air drains (figs. 11 and 12), a hollow 



556 



BRICKWORK 




Fig. io. 

made by the London County 
Metropolis Management and 



space 9 in. or more in width is formed around those portions of the 
walls situated below the ground, the object being to prevent them 
from coming into contact with the brickwork of the main walls and 
so imparting its moisture to the building. Arrangements should be 
made for keeping the area clear of vermin and for ventilating and 
draining it. Dry areas, being far from sanitary, are seldom adopted 

now, and are being super- 
seded by asphalt or cement 
applied to the fare of the wall. 
Moisture is prevented from 
soaking down from the top of 
the wall by using a covering 
of some impervious material 
in the form of a coping. This 
may consist of ordinary bricks 
set on edge in cement with a 
double course of tiles im- 
mediately below, called a 
" creasing," or of specially 
made non-porous coping 
bricks, or of stone, cast- 
iron, or cement sloped or 
" weathered " in order to 
throw the rain off. 

The exterior of walls above 
the ground line may be pro- 
tected by coating the surface' 
with cement or rough cast; or 
covering with slates or tiles 
fixed on battens in a similar 
manner to those on a roof 

(%• i3)- , , ■ ■;,-.■ 

The use of hollow walls in 
exposed positions has already 
been referred to. 

The by-laws dated 1891, 
Council under section 16 of the 
Buildings Acts Amendment Act 
1878, require that" every wall of a house or building shall have 
a damp course composed of materials impervious to moisture 
approved by the district surveyor, extending throughout its whole 
thickness at the level of not less than 6 in. below the level of 
the lowest floor. Every external wall or enclosing wall of habitable 
rooms or their appurtenances or cellars which abuts against the 
earth shall be protected by materials impervious to moisture to the 
satisfaction of the district surveyor. . .'." The top ot every 
party-wall and parapet-wall shall be finished with one course ot 
hard, well-burnt bricks set on edge, in cement, or by a coping of any 
other waterproof and fire-resisting material, properly secured. 

Arches are constructions built of wedge-shaped blocks, which by 
reason of their shape give support one to another, and to the super- 
A„h»* imposed weight, the resulting load being transmitted 
through the blocks to the abutments upon which the ends 
of the arch rest. An arch should be composed of such materials 
and designed of such dimensions as to enable it to retain, its proper 
shape and resist the crushing strain imposed upon it. 1 he abutments 
v also must be strong 

enough to take safely 
the thrust of the 
weighted arch, as the 
slightest movement in 
these supports will cause 
deflection and failure. 
The outward thrust of 
an arch decreases as it 
approaches the semi- 
circular form, but the 
somewhat prevalent 
idea that in the latter 
form no thrusting takes 
place is at variance with 
fact. 

Arches in brickwork 
may be classed under 
three heads: plain 
arches, rough-cut and 
gauged. Plain arches 
are built of uncut 
bricks, and since the 
difference between the 
outer and inner peri- 



air h-r-r 

grating LL 




Fig. 



phery of the arch requires the parts of which an arch is made up to 
be wedge-formed, which an ordinary brick is not, the difference must 
be made in mortar, with the result that the joints become wedge- 
shaped. This obviously gives an objectionable inconsistency of 
material in the arch, and for this reason to obtain greatest strength 
it is advisable to build these arches in independent rings of half-brick 
thickness. The undermost rings should have thin joints, those of 
each succeeding ring being slightly thickened. This prevents the 
lowest ring from settling while those above remain in position, 




'errtilertiittl 
.cpocnsie 



Fig. 12. 



which would cause an ugly fissure. In work of large span bonding 
blocks or " lacing courses " should be built into the arch, set in 
cement and running through its thickness at intervals, care being 
taken to introduce the lacing course at a place where the joints of 
the various rings coincide. Stone blocks in the shape of a voussoir 
(fig. 14) may ; be used instead. Except for these lacing courses, 
hydraulic lime mortar 
should be. used for 
large arches, on 
account of its slightly 
accommodating 
nature. 

Rough -cut arches 
are those in which 
the bricks are roughly 
cut with an axe to a 
wedge form ; they 
are used over openings 
such as doors and win- 
dows, where a strong 
arch of neat appear- 
ance is desired. The 
joints are usually 
made equal in width 
to those of the 
ordinary brickwork. 
Gauged arches are 
composed of specially 
made soft bricks, 
which are cut and 
rubbed to gauges or 
templates so as to 
form perfectly fitting voussoirs. Gauging is, of course, equally 
applicable to arches and walling, as it means no more than bringing 
every brick exactly to a certain form by cutting and rubbin'g. 
Gauged brickwork is set in lime putty instead of common mortar; 
the finished joints should not be more than gV in. wide. To give 
stability the sides of the voussoirs are gauged out hollow and grouted 
in Portland cement, thus connecting each brick with the next by a 
joggle joint. Gauged arches, being for the most part but a half- 
brick in thickness on the soffit and not being tied by a bond to any- 
thing behind them — for behind them is the lintel with rough dis- 
charging arch over, supporting the remaining width of the wall- 
require to be executed with great care and nicety. It is a common 
fault with workmen to rub the bricks thinner behind than before to 
lessen the labour required to obtain a very fine face joint. This 
practice tends to make the work bulge outwards; it should rather 
be inverted if it be done at all, though the best work is that in 
which the bricks are gauged to exactly the same thickness at the 
back as at the front. The same fault occurs when a gauged arch is 
inserted in an old wall, on account of the difficulty of filling up with 
cement the space behind the bricks. 

The bond of an arch obtains its name from the arrangement of 
headers and stretchers on its soffit. The under side of an arch built 
in English bond, therefore, will show the same arrangement as the 
face of a wall built in English bond. If the arch is in Flemish 
the scffit presents the same ap- 
pearance as the elevation of a 
wall built in that bond. 

It is generally held that the 
building of wood into brickwork 
should as far as is possible be 
avoided. Wall plates of wood 
Plates. are ' however, necessary 
where wood joists are 
used, and where these plates may 
not be supported on corbels of 
projecting brickwork or iron they 
must be let flush into the wall, 
taking the place of a course of 
bricks. They form a uniform bed 
for the joists, to which easy 
fixing is obtained. The various 
modes adopted for resting and 
fixing the ends of joists on 
walls are treated in the article 
Carpentry. 

Lintels, which may be of iron, 
steel, plain or reinforced concrete, or stone, are used over square- 
headed openings instead of or in conjunction with arches. They 
are useful to preserve the square form and receive the joiners' 
fittings, but except when made of steel or of concrete reinforced 
with steel bars, they should have relieving arches turned im- 
mediately over them (fig.. 15). 

" Fixing bricks " were formerly of wood of the same size as the 
ordinary brick, and built into the wall as required for fixing joinery. 
Owing to their liability to shrinkage and decay, their use is now 
practically abandoned, their place being taken by bricks of coke- 
breeze concrete, which do not shrink or rot and hold, fjfet nails 
or screws driven into them. Another method often adopted for 




Fig. 13. 



BRICKWORK 



527 



providing a fixing for joinery is to build in wood slips the thickness of 
a joint and 4J in. wide. When suitable provision for fixing has not 
been made, wood plugs are driven into the joints of the bricks. 
Great care must be talcen in driving these in the joints of reveals 
or at the corners of walls, or damage may be done. 

The name " brick-ashlar " is given to walls faced with ashlar 
stonework backed in with brickwork. Such constructions are liable 

in an aggravated de- 
gree to the unequal 
settling and its 
attendant evils 
pointed out as ex- 
isting in walls built 
with different quali- 
ties of bricks. The 
outer face is com- 
posed of unyielding 
stone with few and 
very thin joints, 
which perhaps do 
not occupy more 
than a hundredth 
part of its height, 
while the back is 
built up of bricks 
with about one- 
eighth its height composed of mortar joints, that is, of a material 
that by its nature and manner of application must both shrink 
in drying and yield to pressure. To obviate this tendency to 
settle and thus cause the bulging of the face or failure of the wall, 
the mortar used should be composed of Portland cement and sand 
with a large proportion of the former, and worked as stiff as it 
conveniently can be. In building such work the stones should be in 
height equal to an exact number of brick courses. It is a common 
practice in erecting buildings with a facing of Kentish rag rubble 
to back up the stonework with bricks. Owing to the great irregu- 
larity of the stones, great difficulty is experienced in obtaining 
proper bond between the two materials. Through bonding stones or 





'■King closer \ j cjueer/clcsei 



HI 


WfMl, 


WII/IIMMi, 


'iMi 


jijjjj 


i 


'{IH/IIII//,, 








I 












i 


... -. 





SECTION 



\ ! 



Fig. 15. 



headers should be frequently built in, and the whole of the work 
executed in cement mortar to ensure stability. 

Not the least important part of the bricklayer's art is the formation 
of chimney and other flues. Considerable skill is required in gather- 
_. . ing-over properly above the fireplace so as to conduct 

'??. eys the smoke into the smaller flue, which itself requires to be 
an ues. ^uilt with precision, so that its capacity may not vary in 
different parts. Bends must be made in gradual curves so as to 
offer the least possible resistance to the up-draught, and at least one 
bend of not less than 6o° should be formed in each flue to intercept 
down-draughts. Every fireplace must have a separate flue. The 
collection of a number of flues into a " stack " is economical, and 
tends to increase the efficiency of the flues, the heat from one flue 
assisting the up-draught in those adjoining it. It is also desirable 
from an aesthetic point of view, for a number of single flue chimneys 
sticking up from various parts of the roof would appear most un- 
sightly. The architects of the Elizabethan and later periods were 
masters of this difficult art of treating a stack or stacks as an archi- 
tectural feature. The shaft should be carried well above the roof, 



higher, if possible, than adjacent buildings, which are apt to cause 
down-draught and make the chimney smoke. When this is found 
impossible, one of the many forms of patent chimney-pots or 
revolving cowls must be adopted. Each flue must be separated by 
smoke-proof " withes " or divisions, usually half a brick in thickness; 
connexion between them causes smoky chimneys. The size of the 
flue for an ordinary grate is 14X9 in.; for a kitchen stove 14X14 
in. The outer wall of a chimney stack may with advantage be made 

9 in. thick. Fireclay tubes, rectangular or circular in transverse 
section, are largely used in place of the pargetting; although more 
expensive than the latter they have the advantage in point of 
cleanliness and durability. Fireplaces generally require more depth 
than can be provided in the thickness of the wall, and therefore 
necessitate a projection to contain the fireplace and flues, called 
the " chimney breast." Sometimes, especially when the wall is an 
external one, the projection may be made on the back, thus allowing 
a flush wall in the room and giving more space and a more con- 
veniently-shaped room. The projection on the outside face of the 
wall may be treated as an ornamental feature. The fireplace opening 
is covered by a brick relieving arch, which is fortified by wrought- 
iron bar from § to | in. thick and 2 to 3 in. wide. It is usually 
bent to a " camber," and the brick arch built upon it naturally 
takes the same curve. Each end is " caulked," that is, split longi- 
tudinally and turned up and down. The interior of a chimney breast 
behind the stove should always be filled in solid with concrete or 
brickwork. The flooring in the chimney opening is called the 
" hearth "; the back hearth covers the space between the jambs 
of the chimney breast, and the front hearth rests upon the brick 
" trimmer arch " designed to support it. The hearth is now often 
formed in solid concrete, supported on the brick wall and fillets 
fixed to the floor joists, without any trimmer arch and finished in 
neat cement or glazed tiles instead of stone slabs. 

Tall furnace chimneys should stand as separate constructions, 
unconnected with other buildings. If it is necessary to bring other 
work close up, a straight joint should be used. The shaft of the 
chimney will be built " overhand," the men working from the inside. 
Lime mortar is used, cement being too rigid to allow the chimney 
to rock in the wind. Not more than 3 ft. in height should be erected 
in one day, the work of necessity being done in small portions to 
allow the mortar to set before it is required to sustain much weight. 
The bond usually adopted is one course of headers to four of stretchers. 
Scaffolding is sometimes erected outside for a height of 25 or 30 ft., 
to facilitate better pointing, especially where the chimney is in a 
prominent position. The brickwork at the top must, according to 
the London Building Act, be 9 in. thick (it is better 14 in. in shafts 
over 100 ft. high), increasing half a brick in thickness for every 
additional 20 ft. measured downwards. " The shaft shall taper 
gradually from the base to the top at the rate of at least 2§ in. in 

10 ft. of height. The width of the base of the shaft if square shall be 
at least one-tenth of the proposed height of the shaft, or if round 
or any other shape, then one-twelfth of the height. Firebricks built 
inside the lower portion of the shaft shall be provided, as additional 
to and independent of the prescribed thickness of brickwork, and 
shall not be bonded therewith." The firebrick lining should be 
carried up from about 25 ft. for ordinary temperatures to double 
that height for very great ones, a space of I J to 3 in. being kept 
between the lining and the main wall. The lining itself is usually 
4§ in.thick. The cap is usually of cast iron or terra-cotta strengthened 
with iron bolts and straps, and sometimes of stone, but the difficulty 
of properly fixing this latter material causes it to be neglected in 
favour of one of the former. (See a paper by F. J. Bancroft on 

Chimney Construction," which contains a tabulated description 
of nearly sixty shafts, Proc. Civ. and Mech. Eng. Soc, December 
1883.) 

The work of laying bricks or tiles as paving falls to the lot of the 
bricklayer. Paving formed of ordinary bricks laid flat or on their 
edges was once in general use, but is now almost abandoned 
in favour of floors of special tiles or cement paving, the Brkk 
latter being practically non-porous and therefore more P avIa Z- 
sanitary and cleaner. Special bricks of extremely hard texture are 
made for stable and similar paving, having grooves worked on the 
face to assist drainage and afford good foothold. A bed of concrete 
6 in. thick is usually provided under paving, or when the bricks are 
placed on edge the concrete for external paving may be omitted 
and the bricks bedded in sand, the ground being previously well 
rammed. The side joints of the bricks are grouted in with lime or 
cement. Dutch clinkers are small, hard paving bricks burned at a 
high temperature and of a light yellow colour; they are 6 in. long, 
3 in. wide, i| in. thick. A variety of paving tile called " oven tiles " 
is of similar material to the ordinary red brick, and in size is 10 or 
12 in. square and I to 2 in. thick. An immense variety of ornamental 
paving and walling tiles is now manufactured of different colours, 
sizes and shapes, and the use of these for lining sculleries, lavatories, 
bathrooms, provision shops, &c, makes for cleanliness and improved 
sanitary conditions. Besides, however, being put to these uses, 
tiles are often used in the ornamentation of buildings, externally as 
well as internally. 

Mosaic work is composed of small pieces of marble, stone, glass or 
pottery, laid as paving or wall lining, usually in some ornamental 
pattern or design. A firm bed of concrete is required, the pieces of 



528 



BRICOLE— BRIDGE 



material being fixed in a float of cement about half or three-quarters 
of an inch thick. Roman mosaic is formed with cubes of marble of 
various colours pressed into the float. A less costly paving may be 
obtained by strewing irregularly-shaped marble chips over the floated 
surface: these are pressed into the cement with a plasterer's hand 
float, and the whole is then rolled with an iron roller. This is called 
" terazzo mosaic." In either the Roman or terazzo method any 
patterns or designs that are introduced are first worked in position, 
the ground-work being filled in afterwards. For the use of cement 
for paving see Plaster. 

The principal publications on brickwork are as follows: — 
Rivington, Notes on Building Construction, vols. i. ii. iii. ; Col. 
H. E. Seddon, Aide Memoir, vol. ii.; Specification; J. P. Allen, 
Building Construction ; F. E. Kidder, Building Construction and 
Superintendence, part i. (1903); Longmans & Green, Building 
Construction; E. Dobson, Bricks and Tiles; Henry Adams, Building 
Construction; C. F. Mitchell, Building Construction, vols. i. ii.; 
E. Street, Brick and Marble Architecture in Italy. (J. Bt.) 

BRICOLE (a French word of unknown origin), a military 
engine for casting heavy stones; also a term in tennis for a side- 
stroke rebounding off the wall of the court, corrupted into " brick- 
wall "from a supposed reference to the wall, and in billiards for 
a stroke off the cushion to make a cannon or hazard. 

BRIDAINE (or Brydayne), JACQUES (1701-1767), French 
Roman Catholic preacher, was born at Chuslan in the department 
of Gard on the 2 1st of March 1 701 . He was educated at Avignon, 
first in the Jesuit college and afterwards at the Sulpician seminary 
of St Charles. Soon after his ordination to the priesthood in 
1725, he joined the Missions Roy ales, organized to bring back to 
the Catholic faith the Protestants of France. He gained their 
good- will and made many converts; and for over forty years 
he visited as a missionary preacher almost every town of central 
and southern- France. In Paris, in 1744, his sermons created a 
deep impression by their eloquence and sincerity. He died at 
Roquemaure, near Avignon, on the 22nd of December 1767. 
He was the author of Cantiques spirituels (Montpelier, 1748, 
frequently reprinted, in use in most French churches) ; his ser- 
mons were published in 5 vols, at Avignon in 1823 (ed. Paris, 
1861). 

See Abbe G. Carron, Le Modele des pritres (1803). 

BRIDE (a common Teutonic word, e.g. Goth, bruths, 0. Eng. 
bryd, O. H. Ger. prut, Mod. Ger. Braut, Dut. bruid, possibly 
derived from the root bru-, cook, brew; from the med. latinized 
form bruta, in the sense of daughter-in-law, is derived the Fr. bru), 
the term used of a woman on her wedding-day, and applicable 
during the first year of wifehood. It appears in combination 
with many words, some of them obsolete. Thus " bridegroom " 
is the newly married man, and " bride-bell," " bride-banquet " 
are old equivalents of wedding-bells, wedding-breakfast. 
" Bridal " (from Bride-ale), originally the wedding-feast itself, 
has grown into a general descriptive adjective, e.g. the bridal 
party, the bridal ceremony. The bride-cake had its origin in the 
Roman confarreatio, a form of marriage, the essential features of 
which were the eating by the couple of a cake made of salt, 
water and flour, and the holding by the bride of three wheat- 
ears, symbolical of plenty. Under Tiberius the cake-eating fell 
into disuse, but the wheat ears survived. In the middle ages 
they were either worn or carried by the bride. Eventually it 
became the custom for the young girls to assemble outside 
the church porch and throw grains of wheat over the bride, and 
afterwards a scramble for the grains took place. In time the 
wheat-grains came to be cooked into thin dry biscuits, which were 
broken over the bride's head, as is the custom in Scotland to-day, 
an oatmeal cake being used. In Elizabeth's reign these biscuits 
began to take the form of small rectangular cakes made of eggs, 
milk, sugar, currants and spices. Every wedding guest had one 
at least, and the whole collection were thrown at the bride the 
instant she crossed the threshold. Those which lighted on her 
head or shoulders were most prized by the scramblers. At last 
these cakes became amalgamated into a large one which took on 
its full glories of almond paste and ornaments during Charles 
II. 's time. But even to-day in rural parishes, e.g. north Notts, 
wheat is thrown over the bridal couple with the cry " Bread 
for life and pudding for ever," expressive of a wish that the newly 
wed may be always affluent. The throwing of rice, a very ancient 



custom but one later than the wheat, is symbolical of the wish 
that the bridal may be fruitful. The bride-cup was the bowl or 
loving-cup in which the bridegroom pledged the bride, and she 
him. The custom of breaking this wine-cup, after the bridal 
couple had drained its contents, is common to both the Jews and 
the members of the Greek Church. The former dash it against 
the wall or on the ground, the latter tread it under foot. The 
phrase " bride-cup " was also sometimes used of the bowl of 
spiced wine prepared at night for the bridal couple. Bride- 
favours, anciently called bride-lace, were at first pieces of gold, 
silk or other lace, used to bind up the sprigs of rosemary formerly 
worn at weddings. These took later the form of bunches of 
ribbons, which were at last metamorphosed into rosettes. 
Bridegroom-men and bridesmaids had formerly important 
duties. The men were called bride-knights, and represented 
a survival of the primitive days of marriage by capture, when 
a man called his friends in to assist to " lift " the bride. Brides- 
maids were usual in Saxon England. The senior of them had 
personally to attend the bride for some days before the wedding. 
The making of the bridal wreath, the decoration of the tables for 
the wedding feast, the dressing of the bride, were among her 
special tasks. In the same way the senior groomsman (the 
best man) was the personal attendant of the husband. The 
bride-wain, the wagon in which the bride was driven to her new 
home, gave its name to the weddings of any poor deserving 
couple, who drove a " wain " round the village, collecting small 
surris of money or articles of furniture towards their housekeeping. 
These were called bidding-weddings, or bid-ales, which were in 
the nature of " benefit " feasts. So general is still the custom 
of " bidding- weddings " in Wales, that printers usually keep the 
form of invitation in type. Sometimes as many as six hundred 
couples will walk in the bridal procession. The bride's wreath 
is a Christian substitute for the gilt coronet all Jewish brides 
wore. The crowning of the bride is still observed by the Russians, 
and the Calvinists of Holland and Switzerland. The wearing of 
orange blossoms is said to have started with the Saracens, who 
regarded them as emblems of fecundity. It was introduced into 
Europe by the Crusaders. The bride's veil is the modern form of 
the flammeum or large yellow veil which completely enveloped the 
Greek and Roman brides during the ceremony. Such a coverin; 
is still in use among the Jews and the Persians. 

See Brand, Antiquities of Great Britain (Hazlitt's ed., 1905); Rev 
J. Edward Vaux, Church Folklore (1894). 

BRIDEWELL, a district of London between Fleet Street and 
the Thames, so called from the well of St Bride or St Bridget 
close by. From William the Conqueror's time, a castle or 
Norman tower, long the occasional residence of the kings of 
England, stood there by the Fleet ditch. Henry VIII., Stow 
says, built there " a stately and beautiful house," specially for 
the housing of the emperor Charles V. and his suite in 1525. 
During the hearing of the divorce suit by the Cardinals at 
Blackfriars, Henry and Catharine of Aragon lived there. In 
1553 Edward VI. made it over to the city as a penitentiary, a 
house of correction for vagabonds and loose women; and it 
was formally taken possession of by the lord mayor and corpora- 
tion in 1555. The greater part of the building was destroyed 
in the Great Fire of 1666. New Bridewell, built in 1829, was 
pulled down in 1864. The term has become a synonym for any 
reformatory. 

BRIDGE, a game of cards, developed out of the game of whist. 
The country of its origin is unknown. A similar game is said to 
have been played in Denmark in the middle of the 19th century. 
A game in all respects the same as bridge, except that in " no 
trumps " each trick counted ten instead of twelve, was played 
in England about 1884 under the name of Dutch whist. Some 
connect it with Turkey and Egypt under the name of " Khedive," 
or with a Russian game called " Yeralash." It was in Turkey 
that it first won a share of popular favour. Under the synonyms 
of " Biritch," " Bridge," or " Russian whist," it found its way 
to the London clubs about 1894, from which date its popularity 
rapidly increased. 

Ordinary Bridge. — Bridge, in its ordinary form, differs from 



BRIDGE 



529 



whist in the following respects: — Although there are four players, 
yet in each hand the partner of the dealer takes no part in the 
play of that particular hand. After the first lead his cards are 
placed on the table exposed, and are played by the dealer as at 
dummy whist; nevertheless the dealer's partner is interested 
in the result of the hand equally with the dealer. The trump 
suit is not determined by the last card dealt, but is selected by 
the dealer or his partner without consultation, the former having 
the first option. It is further open to them to play without a 
trump suit. The value of tricks and honours varies with the 
suit declared as trumps. Honours are reckoned differently from 
whist, and on a scale which is somewhat involved. The score 
for honours does not count towards winning or losing the rubber, 
but is added afterwards to the trick score in order to determine 
the value of the rubber. There are also scores for holding no 
trumps (" chicane "), and for winning all the tricks or all but 
one (" slam ")■ 

The score has to be kept on paper. It is usual for the scoring 
block to have two vertical columns divided halfway by a hori- 
zontal line. The left column is for the scorers' side, and the right 
for the opponents'. Honours are scored above the horizontal 
line, and tricks below. The drawback to this arrangement is that, 
since the scores for each hand are not kept separately, it is 
generally impossible to trace an error in the score without going 
through the whole series of hands. A better plan, it seems, is to 
have four columns ruled, the inner two being assigned to tricks, 
the outer ones to honours. By this method a line can be reserved 
for each hand, and any discrepancy in the scores at once rectified. 

The Portland Club, London, drew up a code of laws in 189s, 
and this code, with a few amendments, was in July 1895 adopted 
by a joint committee of the Turf and Portland Clubs. A revised 
code came into force in January 1905, the provisions of which 
are here summarized. 

Each trick above 6 counts 2 points in a spade declaration, 
4 in a club, 6 in a diamond, 8 in a heart, 12 in a no-trump declara- 
tion. The game consists of 30 points made by tricks alone. 
When one side has won two games the rubber is ended. The 
winners are entitled to add 100 points to their score. Honours 
consist of ace, king, queen, knave, ten, in a suit declaration. 
If a player and his partner conjointly hold 3 (or " simple ") 
honours they score twice the value of a trick; if 4 honours, 
4 times; if 5 honours, 5 times. If a player in his own hand hold 
4 honours he is entitled to score 4 honours in addition to the 
score for conjoint honours; thus, if one player hold 4 honours 
and his partner the other their total score is 9 by honours. 
Similarly if a player hold 5 honours in his own hand he is entitled 
to score 10 by honours. If in a no-trump hand the partners 
conjointly hold 3 aces, they score 30 for honours; if 4 aces, 
40 for honours. 4 aces in 1 hand count 100. On the same 
footing as the score for honours are the following: chicane, if 
a player hold no trump, in amount equal to simple honours; 
grand slam, if one side win all the tricks, 40 points; little 
slam, if they win 12 tricks, 20 points. At the end of the 
rubber the total scores, whether made by tricks, honours, chicane, 
slam, or rubber points, are added together, and the difference 
between the two totals is the number of points won. 

At the opening of play, partners are arranged and the cards 
are shuffled, cut and dealt (the last card not being turned) as 
at whist; but the dealer cannot lose the deal by misdealing. 
After the deal is completed, the dealer makes the trump or no- 
trump (sans atout) declaration, or passes the choice to his partner 
without remark. If the dealer's partner make the declaration 
out of his turn, the adversary on the dealer's left may, without 
consultation, claim a fresh deal. If an adversary make a declara- 
tion, the dealer may claim a fresh deal or disregard the declara- 
tion. Then after the declaration, either adversary may double, 
the leader having first option. The effect of doubling is that 
each trick is worth twice as many points as before; but the 
scores for honours, chicane and slam are unaltered. If a declara- 
tion is doubled, the dealer and his partner have the right of 
redoubling, thus making each trick worth four times as much 
as at first. The declarer has the first option. The other side 



can again redouble, and so on; but the value of a trick is limited 
to 100 points. In the play of the hand the laws are nearly the 
same as the laws of whist, except that the dealer may expose his 
cards and lead out of turn without penalty; after the second 
hand has played, however, he can only correct this lead out of 
turn with the permission of the adversaries. Dummy cannot 
revoke. The dealer's partner may take no part in the play of the 
hand beyond guarding the dealer against revoking. 

Advice to Players.— In the choice of a suit two objects are to be 
aimed at: first, to select the suit in which the combined forces 
have the best chance of making tricks; secondly, to select the 
trump so that the value of the suit agrees with the character of the 
hand, i.e. a suit of high value when the hands are strong and of low 
value when very weak. As the deal is a great advantage it generally 
happens that a high value is to be aimed at, but occasionally a low 
value is desirable. The task of selection should fall to the hand 
which has the most distinctive features, that is, either the longest 
suit or unusual strength or weakness. No consultation being allowed, 
the dealer must assume only an average amount of variation from 
the normal in his partner's hand. If his own hand has distinctive 
features beyond the average, he should name the trump suit himself, 
otherwise pass it to his partner. It may here be stated what is the 
average in these respects. 

As regards the length of a suit, a player's long suit is rather more 
likely to be fewer than five than over five. If the dealer has in his hand 
a suit of five cards including two honours, it is probable that he has a 
better suit to make trumps than dummy; if the suit is in hearts, 
and the dealer has a fair hand, he ought to name the trump. As 
regards strength, the average hand would contain ace, king, queen, 
knave and ten, or equivalent strength. Hands stronger or weaker 
than this by the value of a king or less may be described as feature- 
less. If the dealer's hand is a king over the average, it is more 
likely than not that his partner will either hold a stronger hand, or 
will hold such a weak hand as will counteract the player's strength. 
The dealer would not generally with such a hand declare no trump, 
especially as by making a no-trump declaration the dealer forfeits 
the advantage of holding the long trumps. 

Declarations by Dealer^ — In calculating the strength of a hand a 
knave is worth two tens, a queen is worth two knaves, a king is worth 
a queen and knave together, and an ace is worth a king and queen 
together. A king unguarded is worth less than a queen quarded; 
a queen is not fully guarded unless accompanied by three more 
cards; if guarded by one small card it is worth a knave guarded. 
An ace also loses in value by being sole. 

A hand to be strong enough for a no-trump declaration should be a 
king and ten above the average with all the honours guarded arid 
all the suits protected. It must be a king and knave or two queens 
above the average if there is protection in three suits. It must be 
an ace or a king and queen above the average if only two suits are 
protected. An established black suit of six or more cards with a 
guarded king as card of entry is good enough for no trumps. With 
three aces no trumps can be declared. Without an ace, four kings, 
two queens and a knave are required in order to justify the declara- 
tion. When the dealer has a choice of declarations, a sound heart 
make is to be preferred to a doubtful no-trump. Four honours in 
hearts are to be preferred to any but a very strong no-trump declara- 
tion; but four aces counting 100 points constitute a no-trump 
declaration without exception. 

Six hearts should be made trumps and five with two honours 
unless the hand is very weak; five hearts with one honour or four 
hearts with three honours should be declared if the hand is nearly 
strong enough for no trumps, also if the hand is very irregular with 
one suit missing or five of a black suit. Six diamonds with one 
honour, five with three honours or four all honours should be 
declared; weaker diamonds should be declared if the suits are 
irregular, especially if blank in hearts. Six clubs with three honours 
or five with four honours should be declared. Spades are practically 
only declared with a weak hand ; with only a king in the hand a suit 
of five spades should be declared as a defensive measure. With 
nothing above a ten a suit of two or three spades can be declared, 
though even with the weakest hands a suit 01 five clubs or of six red 
cards will probably prove less expensive. 

Declarations by Dummy. — From the fact that the call has been 
passed, the dealer's partner must credit the dealer with less thaai 
average strength as regards the rank of his cards, and probably a 
slightly increased number of black cards ; he must therefore be more 
backward in making a high declaration whenever he can make a 
sound declaration of less value. On the other hand, he has not the 
option of passing the declaration, and may be driven to declare on 
less strength because the only alternative is a short suit of spades. 
For example, with the hand: Hearts, ace, kv. 2; diamonds, qn. 
9, 7, 6, 3 ; clubs, kg. 10, 4; spades, 9, 2, the chances are in the dealer's 
favour with five trumps, but decidedly against with only two, and 
the diamond declaration is to be preferred to the spade. Still, a 
hand may be so weak that spades should be declared with two or 
less, but five clubs or six diamonds would be preferable with the 
weakest of hands. 



53° 



BRIDGE 



Declarations t» the Score. — When one's score is over twenty, club 
declarations should be made more frequently by the dealer. Spades 
should be declared with six at the score of twenty-six and with five 
at twenty-eight. When much behind in the score a risky no-trumper 
such as one with an established suit of seven or eight cards without a 
card of entry, may be declared. 

Declaring to the score is often overdone; an ordinary weak no- 
trump declaration carries with it small chances of three by tricks 
unless dummy holds a no-trump hand. 

Doubling.— Practically the leader only doubles a no-trump de- 
claration when he holds what is probably an established suit of 
seven cards or a suit which can be established with the loss of one 
trick and he has good cards of re-entry. Seven cards of a suit 
including the ace, king and queen make a sound double without any 
other card of value in the hand, or six cards including king, queen 
and knave with two aces in other suits. 

Doubling by the third hand is universally understood to mean 
that the player has a very strong suit which he can establish. In 
response to the double his partner, according to different conventions, 
leads either a heart or his own shortest suit as the one most likely to 
be the third player's strongest. Under the short suit convention, if 
the daubler holds six of a suit headed by the ace, king and queen, 
it is about an even chance that his suit will be selected; he should 
not double with less strength. Under the heart convention it is not 
necessary to have such great strength; with a strong suit of six 
hearts and good cards of reentry, enough tricks will be saved to 
compensate for the doubled value. A player should ascertain the 
convention followed before beginning to play. 

Before doubling a suit declaration a player should feel almost 
certain that he is as strong as the declarer. The minimum strength 
to justify the declaration is generally five trumps, but it may have 
been made on six. If, then, a player holds six trumps with an average 
hand as regards the rank of his cards, or five trumps with a hand of 
no-trump strength, it is highly probable that he is as strong as the 
declarer. It must be further taken into account that the act of 
doubling gives much valuable information to the dealer, who would 
otherwise play with the expectation of finding the trumps evenly 
distributed ; this is counterbalanced when the doubler is on the left 
of the declaring hand by the intimation given to his partner to 
lead trumps through the strong hand. In this position, then, the 
player should double with the strength stated above. When on 
the declarer's right, the player should hold much greater strength 
unless his hand is free from tenaces. When a spade declaration has 
been made by dummy, one trump less is necessary and the doubler 
need not be on the declarer's left. A spade declaration by the dealer 
can be doubled with even less strength. A declaration can be rather 
more freely doubled when a single trick undoubled will take the 
dealer out, but even in this position the player must be cautious of 
informing the dealer that there is a strong hand against him. 

Redoubling. — When a declaration has been doubled, the declarer 
knows the minimum that he will find against him ; he must be pre- 
pared to find occasionally strength against him considerably exceed- 
ing this minimum. Except in the case of a spade declaration, cases 
in which redoubling is justifiable are very rare. 

The Play of the Hand. — In a no-trump declaration the main object 
is to bring in a long suit. In selecting the suit to establish, the 
following are favourable conditions: — One hand should hold at 
least five cards of the suit. The two hands, unless with a sequence 
of high cards, should hold between them eight cards of the suit, so as 
to render it probable that the suit will be established in three rounds. 
The hand which contains the strong suit should be sufficiently strong 
in cards of re-entry. The suit should not be so full of possible tenaces 
as to make it disadvantageous to open it. As regards the play of the 
cards in a suit, it is not the object to make tricks early, but to make 
all possible tricks. Deep finesses should be made when there is no 
other way of stealing a trick. Tricks may be given away, if by so 
doing a favourable opening can be made for a finesse. When, how- 
ever, it is doubtful with which hand the finesse should be made, it is 
better to leave it as late as possible, since the card to be finessed 
against may fall, or an adversary may fail, thus disclosing the suit. 
It is in general unsound to finesse against a card that must be un- 
guarded. From a hand short in cards of re-entry, winning cards 
should not be led out so as to exhaust the suit from the partner's 
hand. E\en a trick should sometimes be given away. For instance, if 
one hand holds seven cards headed by ace, king, and the other hand 
holds only two of the suit, although there is a fair chance of making 
seven tricks in the suit, it would often be right to give the first trick 
to the adversaries. When one of the adversaries has shown a long 
suit, it is frequently possible to prevent, its being brought in by a 
device, such as holding up a winning card, until the suit is exhausted 
from his partner's hand, or playing in other suits so as to give the 
player the lead whilst his partner has a card of his suit to return, 
and to give the latter the lead when he has no card to return. The 
dealer should give as little information as possible as to what lie 
holds in his own hand, playing frequent false cards. Usually he 
should play the higher or highest of a sequence; still, there are 
positions in which playing the higher gives more information than 
the lower; a strict adherence to a rule in itself assists the adversaries. 

With a suit declaration, if there is no chance of letting the weak 
hand make a trump by ruffing, it will generally be the dealer's aim 



to discard the losing cards in the declaring hand either to high cards 
or to the cards of an established suit in the other hand, sometimes 
after the adverse trumps have been taken out, but often before 
there being no time for drawing trumps. With no card of any value 
in a suit in one hand, the lead should come from that hand, but it is 
better, if possible, to let the adversaries open.the suit. It is generally- 
useless to lead a moderately high card from the weaker hand in order 
to finesse it, when holding no cards In sequence with it in either 
hand. Sometimes (especially in no-trumps) it is the better play to 
make the weak hand third player. For instance, with king, 8, 7, 5, 2 
in one hand, knave, 4 in the other, the best way of opening is from 
the hand that holds five cards. 

In a no-trump declaration the opponents of the dealer should 
endeavour to find the longest suit in the two hands, or the one most 
easily established. With this object the leader should open his best 
suit. If his partner next obtains the lead he ought to return the 
suit, unless he himself has a suit which he considers better, having 
due regard to the fact that the first suit is already partially estab- 
lished. The opponents should employ the same tactics as the dealer 
to prevent the latter from bringing in a long suit; they can use 
them with special effect when the long suit is in the exposed hand. 

Against no-trumps the leader should not play his winning cards 
unless he has a good chance of clearing the suit without help from his 
partner; in most cases it is advisable to give away the first trick, 
especially if he has no card of re-entry, in order that his partner on 
gaining the lead may have a card of the suit to return ; but holding 
ace, king and queen, or ace, king with seven in the suit, or ace, king, 
knave, ten with six, the player may lead out his best. With three 
honours any two of which are in sequence (not to the ace) the player 
should lead the higher of the sequence. He should lead his highest 
card from queen, knave, ten ; from queen, knave, nine ; from knave, 
ten, nine; knave, ten, eight, and ten, nine, eight. In other cases the 
player should lead a small card; according to the usual convention, 
the fourth best. His partner, and also the dealer, can credit him 
with three cards higher than the card led, and can often place the 
cards of the suit: for instance, the seven is led, dummy holds queen 
and eight, playing the queen, the third player holds the nine and 
smaller cards; the unseen cards higher than the seven are ace, 
king, knave and ten of which the leader must hold three ; he cannot 
hold both knave and ten or he would have led the knave ; he must 
therefore hold the ace, king and either knave or ten. The " eleven " 
rule is as follows: the number of pips in the card led subtracted from 
eleven (11-7=4 > n the case stated) gives the number of cards 
higher than the one led not in the leader's hand; the three cards 
seen (queen, nine and eight) leave one for the dealer to hold. 
The mental process is no shorter than assigning three out of the 
unseen cards to the leader, and by not noting the unseen cards much 
valuable information may be missed, as in the illustrative case given. 

With a suit declared the best opening lead is a singleton, failing 
which a lead from a strong sequence. A lead from a tenace or a 
guarded king or queen is to be avoided. Two small cards may be 
led from, though the lead is objected to by some. A suit of ihree 
small cards of no great strength should not be opened. In cases of 
doubt preference should be given to hearts and to a less extent to 
diamonds. 

To lead up to dummy's weak suits is a valuable rule. The con- 
verse, to lead through strength, must be used with caution, and 
does not apply to no-trump declarations. It is not advisable to 
adopt any of the recent whist methods of giving information. It is 
clear that, if the adversaries signal, the dealer's hand alone is a 
secret, and he, in addition to his natural advantage, has the further 
advantage of better information than either of the adversaries. 
The following signals are, however, used, and are of great trick- 
making value : playing an unnecessarily high card, whether to one's 
partner's suit or in discarding in a no-trump declaration, indicates 
strength in the suit; in a suit declaration a similar method of play 
indicates two only of the suit and a desire to ruff, — it is best used in 
the case of a king led by one's partner. 

The highest of a sequence led through dummy will frequently 
tell the third player that he has a good finesse. The lowest of a 
sequenceled through the dealer will sometimes explain the position 
to the third player, at the same time keeping the dealer in the dark. 

When on dummy's left it is futile to finesse against a card not in 
dummy's hand. But with ace and knave, if dummy has either king 
or queen, the knave should usually be played, partly because the 
other high card may be in the leader's hand, partly because, if the 
finesse fails, the player may still hold a tenace over dummy. When 
a player is with any chance of success trying to establish his long suit, 
he should keep every card of it if possible, whether it is a suit already 
opened or a suit which he wishes his partner to lead ; when, however, 
the main object of the hand is to establish one's partner's suit, it is 
not necessary for a player to keep his own long suit, and he should 
pay attention to guarding the other suits. In some circles a discard 
from a suit is always understood to indicate strength in the suit ; 
this convention, while it makes the game easier for inferior players, 
frequently causes the player to throw away one of his most valuable 
cards. 

Playing to the Score. — At the beginning of the hand the chances 
are so great against any particular result, that at the score of love-al! 
the advantage of getting to any particular score has no appreciable 



BRIDGEBUILDING BROTHERHOOD— BRIDGE-HEAD 531 



effect in determining the choice of suit. In the play of the hand, the 
advantage of getting to certain points should be borne in mind. 
The principal points to be aimed at are 6, 18, and, in a less degree, 22. 
The reason is that the scores 24, 12 and 8, which will just take the 
dealer out from the respective points, can each be made in a variety 
of ways, and are the most common for the dealer to make. The 
2 points that take the score from 4 to 6 are worth 4, or perhaps 
5, average points; and the 2 points that take the score from 6 to 8 
are worth I point. When approaching game it is an advantage to 
make a declaration that may just take the player out, and, in a 
smaller degree, one that will not exactly take the adversaries out. 
When the score is 24 to 22 against the dealer, hearts and clubs are 
half a trick better relatively to diamonds than at the score of love-all. 
In the first and second games of the rubber the value of each point 
scored for honours is probably about a half of a point scored for 
tricks — in a close game rather less, in a one-sided game rather more. 
In the deciding game of the rubber, on account of the importance 
of winning the game, the value of each point scored for honours sinks 
to one-third of a point scored for tricks. 

Other Forms of Bridge. — The following varieties of the game are 
also played : — 

Three-handed Bridge.— The three players cut ; the one that cuts 
the lowest card deals, and takes dummy for one deal: each takes 
dummy in turn. Dummy's cards are dealt face downwards, and the 
dealer declares without seeing them. If the dealer declares trumps, 
both adversaries may look at their hands ; doubling and redoubling 
proceeds as at ordinary bridge, but dummy's hand is not exposed 
till the first card has been led. If the dealer passes the declaration 
to dummy, his right-hand adversary, who must not have looked at 
his own hand, examines dummy's, and declares trumps, not, however, 
exposing the hand. The declaration is forced: with three or four 
aces sans atout (no trumps) must be declared: in other cases the 
longest suit: if suits are equal in length, the strongest, i.e. the suit 
containing most pips, ace counting eleven, king, queen and knave 
counting ten each. If suits are equal in both length and strength, 
the one in which the trick has the higher value must be trumps. 
On the dummy's declaration the third player can only double before 
seeing his own cards. When the first card has been led, dummy's 
hand is exposed, never before the lead. The game is 30 : the player 
wins the rubber who is the first to win two games. Fifty points are 
scored for each game won, and fifty more for the rubber. Sometimes 
three games are played without reference to a rubber, fifty points 
being scored for a game won. No tricks score towards game except 
those which a player wins in his own deal ; the value of tricks won 
in other deals is scored above the line with honours, slam and 
chicane. At the end of the rubber the totals are added up, and the 
points won or lost are adjusted thus. Suppose A is credited with 
212, B with 290, and C with 312, then A owes 78 to B and 100 to C ; 
B owes 22 to C. 

Dummy Bridge. — The player who cuts the "lowest card takes 
dummy. Dummy deals the first hand of all. The player who takes 
dummy always looks at his own hand first, when he deals for himself 
or for dummy ; he can either declare trumps or " leave it " to dummy. 
Dummy's declaration is compulsory, as in three-handed bridge. 
When the dealer deals for dummy, the player on the dealer's left 
must not look at his cards till either the dealer has declared trumps 
or, the declaration having been left to dummy, his own partner has 
led a card. The latter can double, but his partner can only double 
without seeing his hand. The dealer can only redouble on his own 
hand. When the player of dummy deals for himself, the player on 
his right hand looks at dummy's hand if the declaration is passed, 
the positions and restrictions of his partner and himself being 
reversed. If the player of dummy declares from his own hand, the 
game proceeds as in ordinary bridge, except that dummy's hand is 
not looked at till permission to play has been given. When the 
player on dummy's right deals, dummy's partner may look at 
dummy's hand to decide if he will double, but he may not look at 
his own till a card has been led by dummy. In another form of 
dummy bridge two hands are exposed whenever dummy's adversaries 
deal, but the game is unsuited for many players, as in every other 
hand the game is one of double-dummy. 

Misery Bridge. — This is a form of bridge adapted for two players. 
The non-dealer has the dummy, whilst the dealer is allowed to 
strengthen his hand by discarding four or fewer cards and taking an 
equal number from the fourth packet dealt; the rest of the cards 
in that packet are unused and remain unseen. A novel and interest- 
ing addition to the game is that the three of clubs (called " Cato ") 
does not rank as a club but can be played to any trick and win it. 
The dealer, in addition to his other calls, may declare " misery " 
when he has to make less than two tricks. 

Draw- or Two-handed Bridge.— This is the best form of bridge for 
two players. Each player has a dummy, which is placed opposite 
to him; but the cards are so arranged that they cannot be seen 
by his opponent, a special stand being required for the purpose. 
The dealer makes the declaration or passes it to his dummy to make 
by the same rules as in three-handed or dummy bridge. The objec- 
tion to this is that, since the opponent does not see the dealer's 
dummy, he has no chance of checking an erroneous declaration. 
This could be avoided by not allowing the dealer the option of 
passing. 



Auction Bridge. — This variety of the game for four players, 
which adds an element characteristic of poker, appears to have 
been suggested about 1904, but was really introduced at the 
Bath Club, London, in 1907, and then was gradually taken up 
by a wider circle. The laws were settled in August 1908 by a 
joint committee of the Bath and Portland clubs. The scoring 
(except as below), value of suits, and play are as at ordinary 
bridge, but the variety consists in the method of declaration, 
the declaration not being confined in auction bridge to the dealer 
or his partner, and the deal being a disadvantage rather than 
otherwise. The dealer, having examined his hand, must declare 
to win at least one " odd " trick, and then each player in turn, 
beginning with the one on the dealer's left, has the right to pass 
the previous declaration, or double, or redouble, or overcall by 
making a declaration of higher value,, any number of times till 
all are satisfied, the actual play of the combined hands (or what 
in ordinary bridge would be dealer and dummy) resting eventu- 
ally with the partners making the final declaration; the partner 
who made the first call (however small) in the suit finally con- 
stituting the trump (or no-trump) plays the hands, the other 
being dummy. A declaration of a greater number of tricks in a 
suit of lower value, which equals a previous call in value of 
points (e.g. two in spades as against one in clubs) is " of higher 
value "; but doubling and redoubling only affect the score and 
not the declaration, so that a call of two diamonds overcalls one 
no-trump even though this has been doubled. The scoring in 
auction bridge has the additional element that when the eventual 
player of the two hands wins what was ultimately declared or 
more, his side score the full value below the line (as tricks), but 
if he fails the opponents score 50 points above the line (as 
honours) for each under- trick (i.e. trick short of the declaration), 
or 100 or 200 if doubled or redoubled, nothing being scored by 
either side below the line; the loss on a declaration of one spade 
is limited, however, to a maximum of 100 points. A player whose 
declaration has been doubled and who fulfils his contract, scores 
a bonus of 50 points above the line and a further 50 points for 
each additional trick beyond his declaration; if there was a 
redouble and he wins, he scores double the bonus. The penalty 
for a revoke (unaffected by a double) is (1) in the case of the 
declarer, that his adversaries add 150 above the line; (2) in the 
case of one of his adversaries, that the declarer may either add 
150 points above the line or may take three tricks from his 
opponents and add them to his own; in the latter case such 
tricks may assist him to fulfil his contract, but shall not entitle 
him to any bonus for a double or redouble. A revoking side may 
score nothing either above or below the line except for honours 
or chicane. As regards the essential feature of auction bridge, 
the competitive declaration, it is impossible here to discuss the 
intricacies involved. It entails, clearly, much reliance on a good 
partner, since the various rounds of bidding enable good players 
to draw inferences as .to where the cards lie. The game opens 
the door to much larger scores than ordinary bridge, and since 
the end only comes from scores made below the line, there are 
obvious ways of prolonging it at the cost of scores above the line 
which involve much more of the gambling element. It by no 
means follows that the winner of the rubber is the winner by 
points, and many players prefer to go for points (i.e. above the 
line) extorted from their opponents rather than for fulfilling a 
declaration made by themselves. 

Authorities. — " Hellespont," Laws and Principles of Bridge; 
W. Dalton, Saturday Bridge, containing full bibliography (London, 
1906); J. B. Elwell, Advanced Bridge: R. F. Foster, Bridge Tactics; 
" Badsworth," Laws and Principles of Bridge ; E. Bergholt, Double- 
Dummy Bridge; Biritch, or Russian Whist, pamphlet in Brit. Mus. ; 
W. Dalton, Auction Bridge (1908). (W. H. W.*) 

BRIDGEBUILDING BROTHERHOOD, a confraternity (Fratres 
Pontifices) that arose in the south of France during the latter 
part of the 12th century, and maintained hospices at the chief 
fords of the principal rivers, besides building bridges and looking 
after ferries. The brotherhood was recognized by Pope Clement 
III. in 1 1 89. 

BRIDGE-HEAD (Fr. tUe-du-pont) , in fortification, a work de- 
signed to cover the passage of a river by means of fortifications 



532 



BRIDGEND— BRIDGES, R. 



on one or both banks. As the process of moving an army over 
bridges is slow and complicated, it is usually necessary to 
secure it from hostile interruption, and the works constituting 
the bridge-head must therefore be sufficiently far advanced to 
keep the enemy's artillery out of range of the bridges. In 
addition, room is required for the troops to form up on the 
farther bank. In former days, with short-range weapons, a 
bridge-head was often little more than a screen for the bridge 
itself, but modern conditions have rendered necessary far 
greater extension of bridge defences. 

6BID6END, a market town in the southern parliamentary 
division of Glamorganshire, Wales, on both sides of the river 
Ogwr (whence its Welsh name Penybont-ar-Ogwr) . Pop. of 
urban district (iooi) 6062. It has a station 165 m. from London 
on the South Wales trunk line of the Great Western railway, 
and is the junction of the Barry Company's railway to Barry 
via Llantwit Major. Bridgend has a good market for agricultural 
produce, and is an important centre owing to its being the 
natural outlet for the mining valleys of the Llynvi, Garw and 
the two Ogwr rivers, which converge about 3 m. north of the 
town and are connected with it by branch lines of the Great 
Western railway. Though without large manufacturing indus- 
tries, the town has joinery works, a brass and iron foundry, a 
tannery and brewery. There are brick- works and stone quarries, 
and much lime is burnt in the neighbourhood. Just outside the 
town at Angelton and Pare Gwyllt are the Glamorgan county 
lunatic asylums. 

There was no civil parish of Bridgend previous to 1905, when 
one was formed out of portions of the parishes of Newcastle and 
Coity. Of the castle of Newcastle, built on the edge of a cliff 
above the church of that parish, there remain a courtyard with 
flanking towers and a fine Norman gateway. At Coity, about 
2 m. distant, there are more extensive ruins of its castle, originally 
the seat of the Turbervilles, lords of Coity, but now belonging 
to the earls of Dunraven. Coity church, dating from the 14th 
century, is a fine cruciform building with central embattled 
tower in Early Decorated style. 

BRIDGE OF ALLAN, a police burgh of Stirlingshire, Scotland. 
Pop. (1001) 3240. It lies on the Allan, a left-hand tributary of 
the Forth, 3 m. N. of Stirling by the Caledonian railway and by 
tramway. Built largely on the well-wooded slopes of Westerton 
and Airthrey Hill, sheltered by the Ochils from the north and 
east winds, and environed by charming scenery, it has a great 
reputation as a health resort and watering-place, especially in 
winter and spring. There is a pump-room. The chief buildings 
are the hydropathic and the Macfarlane museum of fine art and 
natural history. The industries include bleaching, dyeing and 
paper-making. The Strathallan Gathering, usually held in the 
neighbourhood, is the most popular athletic meeting in mid- 
Scotland. Airthrey Castle, standing in a fine park with a lake, 
adjoins the town on the south-east, and just beyond it are the 
old church and burying-ground of Logie, beautifully situated 
at the foot of a granite spur of the Ochil range. 

BRIDGEPORT, a city, a port of entry, and one of the county- 
seats of Fairfield county, Connecticut, U.S.A., co-extensive 
with the town of Bridgeport, in the S.W. part of the state, on 
Long Island Sound, at the mouth of the Pequonnock river; 
about 18 m. S.W. of New Haven. Pop. (1880) 27^643; (1890) 
48,866; (1900) 70,996, of whom 22,281 were foreign-born, 
including 5974 from Ireland, 3172 from Hungary, 2854 from 
Germany, 2755 from England, and 1436 from Italy; (1910) 
102,054. Bridgeport is served by the New York, New 
Haven & Hartford railway, by lines of coast steamers, and by 
steamers to New York City and to Port Jefferson, directly 
across Long Island Sound. The harbour, formed by the estuary 
of the river and Yellow Mill Pond, an inlet, is excellent. Between 
the estuary and the pond is a peninsula, East Bridgeport, in 
which are some of the largest manufacturing establishments, 
and west of the harbour and the river is the main portion of the 
city, the wholesale section extending along the bank, the retail 
section farther back, and numerous factories along the line of 
the railway far to the westward. There are two large parks, 



Beardsley, in the extreme north part of the city, and Seaside, west 
of the harbour entrance and along the Sound; in the latter are 
statues of Elias Howe, who built a large sewing-machine factory 
here in 1863, and of P. T. Barnum, the showman, who lived in 
Bridgeport after 1846 and did much for the city, especially for 
East Bridgeport. In Seaside Park there is also a soldiers' and 
sailors' monument, and in the vicinity are many fine residences. 
The principal buildings are the St Vincent's and Bridgeport 
hospitals, the Protestant orphan asylum, the Barnum Institute, 
occupied by the Bridgeport Scientific and Historical Society and 
the Bridgeport Medical Society; and the United States govern- 
ment building, which contains the post-office and the customs 
house. 

In 1905 Bridgeport was the principal manufacturing centre 
in Connecticut, the capital invested in manufacturing being 
$49,381,348, and the products being, valued at $44,586,519. The 
largest industries were the manufacture of corsets — the product 
of Bridgeport was 19-9% of the total for the United States in 
1905, Bridgeport being the leading city in this industry — sewing 
machines (one of the factories of the Singer Manufacturing Co. 
is here), steam-fitting and heating apparatus, cartridges (the 
factory of the Union Metallic Cartridge Co. is here), automobiles, 
brass goods, phonographs and gramophones, and typewriters. 
There are also large foundry and machine shops. Here, too, 
are the winter headquarters of " Barnum and Bailey's circus " 
and of " Buffalo Bill's Wild West Show." Bridgeport is a port 
of entry; its imports in 1908 were valued at $656,271. Bridge- 
port was originally a part of the township of Stratford. The 
first settlement here was made in 1659. It was called Pequonnock 
until 1695, when its name was changed to Stratfield. During 
the War of Independence it was a centre of privateering. In 
1800 the borough of Bridgeport was chartered, and in 1821 the 
township was incorporated. The city was not chartered until 
1836. 

See S. Orcutt's History of the Township of Stratford and the City of 
Bridgeport (New Haven, 1886). 

BRIDGES, ROBERT (1844- ), English poet, born on the 
23rd of October 1844, was educated at Eton and at Corpus Christi 
College, Oxford, and studied medicine in London at St Bartholo- 
mew's hospital. He was afterwards assistant physician at the 
Children's hospital, Great Ormond Street, and physician at the 
Great Northern hospital, retiring in 1882. Two years later he 
married Mary, daughter of Alfred Waterhouse, R.A. As a 
poet Robert Bridges stands rather apart from the current of 
modern English verse, but his work has had great influence in 
a select circle, by its restraint, purity, precision, and delicacy 
yet strength of expression; and it embodies a distinct theory 
of prosody. His chief critical works are Milton's Prosody (1893), 
a volume made up of two earlier essays (1887 and 1889), and 
John Keats, a Critical Essay (1895). He maintained that 
English prosody depended on the number of " stresses " in a 
line, not on the number of syllables, and that poetry should 
follow the rules of natural speech. His, poetry was privately 
printed in the first instance, and was slow in makilig its way 
beyond a comparatively small circle of his admirers. His best 
work is to be found in his Shorter Poems (1890), and a complete 
edition of his Poetical Works (6 vols.) was published in 1898- 
1905. His chief volumes are Prometheus (Oxford, 1883, privately 
printed), a " mask in the Greek Manner"; Eros and Psyche 
(1885), a version of Apuleius; The Growth of Love, a series of 
sixty-nine sonnets printed for private circulation in 1876 and 
1889; Shorter Poems (1890); Nero (1885), a historical tragedy, 
the second part of which appeared in 1894; Achilles in Scyros 
(1890), a drama; Palicio (1890), a romantic drama in the 
Elizabethan manner; The Return of Ulysses (1890), a drama 
in^five acts; The Christian Captives (1890), a tragedy on the 
same subject as Calderon's El Principe Constanie; The Humours 
of the Court (1893), a comedy founded on the same dramatist's 
El secreto a voces and on Lope de Vega's El Perro del hortelano; 
The Feast of Bacchus (1889), partly translated from the Heauton- 
Timoroumenos of Terence; Hymns from the Yattendon Hymnal 
(Oxford, 1899); and Demeler, a Mask (Oxford, 1905). 



BRIDGES 



533 



BRIDGES, i. Definitions and General Considerations. — Bridges 
(old forms, brig, brygge, brudge; Dutch, brug; German, 
Briicke; a common Teutonic word) are structures carrying 
roadways, waterways or railways across streams, valleys or 
other roads or railways, leaving a passage way below. Long 
bridges of several spans are often termed " viaducts," and 
bridges carrying canals are termed " aqueducts," though this 
term is sometimes used for waterways which have no bridge 
structure. A " culvert " is a bridge of small span giving passage 
to drainage. In railway work an " overbridge " is a bridge over 
the railway, and an " underbridge " is a bridge carrying the 
railway. In all countries there are legal regulations fixing the 
minimum span and height of such bridges and the width of road- 
way to be provided. Ordinarily bridges are fixed bridges, but 
there are also movable bridges with machinery for opening 
a clear and unobstructed passage way for navigation. Most 
commonly these are " swing " or " turning " bridges. " Float- 
ing " bridges are roadways carried on pontoons moored in a 
stream. 

In classical and medieval times bridges were constructed 
of timber or masonry, and later of brick or concrete. Then 
late in the 18th century wrought iron began to be used, at first 
in combination with timber or cast iron. Cast iron was about 
the same time used for arches, and some of the early railway 
bridges were built with cast iron girders. Cast iron is now only 
used for arched bridges of moderate span. Wrought iron was used 
on a large scale in the suspension road bridges of the early part 
of the 19th century. The great girder bridges over the Menai 
Strait and at Saltash near Plymouth, erected in the middle of 
the 1 9th century, were entirely of wrought iron, and subsequently 
wrought iron girder bridges were extensively used on railways. 
Since the introduction of mild steel of greater tenacity and tough- 
ness than wrought iron (i.e. from 1880 onwards) it has wholly 
superseded the latter except for girders of less than 100 ft. span. 
The latest change in the material of bridges has been the introduc- 
tion of f erro-concrete, armoured concrete, or concrete strengthened 
with steel bars for arched bridges. The present article relates 
chiefly to metallic bridges. It is only since metal has been 
used that the great spans of 500 to 1800 ft. now accomplished 
have been made possible. 

2. In a bridge there may be distinguished the superstructure 
and the substructure. In the former the main supporting member 
or members may be an arch ring or arched ribs, suspension 
chains or ropes, or a pair of girders, beams or trusses. The 
bridge flooring rests on the supporting members, and is of very 
various types according to the purpose of the bridge. There is 
also in large bridges wind-bracing to stiffen the structure against 
horizontal forces. The substructure consists of (c) the piers and 
end piers or abutments, the former sustaining a vertical load, 
and the latter having to resist, in addition, the oblique thrust 
of an arch, the pull of a suspension chain, or the thrust of an 
embankment; and (b) the foundations below the ground level, 
which are often difficult and costly parts of the structure, because 
the position of a bridge may be fixed by considerations which 
preclude the selection of a site naturally adapted for carrying 
a heavy structure. 

3. Types of Bridges. — Bridges may be classed as arched bridges, 
in which the principal members are in compression; suspension 
bridges, in which the principal members are in tension; and 
girder bridges, in which half the components of the principal 
members are in compression and half in tension. But there are 
cases of bridges of mixed type. The choice of the type to be 
adopted depends on many and complex considerations: — (1) 
The cost, having regard to the materials available. For moderate 
spans brick, masonry or concrete can be used without excessive 
cost, but for longer spans steel is more economical, and for very 
long spans its use is imperative. (2) The importance of securing 
permanence and small cost of maintenance and repairs has to 
be considered. Masonry and concrete are more durable than 
metal, and metal than timber. (3) Aesthetic considerations 
sometimes have great weight, especially in towns. Masonry 
bridges are preferable in appearance to any others, and 



metal arch bridges are less objectionable than most forms of 
girder. 

Most commonly the engineer has to attach great importance 
to the question of cost, and to design his structure to secure 
the greatest economy consistent with the provision of adequate 
strength. So long as bridge building was an empirical art, great 
waste of material was unavoidable. The developmenc of tne 
theory of structures has been largely directed to determining 
the arrangements of material which are most economical, 
especially in the superstructure. In the case of bridges of large 
span the cost and difficulty of erection are serious, and in such 
cases facility of erection becomes a governing consideration in 
the choice of the type to be adopted. In many cases the span 
is fixed by local conditions, such as the convenient sites for piers, 
or the requirements of waterway or navigation. But here also 
the question of economy must be taken into the reckoning. 
The cost of the superstructure increases very much as the span 
increases, but the greater the cost of the substructure, the larger 
the span which is economical. Broadly, the least costly arrange- 
ment is that in which the cost of the superstructure of a span 
is equal to that of a pier and foundation. 

For masonry, brick or concrete the arch subjected throughout 
to compression is the most natural form. The arch ring can 
be treated as a blockwork structure composed of rigid voussoirs. 
The stability of such structures depends on the position of the 
line of pressure in relation to the extrados and intrados of the 
arch ring. Generally the line of pressure lies within the middle 
half of the depth of the arch ring. In finding the line of pressure 
some principle such as the principle of least action must be used 
in determining the reactions at the crown and springings, and 
some assumptions must be made of not certain validity. Hence 
to give a margin of safety to cover contingencies not calculable, 
an excess of material must be provided. By the introduction 
of hinges the position of the line of resistance can be fixed and 
the stress in the arch ring determined with less uncertainty. 
In some recent masonry arched bridges of spans up to 1 50 ft. built 
with hinges considerable economy has been obtained. 

For an elastic arch of metal there is a more complete theory, 
but it is difficult of application, and there remains some un- 
certainty unless (as is now commonly done) hinges are intro- 
duced at the crown and springings. 

In suspension bridges the principal members are in tension, 
and the introduction of iron link chains about the end of the 
1 8th century, and later of wire ropes of still greater tenacity, 
permitted the construction of road bridges of this type with 
spans at that time impossible with any other system of con- 
struction. The suspension bridge dispenses with the compression 
member required in girders and with a good deal of the stiffening 
required in metal arches. On the other hand, suspension bridges 
require lofty towers and massive anchorages. The defect of the 
suspension bridge is its flexibility. It can be stiffened by girders 
and bracing and is then of mixed type, when it loses much of its 
advantage in economy. Nevertheless, the stiffened suspension 
bridge will probably be the type adopted in future for very great 
spans. A bridge on this system has been projected at New 
York of 3 200 ft. span. 

The immense extension of railways since 1830 has involved 
the construction of an enormous number of bridges, and most 
of these are girder bridges, in which about half the superstructure 
is in tension and half in compression. The use of wrought iron 
and later of mild steel has made the construction of such bridges 
very convenient and economical. So far as superstructure is 
concerned, more material must be used than for an arch or chain, 
for the girder is in a sense a combination of arch and chain 
On the other hand, a girder imposes only a vertical load on its 
piers and abutments, and not a horizontal thrust, as in the case 
of an arch or suspension chain. It is also easier to erect. 

A fundamental difference in girder bridges arises from the 
mode of support. In the simplest case the main girders are 
supported at the ends only, and if there are several spans they 
are discontinuous or independent. But a main girder may be 
supported at two or more points so as to be continuous over two 



534 



BRIDGES 



or more spans. The continuity permits economy of weight. 
In a three-span bridge the theoretical advantage of continuity 
is about 49% for a dead load and 16% for a live load. The 
objection to continuity is that very small alterations of level 
of the supports due to settlement of the piers may very greatly 
alter the distribution of stress, and render the bridge unsafe. 
Hence many multiple-span bridges such as the Hawkesbury, 
Benares and Chittravatti bridges have been built with inde- 
pendent spans. 

Lastly, some bridges are composed of cantilevers and suspended 
girders. The main girder is then virtually a continuous girder 
hinged at the points of contrary flexure, so that no ambiguity 
can arise as to the stresses. 

Whatever type of bridge is adopted, the engineer has to 
ascertain the loads to be carried, and to proportion the parts 
so that the stresses due to the loads do not exceed limits found 
by experience to be safe. In many countries the limits of working 
stress in public and railway bridges are prescribed by law. The 




Fig. i. — Trajan's Bridge. 



development of theory has advanced pari passu with the demand 
for bridges of greater strength and span and of more complex 
design, and there is now little uncertainty in calculating the 
stresses in any of the types of structure now adopted. In the 
modern metal bridge every member has a definite function and 
is subjected to a calculated straining action. Theory has been 
the guide in the development of bridge design, and its trust- 
worthiness is completely recognized. The margin of uncertainty 
which must be met by empirical allowances on the side of safety 
has been steadily diminished. 

The larger the bridge, the more important is economy of 
material, not only because the total expenditure is more serious, 
but because as the span increases the dead weight of the structure 
becomes a greater fraction of the whole load to be supported. 
In fact, as the span increases a point is reached at which the dead 
weight of the superstructure becomes so large that a limit is 
imposed to any further increase of span. 

History of Bridge Building 
4. Roman Bridges. — The first bridge known to have been 
constructed at Rome over the Tiber was the timber Pons Sub- 



Quattro Capi), of about 62 B.C., is practically intact; and the 
Pons Cestius, built probably in 46 B.C., retains much of the 
original masonry. The Pons Aelius, built by Hadrian a.d. 134 
and repaired by Pope Nicholas II. and Clement IX., is now 
the bridge of St Angelo. It had eight arches, the greatest span 




Fig. 3. — Ponte Salario. 

being 62 ft. 1 Dio Cassius mentions a bridge, possibly 3000 to 
4000 ft. in length, built by Trajan over the Danube in a.d. 104. 
Some piers are said still to exist. A bas-relief on the Trajan 
column shows this bridge with masonry piers and timber arches, 
but the representation is probably conventional (fig. 1). Trajan 
also constructed the bridge of Alcantara in Spain (fig. 2), of a 
total length of 670 ft., at 210 ft. above the stream. This had 
six arches and was built of stone blocks without cement. The 
bridge of Narses, built in the 6th century (fig. 3), carried the Via 
Salaria over the Anio. It was destroyed in 1867, during the 
approach of Garibaldi to Rome. It had a fortification such as 
became usual in later bridges for defence or for the enforcement 
of tolls. The great lines of aqueducts built by Roman engineers, 
and dating from 300 B.C. onwards, where they are carried above 




Fig. 4. — First Span of Schaffhausen Bridge. 

ground, are arched bridge structures of remarkable magnitude 
(see Aqueducts, § Roman). They are generally of brick and 
concrete. 

5. Medieval and other Early Bridges. — Bridges with stone- 
piers and timber superstructures were no doubt constructed 
from Roman times onward, but they have perished. Fig. 4 
shows a timber bridge erected by the brothers Grubenmann at 
Schaffhausen about the middle of the 18th century. It had 
spans of 172 and 193 ft., and may be taken as a representative 




Fig. 2. — Bridge of Alcantara. 



licius, the bridge defended by Horatius. The Pons Milvius, 
now Ponte Molle, was reconstructed in stone by M. Aemilius 
Scaurus in 109 B.C., and some portions of the old bridge are 
believed to exist in the present structure. The arches vary 
f-rom 51 to 79 ft. span. The Pons Fabricius (mod. Ponte dei 



type of bridges of this kind. The Wittingen bridge by the same 
engineers had a span of 390 ft., probably the longest timber 

1 For the ancient bridges in Rome see further Rome: Archaeology, 
and such works as R. Lanciani, Ruins and Excavations of Ancient 
Rome (Eng. trans., 1897), pp. 16 foil. 



BRIDGES 



535 



span ever constructed. Of stone bridges in Great Britain, the 
earliest were the cyclopean bridges still existing on Dartmoor, 
consisting of stone piers bridged by stone slabs. The bridge 
over the East Dart near Tavistock had three piers, with slabs 




Fig. 5. — Crowland Bridge. 



It is 



15 ft. by 6 ft. (Smiles, Lives of the Engineers, ii. 43), 
reputed to have lasted for 2000 years. 

The curious bridge at Crowland near Peterborough (fig. 5) 
which now spans roadways, the streams which formerly flowed 
under it having been diverted, is one of the earliest known stone 
bridges in England. It is referred to in a charter of the year 
943. It was probably built by the abbots. The first bridges 
over the Thames at London were no doubt of timber. William of 
Malmesbury mentions the existence of a bridge in 994. J. Stow 
(Survey of the Cities of London and Westminster) describes 



was destroyed for military reasons by Carmagnola in 141 6. The 
Rialto bridge at Venice, with a span of 91 ft., was built in 
1588 by Antonio da Ponte. Fig. 7 shows the beautiful Ponte 
della Trinita erected at Florence in 1566 from the design of 
B. Ammanati. 

6. Modern Bridges. — (a) Timber. — In England timber bridges 
of considerable span, either braced trusses or laminated arches 
(i.e. arches cf planks bolted together), were built for some 
of the earlier railways, particularly the Great Western and 
the Manchester, Sheffield & Lincolnshire. They have mostly 
been replaced, decay having taken place at the joints. Timber 
bridges of large span were constructed in America between the 
end of the 18th and the middle of the 19th century. The Amos- 
keag bridge over the Merrimac at Manchester, N.H., U.S.A., 
built in 1792, had 6 spans of 92 ft. The Bellows Falls bridge 
over the Connecticut (built 1 785-1 792) had 2 spans of 184 ft. 
The singular Colossus bridge, built in 181 2 over the Schuylkill, 
a kind of flat arched truss, had a span of 340 ft. Some of these 
timber bridges are said to have lasted ninety years with ordinary 
repairs, but they were road bridges not heavily loaded. From 
1840, trusses, chiefly of timber but with wrought-iron .tension- 
rods and cast-iron shoes, were adopted in America. The Howe 
truss of 1830 and the Pratt truss of 1844 are examples. The 
Howe truss had timber chords and a lattice of timber struts, 
with vertical iron ties. In the Pratt truss the struts were 
vertical and the ties inclined. Down to 1850 such bridges were 
generally limited to 150 ft. span. The timber was white pine. 
As railway loads increased and greater spans were demanded, 
the Howe truss was stiffened by timber arches on each side of 
each girder. Such a composite structure is, however, funda- 
mentally defective, the distribution of loading to the two 
independent systems being indeterminate. Remarkably high 
timber piers were built. The Genesee viaduct, 800 ft. in length, 
built in 1851-1852 in 10 spans, had timber trestle piers 190 ft. in 




From J. R. Green's A Short History of the English People, by permission of Macmillan& Co.. Ltd. [ 

Fig. 6. — Old London Bridge, A.D. 1600. From a Drawing in the Pepysian Library ; Magdalene College, Cambridge. 



the building of the first stone bridge commonly called Old 
London Bridge: '" About the year n 76, the stone bridge was 
begun to be founded by Peter of Colechurch, near unto the 
bridge of timber, but more towards the west." It carried 
timber houses (fig. 6) which were frequently burned down, yet 
the main structure existed till the beginning of the 19th century. 
The span of the arches ranged from 10 to 33 ft., and the total 
waterway was only 33 7 ft. The waterway of the present London 
Bridge is 690 ft., and the removal of the obstruction caused by 
the old bridge caused a lowering of the low-water level by 5 ft., 




- 88:0—— 



Fig. 7.— Ponte della Trinita, Florence. 



and a considerable deepening of the river-bed. (See Smiles, 
Lives of the Engineers, " Rennie.") 

The architects of the Renaissance showed great boldness in 
their designs. A granite arch built in 1377 over the Adda at 
Trezzo had a span at low water of 251 ft. This noble bridge 



height. (See Mosse, " American Timber Bridges," Proc. Inst. 
C.E. xxii. p. 305, and for more modern examples, cxlii. p. 409; 
and civ. p. 382; Cooper, "American Railroad Bridges," Trans. 
Am. Soc. C.E. vol. xxi. pp. 1-28.) These timber framed structures 
served as models for the earlier metal trusses which began to 
be used soon after 1850, and which, except in a few localities 
where iron is costly, have quite superseded them. 

7. (b) Masonry. — The present London Bridge, begun in 1824 
and completed in 183 1, is as fine an example of a masonry arch 
structure as can be found (figs. 8 and 9). The design was made 

by John Rennie the elder, 



and 



the acting engineer 
was his son, Sir John 
Rennie. The semi-ellip- 
tical shape of the arches 
the variation of span, the 
slight curvature of the 

7S~~- - roadway, and the simple 

yet bold architectural 
details, combine to make 



it a singularly beautiful bridge. The centre arch has a span of 
152 ft., and rises 29 ft. 6 in. above Trinity high-water mark; the 
arches on each side of the centre have a span of 140 ft., and the 
abutment arches 130 ft. The total length of the bridge is 1005 ft., 
its width from outside to outside 56 ft., and height above low 



—se'o- 1 



536 



BRIDGES 



water 60 ft. The two centre piers are 24 ft. thick, the exterior 
stones are granite, the interior, half Bramley Fall and half from 
Painshaw, Derbyshire. The voussoirs of the centre arch (all of 
granite) are 4 ft. 9 in. deep at the crown, and increase to not less 
than 9 ft. at the springing. The general depth at which the 
foundations are laid is about 29 ft. 6 in. below low water. The 
total cost was £1,458,311, but the contractor's tender for the 
bridge alone was £425,081. 

Since 1867 it had been recognized that London Bridge was 
inadequate to carry the traffic passing over it, and a scheme for 
widening it was adopted in 1900. This was carried out in 1902- 



paper by H. M. Martin (Proc. Inst. C. E. vol. xciii. p. 462); and 
for that of the elastic arch, to a paper by A. E. Young (Proc. 
Inst. C.E. vol. cxxxi. p. 323). 

In Germany and America two- and three-hinged arches of masonry 
and concrete have been built, up to 150 ft. span, with much economy, 
and the calculations being simple, an engineer can venture to work 
closely to the dimensions required by theory. For hinges, Leibbrand, 
of Stuttgart, uses sheets of lead about I in. thick extending over the 
middle third of the depth of the voussoir joints, the rest of the joints 
being left open. As the lead is plastic this construction is virtually 
an articulation. If the pressure on the lead is uniformly varying, 
the centre of pressure must be within the middle third of the width 
of the lead; that is, it cannot deviate from the centre of the voussoir 




Scale of Feet 

100 200 



JOO 



Fig. 8. — London New Bridge. 



1904, the footways being carried on granite corbels, on which 
are mounted cornices and open parapets. The width between 
parapets is now 65 ft., giving a roadway of 35 ft. and two foot- 
ways of 15 ft. each. The architect was Andrew Murray and 
the engineer, G. E. W. Cruttwell. (Cole, Proc. Inst. C.E. clxi. 
p. 290.) 

The largest masonry arch is the Adolphe bridge in Luxemburg, 
erected in 1900-1903. This has a span of 278 ft., 138 ft. rise 
above the river, and 102 ft. from foundation to crown. The 
thickness of the arch is 4 ft. 8 in. at the crown and 7 ft. 2 in. 
where it joins the spandrel masonry. The roadway is 52 ft. 6 in. 
wide. The bridge is not continuous in width, there are arch 
rings on each face, each 16-4 ft. wide with a space between of 
19- 7 ft. This space is filled with a flooring of reinforced concrete, 
resting on the two arches, and carrying the central roadway. 
By the method adopted the total masonry has been reduced 
one-third. One centering was used for the two arch rings, 
supported on dwarf walls which formed a slipway, along which 
it was moved after the first arch was built. 

Till near the end of the 19th century bridges of masonry or 
brickwork were so constructed that they had to be treated as 
rigid blockwork structures. The stability of such structures 
depends on the position of the line of pressure relatively to the 
intrados and extrados of the arch ring. Generally, so far as 




Fig. 9. — Half Elevation and Half Section of Arch of London 
Bridge. 

could be ascertained, the line of pressure lies within the middle 
half of the depth of the voussoirs. In finding the abutment 
reactions some principle such as the principle of least action must 
be used, and some assumptions of doubtful validity made. But 
if hinges are introduced at crown and springings, the calculation 
of the stresses in the arch ring becomes simple, as the line of 
pressures must pass through the hinges. Such hinges have been 
used not only for metal arches, but in a modified form for 
masonry and concrete arches. Three cases therefore arise: 
(a) The arch is rigid at crown and springings; (b) the arch is 
two-hinged (hinges at springings) ; (c) the arch is three-hinged 
(hinges at crown and springings). For an elementary account of 
the theory of arches, hinged or not, reference may be made to a 



joint by more than one-eighteenth of its depth. In any case the 
position of the line of pressures is confined at the lead articulations 
within very narrow limits, and ambiguity as to the stresses is greatly 
diminished. The restricted area on which the pressure acts at the 
lead joints involves greater intensity of stress than has been usual in 
arched bridges. In the Wiirttemberg hinged arches a limit of stress 
of 1 10 tons per sq. ft. was allowed, while in the unhinged arches at 
Cologne and Coblentz the limit was 50 to 60 tons per sq. ft. (Annates 
des Fonts et ChaussSes, 1891). At Rechtenstein a bridge of two 
concrete arches has been constructed, span 75 J ft., with lead articula- 
tions : width of arch 11 ft. ; depth of arch at crown and springing 
2-1 and 2-96 ft. respectively. The stresses were calculated to be 15, 
17 and 12 tons per sq. ft. at crown, joint of rupture, and springing 
respectively. At Cincinnati a concrete arch of 70 ft. span has been 
built, with a rise of 10 ft. The concrete is reinforced by eleven 9-in. 
steel-rolled joists, spaced 3 ft. apart and supported by a cross-channel 
joist at each springing. The arch is 15 in. thick at the crown and 
4 ft. at the abutments. The concrete consisted of 1 cement, 2 sand 
and 3 to 4 broken stone. An important series of experiments on 
the strength of masonry, brick and concrete structures will be 
found in the Zeitschr. des bsterreichen Ing. und Arch. Vereines 
(1895)- 

The thermal coefficient of expansion of steel and concrete is nearly 
the same, otherwise changes of temperature would cause shearing 
stress at the junction of the two materials. If the two materials 
are disposed symmetrically, the amount of load carried by each would 
be in direct proportion to the coefficient of elasticity and inversely 
as the moment of inertia of the cross section. But. it is usual in 
many cases to provide a sufficient section of steel to carry all the 
tension. For concrete the coefficient of elasticity E varies with 
the amount of stress and diminishes as the ratio of sand and stone 
to cement increases. Its value is generally taken at 1,500,000 to 
3,000,000 lb per sq. in. For steel E = 28,000,000 to 30,000,000, or an 1 
the average about twelve times its value for concrete. Themaxjmum' 
compressive working stress on the concrete may be 500 lb ppr sq. in., 
the tensile working stress 50 lb per sq. in., and the working shearing 
stress 75 lb per sq. in. The tensile stress on the steel may be 1 6,ood ffi 
per sq. in. The amount of steel in the structure may vary from 
o-75 to 1-5%. The concrete not only affords much of the strength 
to resist compression, but effectively protects the steel from corrosion, 

8. (c) Suspension Bridges. — A suspension bridge consists of 
two or more chains, constructed of links connected by pins, or 
of twisted wire strands, or of wires laid parallel. The chains pass 
over lofty piers on which they usually rest on saddles carried by 
rollers, and are led down on either side to anchorages in rpck 
chambers. A level platform is hung from the chains by sus- 
pension rods. In the suspension bridge iron or steel can be used 
in its strongest form, namely hard-drawn wire. Iron suspension 
bridges iegan to be used at the end of the 18th century for 
road bridges with spans unattainable at that time in any 
other system. In 181 9 T. Telford began the construction of the 
Menai bridge (fig. 10), the span being 570 ft. and the dip 43 ft. 
This bridge suffered some injury in a storm, but it is still in good 
condition and one of the most graceful of bridges. Other bridges 
built soon after were the Fribourg bridge of 870 ft. span, the 
Hammersmith bridge of 422 ft. span, and the Pest bridge of 
666 ft, span. The merit of the simple suspension bridge is its 
cheapness, and its defect is its flexibility. This last becomes less 



BRIDGES 



537 



serious as the dead weight of the structure becomes large in 
proportion to the live or temporary load. It is, therefore, a type 
specially suited for great spans. Some suspension bridges have 
broken down in consequence of the oscillations produced by 
bodies of men marching in step. In 1850 a suspension bridge 



cable was carried on a separate saddle on rollers on each pier. The 
stiffening girder, constructed chiefly of timber, was a box-shaped 
braced girder 18 ft. deep and 25 ft. wide, carrying the railway on 
top and a roadway within. After various repairs and strengthenings, 
including the replacement of the timber girder by an iron one in 
1880, this bridge in 1896-1897 was taken down and a steel arch built 



s7&-«ifrcrtoCc- 




Fig. 10.— Menai Suspension Bridge. 



at Angers gave way when 487 soldiers were marching over it, 
and 226 were killed. 

To obtain greater stiffness various plans have been adopted. 
In the Ordish system a certain number of intermediate points 
in the span are supported by oblique chains, on which girders 
rest. The Ordish bridge built at Prague in 1868 had oblique 
chains supporting the stiffening girders at intermediate points 
of the span. A curved chain supported the obique chains and 
kept them straight. In i860 a bridge was erected over the 
Danube canal at Vienna, of 264 ft. span which had two parallel 
chains one above the other and 4 ft. apart on each side of the 
bridge. The chains of each pair were connected by bracing so 
that they formed a stiff inverted arch resisting deformation 



in its place. It was not strong enough to deal with the increasing 
weight of railway traffic. In 1836 I. K. Brunei constructed the 
towers and abutments for a suspension bridge of 702 ft. span at 
Clifton over the Avon, but the project was not then carried further ; 
in i860, however, the link chains of the Hungerford suspension bridge 
which was being taken down were available at small cost, and these 
were used to complete the bridge. There are three chains on each 
side, of one and two links alternately, and these support wrought 
iron stiffening girders. There are wrought iron saddles and steel 
rollers on the piers. At 196 ft. on either side from the towers the 
chains are carried over similar saddles without rollers, and thence at 
45° with the horizontal down to the anchorages. Each chain has 
an anchor plate 5 ft. by 6 ft. The links are 24 ft. long at the centre 
of the bridge, and longer as they are more inclined, so that their 
horizontal projection is 24 ft. The chains are so arranged that there 
is a suspending rod at each 8 ft., attached at the joint of one of the 




Fig. 11. — Niagara 

under unequal loading. The bridge carried a railway, but it 
proved weak owing to errors of calculation, and it was taken 
down in 1884. The principle was sound and has been proposed 
at various times. About 1850 it was perceived that a bridge 
stiff enough to carry railway trains could be constructed by 
combining supporting chains with stiffening girders suspended 
from them. W. J. M. Rankine proved {Applied Mechanics, 
p. 370) that the necessary strength of a stiffening girder would 
be only one-seventh part of that of an independent girder of 
the same span as the bridge, suited to carry the same moving 
load (not including the dead weight of the girder which is sup- 
ported by the chain). (See " Suspension Bridge with Stiffened 
Roadway," by Sir G. Airy, and the discussion, Proc. Inst. C.E., 



Suspension Bridge. 

three chains. For erection a suspended platform was constructed on 
eight wire ropes, on which the chains were laid out and connected. 
Another wire rope with a travelling carriage took out the links. 
The sectional area of the chains is 481 s(j. in. at the piers and 440 
sq. in. at the centre. The two stiffening girders are plate girders 3 ft. 
deep with flanges of II sq. in. area. In addition, the hand railing 
on each side forms a girder 4 ft. 9 in. deep, with flanges 4! sq. in. 
area. 

Of later bridges of great span, perhaps the bridges over the East 
river at New York are the most remarkable. The Brooklyn bridge, 
begun in 1872, has a centre span of 15955 and side spans of 930 ft. 
The Brooklyn approach being 971 ft., and the New York approach 
1 562 J ft., the total length of the bridge is 5989 ft. There are four 
cables which carry a promenade, a roadway and an electric railway. 
The stiffening girders of the main span are 40 ft. deep and 67 ft. 
apart. The saddles for the chains are 329 ft. above high water. 




Fig. 12. — Williamsburg Bridge, New York. 



1867, xxvi. p. 258; also " Suspension Bridges with Stiffening 
Girders," by Max am Ende, Proc. Inst. C.E. cxxxvii. p. 306.) 

The most remarkable bridge constructed on this system was the 
Niagara bridge built by J. A. Roebling in 1852-1855 (fig. 11). The 
span was 821 ft., much the largest of any railway bridge at that time, 
and the height above the river 245 ft. There were four suspension 
cables, each 10 in. in diameter; each was composed of seven strands, 
containing 520 parallel wires, or 3640 wires in each cable. Each 



The cables are 15! in. in diameter. Each cable has 19 strands of 
278 parallel steel wires, 7 B.W.G. Each wire is taken separately 
across the river and its length adjusted. Roebling preferred parallel 
wires as 10 % stronger than twisted wires. Each strand when made 
up and clamped was lowered to its position. The Williamsburg 
bridge (fig. 12), begun in 1897 and opened for traffic in 1903, has 
a span of 1600 ft., a versed sine of 176 ft., and a width of 118 ft. 
It has two decks, and carries two elevated railway tracks, four 
electric tramcar lines, two carriageways, two footways and two 



538 



BRIDGES 



bicycle paths. There are four cables, one on each side of the two 
main trusses or stiffening girders. These girders are supported 
by the cables over the centre span but not in the side spans. Inter- 
mediate piers support the trusses in the side spans. The cables are 
l8f in. in diameter; each weighs about 1116 tons, and has a nominal 
breaking strength of 22,320 tons, the actual breaking strength being 



the floor into rectangles 3 ft. by 3I ft. covered with buckled plates. 
The roadway is of pine blocks dowelled. The bascules rotate 
through an angle of 82°, and their rear ends in the bascule chambers 
of the piers carry 365 tons of counterweight, the total weight of each 
being 1070 tons. They rotate on steel shafts 21 in. in diameter and 
48 ft. long, and the bascules can be lifted or lowered in one minute, 




Xttct MQurOrdnartrtDatum £> r I-:-i££ c- 



£ :- - 1&fi~z$ 3 



mm* 



HALF ELEVATION 



HALF LONGITUDINAL SECTION 



probably greater. The saddles are 332 ft. above the water. The 
four cables support a dead load of 7140 tons and a live load of 4017 
tons. Each cable is composed of 37 strands of 208 wires, or 7696 
parallel steel wires, No. 8 B.W.G., or about j 3 g in. in diameter. 
The wire was required to have a tensile strength of 89 tons per sq. in., 
and 2\% elongation in 5 ft. and 5% in 8 in. Cast steel clamps 
hold the cable together, and to these the suspending rods are attached. 
The cables are wrapped in cotton duck soaked in oxidized oil and 
varnish, and are sheathed in sheet iron. A later bridge, the Man- 
hattan, is designed to carry four railway tracks and four tramway 
lines, with a wide roadway and footpaths, supported by cables 
2i| in. in diameter, each composed of 9472 galvanized steel wires 
ft in. in diameter. 

The Tower Bridge, London (fig. 13), is a suspension bridge with a 
secondary bascule bridge in the centre span to permit the passage of 
ships. Two main towers in the river and two towers on the shore 
abutments carry the suspension chains. The opening t>ridge between 
the river towers consists of two leaves or bascules, pivoted near the 
faces of the piers and rotating in a vertical plane. When raised, 
the width of 200 ft. between the main river piers is unobstructed 
up to the high-level foot-bridge, which is 141 ft. above Trinity H.W. 
The clear width of the two shore spans is 270 ft. The total length 
of the bridge is 940 ft., and that of the approaches 1260 ft. on the 
north and 780 ft. on the south. The width of the bridge between 
parapets is 60 ft., except across the centre span, where it is 49 ft. 
The main towers consist of a skeleton of steel, enclosed in a facing of 
granite and Portland stone, backed with brickwork. There are two 
high-level footways for use when the bascules are raised, the main 
girders of which are of the cantilever 
and suspended girder type. The canti- 
levers are fixed to the shore side of the 
towers. The middle girders are 120 ft. 
in length and attached to the cantilevers 
by links. The main suspension chains 
are carried across the centre span in the 
form of horizontal ties resting on the 
high-level footway girders. These ties 
are jointed to the hanging chains by pins 
20 in. in diameter with a ring in halves 
surrounding it 5 in. thick. One half 
ring is rigidly attached to the tie and 
one to the hanging chain, so that the 
wear due to any movement is distributed 
over the length of the pin. A rocker 
bearing under these pins transmits the 
load at the joint to the steel columns 
of the towers. The abutment towers are 
similar to the river towers. On the 
abutment towers the chains are connected 
by horizontal links, carried on rockers, 
to anchor ties. The suspension chains 
are constructed in the form of braced 
girders, so that they are stiff against un- 
sym metrical loading. Each chain over 

a shore span consists of two segments, the longer attached to the tie 
at the top of the river tower, the shorter to the link at the top of the 
abutment tower, and the two jointed together at the lowest point. 
Transverse girders are hung from the chains at distances of 18 ft. 
There are fifteen main transverse girders to each shore span, with nine 
longitudinal girders between each pair. The trough flooring, | in. 
thick and 6 in. deep, is riveted to the longitudinals. The anchor ties 
are connected to girders embedded in large concrete blocks in the 
foundations of the approach viaducts. 

The two bascules are each constructed with four main girders. 
Over the river these are lattice girders, with transverse girders 12 
ft. apart, and longitudinal and subsidiary transverse girders dividing 



Fig. 13.— Tower Bridge, London. 

but usually the time taken is one and a half minutes, 
worked by hydraulic machinery. 



They are 



9. (d) Iron and Steel Girder Bridges. — The main supporting 
members are two or more horizontal beams, girders or trusses. 
The girders carry a floor or platform either on top (deck bridges) 
or near the bottom (through bridges). The platform is variously 
constructed. For railway bridges it commonly consists of cross 
girders, attached to or resting on the main girders, and longi- 
tudinal rail girders or stringers carried by the cross girders and 
directly supporting the sleepers and rails. For spans over 75 ft., 
expansion due to change of temperature is provided for by carry- 
ing one end of each chain girder on rollers placed between the 
bearing-plate on the girder and the bed-plate on the pier or 
abutment. 

Fig. 14 shows the roller bed of a girder of the Kuilenburg 
bridge of 490 ft. span. It will be seen that the girder directly 
rests on a cylindrical pin or rocker so placed as to distribute the 
load uniformly to all the rollers. The pressure on the rollers 
is limited to about p = 6oo d in lb per in. length of roller, where 
d is the diameter of the roller in inches. 

In the girders of bridges the horizontal girder is almost 
exclusively subjected to vertical loading forces. Investigation 




Fig. 14. — Roller Bed of a Girder. • 

of the internal stresses, which balance the external forces, shows 
that most of the material should be arranged in a top flange, 
boom or chord, subjected to compression, and a bottom flange 
or chord, subjected to tension. (See Strength of Materials.) 
Connecting the flanges is a vertical web which may be a solid 
plate or a system of bracing bars. In any case, though the exact 
form of cross section of girders varies very much, it is virtually 
an I section (fig. 15). The function of the flanges is to resist a 
horizontal tension and compression distributed practically urii : 
formly on their cross sections. The web resists forces equivalent 



BRIDGES 



539 




Fig. 15. — Flanged Girder. 



to a shear on vertical and horizontal planes. The inclined 
tensions and compressions in the bars of a braced web are 
equivalent to this shear. The horizontal stresses in the flanges 
are greatest at the centre of a span. The stresses in the web are 

greatest at the ends of 
the span. In the most 
numerous cases the flanges 
or chords are parallel. But 
girders may have curved 
chords and then the stresses 
in the web are diminished. 
At first girders had solid 
or plate webs, but for spans 
over 100 ft. the web always 
now consists of bracing 
bars. In some girder 
bridges the members are 
connected entirely by 
riveting, in others the 
principal members are con- 
nected by pin joints. The 
pin system of connexion 
used in the Chepstow, Salt- 
ash, Newark Dyke and other early English bridges is now rarely 
used in Europe. But it is so commonly used in America as to be 
regarded as a distinctive American feature. With pin connexions 
some weight is saved in the girders, and erection is a little easier. 
In early pin bridges insufficient bearing area was allowed between 
the pins and parts connected, and they worked loose. In some 
cases riveted covers had to be substituted for the pins. The 
proportions are now better understood. Nevertheless the tend- 
ency is to use riveted connexions in preference to pins, and in 
any case to use pins for tension members only. 

On the first English railways cast iron girder bridges for spans 
of 20 to 66 ft. were used, and in some cases these were trussed 
with wrought iron. When in 1845 the plans for carrying the 
Chester and Holyhead railway over the Menai Straits were 
considered, the conditions imposed by the admiralty in the 
interests of navigation involved the adoption of a new type of 
bridge. There was an idea of using suspension chains combined 
with a girder, and in fact the tower piers were built so as to 
accommodate chains. But the theory of such a combined 
structure could not be formulated at that time, and it was proved, 
partly by experiment, that a simple tubular girder of wrought 
iron was strong enough to carry the railway. The Britannia 
bridge (fig. 16) has two spans of 460 and two of 230 ft. at 104 ft. 
above high water. It consists of a pair of tubular girders with 
solid or plate sides stiffened by angle irons, one line of rails 
passing through each tube. Each girder is 1511 ft. long and 
weighs 4680 tons. In cross section (fig. 17), it is 15 ft. wide and 
varies in depth from 23 ft. at the ends to 30 ft. at the centre. 
Partly to counteract any tendency to buckling under com- 
pression and partly for convenience in assembling a great mass 
of plates, the top and bottom were made cellular, the cells being 
just large enough to permit passage for painting. The total 



Eaton Hodgkinson, who assisted in the experimental tests and 
in formulating the imperfect theory then available. The Conway 
bridge was first completed, and the first train passed through 
the Britannia bridge in 1850. Though each girder has been 
made continuous over the four spans it has not quite the pro- 
portions over the piers which a continuous girder should have, 




Fig. 17. — Britannia Bridge (Cross Section of Tubular Girder). 

and must be regarded as an imperfectly continuous girder. The 
spans were in fact designed as independent girders, the advantage 
of continuity being at that time imperfectly known. The vertical 
sides of the girders are stiffened so that they amount to 40% 
of the whole weight. This was partly necessary to meet the 
uncertain conditions in floating when the distribution of support- 
ing forces was unknown and there were chances of distortion. 
Wrought iron and, later, steel plate web girders were largely 




Britannia Bridge. 



area of the cellular top flange of the large-span girders is 648 
sq. in., and of the bottom 585 sq. in. As no scaffolding could be 
used for the centre spans, the girders were built on shore, floated 
out and raised by hydraulic presses. The credit for the success 
of the Conway and Britannia bridges must be divided between 
the engineers. Robert Stephenson and William Fairbairn, and 



used for railway bridges in England after the construction of the 
Conway and Menai bridges, and it was in the discussions arising 
during their design that the proper function of the vertical web 
between the top and bottom flanges of a girder first came to be 
understood. The proportion of depth to span in the Britannia 
bridge was T V But so far as the flanges are concerned the stress 



54° 



BRIDGES 



to be resisted varies inversely as the depth of the girder. It 
would be economical, therefore, to make the girder very deep. 
This, however, involves a much heavier web, and therefore for 
any type of girder there must be a ratio of depth to span which 
is most economical. In the case of the plate web there must 
be a considerable excess of material, partly to stiffen it against 
buckling and partly because an excess of thickness must be 
provided to reduce the effect of corrosion. It was soon found 
that with plate webs the ratio of depth to span could not be 
economically increased beyond 
tV t0 t 1 ?. On the other hand 
a framed or braced web afforded 
opportunity for much better 
arrangement of material, and 
it very soon became apparent 
that open web or lattice or 
braced girders were more econo- 
mical of material than solid web 
girders, except for small spans. 
In America such girders were 
used from the first and naturally 
followed the general design of 
the earlier timber bridges. Now 
plate web girders are only used 
for spans of less than ioo ft. 

Three types of bracing for 
the web very early developed — 

the Warren type in which the bracing bars form equilateral 
triangles, the Whipple Murphy in which the struts are vertical 
and the ties inclined, and the lattice in which both struts and 
ties are inclined at equal angles, usually 45° with the horizontal. 
The earliest published theoretical investigations of the stresses 
in bracing bars were perhaps those in the paper by W. T. Doyne 
and W. B. Blood (Proc. Inst. C.E., 1851, xi. p. 1), and the paper 
by J. Barton, " On the economic distribution of material in 
the sides of wrought iron beams" (Proc. Inst. C.E., 1855, xiv. 

P-443)- 
The Boyne bridge, constructed by Barton in Ireland, in 



culated position of one of the points of contrary flexure all the 
rivets of the top boom were cut out, and by lowering the end 
of the girder over the side span one inch, the joint was opened 




Newark Dyke Bridge. 




Fig. 18. — Span of Saltash Bridge. 

1854-1855, was a remarkable example of the confidence with 
which engineers began to apply theory in design. It was a bridge 
for two lines of railway with lattice girders continuous over 
three spans. The centre span was 264 ft., and the side spans 
138 ft. 8 in.; depth 22 ft. 6 in. Not only were the bracing bars 
designed to calculated stresses, and the continuity of the girders 
taken into account, but the validity of the calculations was 
tested by a verification on the actual bridge of the position of 
the points of contrary flexure of the centre span. At the cal- 




Fig. 19. 



Section of Newark Dyke Bridge. 



■fa in. Then the rivets were cut out similarly at the other point 
of contrary flexure and the joint opened. The girder held its 
position with both joints severed, proving that, as should be 
the case, there was no stress in the boom where the bending 
moment changes sign. 

By curving the top boom of a girder to form an arch and the 
bottom boom to form a suspension chain, the need of web except 
for non-uniform loading is obviated. I. K. Brunei adopted 
this principle for the Saltash bridge near Plymouth, built soon 
after the Britannia bridge. It has two spans of 455 ft. and 
seventeen smaller spans, the roadway being 100 ft. above high 
water. The top boom of each girder is an elliptical wrought iron 
tube 17 ft. wide by 12 ft. deep. The lower boom is a pair of chains, 
of wrought-iron links, 14 in each chain, of 7 in. by 1 in. section, the 
links being connected by pins. The suspending rods and cross 
bracing are very light. The depth of the girder at the centre 
is about one-eighth of the span. 

In both England and America in early braced bridges cast 
iron, generally in the form of tubes circular or octagonal in 
section, was used for compression members, and wrought iron 
for the tension members. Fig. 19 shows the Newark Dyke 
bridge on the Great Northern railway over the Trent. It was 
a pin-jointed Warren girder bridge erected from designs by 
C. M. Wild in 1851-1853. The span between supports was 
259 ft., the clear span 240! ft.; depth between joint pins 16 ft. 
There were four girders, two to each line of way. The top flange 
consisted of cast iron hollow castings butted end to end, and 
the struts were of cast iron. The lower flange and ties were flat 
wrought iron links. This bridge has now been replaced by a 
stronger bridge to carry the greater loads imposed by modern 
traffic. Fig. 20 shows a Fink truss, a characteristic early American 
type, with cast iron compression and wrought iron tension 
members. The bridge is a deck bridge, the railway being carried 
on top. The transfer of the loads to the ends of the bridge by 




Fig. 20.— Fink Truss. 



BRIDGES 



541 



long ties is uneconomical, and this type has disappeared. The 
Warren type, either with two sets of bracing bars or with inter- 
mediate verticals, affords convenient means of supporting the 
floor girders. In 1869 a bridge of 390 ft. span was built on this 
system at Louisville. 

Amongst remarkable American girder bridges may be men- 
tioned the Ohio bridge on the Cincinnati & Covington railway, 
which is probably the largest girder span constructed. The 



girders after erection. Fig. 22 shows girders erected in this way, 
the dotted lines being temporary members during erection, 
which are removed afterwards. The side spans are erected first 
on staging and anchored to the piers. From these, by the aid 
of the temporary members, the centre span is built out from 
both sides. The most important cantilever bridges so far erected 
or projected are as follows: — 

(1) The Forth bridge (fig. 23). The original design was for a 




-Typical 

centre span is 550 ft. and the side spans 490 ft. — centre to centre 
of piers. The girders are independent polygonal girders. The 
centre girder has a length of 545 ft. and a depth of 84 ft. between 
pin centres. It is 67 ft. between parapets, and carries two lines 
of railway, two carriageways, and two footways. The cross 
girders, stringers and wind-bracing are wrought iron, the rest 
of mild steel. The bridge was constructed in 1888 by the 
Phoenix Bridge Company, and was erected on staging. The 
total weight of iron and steel in three spans was about 5000 tons. 
10. (e) Cantilever Bridges. — It has been stated that if in a 
girder bridge of three or more spans, the girders were made 
continuous there would be an important economy of material, 
but that the danger of settlement of the supports, which would 
seriously alter the points of contrary flexure or points where 




Fig. 22. 

the bending moment changes sign, and therefore the magnitude 
and distribution of the stresses, generally prevents the adoption 
of continuity. If, however, hinges or joints are introduced at 
the points of contrary flexure, they become necessarily points 
where the bending moment is zero and ambiguity as to the 
stresses vanishes. The exceptional local conditions at the site 
of the Forth bridge led to the adoption there of the cantilever 
system, till then little considered. Now it is well understood 
that in many positions this system is the simplest and most 
economical method of bridging. It is available for spans greater 
than those practicable with independent girders; in fact, on this 
system the spans are virtually reduced to smaller spans so far 
as the stresses are concerned. There is another advantage which 
in many cases is of the highest importance. The cantilevers can 



stiffened suspension bridge, but alter the fall of the Tay bridge in 
1879 this was abandoned. The bridge, which was begun in 1882 
and completed in 1889, is at the only narrowing of the Forth in a 
distance of 50 m., at a point where the channel, about a mile in 
width, is divided by the island of Inchgarvie. The length of the 
cantilever bridge is 5330 ft., made up thus: central tower on Inch- 
garvie 260 ft. ; Fife and Queensferry piers each 145 ft. ; two central 
girders between cantilevers each 350 ft. ; and six cantilevers each 
680 ft. The two main spans are each 17 10 ft. The clear headway is 
157 ft., and the extreme height of the towers above high water 361 ft. 
The outer ends of the shore cantilevers are loaded to balance half 
the weight of the central girder, the rolling load, and 200 tons in 
addition. An internal viaduct of lattice girders carries a double 
line of rails. Provision is made for longitudinal expansion due to 
change of temperature, for distortion due to the sun acting on one 
side of the structure, and for the wind acting on one side of the bridge. 
The amount of steel used was 38,000 tons exclusive of approach 
viaducts. (See The Forth Bridge, by W. Westhofen ; Reports of the 
British Association (1884 and 1885); Die Forth Briicke, von G. 
Barkhausen (Berlin, 1889) ; The Forth Bridge, by Philip Phillips 
(1890) : Vernon Harcourt, Proc. Inst. C.E. cxxi. p. 309.) 

(2) The Niagara bridge of a total length of 910 ft., for two lines of 
railway. Clear span between towers 495 ft. Completed in 1883, 
and more recently strengthened (Proc. Inst. C.E. cvii. p. 18, and 
cxliv. p. 331). 

(3) The Lansdowne bridge (completed 1889) at Sukkur, over the 
Indus. The clear span is 790 ft., and the suspended girder 200 ft. 
in length. The span to the centres of the end uprights is 820 ft.; 
width between centres of main uprights at bed-plate 100 ft., and 
between centres of main members at end of centilevers 20 ft. The 
bridge is for a single line of railway of 5 ft. 6 in. gauge. The back 
guys are the most heavily strained part of the structure, the stress 
provided for being 1200 tons. This is due to the half weight of 
centre girder, the weight of the cantilever itself, the rolling load 
on half the bridge, and the wind pressure. The anchors are built 
up of steel plates and angle, bars, and are buried in a large mass of 
concrete. The area of each anchor plate, normal to the line of stress, 
is 32 ft. by 12 ft. The bridge was designed by Sir A. Rendel, the 
consulting engineer to the Indian government (Proc. Inst. C.E. 
ciii. p. 123), 

(4) The Red Rock cantilever bridge over the Colorado river, with 
a centre span of 660 ft. 




/€ - 



be built out from the piers, member by member, without any 
temporary scaffolding below, so that navigation is not interrupted, 
the cost of scaffolding is saved, and the difficulty of building in 
deep water is obviated. The centre girder may be built on the 
cantilevers and rolled into place or lifted from the water-level. 
Fig. 21 shows a typical cantilever bridge of American design. 
In this case the shore ends of the cantilevers are anchored to 
the abutments. J. A. L. Waddell has shown that, in some cases, 
it is convenient to erect simple independent spans, by building 
them out as cantilevers and converting them into independent 



1710' * 

Fig. 23. — Forth Bridge. 

(5) The Poughkeepsie bridge over the Hudson, built 1886-1887. 
There are five river and two shore spans. The girders over the second 
and fourth spans are extended as cantilevers oyer the adjoining 
spans. The shore piers carry cantilevers projecting one way over 
the river openings and the other way over a shore span where it is 
secured to an anchorage. The girder spans are 525 ft., the cantilever 
spans 547 ft., and the shore spans 201 ft. 

(6) The Quebec bridge (fig. 25) over the St Lawrence, which 
collapsed while in course of construction in 1907. This bridge, 
connecting very important railway systems, was designed to carry 
two lines of rails, a highway and electric railway on each side, all 
between the main trusses. Length between abutments 3240 ft.; 



542 



BRIDGES 



channel span 1800 ft.; suspended span 675 ft.; shore spans 562^ ft. 
Total weight of metal about 32,000 tons. 

(7) The Jubilee bridge over the Hugh, designed by Sir Bradford 
Leslie, is a cantilever bridge of another type (fig. 26). The girders 
are of the Whipple Murphy type, but with curved top booms. The 



bridges. Such a bridge was the Wearmouth bridge, designed 
by Rowland Burdon and erected in 1 793-1 796, with a span of 
235 ft. South wark bridge over the Thames, designed by John 
Rennie with cast iron ribs and erected in 1814-1819, has a centre 




ROCK 



Fig. 24. — Lansdowne Bridge 
bridge carries a double line of railway, between the main girders, span of 240 ft. and a rise of 24 ft 



The~central double cantilever is 360 "ft. long. The two side span 
girders are 420 ft. long. The cantilever rests on two river piers 
120 ft. apart, centre to centre. The side girders rest on the cantilevers 
on 15-in. pins, in pendulum links suspended from similar pins in 
saddles 9 ft. high. 

11. (J) Metal Arch Bridges. — The first iron bridge erected was 
constructed by John Wilkinson (1728-1808) and Abraham Darby 



In Paris the Austerlitz (1800- 
1806) and Carrousel (1834-1836) bridges had cast iron arches. 
In 1858 an aqueduct bridge was erected at Washington by M. C. 
Meigs (1816-1892). This had two arched ribs formed by the 
cast iron pipes through which the water passed. The pipes were 
4 ft. in diameter inside, 15 in. thick, and were lined with staves 
of pine 3 in. thick to prevent freezing. The span was 200 ft. 




Fig. 25. — Quebec Bridge (original design). 



(1750-1791) in 1773-1779 at Coalbrookdale over the Severn (fig. 
27). It had five cast iron arched ribs with a centre span of 100 ft. 
This curious bridge is still in use. Sir B. Baker stated that it 
had required patching for ninety years, because the arch and 
the high side arches would not work together. Expansion and 
contraction broke the high arch and the connexions between 
the arches. When it broke they fished it. Then the bolts 
sheared or the ironwork broke in a new place. He advised that 



Fig. 28 shows one of the wrought iron arches of a bridge over thf 
Rhine at Coblenz. The bridge consists of three spans of about 
315 ft. each. 

Of large-span bridges with steel arches, one of the most important 
is the St Louis bridge over the Mississippi, completed in 1874 (%• 2 9)- 
The river at St Louis is confined to a single channel, 1600 ft. wide, 
and in a freshet in 1870 the scour reached a depth of 51 ft. Captain 
J. B. Eads, the engineer, determined to establish the piers and 
abutments on rock at a depth for the east pier and east abutment 
of 136 ft. below high water. This was effected by caissons with air 




^^^ro^T^^^^W^^^^^^^^^^^^ 



M 



a 




Fig. 26. — Jubilee Bridge over the Hugli. 



there was nothing unsafe; it was perfectly strong and the stress 
in vital parts moderate. All that needed to be done was to fish 
the fractured ribs of the high arches, put oval holes in the fishes, 
and not screw up the bolts too tight. 

Cast iron arches of considerable span were constructed late 




Fig. 27. — Coalbrookdale Bridge. 

in the 18th and early in the 19th century. The difficulty of 
casting heavy arch ribs led to the construction of cast iron 
arches of cast voussoirs, somewhat like the voussoirs of masonry 



chambers a»d air locks, a feat unprecedented in the annals of 
engineering. The bridge has three spans, each formed of arches of 
cast steel. The centre span is 520 ft. and the side spans 502 ft. in 
the clear. The rise of the centre arch is 475 ft., and that of the side 
arches 46 ft. Each span has four steel double ribs of steel tubes 
butted and clasped by wrought iron couplings. The vertical bracing 
between the upper and lower members of each rib, which are 12 ft. 
apart, centre to centre, consolidates them into a single arch. The 
arches carry a double railway track and above this a roadway 54 ft. 
wide. 

The St Louis bridge is not hinged, but later bridges have been 
constructed with hinges at the springings and sometimes with hinges 
at the crown also. 

The Alexander III. bridge over the Seine has fifteen steel ribs 
hinged at crown and springings with a span of 353 ft. between 
centres of hinges and 358 ft. between abutments. The rise from side 
to centre hinges is 20 ft. 7 in. The roadway is 65! ft. wide and 
footways 33 ft. (Proc. Inst. C.E. cxxx. p. 335). 

The largest three-hinged-arch bridge constructed is the Viaur 
viaduct in the south of France (fig. 30). The central span is 721 ft. 
9 in. and the height of the rails above the valley 380 ft. It has a 
very fine appearance, especially when seen in perspective and not 
merely in elevation. 

Fig. 31 shows the Douro viaduct of a total length of 1158 ft. 
carrying a railway 200 ft. above the water. The span of the central 
opening is 525 ft. The principal rib is crescent-shaped 32-8 ft. deep 



BRIDGES 



543 



at the crown. Rolling load taken at I -2 ton per ft. Weight of centre 
span 727 tons. The Luiz I. bridge is another arched bridge over the 
Douro, also designed by T. Seyrig. This has a span of 566 ft. There 
are an upper and a lower roadway, 164 ft. apart vertically. The arch 
rests on rollers and is narrowest at the crown. The reason given for 
this change of form was that it more conveniently allowed the lower 

W TOHBf 
finritiMnfr 



the lattice girders above. The total weight of ironwork was 320c 
tons and the cost £124,000 (Annates des travaux publiques, 1884). 

The Victoria Falls bridge over the Zambezi, designed by Sir 
Douglas Fox, and completed in 1905, is a combination of girder and 
arch having a total length of 650 ft. The centre arch is 500 ft. span, 
the rise of the crown 90 ft., and depth at crown 15 ft. The width 




Fig. 28. — Arch of Bridge at Coblenz. 



road to pass between the springings and ensured the transmission 
of the wind stresses to the abutments without interrupting the cross- 
bracing. Wire cables were used in the erection, by which the 
members were lifted from barges and assembled, the operations being 
conducted from the side piers. 

The Niagara Falls and Clifton steel arch (fig. 32) replaces the older 
Roebling suspension bridge. The centre span is a two-hinged para- 
bolic braced rib arch, and there are side spans of 190 and 210 ft. 
The bridge carries two electric-car tracks, two roadways and two 
footways. The main span weighed 1629 tons, the side spans 154 
and 166 tons (Buck, Proc. Inst. C.E. cxliv. p. 70). Prof. Claxton 
Fidler, speaking of the arrangement adopted for putting initial 
stress on the top chord, stated that this bridge marked the furthest 



between centres of ribs of main arch is 27! ft. at crown and 53 ft. 
9 in. at springings. The curve of the main arch is a parabola. The 
bridge has a roadway of 30 ft. for two lines of rails. Each half arch 
was supported by cables till joined at the centre. An electric cable- 
way of 900 ft. span capable of carrying 10 tons was used in erection. 

12. (g) Movable Bridges can be closed to carry a road or railway 
or in some cases an aqueduct, but can be opened to give free 
passage to navigation. They are of several types : — 

(1) Lifting Bridges. — The bridge with its platform is suspended 
from girders above by chains and counterweights at the four 
corners (fig. 33 a). It is lifted vertically to the required height 

4 




Fig. 29.— St 
advance yet made in this type of construction. When such a rib 
is erected on centering without initial stress, the subsequent com- 
pression of the arch under its weight inflicts a bending stress and 
excess of compression in the upper member at the crown. But the 
bold expedients adopted by the engineer annulled the bending action. 
The Garabit viaduct carries the railway near St Flour, in the 
Cantal department, France, at 420 ft. above low water. The 
deepest part of the valley is crossed by an arch of 541 ft. span, and 
213 ft. rise. The bridge is similar to that at Oporto, also designed 
by Seyrig. It is formed by a crescent-shaped arch, continued on 
one side by four, on the other side by two lattice girder spans, on 
iron piers. The arch is formed by two lattice ribs hinged at the 
abutments. Its depth at the crown is 33 ft., and its centre line 



Louis Bridge. 

when opened. Bridges of this type are not very numerous or 
important. 

(2) Rolling Bridges. — The girders are longer than the span 
and the part overhanging the abutment is counter-weighted so 
that the centre of gravity is over the abutment when the bridge 
is rolled forward (fig. 33' b). To fill the gap in the approaches 
when the bridge is rolled forward a frame carrying that part of 
the road is moved into place sideways. At Sunderland, the bridge 
is first lifted by a hydraulic press so as to clear the roadway 
behind, and is then rolled back. 




Fig. 30. — Viaur Viaduct. 



follows nearly the parabolic line of pressures. The two arch ribs 
are 65$ ft. apart at the springings and 2o| ft. at the crown. The 
roadway girders are lattice, 17 it. deep, supported from the arch 
ribs at four points. The total length of the viaduct is 1715 ft. 
The lattice girders of the side spans were first rolled into place, so 
as to project some distance beyond the piers, and then the arch 



(3) Draw or Bascule Bridges. — The fortress draw-bridge is 
the original type, in which a single leaf, or bascule, turns round 
a horizontal hinge at one abutment. The bridge when closed 
is supported on abutments at each end. It is raised by chains 
and counterweights. A more common type is a bridge with two 



ribs were built out, being partly supported by wire-rope cables from leaves or bascules, one hinged at each abutment. When closed 



544 



BRIDGES 



the bascules are locked at the centre (see fig. 13). In these bridges 
each bascule is prolonged backwards beyond the hinge so as 
to balance at the hinge, the prolongation sinking into the piers 
when the bridge is opened. 

(4) Swing or Turning Bridges. — The largest movable bridges 



i!6<Mxl><N^>x><b<i><ix^i><lxl><l>^ixMxi><t<i: 



ix^^b^xixlxlxt^^ 




Fig. 31. — Douro Viaduct, 
revolve about a vertical axis. The bridge is carried on a circular 
base plate with a central pivot and a circular track for a live 
ring and conical rollers. A circular revolving platform rests 
on the pivot and rollers. A toothed arc fixed to the revolving 
platform or to the live ring serves to give motion to the bridge. 



the span. The counterweight is a depressed cantilever arm 12 ft. 
long, overlapped by the fixed platform which sinks into a recess in 
the masonry when the bridge opens. In closed position the main 
girders rest on a bed plate on the face of the pier 4 ft. 3 in. beyond the 
shaft bearings. The bridge is worked by hydraulic power, an 
accumulator with a load of 34 tons supplying pressure water 

at 630 lb per sq. in. 
The bridge opens in 15 
seconds and closes in 
25 seconds. 

At the opening span 
of the Tower bridge (fig. 
13) there are four main 
girders in each bascule. 
They project 100 ft. be- 
yond and 62 ft. 6 in. 
within the face of the 
piers. Transverse girders 
and bracings are inserted 
between the main girders 
at 12 ft. intervals. The 
floor is of buckled plates 
paved with wood blocks. 
The arc of rotation is 82°, 
and the axis of rotation 
is 13 ft. 3 in. inside the face of the piers, and 5 ft. 7 in. below 
the roadway. The weight of ballast in the short arms of the 
bascules is 365 tons. The weight of each leaf including ballast is 
about 1070 tons. The axis is of forged steel 21 in. in diameter 
and 48 ft. long. The axis has eight bearings, consisting of rings 
of live rollers 4 T ' S in. in diameter and 22 in. long. The bascules 




*/ai — — — — ■ an^ — — ^ *» ^PPP ■"* """ "■"■ ™~ \ 

1 ^c^_ ""■ ■"— "^ Cup^^ ^^m^T? »«Br -■■- •■■■ J 

1 v.^§_. ^" *fv J*^ ^^C 7r^ mmm jS^ 

I iy £_____ _ _ Jjfcap ^ 



W—zio *•■ 



8f0 — ■ — 



'-^■ — ■tao'- — -A 



Fig. 32. — Niagara Falls and Clifton Bridge. 



The main girders rest on the revolving platform, and the ends 
of the bridge are circular arcs fitting the fixed roadway. Three 
arrangements are found: (a) the axis of rotation is on a pier at 
the centre of the river and the bridge is equal armed (fig. 33 c), so 
that two navigation passages are opened simultaneously, (b) The 

axis of rotation is on one 
abutment, and the bridge 
is then usually unequal 
armed(fig. 33d) , the shorter 
arm being over the land, 
(c) In some small bridges 
the shorter arm is vertical 
and the bridge turns on a 
kind of vertical crane post 
at the abutment (fig. 3$e). 
(5) Floating Bridges, the 
roadway being carried on 
pontoons moored in the 

stream. 

The movable bridge in 
its closed position must be 
proportioned like a fixed 
bridge, but it has also other 
conditions to fulfil. If it re- 
volves about a vertical axis 
its centre of gravity must 
always lie in that axis; if it 
rolls the centre of gravity 
must always lie over ' the 
abutment. It must have 
strength to support safely 
its own overhanging weight 
when moving. 
At Konigsberg there is 
a road bridge of two fixed spans of 39 ft., and a central span 
of 60 ft. between bearings, or 41 ft. clear, with balanced 
bascules over the centre span. Each bascule consists of two main 
girders with cross girders and stringers. The main girders are 
hung at each side on a horizontal shaft 84 in. in diameter, and 
are 6 ft. deep at the hinge, diminishing to 1 ft. 7 in. at the centre of 




Fig. 33. 



are rotated by pinions driven by hydraulic engines working in steel 
sectors 42 ft. radius (Proc. Inst. C.E. cxxvii. p. 35). 

As an example of a swing bridge, that between Duluth and 
Superior at the head of Lake Superior over the St Louis river may be 
described. The centre opening is 500 ft., spanned by a turning bridge, 
58 ft. wide. The girders weighing 2000 tons carry a double track for 
trains between the girders and on each side on cantilevers a trolley 
track, roadway and footway. The bridge can be opened in 2 
minutes, and is operated by two large electric motors. These have a 
speed reduction from armature shaft to bridge column of 1500 to 1, 
through four intermediate spur gears and a worm gear. The end 
lifts which transfer the weight of the bridge to the piers when the 
span is closed consist of massive eccentrics having a throw of 4 in. 
The clearance is 2 in., so that the ends are lifted 2 in. This gives a 
load of 50 tons per eccentric. One motor is placed at each end of 
the span to operate the eccentrics and also to release the latches 
and raise the rails of the steam track. 

At Riga there is a floating pontoon bridge over the Diina. It 
consists of fourteen rafts, 105 ft. in length, each supported by two 
pontoons placed 64 ft; apart. The pairs of rafts are joined by three 
baulks 15 ft. long laid in parallel grooves in the framing. Two spans 
are arranged for opening easily. The total length is 1720 ft. and the 
width 46 ft. The pontoons are of iron, 85! ft. in length, and their 
section is elliptical, I0j ft. horizontal and 12 ft. vertical. The dis- 
placement of each pontoon is 180 tons and its weight 22 tons. The 
mooring chains, weighing 22 lb per ft., are taken from the upstream 
end of each pontoon to a downstream screw pile mooring and from 
the downstream end to an upstream screw pile. 

13. Transporter Bridges. — This new type of bridge consists 
of a high level bridge from which is suspended a car at a low 
level. The car receives the traffic and conveys it across the river, 
being caused to travel by electric machinery on the high level 
bridge. Bridges of this type have been erected at Portugalete, 
Bizerta, Rouen, Rochefort and more recently across the Mersey 
between the towns of Widnes and Runcorn. 

The Runcorn bridge crosses the Manchester Ship Canal and the 
Mersey in one span of 1000 ft., and four approach spans of 55J ft. 
on one side and one span on the other. The ' low-level approach 
roadways are 35 ft. wide with footpaths 6 ft. wide on each side. 
The supporting structure is a cable suspension bridge with stiffening 
girders. A car is suspended from the bridge, carried by a trolley 
running on the underside of the stiffening girders, the car being 



BRIDGES 



545 



propelled electrically from one side to the other. The underside of 
the stiffening girder is 82 ft. above the river. The car is 55 ft. long 
by 24^ ft. wide. The electric motors are under the control of the 
driver in a cabin on the car. The trolley is an articulated frame 
77 ft. long in five sections coupled together with pins. To this are 
fixed the bearings of the running wheels, fourteen on each side. 
There are two steel-clad series-wound motors of 36 b.h.p. For a 
test load of 120 tons the tractive force is 70 lb per ton, which is 
sufficient for acceleration, and maintaining speed against wind pres- 
sure. The brakes are magnetic, with auxiliary handbrakes. Elec- 
tricity is obtained by two gas engines (one spare) each of 75 b.h.p. 



by dredging, or some form of mechanical excavator, until the 
formation is reached which is to support the pier; the concrete 
is then shot into the enclosed space from a height of about 10 ft., 
and rammed down in layers about 1 ft. thick ; it soon consolidates 
into a permanent artificial stone. 

Piles are used as foundations in compressible or loose soil. 
The heads of the piles are sawn off, and a platform of timber or 
concrete rests on them. Cast iron and concrete reinforced piles 
are now used. Screw piles are cast iron piles which are screwed 




SANOSTONE ROCI 



Fig. 34. — Widnes and Runcorn Transporter Bridge. 



On the opening day passengers were taken across at the rate of 
more than 2000 per hour in addition to a number of vehicles. The 
time of crossing is 3 or 4 minutes. The total cost of the structure 
was £133,000. 

14. In the United States few railway companies design or 
build their own bridges. General specifications as to span, 
loading, &c, are furnished to bridge-building companies, which 
make the design under the direction of engineers who are experts 
in this kind of work. The design, with strain sheets and detail 
drawings, is submitted to the railway engineer with estimates. 
The result is that American bridges are generally of well-settled 
types and their members of uniform design, carefully considered 
with reference to convenient and accurate manufacture. Stand- 
ard patterns of details are largely adopted, and more system is 
introduced in the workshop than is possible where the designs 
are more varied. Riveted plate girders are used up to 50 ft. 
span, riveted braced girders for spans of 50 ft. to 75 ft., and pin- 
connected girders for longer spans. Since the erection of the 
Forth bridge, cantilever bridges have been extensively used, 
and some remarkable steel arch and suspension bridges have also 
been constructed. Overhead railways are virtually continuous 
bridge constructions, and much attention has been given to a 
study of the special conditions appertaining to that case. 

Substructure. 

15. The substructure of a bridge comprises the piers, abut- 
ments and foundations. These portions usually consist of 
masonry in some form, including under that general head stone 
masonry, brickwork and concrete. Occasionally metal work 
or woodwork is used for intermediate piers. 

When girders form the superstructure, the resultant pressure 
on the piers or abutments is vertical, and the dimensions of these 
are simply regulated by the sufficiency to bear this vertical load. 

When arches form the superstructure, the abutment must be so 
designed as to transmit the resultant thrust to the foundation 
in a safe direction, and so distributed that no part may be unduly 
compressed. The intermediate piers should also have consider- 
able stability, so as to counterbalance the thrust arising when 
one -arch is loaded while the other is free from load. 

For suspension bridges the abutment forming the anchorage 
must be so designed as to be thoroughly stable under the greatest 
pull which the chains can exert. The piers require to be carried 
above the platform, and their design must be modified according 
to the type of suspension bridge adopted. When the resultant 
pressure is not vertical on the piers these must be constructed 
to meet the inclined pressure. In any stiffened suspension 
bridge the action of the pier will be analogous to that of a pier 
between two arches. 

Concrete in a shell is a name which might be applied to all the 
methods of founding a pier which depend on the very valuable 
property which strong hydraulic concrete possesses of setting 
into a solid mass under water. The required space is enclosed 
by a wooden or iron shell; the soil inside the shell is removed 

IV. 18 



into the soil instead of being driven in. At their end is fixed a 
blade of cast iron from two to eight times the diameter of the 
shaft of the pile; the pitch of the screw varies from one-half to 
one- fourth of the external diameter of the blade. 

Disk piles have been used in sand. These piles have a flat 
flange at the bottom, and water is pumped in at the top of the 
pile, which is weighted to prevent it from rising. Sand is thus 
blown or pumped from below the piles, which are thus easily 
lowered in ground which baffles all attempts to drive in piles 
by blows. In ground which is of the nature of quicksand, piles 
will often slowly rise to their original position after each blow. 

Wells. — In some soils foundations may be obtained by the 
device of building a masonry casing like that of a well and 
excavating the soil inside; the casing gradually sinks and the 
masonry is continued at the surface. This method is applicable 
in running sands. The interior of 
the well is generally filled up with 
concrete or brick when the required 
depth has been reached. 

Piers and Abutments. — Piers and 
abutments are of masonry, brick- 
work, or cast or wrought iron. In 
the last case they consist of any 
number of hollow cylindrical pillars, 
vertical or raking, turned and 
planed at the ends and united by a 
projection or socket and by flanges 
and bolts. The pillars are strength- 
ened against lateral yielding by 
horizontal and diagonal bracing. 
In some cases the piers are cast 
iron cylinders 10 ft. or more in 
diameter filled with concrete. 

Cylinder Foundations. — Formerly 
when bridge piers had to be placed 
where a firm bearing stratum could 
only be reached at a considerable y^j 
depth, a timber cofferdam was used j 
in which piles were driven down to 
the firm stratum. On the piles the 
masonry piers were built. Many 
bridges so constructed have stood 
for centuries. A great change of 

method arose when iron cylinders p IG . 35. Cylinder, Charing 

and in some cases brick cylinders Cross Bridge, 

or wells were adopted for founda- 
tions. These can be sunk to almost any depth or brought 
up to any height, and are filled with Portland cement con- 
crete. They are sometimes excavated by grabs. Sometimes 
they are closed in and kept free of water by compressed air so 
that excavation work can be carried on inside them (fig. 35). 
Sometimes in silty river beds they are sunk 100 ft. or more, for 




ii+6 



BRIDGES 



security against deep scouring of the river-bed in floods. In the 
case of the Empress bridge over the Sutlej each pier consisted 
of three brick wells, 19 ft. in diameter, sunk no ft. The piers 
of the Benares bridge were single iron caissons, 65 ft. by 28 ft., 
sunk about 100 ft., lined with brick and filled with concrete. At 
the Forth bridge iron caissons 70 ft. in diameter were sunk about 
40 ft. into the bed of the Forth. In this case the compressed air 
process was used. 

16. Erection. — Consideration of the local conditions affecting 
the erection of bridges is always important, and sometimes 
becomes a controlling factor in the determination of the design. 
The methods of erection may be classed as — (1) erection on 
staging or falsework; (2) floating to the site and raising; (3) 
rolling out from one abutment; (4) building out member by 
member, the completed part forming the stage from which 
additions are handled. 

(1) In erection on staging, the materials available determine the 
character of the staging; stacks of timber, earth banks, or built- 
up staging of piles and trestles have all been employed, also iron 
staging, which can be rapidly erected and moved from site to site. 
The most ordinary type of staging consists of timber piles at nearly 
equal distances of 20 ft. to 30 ft., carrying a timber platform, on 
which the bridge is erected. Sometimes a wide space is left for 
navigation, and the platform at this part is carried by a timber and 
iron truss. When the headway is great or the river deep, timber- 
braced piers or clusters of piles at distances of 50 ft. to 100 ft. may 
be used. These carry temporary trusses of timber or steel. The 
Kuilenburg bridge in Holland, which has a span of 492 ft., was erected 
on a timber staging of this kind, containing 81,000 cub. ft. of timber 
and 5 tons of bolts. The bridge superstructure weighed 2150 tons, 
80 that 38 cub. ft. of timber were used per ton of superstructure. 

(2) The Britannia and Conway bridges were built on staging on 
shore, lifted by pontoons, floated out to their position between the 

Ciers, and lastly lifted into place by hydraulic presses. The Moerdyk 
ridge in Holland, with 14 spans of 328 ft., was erected in a similar 
way. The convenience of erecting girders on shore is very great, 
but there is some risk in the floating operations and a good deal of 
hauling plant is required. 

(3) If a bridge consists of girders continuous over two or more 
spans, it may be put together on the embankment at one end and 
rolled over the piers. In some cases hauling tackle is used, in others 
power is applied by levers and ratchets to the rollers on which the 
girders travel. In such rolling operations the girder is subjected 
to straining actions different from those which it is intended to resist, 
and parts intended for tension may be in compression; hence it 
may need to be stiffened by timber during rolling. The bending 
action on the bottom boom, in passing over the rollers is also severe. 
Modifications of the system have been adopted for bridges with 
discontinuous spans. In narrow ravines a bridge of one span may 
be rolled out, if the projecting end is supported on a temporary 
suspension cable anchored on each side. The free end is slung to a 
block running on the cable. If the bridge is erected when the ri^er 
is nearly dry a travelling stage may be constructed to carry the 
projecting end of the girder while it is hauled across, the other end 
resting on one abutment. Sometimes a girder is rolled out about 
one-third of its length, and then supported on a floating pontoon. 

(4) Some types of bridge can be built out from the abutments, the 
completed part forming an erecting stage on which lifting appliances 
are fixed. Generally, in addition, wire cables are stretched across 
the span, from which lifting tackle is suspended. In bridges so 
erected the straining action during erection must be studied, and 
material must be added to resist erecting stresses. In the case of the 
St Louis bridge, half arches were built out on either side of each pier, 
so that the load balanced. Skeleton towers on the piers supported 
chains attached to the arched ribs at suitable points. In spite of 
careful provision, much difficulty was experienced in making the 
connexion at the crown, from the expansion due to temperature 
changes. The Douro bridge was similarly erected. The girders of 
the side spans were rolled out so as to overhang the great span by 
105 ft., and formed a platform from which parts of the arch could be 
suspended. Dwarf towers, built on the arch ring at the fifth panel 
from either side, helped to support the girder above, in erecting the 
centre part of the arch (Seyrig, Proc. Inst. C.E. lxiii. p. 177). The 
great cantilever bridges have been erected in the same way, and they 
are specially adapted for erection by building out. 

Straining Actions and Working Stresses. 

17. In metal bridges wrought iron has been replaced by mild 
steel — a stronger, tougher and better material. Ingot metal or 
mild steel was sometimes treacherous when first introduced, and 
accidents occurred, the causes of which were obscure. In fact, 
small differences of composition or variations in thermal treat- 
ment during manufacture involve relatively large differences of 



quality. Now it is understood that care must be taker! in 
specifying the exact quality and in testing the material supplied. 
Structural wrought iron has a tenacity of 20 to 22^ tons per 
sq. in. in the direction of rolling, and an ultimate elongation 
of 8 or 10 % in 8 in. Across the direction of rolling the tenacity 
is about 18 tons per sq. in., and the elongation 3 % in 8 in. Steel 
has only a small difference of quality in different directions. 
There is still controversy as to what degree of hardness, or 
(which is nearly the same thing) what percentage of carbon, 
can be permitted with safety in steel for structures. 

The qualities of steel used may be classified as follows: — (a) Soft 
steel, having a tenacity of 22 J to 26 tons per sq. in., and an elongation 
of 32 to 24% in 8 in. (b) Medium steel, having a tenacity of 26 to 
34 tons per sq. in., and 28 to 25% elongation, (c) Moderately hard 
steel, having a tenacity of 34 to 37 tons per sq. in., and 17% elonga- 
tion, (d) Hard steel, having a tenacity of 37 to 40 tons per sq. in., 
and 10% elongation. Soft steel is used for rivets always, and 
sometimes for the whole superstructure of a bridge, but medium 
steel more generally for the plates, angle bars, &c, the weight of the 
bridge being then reduced by about 7% for a given factor of safety. 
Moderately hard steel has been used for the larger members of long- 
span bridges. Hard steel, if used at all, is used only for compression 
members, in which there is less risk of flaws extending than in 
tension members. With medium or moderately hard steel all rivet 
holes should be drilled, or punched | in. less in diameter than the 
rivet and reamed out, so as to remove the ring of material strained 
by the punch. 

In the specification for bridge material, drawn up by the British 
Engineering Standards Committee, it is provided that the steel 
shall be acid or basic open-hearth steel, containing not more than 
0-06% of sulphur or phosphorus. Plates, angles and bats, other 
than rivet bars, must have a tensile strength of 28 to 32 tons per 
sq. in., with an elevation of 20% in 8 in. Rivet bars tested on a 
gauge length eight times the diameter must have a tensile strength of 
26 to 30 tons per sq. in. and an elongation of 25%. 

18. Straining Actions. — The external forces acting on a 
bridge may be classified as follows: — 

(1) The live or temporary load, for road bridges the weight 
of a dense crowd uniformly distributed, or the weight of a heavy 
wagon or traction engine ; for railway bridges the weight of the 
heaviest train likely to come on the bridge. (2) An allowance 
is sometimes made for impact, that is the dynamical action of 
the live load due to want of vertical balance in the moving 
parts of locomotives, to irregularities of the permanent way, or 
to yielding of the structure. (3) The dead load comprises the 
weight of the main girders, flooring and wind bracing, or the 
total weight of the superstructure exclusive of any part directly 
carried by the piers. This is usually treated as uniformly 
distributed over the span. (4) The horizontal pressure due to a 
wind blowing transversely to the span, which becomes of im- 
portance in long and high bridges. (5) The longitudinal drag 
due to the friction of a train when braked, about one-seventh 
of the weight of the train. (6) On a curved bridge the centrifugal 
load due to the radical acceleration of the train. If w is the 
weight of a locomotive in tons, r the radius of curvature of the 
track, v the velocity in feet per sec; then the horizontal force 
exerted on the bridge is w&jgr tons. (7) In some cases, especially 
in arch and suspension bridges, changes of temperature set up 
stresses equivalent to those produced by an external load. In 
Europe a variation of temperature of 70 C. or 126° F. is com- 
monly assumed. For this the expansion is about 1 in. in 100 ft. 
Generally a structure should be anchored at one point and free 
to move if possible in other directions. Roughly, if expansion 
is prevented, a stress of one ton per sq. in. is set up in steel 
structures for each 12° change of temperature. 

i. Live Load on Road Bridges. — A dense crowd of people may be 
taken as a uniform load of 80 to 120 lb per sq. ft. But in recent 
times the weight of traction engines and wagons which pass over 
bridges has increased, and this kind of load generally produces 
greater straining action than a crowd of people. In manufacturing 
districts and near large towns loads of 30 tons may come on road 
bridges, and county and borough authorities insist on provision being 
made for such loads. In Switzerland roads are divided into three 
classes according to their importance, and the following loads are 
prescribed, the designer having to provide sufficient strength either 
for a uniformly distributed crowd, or for a heavy wagon anywhere 
on the roadway : — 



BRIDGES 



547 





Crowd, 
lb per sq. ft. 


Wagon, 
tons per axle. 


Main Roads .... 
Secondary Roads . 
Other Roads 


92 

72 
51 


10 with 13 ft. wheel base 
6 ,, 10 „ „ 
3.. 8 „ 



In England still larger loads are now provided for. J. C. Inglis 
(ProCi Inst. C.E. cxli. p. 35) has considered two cases — (a) a traction 
engine and boiler trolley, and (b) a traction engine and trucks loaded 
with granite. He has calculated the equivalent load per foot of 
span which would produce the same maximum bending moments. 
The following are some of the results : — 



Span Ft. 


10. 


20. 


30. 


40. 


50. 


Equivalent load in tons per ft. run, 

Case a 

Do. Case b 


1-75 
3-25 


o-95 

i-7 


o-75 
i-3 


o-73 

1-2 


0-72 
I- 15 



Large as these loads are on short spans, they are not more than must 
often be provided for. 

Live Load on Railway Bridges. — The live load is the weight of the 
heaviest train which can come on the bridge. In the earlier girder 
bridges the live load was taken to be equivalent to a uniform load 
of I ton per foot run for each line of way. At that time locomotives 
on railways of 4 ft. Si in. gauge weighed at most 35 to 45 tons, and 
their length between buffers was such that the average load did not 
exceed 1 ton per foot run. Trains of wagons did not weigh more 
than three-quarters of a ton per foot run when most heavily loaded. 
The weights of engines and wagons are now greater, and in addition 
it is recognized that the concentration of the loading at the axles 
gives rise to greater straining action, especially in short bridges, than 
the same load uniformly distributed along the span. Hence many 
of th* earlier bridges have had to be strengthened to carry modern 
traffic.. The following examples of some of the heaviest locomotives 
on English railways is given by W. B. Farr (Proc. Inst. C. E. cxli. 
p. I?).:— 



Passenger Engines. 



Total weights, tons .... 


84-35 


98-90 


91-90 


85-48 


Tons per ft. over all . 


1-58 


171 


1-62 


i-6i 


Tons per ft. of wheel base . 


1-92 


2-04 


1-97 


1-95 


Maximum axle load, tons. 


19-00 


16-00 


18-70 


18-50 



Goods Engines. 



Total weight, tons .... 


77-90 


78-80 


7646 


75-65 


Tons per ft. over all . 


1-54 


1-50 


1-54 


i-5i 


Tons per ft. of wheel base . 


2-02 


2-02 


2-03 


2-00 


Maximum axle load, tons . 


I5-90 


16-00 


13-65 


15-50 



Tank Engines. 



Total weight, tons .... 


53-80 


58-61 6o-8o 


47-00 


Tons per ft. over all . 


i-6o 


i-68 


1-70 


i-55 


Tons per ft. of wheel base. 


2-45 


2-52 


2-23 


3-03 


Maximum axle load, tons. 


17-54 


15-29 


17-10 


15-77 



Farr has drawn diagrams of bending moment for forty different 
very heavy locomotives on different spans, and has determined for 
each case a uniform load which at every point would produce as 
great a bending moment as the actual wheel loads. The following 
short abstract gives the equivalent uniform load which produces 
bending moments as great as those of any of the engines calculated : — 





Load per ft. run equivalent 
to actual Wheel Loads in Tons, 


Span in Ft. 




for each Track. 


5<o 


76 


IO-0 


4-85 


20-0 


3-20 


30-0 


2-63 


50-O 


2-24 


100-0 


1-97 



Fig. 36 gives the loads per axle and the distribution of loads in 
some exceptionally heavy modern British locomotives. 




4W 



eJA'_4*---">j*-- el;c7 ' 



e'-ar 




.__*»:-£ __J«_ _«-«:_ 

i--- \ Ws^L°yer_ iBuffet'S. L_____L. 



6-6 



.+-&£ 



T.lc. Tic. r.\a. rlc. r.ic. r.ic. 

IG-I3 18-0 18-0 12-17 11-10 14-10 

Express Passenger Engine, G.N. Ry. 



T .1 C. 
14-18 




5-3' ' -5'-&" ! 5-3" J 5'-10V 



....^...^^^M+Ai*.,). ^^____^_5-3 • 5-3" - ^^a-?? 

l 1 . J sa^itfover Buffers, 'if 



;$ 



T- 
12-13 



T. 
14-08 



I"" x1 



TA 
14-14- 



"fl iX 

f2-+S 10-4-6 

Goods Engine, L. & Y. Ry. 



iX 

10-46 



if 
10-46 



■<£■ 



TA 
S-65 




76-6* 



1Z-dS 



/8-0 17-ta 

Passenger Engine, Cal. Ry. 

Fig. 36. 



548 



BRIDGES 



In Austria the official regulations require that railway bridges 
shall be designed for at least the following live loads per foot run and 
per track :- 



Span. 


Live Load in Tons. 


Metres. 
i 

2 

5 

20 

3° 


Ft. 

3-3 

6-6 

i6>4 

65-6 

9»-4 


Per metre run. 

20 

15 
io 

5 
4 


Per ft. run. 
6-1 
4-6 
3-1 
i-5 

1-2 



It would be simpler and more convenient in designing short 
bridges if, instead of assuming an equivalent uniform rolling load, 
agreement could be come to as to a typical heavy locomotive which 
would produce stresses as great as any existing locomotive on each 
class of railway. Bridges would then be designed for these selected 
loads, and the process, would be safer in dealing with flooring girders 
and shearing forces than the assumption of a uniform load. 

Some American locomotives are very heavy. Thus a consolida- 
tion engine may weigh 126 tons with a length over buffers of 57 ft., 
corresponding to an average load of 2-55 tons per ft. run. Also long 
ore wagons are used which weigh loaded two tons per ft. run. J.A.L. 
Waddell (De Pontibus, New York, 1898) proposes to arrange railways 
in seven classes, according to the live loads which may be expected 
from the character of their traffic, and to construct bridges in 
accordance with this classification. For the lightest class; he takes a 
locomotive and tender of 93-5 tons, 52 ft. between buffers (average 
load 1-8 tons per ft. run), and for the heaviest a locomotive and 
tender weighing 144-5 tons, 52 ft. between buffers (average load 2-77 
tons per ft. run). Wagons he assumes to weigh for the lightest class 
1-3 tons per ft. run and for the heaviest 1-9 tons. He takes as the 
live load for a bridge two such engines, followed by a train of wagons 
covering the span. Waddell's tons are short tons of 2000 lb. 

ii. Impact.— If a vertical load is imposed suddenly, but without 
velocity, work is done during deflection, and the deformation and 
stress are .momentarily double those due to the same load at rest 
on the structure. No load of exactly this kind is ever applied to a 
bridge. But if a load is so applied that the deflection increases with 
speed, the stress is greater than that due to a very gradually applied 
load, and vibrations about a mean position are set up. The rails 
not being absolutely straight and smooth, centrifugal and lurching 
actions occur which alter the distribution of the loading. Again, 
rapidly changing forces-, due to the moving parts of the engine 
which are unbalanced vertically, act on the bridge; and, lastly, 
inequalities of level at the rail ends give rise to shocks. For all 
these reasons the stresses due to the live load are greater than those 
due to the same load resting quietly on the bridge. This increment 
is larger on the flooring girders than on the main ones, an^d on short 
main girders than On long ones. The impact stresses depend so 
much on lcx^al conditions that it is difficult to fix what allowance 
should be made. E. H. Stone '( Trans. Am. Soc. of C. B. xli. p. 467) 
collated some measurements of deflection taken during official trials 
of Indian bridges, and found the increment of deflection due to 
impact to depend on the ratio of dead to live load. By plotting and 
averaging he obtained the following results : — 

Excess of Deflection and straining Action of a moving Load over that 
due to a resting Load. 



Dead load in per cent 
of total load. 


10 


20 


3° 


40 


50 


70 


90 


Live load in per cent 
of total load . . ' . 


90 


80 


7" 


(■n 
i-5 


r )° 


30 


10 


Ratio of ; live to dead 
load. .■■ 


9 


4 


2-3 


I-O 


o-43 


O-IO 


Excess of deflection and 
stress due to moving 
load per cent 


23 


13 


8 


5-5 


4-0 


i-6 


o-3 



These results are for the centre deflections of main girders, but 
Storie infers : that the augmentation of stress for any member, 
due to causes included in impact allowance, will be the same per- 
centage for the same ratios of live to dead load stresses. Valuable 
measurements of the deformations of girders and tension members 
due ta moving, trains have been made by S. W. Robinson {Trans. Am. 
Soc. C. E. xvi.) and by F. E. Turneaure (Trans. Am. Soc. C. E. xli.). 
The latter used a recording, defiectometer and two recording extenso- 
meters. The observations are difficult, and the inertia of the instru- 
ment is liable to cause error, but much care was taken. The most 
striking conclusions from the results are that the locomotive balance 
weights have a large effect in causing vibration, and next, that in 
certain cases the vibrations are cumulative, reaching a value greater 
than that due to any single impact action. Generally : (1) At speeds 
less than 25 m. an hour there is not much vibration. _ (2) The increase 
of deflection due to impact at 40 or 50 m. an hour is likely to reach 



40 to 50% for girder spans of less than 50 ft. (3) This percentage 
decreases rapidly for longer spans, becoming about 25 % for 75-ft. 
spans. (4) The increase per cent of boom stresses due to impact is 
about the same as that of deflection; that in web bracing bars is 
rather greater. (5) Speed of train produces no effect on the mean 
deflection, but only on the magnitude of the vibrations. 

A purely empirical allowance for impact stresses has been proposed, 
amounting to 20% of the live load stresses for floor stringers; 15% 
for floor cross girders; and for main girders, 10% for 40-ft. spans, 
and 5% for 100-ft. spans. These percentages are added to the live 
load stresses. 

iii. Dead Load. — The dead load consists of the weight of main 
girders, flooring and wind-bracing. It is generally reckoned to be 
uniformly distributed, but in large spans the distribution of weight 
in the main girders should be calculated and taken into account. 
The weight of the bridge flooring depends on the type adopted. 
Road bridges, vary so much in the character of the flooring that no 
general rule can be given. In railway bridges the weight 6f sleepers, 
rails, &c, is o-2 to 0-25 tons per ft. run for each line of way, while 
the rail girders, cross girders, &c, weigh 0-15 to 0'2 tons. If a foot- 
way is added about 0-4 ton per ft. run may be allowed for this. 
The weight of main girders increases with the span, and there is for 
any type of bridge a limiting span beyond which the dead load 
stresses exceed the assigned limit of working stress. 

Let Wi be the total live load, W/ the total flooring load on a 
bridge of span I, both being considered for the present purpose to 
be uniform per ft. run. Let &(W;+W/) be the weight of main 
girders designed to carry Wr+W/, but not their own weight in 
addition. Then 

w =(m+w,){k+k*+k 3 . . .) 

will be the weight of main girders to carry Wi+W/ and their own 
weight (Buck, Proc. Inst. C. E. lxvii. p. 331). Hence, 

W„ = (W,+W / )*/(i-ife)._ 

Since in designing a bridge Wi+W/ is known, £(Wj+W/) can be 
found from a provisional design in which the weight W, is neglected. 
The actual bridge must have the section of all members greater 
than those in the provisional design in the ratio k/(i—k). 

Waddell {De Pontibus) gives the following convenient empirical 
relations. Let Wi, w^ be the weights of main girders per ft. run for 
a live load p per ft. run and spans h, Z 2 . Then 

«»/% = §&/*! + &/«']■ 

Now let wi', Wi be the girder weights per ft. run for spans l u h, and 
live loads p' per ft. run. Then 

A partially rational approximate formula for the weight of main 
girders is the following (Unwin, Wrought Iron Bridgis and Roofs, 
1869, p. 40):— ... 

Let w = total live load per ft. run of girder; wi the weight of 
platform per ft. run; w s the weight of main girders per ft. run, all 
in tons; Z = span in ft.; s = average stress in tons per sq. in. on gross 
section of metal; d = depth of girder at centre in ft.; r = ratio of 
span to depth of girder so that r = l/d. Then 

W3 = (wi+W2)P/{Cds— h) = {wi-\-Wi)lrl (Cs —Ir) , 

where C is a constant for any type of girder. It is not easy to fix the 
average stress s per sq. in. of gross section. Hence the formula is 
more useful in the form 

w = (wi+w 2 )Pl(Kd-P) = (w>i+aij)/r/(K-Zr) 

where k = (wi-\-Wi-\-Ws)lr/w3 is to be deduced from the data of some 
bridge previously designed with the same working stresses. From 
some known examples, C varies from 1500 to 1800 for iron braced 
parallel or bowstring girders, and from 1200 to 1500 for similar girders 
of steel. K = 6ooo to 7200 for iron and =7200 to 9000 for steel 
bridges. 

iv. Wind Pressure. — Much attention has been given to wind action 
since the disaster to the Tay bridge in 1879. As to the maximum 
wind pressure on small plates normal to the wind, there is not much 
doubt. Anemometer observations show that pressures of 30 lb 
per sq. ft. occur in storms annually in many localities, and that 
occasionally higher pressures are recorded in exposed positions. 
Thus at Bidstone, Liverpool, where the gauge has an exceptional 
exposure, a pressure of 80 lb per sq. ft. has been observed. In 
tornadoes, such as that at St Louis in 1896, it has been calculated, 
from the stability of structures overturned, that pressures of 45 
to 90 lb per sq. ft. must have been reached. As to anemometer 
pressures, it should be observed that the recorded pressure is made 
up of a positive front and negative (vacuum) back pressure, but in 
structures the latter must be absent or only partially developed. 
Great difference of opinion exists as to whether on large surfaces the 
average pressure per sq. ft. is as great as on small, surf aces, such as 
anemometer plates. The experiments of Sir B. Baker at the Forth 
bridge showed that on a surface 30 ft. X 15 ft- the intensity of pressure 
was less than on a similarly exposed anemometer plate. In the case 
of bridges there is the further difficulty that some surfaces partially 



BRIDGES 



549 



shield other surfaces; one girder, for instance, shields the girder 
behind it (see Brit. Assoc. Report, 1884). In J 88l a committee of the 
Board of Trade decided that the maximum wind pressure on a 
vertical surface in Great Britain should be assumed in designing 
structures to be 56 lb per sq. ft. For a plate girder bridge of less 
height than the train, the wind is to be taken to act on a surface 
equal to the projected area of one girder and the exposed part of a 
train covering the bridge. In the case of braced girder bridges, the 
wind pressure is taken as acting on a continuous surface extending 
from the rails to the top of the carriages, plus the vertical projected 
area of so much of one girder as is exposed above the train or below 
the rails. In addition, an allowance is made for pressure on the lee- 
ward girder according to a scale. The committee recommended that 
a factor of safety of 4 should be taken for wind stresses. For safety 
against overturning they considered a factor of 2 sufficient. In the 
case of bridges not subject to Board of Trade inspection, the allow- 
ance for wind pressure varies in different cases. C. Shaler Smith 
allows 300 lb per ft. run for the pressure on the side of a train, and 
in addition 30 lb per sq. ft. on twice the vertical projected area of 
one girder, treating the pressure on the train as a travelling load. 
In the case of bridges of less than 50 ft. span he also provides strength 
to resist a pressure of 5° tt> per sq. ft. on twice the vertical projection 
of one truss, no train being supposed to be on the bridge. 

19. Stresses Permitted. — For a long time engineers held the 
convenient opinion that, if the total dead and live load stress 
on any section of a structure (of iron) did not exceed 5 tons per 
sq. in., ample safety was secured. It is no longer possible to 
design by so simple a rule. In an interesting address to. the 
British Association in 1885, Sir B.Baker described the condition 
of opinion as to the safe limits of stress as chaotic. " The old 
foundations," he said, " are shaken, and engineers have not 
come to an agreement respecting the rebuilding of the structure. 
The variance in the strength of existing bridges is such as to be 
apparent to the educated eye without any calculation. In the 
present day engineers are in accord as to the principles of estimat- 
ing the magnitude of the stresses on the members of a structure, 
but not so in proportioning the members to resist those stresses. 
The practical result is that a bridge which would be passed by 
the English Board of Trade would require to be strengthened 
5% in some parts and 60% in others, before it would be ac- 
cepted by the German government, or by any of the leading rail- 
way companies in America." Sir B. Baker then described the 
results of experiments on repetition of stress, and added that 
" hundreds of existing bridges which carry twenty trains a day 
with perfect safety would break down quickly under twenty 
trains an hour. This fact was forced on my attention nearly 
twenty-five years ago by the fracture of a' number of girders of 
ordinary strength under a five-minutes' train service." 

Practical experience taught engineers that though 5 tons per 
sq. in. for iron, or 6| tons per sq. in. for steel, was safe or more 
than safe for long bridges with large ratio of dead to live load, it 
was not safe for short ones in which the stresses are mainly due to 
live load, the weight of the bridge being small. The experiments 
of A. Wohler, repeated by Johann Bauschinger, Sir B. Baker and 
others, show that the breaking stress of a bar is not a fixed quantity, 
but depends on the range of variation of stress to which it is sub- 
jected, if that variation is repeated a very large number of times. 
Let K be the breaking strength of a bar per unit of section, when it 
is loaded once gradually to breaking. This may be termed the 
statical breaking strength. Let fc^ x . be the breaking strength of 
the same bar when subjected to stresses varying from &„„*• to kmin. 
alternately and repeated an indefinitely great number of times; 
kmin' is to be reckoned + if of the same kind as kmax- and — if 
of tie opposite kind (tension or thrust). The range of stress is there- 
fore kmax.—k m i„., if the stresses are both of the same kind, and 
kmax- +k„in; if they are of opposite kinds. Let A = kma*. + k m i n - = the 
range of stress, where A is always positive. Then Wohler's results 
agree closely with the rule, 

*■»•*. = JA+ V(K 2 -raAK), 
where n is a constant which varies from 1-3 to 2 in various qualities 
of iron and steel. For ductile iron or mild steel it may be taken as 
1-5. For a statical load, range of stress nil, A = o, k max . = Vi., the 
statical breaking stress. For a bar so placed that it is alternately 
loaded and the load removed, A = £„<.». and kma X . =o-6 K. For a 
bar subjected to alternate tension and compression of equal amount, 
A = 2 fmax- and&mai. = 0-33 K. The safe working stress in these dif- 
ferent cases is &»„*. divided by the factor of safety. It is sometimes 
said that a bar is ' ' fatigued ' ' by repeated straining. The real nature 
of the action is not well understood, but the word fatigue may be 
used, if it is not considered to imply more than that the breaking 
stress under repetition of loading diminishes as the range of variation 
increases. 



It was pointed out as early as 1869 (Unwin, Wrought Iron Bridges 
and Roofs) that a rational method of fixing the working stress, so 
far as knowledge went at that time, would be to make it depend on 
the ratio of live to dead load, and in such a way that the factor of 
safety for the live load stresses was double that for the dead load 
stresses. Let A be the dead load and B the live load, producing 
stress in a bar; p = B/A the ratio of live to dead load; f\ the safe 
working limit of stress for a bar subjected to a dead load only and / 
the safe working stress in any other case. Then 

fi(A+B)/(A+2B) =/,(i+p)/(i +2 P ). 
The following table gives values of / so computed on the assumption 
that /1 = 7 J tons per sq. in. for iron and 9 tons per sq. in. for steel. 

Working Stress for combined Dead and Live Load. Factor of Safety 
twice as great for Live Load as for Dead Load. 





Ratio 
P 


I+P 
I+2p 


Values of /, tons per sq. in. 


Iron. 


Mild Steel. 


All dead load . . 





1-00 


7-5 


9P 


Live load = Dead load 


•25 
■33 
•50 
•66 

I-OO 


0-8 3 
0-78 

o-75 
0-71 
o-66 


6-2 

5-8 
5-6 
53 
4-9 


7-5 
7-0 
6-8 
64 
59 


All live load . . 


2-00 

4-O0 

00 


o-6o 
0-56 
0-50 


4-5 
4-2 

37 


5-4 
50 

4'5 



Bridge sections designed by this rule differ little from those designed 
by formulae based directly on Wohler's experiments. This rule has 
been revived in America, and appears to be increasingly relied on in 
bridge-designing. (See Trans. Am. Soc. C.E. xli. p. 156.) 

The method of J. J. Weyrauch and W. Launhardt, based on an 
empirical expression for Wohler's law, has been much used in bridge 
designing (see Proc. Inst. C.E. lxiii. p. 275). Let t be the statical 
breaking strength ef a bar, loaded once gradually up to fracture 
(t = breaking load divided by original area of section) ; u the breaking 
strength of a bar loaded and unloaded an indefinitely great number 
of times, the stress varying from u to o alternately (this is termed the 
primitive strength); and, lastly, let s be the breaking strength of a 
bar subjected to an indefinitely great number of repetitions of 
stresses equal and opposite in sign (tension and thrust), so that the 
stress ranges alternately from s to -— «. This is termed the vibration 
strength. Wohler's and Bauschinger's experiments give values of/, 
u, and s, for some materials. If a bar is subjected to alternations of 
stress having the range A =/«,.- /«,<»., then, by Wohler's law, the 
bar will ultimately break, if 

fmax-— FA, . . . . (i) 

where F is some unknown function. Launhardt found that, for 
stresses always of the same kind, F = ((-»)/((-/„,.) approximately 
agreed with experiment. For stresses of different kinds Weyrauch 
found F = (u—s)f)(2u~s—fmax-) to be similarly approximate. Now 
let /«„.//„•„. = </>, where <p is +or— according as the stresses are 
of the same or opposite signs. Putting the values of F in (1) and 
solving for / m<w ., we get for the breaking stress of a bar subjected 
to repetition of varying stress, 

fmax-=u(i + (t — u)<t>/u) [Stresses of same sign.] 
fmax- = u(i + (u—s) <t>/u) [Stresses of opposite sign.] 

The working stress in any case is f max . divided by a factor of 
safety. Let that factor be 3. Then Wohler's results for iron and 
Bauschinger's for steel give the following equations for tension or 
thrust:— 

Iron, working stress, /=4'4 {l-\-\<j>) 
Steel, „ „ =5-87 (1-H0). 

In these equations <j> is to have its + or — value according to the 
case considered. For shearing stresses the working stress may have 
0-8 of its value for tension. The following table gives values of 
the working stress calculated by these equations : — 

Working Stress for Tension or Thrust by Launhardt and 
Weyrauch Formula. 







<t> 


Working Stress /, 




<t> 


i+~ 
2 


tons per sq. in. 


• Iron. 


Steel. 


All dead load .... 


i-o 


i-5 


6-6o 


8-8o 




o-75 


!-375 


6-05 


8-07 




0-50 


1 25 


550 


7'34 




025 


1 -125 


4-95 


6-60 


All live load .... 


o-oo 


I-OO 


4-40 


5-87 




-0-25 


0-875 


3-85 


5-14 




-0-50 


o-75 


3-30 


4-40 




-o-75 


0-625 


2-75 ■- 


3'67 


Equal stresses + and — . 


— I -00 


0-500 


2-20 


2-93 



55° 



BRIDGES 



To compare this with the previous table, c£ = (A+B)/A = l+p. 
Except when the limiting stresses are of opposite sign, the two 
tables agree very well. In bridge work this occurs only in some of 
the bracing bars. 

It is a matter of discussion whether, if fatigue is allowed for by 
the Weyrauch method, an additional allowance should be made for 
impact. There was no impact in Wohler's experiments, and there- 
fore it would seem rational to add the impact allowance to that 
for fatigue ; but in that case the bridge sections become larger than 
'.xperience shows to be necessary. Some engineers escape this 
difficulty by asserting that Wohler's results are not applicable to 
bridge work. They reject the allowance for fatigue (that is, the 
effect of repetition) and design bridge members for the total dead 
and live load, plus a large allowance for impact varied according to 
some purely empirical rule. (See Waddell, De Pontibus, p. 7.) Now 
in applying Wohler's law, f max . for any bridge member is found for 
the maximum possible live load, a live load which though it may 
sometimes come on the bridge and must therefore be provided for, 
is not the usual live load to which the bridge is subjected. Hence 
the range of stress, /„„. -/ m ,„., from which the working stress is 
deduced, is not the ordinary range of stress which is repeated a 
practically infinite number of times, but is a range of stress to which 
the bridge is subjected only at comparatively long intervals. Hence 
practically it appears probable that the allowance for fatigue made 
in either of the tables above is sufficient to cover the ordinary effects 
of impact also. 

English bridge-builders are somewhat hampered in adopting 
rational limits of working stress by the rules of the Board of Trade. 
,Nor do they all accept the guidance of Wohler's law. The following 
are some examples of limits adopted. For the Dufferin bridge (steel) 
the working stress was taken at 6-5 tons per sq. in. in bottom booms 
and diagonals, 6-o tons in top booms, 5-0 tons in verticals and long 
compression members. For the Stanley bridge at Brisbane the 
limits were 6-5 tons per sq. in. in compression boom, 7-0 tons in 
tension boom, 5-0 tons in vertical struts, 6-5 tons in diagonal ties, 
8-o tons in wind bracing, and 6-5 tons in cross and rail girders. 
In the new Tay bridge the limit of stress is generally 5 tons per sq. 
in., but in members in which the stress changes sign 4 tons per sq. in. 
In the Forth bridge for members in which the stress varied from o 
to a maximum frequently, the limit was 5-0 tons per sq. in., or if 
the stress varied rarely 5-6 tons per sq. in.; for members subjected 
to alternations of tension and thrust frequently 3-3 tons per sq. in. 
or 5 tons per sq. in. if the alternations were infrequent. The shearing 
area of rivets in tension members was made ij times the useful 
section of plate in tension. For compression members the shearing 
area of rivets in butt-joints was made half the useful section of plate 
in compression. 

20. Determination of Stresses in the Members of Bridges. — It is 
convenient to consider beam girder or truss bridges, and it is the 
stresses in the main girders which primarily require to be determined. 
A main girder consists of an upper and lower flange, boom or chord 
and a vertical web. The loading forces to be considered are vertical, 
the horizontal forces due to wind pressure are treated separately 
and provided for by a horizontal system of bracing. For practical 
purposes it is accurate enough to consider the booms or chords as 
carrying exclusively the horizontal tension and compression and the 
web as resisting the whole of the vertical and, in a plate web, the 
equal horizontal shearing forces. Let fig. 37 represent a beam with 
any system of loads Wi, W 2 , . . . W». 



R, 



-^ 












t-X,-* 



lb. 



$ 

-& 



) I 



V 



Fig. 37. 
The reaction at the right abutment is 

Ri = 'W 1 x 1 /l+V^ 2 Xi/l-r . . . 
That at the left abutment is 

Ri = W,+W 2 4-...-R 2 . 
Consider any section a b. The total shear at a 6 is 

S = R-2(Wi+W 2 ...) 
where the summation extends to all the loads to the left of the sec- 
tion. Let p u p, . . . be the distances of the loads from a b, and p 
the distance of Ri from a b; then the bending moment at a b is 

M=R 1 p-2(W 1 p 1 +VJ 1 p t . . .) 
where the summation extends to all the loads to the left of a b. 
If the loads on the right of the section are considered the expressions 
are similar and give the same results. 

If Ai A c are the cross sections of the tension and compression 
flanges or chords, and h the distance between their mass centres, 
then on the assumption that they resist all the direct horizontal 
forces the total stress on each flange is 

H, = H„ = M/ft 



and the intensity of stress of tension or compression is 

f, = M/A,h, 

/„ = M/A e A. 
If A is the area of the plate web in a vertical section, the intensity of 
shearing stress is 

/. = S/A 
and the intensity on horizontal sections is the same. If the web is 
a braced web, then the vertical component of the stress in the web 
bars cut by the section must be equal to S. 

21. Method of Sections. A. Ritter's Method.— In the case of braced 
structures the following method is convenient : When a section of a 
girder can be taken cutting only three bars, the stresses in the bars 
can be found by taking moments. In fig. 38 m n cuts three bars, 
and the forces in the three bars cut by the section are C, S and T. 
There are to the left of the section the external forces, R, W t , W 2 . 



0-'" 




Fig. 38. 
Let j be the perpendicular from O, the join of C and T on the direc- 
tion of S ; t the perpendicular from A, the join of C and S on the 
direction of T; and c the perpendicular from B, the join of S and T 
on the direction of C. Taking moments about O, 
R*-Wi(*+<i) -W 2 (*+2a) =Si; 
taking moments about A, 

R3a-Wi2o-W 2 a=T/; 
and taking moments about B, 

R2a-Wia = Cc. 
Or generally, if Mi M 2 M 3 are the moments of the external forces 
to the left of O, A, and B respectively, and 5, t and c the perpendiculars 
from O, A and B on the directions of the forces cut by the section, 
then ■ ' » 

Si = M i; T/ = M 2 andCc = M 3 . 
Still more generally if H is the stress on any bar, h the perpendicular 
distance from the join of the other two bars cut by the section, and 
M is the moment of the forces on one side of that join, 

HA = M. 

22. Distribution of Bending Moment and Shearing Force. — Let a 

girder of span /, fig. 39, supported at the ends, carry a fixed load 

W at m from the right abutment. The reactions at the abutments 

are Ri -Wm/l and R 2 = W(/— m)/l. The shears on vertical sections 





; Bending Moment. 



Fig. 39. Fig. 40. 

to the left and right of the load are R l and -R 2 , and the distribution 
of shearing force is given by two rectangles. Bending moment 
increases uniformly from either abutment to the load, at which 
the bending moment is M = R 2 m = Ri(i— m). The distribution of 
bending moment is given by the ordinates of a triangle. Next let 
the girder carry a uniform load w per ft. run (fig. 40). The total load 



BRIDGES 



551 



is wl; the reactions at abutments, Ri = R 2 = |wZ. The distribution 
of shear on vertical sections is given by the ordinates of a sloping 
line. The greatest bending moment is at the centre and = M c = \wV. 
At any point x from the abutment, the bending moment is M = 
\wx(l— x), an equation to a parabola. 

23. Shear due to Travelling Loads. — Let a uniform train weighing 
w per ft. run advance over a girder of span 2C, from the left abutment. 
_ _ When it covers the girder to a dis- 

tance x from the centre (fig. 41) the 
total load is w(c+x); the reaction 
at B is 

R 2 = w(c+x)X c -±? = -(c+xy, 
4c 4^ 




which is also the shearing force at C 
for that position of the load. As 
the load travels, the shear at the 
head of the train will be given -by 
the ordinates of a parabola having 
its vertex at A, and a maximum 
F m „*. =-iwl at B. If the load 
FlG. 41. travels the reverse way, the shearing 

force at the head of the train is given by the ordinates of the dotted 
parabola. The greatest shear at C for any position of the load occurs 
when the head of the train is at C. For any load p between C and B 
will increase the reaction at B and therefore the shear at C by part 
of p, but at the same time will diminish the shear at C by the whole 




*v 



^ t 



Fig. 42. 



of p. The web of a girder must resist the maximum shear, and, 
with a travelling load like a railway train, this is greater for partial 
than for complete loading. Generally a girder supports both a dead 
and a live load. The distribution of total shear, due to a dead load 
wi per ft. run and a travelling load Wi per ft. run, is shown in fig. 42, 
arranged so that the dead load shear is added to the maximum 

travelling load shear of the same 
sign. 

24. Counterbracing. — In the case of 
girders with braced webs, the tension 
bars of which are not adapted to 
resist a thrust, another circumstance 
due to the position of the live load 
must be considered. For a train ad- 
vancing from the left, the travelling 
load shear in the left half of the span 
is of a different sign from that due to 
the dead load. Fig. 43 shows the 
maximum shear at vertical sections 
due to a dead and travelling load, the 
latter advancing (fig. 43, a) from the 
left and (fig. 43, b) from the right 
abutment. Comparing the figures it 
will be seen that over a distance 
x near the middle of the girder the 
shear changes sign, according as the load advances from the left 
or the right. The bracing bars, therefore, for this part of the girder 
must be adapted to resist either tension or thrust. Further, the 
range of stress to which thev are subjected is the sum of the stresses 
due to the load advancing from the left or the right. 

25. Greatest Shear when concentrated Loads travel over the Bridge. — 

To find the greatest shear 

_, „ R 9 with a set of concentrated 

loads at fixed distances, 
let the loads advance from 
the left abutment, and 
let C be the section at 
which the shear is required 
(fig. 44). The greatest 
shear at C may occur with 
Wi at C. If W t passes 
beyond C, the shear at C 
will probably be greatest 




Fig. 43. 



Wi 



W2 



\9 9 



k— a — »; 



I 
i 
— «i<— -lm- 



- L— 



Fig. 44. 

when Wj is at C. Let R be the resultant of the loads on the 
bridge when Wi' is at C. Then the reaction at B and shear at 
C is Rnjl. Next let the loads advance a distance a so that W 2 
comes to C. Then the shear at C is R(»+o)//— Wi, plus any 
reaction d at B, due to any additional load which has come on the 




girder during the movement. The shear will therefore be increased 
by bringing W 2 to C, if Ra//+d>Wi and d is generally small and 
negligible. This result is modified if the action of the load near 
the section is distributed to the bracing intersections by rail -and 
cross girders. In fig. 45 the action 
of W is distributed to A and B by 
the flooring. Then the loads at A 
and B are W(p-x)/p and Wx/p. 
Now let C (fig. 46) be the section at 

which the greatest shear is required, _ 

and let the loads advance from the Aw— or-'-— ♦" IB 

left till Wi is at C. If R is the re- <_ p J 

sultant of the loads then on the 

girder, the reaction at B and shear 

at C is Rn/l. But the shear may 

be greater when W 2 is at C. In that case the shear at C becomes 

R(n+a)/l+d-W u if a>p, and R{n+a)/l+d-W 1 alp, if a<p. If 

we neglect d, then the shear increases by moving W 2 to C , if Ra/l > Wi 

in the first case, and if Ra/l>Wialp in the second case. 

26. Greatest Bending Moment due to travelling concentrated Loads.— 
For the greatest bending moment due to a travelling live load, let a 
load of w per ft. run advance from the left abutment (fig. 47), and 
let its centre be at x from the left abutment. The reaction at B is 
2wx 2 /l and the bending moment at any section C, at m from the left 
abutment, is. 2wx*](l—m)/l, which increases as x increases till the span 
is covered. Hence, for uniform travelling loads, the bending moments 



Fig. 45. 




Fig. 46. 

are greatest when the loading is complete. In that case the loads on 
either side of C are proportional to m and l — m. In the case of a 
series of travelling loads at fixed distances apart passing over the 
girder from the left, let Wi, W 2 (fig. 48), at distances x and x+a 
from the left abutment, be their resultants on either side of C. 
Then the reaction at B is Wiz//-fW 2 (x-)-a)//. The bending moment 

M=Wi*(/-m)/7+W,m{i-(*+a)//|. 

If the loads are moved a distance Ax to the right, the bending 
moment becomes 

M+AM =Wi(*+Ax)(Z-w)/Z+W 2 m(l -(x+Ax+a)fl\ 

Am = WiA*(/ — m)/l — W^Axm/l, 

and this is positive or the bending moment increases, if 

Wi(Z — w)>W 2 m, or_ if m > 

D 
AQQQQQiQQQO ^ B 



Wi/m>W 2 /(/-w). But 
these are the average 
loads per ft. run to the 
left and right of C. Hence, 
if the average load to the 
left of a section is greater 
than that to the right, the 
bending moment at the 
section will be increased 
by moving the loads to 
the right, and vice versa. 
Hence the maximum 



1 



I 



W-— _. 



x- — >U 1-x 1— 

1 



~M 



-1-2C 

Fig. 47. 



bending moment at C for a series of travelling loads will occur 
when the average load is the same on either side of C. If one of 
the loads is at C, spread over a very small distance in the 
neighbourhood of C, then a very small displacement of the loads 
will permit the fulfilment of the condition. Hence the criterion 
for the position of the loads which makes the moment at C greatest 
is this: one load must be at C, and the other loads must be dis- 
tributed, so that the average loads per ft. on either side of C (the 
load at C being neglected) are nearly equal. If the loads are very 
unequal in magnitude or distance this condition may be satisfied 
for more than one position 



of the loads, but it is not 
difficult to ascertain which 
position gives the maxi- 
mum moment. Generally 
one of the largest of the 
leads must be at C with as 
many others to right and 
left as is consistent with 
that condition. 

This criterion may be 
stated in another way. 
The greatest bending 



Wi 

a o 



W2 

CQ;QB 



•— x— - A a 



I 

-4- 



--j..b..,j 

-l-m >{ 



U- 



-•1-2 C 

Fig. 48. 



moment will occur with one of the greatest loads at the section, 
and when this further condition is satisfied. Let fig. 49 represent a 
beam with the series of loads travelling from the right. Let a b be 



552 



BRIDGES 



the section considered, and let W» bei the load at a b when the bending 
moment there is greatest, and W„ the last load to the right then on 
the bridge. Then the position of the loads must be that which satisfies 
the- condition 

Wi+W 2 + . ■ ■ W t . 



: greater than 



less than 



Wi+W 2 + 

w,+w 2 + 



w, 



I l "° u " a " Wi+W,+ . 
Fig. 50 shows the curve of bending moment under one of a series 
of travelling loads at fixed distances. Let Wi, W 2 , W 3 traverse the 
girder from the left at fixed distances o, 6. For the position shown 
the distribution of bending moment due to Wi is given by ordinates 

of the triangle 
A'CB'; that due 
to W 2 by ordin- 
ates of A'DB'; 
and that due to 
3__Ws by ordinates 
fof A'EB'. The 
j total moment at 
*l Wi, due to three 
' loads, is the sum 
mC+mn+mo of 
the intercepts 



W, 

Ml 






a 

-4— 



x —- 



4 









represented by this parabola. Then w, may be termed the uniform 
load per ft. equivalent to any assumed set of concentrated loads. 
Waddell has calculated tables of such equivalent uniform loads. 
But it is not difficult to find w e , approximately enough for practical 
purposes, very simply. Experience shows that (a) a parabola having 
the same ordinate at the centre of the span, or (b) a parabola having 
15 1 



5 tons 



10 tons 



Fig. 49. 



which the triangle sides cut off from the vertical under Wi. As the 
loads move over the girder, the points C, D, E describe the parabolas 
Mi, M 2 , M(, the middle ordinates of which are |Wi/, |W 2 J, and iW 3 /. 
If these are first drawn it is easy, for any position of the loads, to 
draw the lines B'C, B'D, B'E, and to find the sum of the intercepts 
which is the total bending moment under a load. • The lower portion 
of the figure is the curve of bending moments under the leading load. 
Till Wi has advanced a distance a only one load is on the girder, 
and the curve A"F gives bending moments due to Wi only; as Wi 
advances to a distance a +6, two loads are on the girder, and the 
curve FG gives moments due to Wi and W 2 . GB" is the curve of 
moments for all three loads Wi+W 2 -|-W». 

Fig. 51 shows maximum bending moment curves for an extreme 
case of a short bridge with very unequal loads. The three lightly 




dotted parabolas are the curves of maximum moment for each of 
the loads taken separately. The three heavily dotted curves are 
curves of maximum moment under each of the loads, for the three 
loads passing over the bridge, at the given distances, from left to 
right. As might be expected, the moments are greatest in this 
case at the sections under the 15-ton load. The heavy continuous 
line gives the last- mentioned curve for the reverse direction of 
passage of the loads. 

With short bridges it is best to draw the curve of maximum 
bending moments for some assumed typical set of loads in the way 
just described, and to design the girder accordingly. For longer 
bridges the funicular polygon affords a method of determining 
maximum bending moments which is perhaps more convenient. 
But very great accuracy in drawing this curve is unnecessary, 
because the rolling stock of railways varies so much that the precise 
magnitude and distribution of the loads which will pass over a bridge 
cannot be known. All that can be done is to assume a set of loads 
likely to produce somewhat severer straining than any probable 
actual rolling loads. Now, except for very short bridges and very 
unequal loads, a parabola can be found which includes the curve 
of maximum moments. This parabola is the curve of maximum 
moments for a travelling load uniform per ft. run. Let w. be the 
load per ft. run which would produce the maximum moments 




Fig. 51. 

the same ordinate at one-quarter span as the curve of maximum 
moments, agrees with it closely enough for practical designing. 
A criterion already given shows the position of any set of loads 
which will produce the greatest bending moment at the centre of the 
bridge, or at one-quarter span. Let M c and M„ be those moments. 
At a section distant x from the centre of a girder of span 2c, the bend- 
ing moment due to a uniform load w e per ft run is 

M = \w e (c-x){c+x). 
Putting x = o, for the centre section 

and putting x = §c, for section at quarter span 

M, = §w e cK 
From these equations a value of w, can be obtained. Then the 
bridge is designed, so far as the direct stresses are concerned, for 
bending moments due to a uniform dead load and the uniform 
equivalent load w e . 

27. Influence Lines. — In dealing with the action of travelling 
loads much assistance may be obtained by using a line termed an 
influence line. Such a line has for abscissa the distance of a load 
from one end of a girder, and for ordinate the bending moment or 
shear at any given section, or on any member, due to that load. 
Generally the influence line is drawn for unit load. In fig. 52 let 
A'B' be a girder supported at the ends and let it be required to 
investigate the bending moment at C' due to unit load in any position 
on the girder. When the load is at F', the reaction at B' is m/l and 
the moment at C' is m(l~x)/l, which will be reckoned positive, when 
it resists a tendency of the right-hand part of the girder to turn 
counter-clockwise. Projecting A'F'C'B' on to the horizontal AB, 
take Ff=m(l-x)tl, the moment at Cof unit load at F. If this process 
is repeated for all positions of the load, we get the influence line 
AGB for the bending moment at C. The area AGB is termed the 
influence area. The greatest moment CG at C is x(l-x)/l. To use 
this line to investigate the maximum moment at C due to a series 




Fig. 52. 



of travelling loads at fixed distances, let Pi, P 2 , P 3 , . . . be the 
loads which at the moment considered are at distances mi, mi, . . . 
from the left abutment. Set off these distances along AB and let 
yi, yt, ■ . . be the corresponding ordinates of the influence curve 
(y = F/) on the verticals under the loads. Then the moment at C due 
to all the loads is 

M=Piy,-(-P 2 y2+... 



BRIDGES 



553 



The position of the loads which gives the greatest moment at C 
may be settled by the criterion given above. For a uniform travel- 
ling load w per ft. of span, consider a small interval Fk = Am on .which 
the load is wAm. The moment due to this, at C, is wti (l-xj Am/l. 

But m(l-x)Am/l is the 
area of the strip Ffhk, 
that is yAm. Hence the 
moment of the load on 
Am at C is ivy Am, and 
the moment of a uniform 
load over any portion of 
the girder is w X the area 
of the influence curve 
under that portioi. If 
the scales are so chosen 
that a inch represents I 
in. ton of moment, and 
b inch represents I ft. of 

span, and w is in tons per 
p . ^ ^^ ^^^ ^ . s t ^ e ^^.^ 

p IG ,, of area in measuring the 

' influence curve. 

If the load is carried by a rail girder (stringer) with cross girders 
at the intersections of bracing and boom, its effect is distributed to 
the bracing intersections D'E' (fig. 53), and the part of the influence 
line for that bay (panel) is altered. With unit load in the position 
shown, the load at D' is (p-n)/p, and that at E' is nip. The moment 
of the load at C is m(l-x)/l-n(p-n)/p. This is the equation to the 
dotted line RS (fig. 52). 

If the unit load is at F', the reaction at B' and the shear at C 
is mil, positive if the shearing stress resists a tendency of the part of 
the girder on the right to move upwards; set up Ff = m/l (fig. 54) 





H 
Fig. 54. 

on the vertical under the load. Repeating the process for other 
positions, we get the influence line AGHB, for the shear at C due to 
unit load anywhere on the girder. GC—x/l and CH =-(/-*)//. 
The lines AG, HB are parallel. If the load is in the bay D'E' and is 
carried by a rail girder which distributes it to cross girders at D'E', 
the part of the influence line under this bay is altered. Let n (Fig. 55) 
be the distance of the load from D', Xi the distance of D' from the 
left abutment, and p the length of a bay. The loads at D', E, 
due to unit weight on the rail girder are (p-n)/p and nip. The 
reaction at B' is {(p-n)xi+n(xi+p)\ /pi. The shear at C' is the 

reaction at B' less the 
load at E', that is, 

(P(*i +»)-»/)/#, 
y! which is the equation to 

A \ the line DH (fig. 54). 

\d& l\ / Clearly, the distribution 
' ; \ '/ of the load by the rail 

_ J __ girder considerably alters 
ID 1 1 p 1 ;E' the distribution of shear 

i j j ! due to a load in the bay 

Xt «— -n- J 1 ! jn which the section con- 

^ ! . ,. j ! sidered lies. The total 

!• p '-— «( shear due to a series of 

j • i ' loads Pi, P 2 , . . . at dis- 

x 1-- 1 »i tances mi, m?., . . . from 

Fig. 55. the left abutment, y\,y%, . . . 

being the ordinates 
of the influence curve under the loads, is S = Pr>>i-(-P2y2 + . . . 
Generally, the greatest shear S at C will occur when the longer of the 
segments into which C divides the girder is fully loaded and the 
other is unloaded, the leading load being at C. If the loads are very 
unequal or unequally spaced, a trial or two will determine which 
position gives the greatest value of S. The greatest shear at C' of 
the opposite sign to that due to the loading of the longer segment 




occurs with the shorter segment loaded. For a uniformly distributed 
load w per ft. run the shear at C is w X the area of the influence curve 
under the segment covered by the load, attention being paid to the 
sign of the area of the curve. If the load rests directly on the main 
girder, the greatest + and - shears at C will be wXAGC and 
-wXCHB. But if the load is distributed to the bracing inter- 
sections by rail and cross girders, then the shear at C will be greatest 
when the load extends to N, and will have the values ojXADN and 
^fXNEB. 

An interesting paper by F. C. Lea, dealing with the determination 
of stress due to concentrated loads, by the method of influence lines 
will be found in Proc. Inst. C.E. clxi. p. 261. 

Influence lines were described by Frankel, Der Civilingenieur t 
1876. See also Handbuch der Ingenieur-wissenschaften, vol. ii. ch. 
x. (1882), and Levy, La Statique graphigue (1886). There is a useful 
paper by Prof. G. F. Swain (Trans. Am. Soc. C.E. xvii., 1887), 
and another by L. M. Hoskins (Proc. Am. Soc. C.E. xxv., 1899) 

28. Eddy's Method. — Another method of investigating the 
maximum shear at a section due to any distribution of a travelling 
load has been given by Prof. H. T. Eddy (Trans. Am. Soc. C.E. xxii., 
1890). Let hk (fig. 56) represent in magnitude and position a load 
W, at x from the left abutment, on a girder A B of span /. Lay off kf, 
hg, horizontal and equal to /. Join/and g to h and k. Draw verticals 
at A, B, and join no. Obviously no is horizontal and equal to /. 
Also mn/mf=hk/kf or mn-W(l-x)/l, which. is the reaction at A 
due to the load at C, and is the shear at any point cf AC. Similarly, 
po is the reaction at B and shear at any point of CB. The shaded 
rectangles represent the distribution of shear due to the load at C, 
while no may be termed the datum line of shear. Let the load move 
to D, so that its distance from the left abutment is x+a. Draw a 
vertical at D, intersecting fh, kg, in s and q. Then qrlro = hk]hg or 
ro — 'W(l-x-a)/l, which is the reaction at A and shear at any point 
of AD, for the new position of the load. Similarly, « = W(x+o)// 
is the shear on DB. The distribution of shear is given by the partially 
shaded rectangles. For the application of this method to a series of 
loads Prof. Eddy's paper must be referred to. 

29. Economic Span.— In the case of a bridge of many spans, 
there is a length of span which makes the cost of the bridge least. 
The cost of abutments and bridge flooring is practically independent 
of the length of span adopted. Let P be the cost of one pier ; G the 
cost of the main girders for one span, erected; n the number of 
spans; I the length of one span, and L the length of the bridge 
between abutments. Then, n = L/l nearly. Cost of piers (»-i)P. 
Cost of main girders nO. The cost of a pier will not vary materially 
with the span adopted. It depends mainly on the character of the 
foundations and height at which the bridge is carried. The cost 
of the main girders for one span will vary nearly as the square' of the 
span for any given type of girder and intensity of live load. That is, 
G = aP : whereo is a constant. Hence the total cost of that part of 
the bridge which varies with the span adopted is — 

C = (n-l)P+naP 
= LP//-P+La/. 

Differentiating and equating to zero, the cost is least when 

dC LP . T . 
:s -=- lr 4-La = o, 

P=a^ = G; 
that is, when the cost of one pier is equal to the cost erected of the 
main girders of one span. Sir Guilford Molesworth puts this in a 
convenient but less exact form. Let G be the cost of superstructure 




of a 100-ft. span erected, and P the cost of one pier with its protection. 
Then the economic span is / = 100V P/ V G. 

30. Limiting Span. — If the weight of the main girders of a bridge, 
per ft. run in tons, is — ■ 

W3 = (iVi+Wi)lrl(K-lt) 
according to a formula already given, then w t becomes infinite if 
k-lr = o, or if 

l-Kfr, ■ 



554 



BRIDGES 



where I is the span in feet and r is the ratio of span to depth of girder 
at centre. Taking K for steel girders as 7200 to 9000, 
Limiting Span in Ft. 
r = l2 / = 6ooto 750 

= 10 =720 to 900 

= 8 =900 to 1 120 

The practical limit of span would be less than this. Professor 
Claxton Fidier (Treatise on Bridge Construction, 1887) has made a 
very careful theoretical analysis of the weights of bridges of different 
types, and has obtained the following values for the limiting spans. 
For parallel girders when r = lo, the limiting span is 1070 ft. For 
parabolic or bowstring girders, when r = 8, the limiting span is 
1280 ft. For flexible suspension bridges with wrought iron link 
chains, and dip =i 1 oth of the span, the limiting span is 2800 ft. 
For stiffened suspension bridges with wire cables, if the dip is -j'dth 
of the span the limiting span is 2700 to 3600 ft., and if the dip is |th 
of the span, 3250 to 4250 ft., according to the factor of safety allowed. 

31. Braced Girders. — A frame is a rigid structure composed 
of straight struts and ties. The struts and ties are called bracing 
bars. The frame as a whole may be subject to a bending moment, 
but each member is simply extended or compressed so that the 
total stress on a given member is the same at all its cross sections, 
while the intensity of stress is uniform for all the parts of any 
one cross section. This result must follow in any frame, the 
members of which are so connected that the joints offer little 
or no resistance to change in the relative angular position of the 
members. Thus if the members are pinned together, the joint 
consisting of a single circular pin, the centre of which lies in the 
axis of the piece, it is clear that the direction of the only stress 
which can be transmitted from pin to pin will coincide with this 
axis. The axis becomes, therefore, a line of resistance, and in 
reasoning of the stresses on frames we may treat the frame as 
consisting of simple straight lines from joint to joint. It is 
found in practice that the stresses on the several members do 
not differ sensibly whether these members are pinned together 
with a single pin or more rigidly jointed by several bolts or 
rivets. Frames are much used as girders, and they also give 
useful designs for suspension and arched bridges. A frame used 
to support a weight is often called a truss; the stresses on the 
various members of a truss can be computed for any given load 
with greater accuracy than the intensity of stress on the various 
parts of a continuous structure such as a tubular girder, or the 
rib of an arch. Many assumptions are made in treating of the 
flexure of a continuous structure which are not strictly true; 
no assumption is made in determining the stresses on a frame 
except that the joints are flexible, and that the frame shall be 
so stiff as not sensibly to alter in form under the load. Frames 
used as bridge trusses should never be designed so that the 
elongation or compression of one member can elongate or 
compress any other member. An example will serve to make 
the meaning of this limitation clearer. Let a frame consist of 
the five members AB, BD, DC, CA, CB (fig. 57), jointed at the 

A n points A, B, C and D, and all capable of 

resisting tension and compression. This 
frame will be rigid, i.e. it cannot be distorted 
without causing an alteration in the length 
of one or more of the members; but if from 
a change of temperature or any other cause 
one or all of the members change their 
length, this will not produce a stress on any 
member, but will merely cause a change in 
the form of the frame. Such a frame as this cannot be 
self -strained. A workman, for instance, cannot produce a 
stress on one member by making some other member of a wrong 
length. Any error of this kind will merely affect the form of the 
frame; if, however, another member be introduced between 
A and D, then if BC be shortened AD will be strained so as to 
extend it, and the four other members will be compressed; if 
CB is lengthened AD will thereby be compressed, and the four 
other members extended; if the workman does not make CB 
and AD of exactly the right length they and all the members 
will be permanently strained. These stresses will be unknown 
quantities, which the designer cannot take into account, and 
such a combination should if possible be avoided. A frame of 
this second type is said to have one redundant member. 




32. Types of Braced Girder Bridges. — Figs. 58, 59 and 60 
show an independent girder, a cantilever, and a cantilever and 
suspended girder bridge. 

In a three-span bridge continuous girders are lighter than dis- 
continuous ones by about 45% for the dead load and 15% for the 
live load, if no allowance is made for ambiguity due to uncertainty 
as to the level of the sup- 
ports. The cantilever and 
suspended girder types are 
as economical and free 
from uncertainty as to 
the stresses. In long-span 
bridges the cantilever 
system permits erection FlG. 58. 

by building out, which is economical and sometimes necessary. It is, 
however, unstable unless rigidly fixed at the piers. In the Forth 
bridge stability is obtained partly by the great excess of dead over 
live load, partly by the great width of the river piers. The majority 
of bridges not of great span have girders with parallel booms. This 
involves the fewest difficulties of workmanship and perhaps permits 





Fig. 59, 

the closest approximation of actual to theoretical dimensions of the 
parts. In spans over 200 ft. it is economical to have one horizontal 
boom and one polygonal (approximately parabolic) boom. The hog- 
backed girder is a compromise between the two types, avoiding 
some difficulties of construction near the ends of the girder. 

Most braced girders may be considered as built up of two simple 




Fig. 60. 

forms of truss, the king-post truss (fig. 61, a), or the queen-post 
truss (fig. 61, b). These may be used in either the upright or the 
inverted position. A multiple truss consists of a number of simple 
trusses, e.g. Bollman truss. Some timber bridges consist of queen- 
post trusses in the upright position, as shown diagrammatically in 
fig. 62, where the circles indicate points at which the flooring girders 













\ 


\ 


^ 


k 






9 


A 


i 


9 f 
> 


™Wv 




yw f\ 


\ 




/ 


/r 



Fig. 61. 

transmit load to the main girders. Compound trusses consist of 
simple trusses used as primary, secondary and tertiary trusses, 
the secondary supported on the primary, and the tertiary on the 
secondary. Thus, the Fink truss consists of king-post trusses; 
the Pratt truss (fig. 63) and the Whipple truss (fig. 64) of queen-post 
trusses alternately upright and inverted. 

A combination bridge is built partly of timber, partly of steel, 




the compression members being generally of timber and the tension 
members of steel. On the Pacific coast, where excellent timber is 
obtainable and steel works are distant, combination bridges are 
still largely used (Ottewell, Trans. Am. Soc. C.E. xxvii. p. 467). 
The combination bridge at Roseburgh, Oregon, is a cantilever bridge. 



BRIDGES 



555 



The shore arms are 147 ft. span, the river arms 105 ft., and the 
suspended girder 80 ft., the total distance between anchor piers 
being 584 ft. The floor beams, floor and railing are of timber. 
The compression members are of timber, except the struts and bottom 
chord panels next the river piers, which are of steel. The tension 
members are of iron and the pins of steel. The chord blocks and post 
shoes are of cast-iron. 

33. Graphic Method of finding the Stresses in Braced Structures. — 
Fig. 65 shows a common form of bridge truss known as a Warren 
girder, with lines indicating external forces applied to the joints; 




Fig. 63. 
half the load carried between the two lower joints next the piers 
on either side is directly carried by the abutments. The sum of the 
two upward vertical reactions must clearly be equal to the sum of 
the loads. The lines in the diagram represent the directions of a 
series of forces which must alL be in equilibrium; these lines may, 
for an object to be explained in the next paragraph, be conveniently 
named by the letters in the spaces which they separate instead of 
by the method usually employed in geometry. Thus we shall call 
the first inclined line on the left hand the line AG, the line represent- 
ing the first force on the top left-hand joint AB, the first horizontal 
member at the top left hand the line BH, &c; similarly each point 
requires at least three letters to denote it; the top first left-hand 
"joint may be called ABHG, being the point where these four spaces 
meet. In this method of lettering, every enclosed space must be 
designated by a letter; all external forces must be represented by 
lines outside the frame, and each space between any two forces must 
receive a distinctive letter; this method of lettering was first pro- 
posed by O. Henrici and R. H. Bow (Economics of Construction), 
and is convenient in applying the theory of reciprocal figures to the 
computation of stresses on frames. 

34. Reciprocal Figures. — J. Clerk Maxwell gave (Phil. Mag. 1864) 




Fig. 64. 
the following definition of reciprocal figures: — •" Two plane figures 
are reciprocal when they consist of an equal number of lines so that 
corresponding lines in the two figures are parallel, and corresponding 
lines which converge to a point in one figure form a closed polygon 
in the other." 

Let a frame (without redundant members), and the external 
forces which keep it in equilibrium, be represented by a diagram 
constituting one of these two plane figures, then the lines in the other 
plane figure or the reciprocal will represent in direction and magni- 
tude the forces between the joints of the frame, and, consequently, 
the stress on each member, as will now be explained. 

Reciprocal figures are easily drawn by following definite rules, 
and afford therefore a simple method of computing the stresses 
on members of a frame. 

The external forces on a frame or bridge in equilibrium under 
those forces may, by a well-known proposition in statics, be repre- 
sented by a closed polygon, each side of which is parallel to one 
force, and represents the force in magnitude as well as in direction. 
The sides of the polygon may be arranged in any order, provided 
care is taken so to draw them that in passing round the polygon in 





■ A /\ 


JI 




cr / \ 


z. 


/ \ 2V / > 


yF 




/ G 




2 


\ / K 




' at\ / 




X' 
































X> 




<i 


i -S 




S I -r 





Fig. 65. 
one direction this direction may for each side correspond to the 
direction of the force which it represents. 

This polygon of forces may, by a slight extension of the above 
definition, be called the reciprocal figure of the external forces, if 
the sides are arranged in the same order as that of the joints on 
which they act, so that if the joints and forces be numbered 1, 2, 3, 
4, &c, passing round the outside of the frame in one direction, and 
returning at last to joint 1, then in the polygon the side represent- 
ing the force 2 will be next the side representing the force I, and 
will be followed by the side representing the force 3, and so forth. 



This polygon falls under the definition of a reciprocal figure given 
by Clerk Maxwell, if we consider the frame as a point in equilibrium 
under the external forces. 

Fig. 66 shows a frame supported at the two end joints, and loaded 
at each top joint. The loads and the supporting forces are indicated 
by arrows. Fig. 67 a shows the reciprocal figure or polygon for the 
external forces on the assumption that the reactions are slightly in- 
clined. The lines in fig. 67 a, lettered in the usual manner, correspond 
to the forces indicated by arrows in fig. 66, and lettered according 
to Bow's method. When all the forces are vertical, as will be 
the case in girders, the polygon of external forces will be reduced 
to two straight lines, fig. 67 b, superimposed and divided so that the 
length AX represents the load AX, the length AB the load AB, the 
length YX the reaction YX, and so forth. The line XZ consists of 
a series of lengths, as XA, AB . . . DZ, representing the loads taken 
in their order. In subsequent diagrams the two reaction lines will, 
for the sake of clearness, be drawn as if slightly inclined to the 
vertical. 

If there are no redundant members in the frame there will be only 
two. members abutting at the point of support, for these two members 
will be sufficient to balance the reaction, whatever its direction 
may be; we can therefore draw two triangles, each having as one 
side the reaction YX, and having the two other sides parallel to 
these two members; each of these triangles will represent a polygon 
of forces in equilibrium at the point of support. Of these two 
triangles, shown in fig. 67 c, select that in which the letters X and 
Y are so placed that (naming the apex of the triangle E) the lines 
XE and YE are the lines parallel to the two members of the same 
name in the frame (fig. 66). Then the triangle YXE is the reciprocal 

Fig. 66. 




Fig. 67. 

figure of the three lines YX, XE, EY in the frame, and represents the 
three forces in equilibrium at the point YXE of the frame. The 
direction of YX, being a thrust upwards, shows the direction in 
which we must go round the triangle YXE to find the direction of the 
two other forces ; doing this we find that the force XE must act down 
towards the point YXE, and the force EY away from the same point. 
Putting arrows on the frame diagram to indicate the direction of the 
forces, we see that the member EY must pull and therefore act as a 
tie, and that the member XE must push and act as a strut. Passing 
to the point XEFA we find two known forces, the load XA acting 
downwards, and a push from the strut XE, which, being in compres- 
sion, must push at both ends, as indicated by the arrow, fig. 66. The 
directions and magnitudes of these two forces are already drawn (fig. 
67 a) in a fitting position to represent part of the polygon of forces at 
XEFA; beginning with the upward thrust EX, continuing down 
XA, and drawing AF parallel to AF in the frame we complete the 
polygon by drawing EF parallel to EF in the frame. The point F is 
determined by the intersection of the two lines, one beginning at A, 
and the other at E. We then have the polygon of forces EXAF, the 
reciprocal figure of the lines meeting at that point in the frame, 
and representing the forces at the point EXAF ; the direction of 
the forces on EH and XA being known determines the direction 
of the forces due to the elastic reaction of the members AF and EF, 
showing AF to push as a strut, while EF is a tie. We have, been 
guided in the selection of the particular quadrilateral adopted by 
the rule of arranging the order of the sides so that the same letters 
indicate corresponding sides in the diagram of the frame and its 
reciprocal. Continuing the construction of the diagram in the same 
way, we arrive at fig. 67 d as the complete reciprocal figure of the 
frame and forces upon it, and we see that each line in the reciprocal 
figure measures the stress on the corresponding member in the frame, 
and that the polygon of forces acting at any point, as IJKY, in the 
frame is represented by a polygon of the same name in the reciprocal 



556 



BRIDGES 



figure. The direction of the force in each member is easily ascertained 
by proceeding in the manner above described. A single known force 
in a polygon determines the direction of all the others, as these must 
all correspond with arrows pointing the same way round the polygon. 
Let the arrows be placed on the frame round each joint, and so as to 
indicate the direction of each force on that joint; then when two 
arrows point to one another on the same piece, that piece is a tie; 
when they point from one another the piece is a strut. It is hardly 
necessary to say that the forces exerted by the two ends of any one 
member must be equal and opposite. This method is universally 
applicable where there are no redundant members. The reciprocal 
figure for any loaded frame is a complete formula for the stress on 
every member of a frame of that particular class with loads on 
given joints. < 

Consider a Warren girder (fig. 68), loaded at the top and bottom 
joints. Fig. 69 b is the polygon of external forces, and 69 c is half the 
reciprocal figure. The complete reciprocal figure is shown in fig. 69 a. 

The method of sections already described is often more convenient 
than the method of reciprocal figures, and the method of influence 
lines is also often the readiest way of dealing with braced girders. 




Fig. 69. 

35. Chain Loaded uniformly along a Horizontal Line. — If the 
lengths of the links be assumed indefinitely short, the chain under 
given simple distributions of load will take the form of compara- 
tively simple mathematical curves known as catenaries. The true 
catenary is that assumed by a chain of uniform weight per unit of 
length, but the form generally adopted for suspension bridges is that 
assumed by a chain under a weight uniformly distributed relatively 
to a horizontal line. This curve is a parabola. 

Remembering that in this case the centre bending moment 'Zwl will 
be equal to wU/S, we see that the horizontal tension H at the vertex 
for a span L (the points of support being at equal heights) is given 
by the expression 

1. . . . . . . H=roLV8y, 

or, calling x the distance from the vertex to the point of support, 
H=wx i /2y. 

The value of H is equal to the maximum tension on the bottom 
flange, or compression on the top flange, of a girder of equal span, 
equally and similarly loaded, and having a depth equal to the dip 
of the suspension bridge. 

Consider any other point F of the curve, fig. 70, at a distance * 



from the vertex, the horizontal component of the resultant (tangent 
to the curve) will be unaltered ; the vertical component V will be 
simply the sum of the loads between O and F, or vix. In the triangle 
FDC, let FD be tangent to the curve, FC vertical, and DC horizontal ; 
these three sides will necessarily be proportional respectively to the 




Fig. 70. 

resultant tension along the chain at F, the vertical force V passing 
through the point D, and the horizontal tension at O ; hence 

H : V = DC : FC = wx 2 /2y : wx = x/2 : y, 

hence DC is the half of OC, proving the curve to be a parabola. 

The value of R, the tension at any point at a distance x from the 
vertex, is obtained from the equation 



or, 



R 2 = H 2 + V 2 = v?x"\\f + m¥, 



2 R=w*V(i+» 2 /43' 2 )- 

Let i be the angle between the tangent at any point having the 
co-ordinates x and y measured from the vertex, then 

3 tan i — 2yjx. 

Let the length of half the parabolic chain be called s, then 
4 . . s=x+2y i /$x. 

The following is the approximate expression for the relation 
between a change As in the length of the half chain and the corre- 
sponding change Ay in the dip : — 

s+As = x+(2/3x) {y 1 +2yAy + {Ay) i } =x+2y*l3x+4yAy/3x+2Ay 1 l3x, 
or, neglecting the last term, 

5 As = 4yAy/3x, 

and 

6 Ay-3xAs/4y. 

From these equations the deflection produced by any given stress 
on the chains or by a change^ of temperature can be calculated. 

36. Deflection of Girders.— Let fig. 71 represent a beam bent by 
external loads. Let the origin O be-taken at the lowest point of the 
bent beam. Then the deviation y ~ DE of the neutral axis of the beat 
beam at any point D from the axis OX is given by the relation , 

d 2 y M 1 

dx 2 ~EV 
where M is the bending moment and I the amount of inertia of the 
beam at D, and E is the coefficient of elasticity. It is usually 
accurate enough in deflection calculations to take for I the moment of 
inertia at the centre of the beam and to consider it constant for the 
length of the beam. Then 



dx~ 



Mdx 



■m 



Mdx*. 



The integration can be performed when M is expressed in terms of *. 
Thus for a beam supported at the ends and loaded with w per inch 
length M =w (a 2 — x 2 ), where a is the half span. Then the deflection 
at the centre is the value of 
y for x = a, and is 

5 o'O 4 
a= i4"ET 

The radius of curvature of 
the beam at D is given by 
the relation 

R = EI/M. 
37. Graphic Method of 
finding Deflection. — Divide 
the span L into any con- 
venient number n of equal 
parts of length /, so that 
«/ = L; compute the radii 
of curvature Ri, R 2 , R3 for 
the several sections. Let 
measurements along the beam be represented according to any 
convenient scale, so that calling Li and h the lengths to be drawn on 
paper ,we have L = 0L1 ; now let n, ri, r z be a series of radii such that 
7i = Ri/a&, ra = Rj/o6, &c, where b is any convenient constant chosen 
of such magnitude as will allow arcs with the radii, r\, r±, &c., to be 
drawn with the means at the draughtsman's disposal. Draw a curve 




Fig. 71. 



BRIDGET— BRIDGETT 



557 



as shown in fig. 72 with arcs of the length h, h, h, &c, and with the 
radii n, ri, &c. (note, for a length \h at each end the radius will be 
infinite, and the curve must end with a straight line tangent to the 
last arc), then let v be the measured deflection of this curve from the 
straight line, and V the actual deflection of the bridge; we have 
V=*av/b, approximately. This method distorts the curve, so that 
vertical ordinates of the curve are drawn to a scale b times greater 
than that of the horizontal ordinates. Thus if the horizontal scale 
be one-tenth of an inch to the foot, a = 120, and a beam 100 ft. in 
length would be drawn equal to 10 in.; then if the true radius at 
the centre were 10,000 ft., this radius, if the curve were undistorted, 




would be on paper 1000 in., but making b = 50 we can draw the curve 
with a radius of 20 in. The vertical distortion of the curve must not 
be so great that there is a very sensible difference between the length 
of the arc and its chord. This can be regulated by altering the value 
of b. In fig. 72 distortion is carried too far ; this figure is merely used 
as an illustration. 

38. Camber. — In order that a girder may become straight under 
its working loa*l it should be constructed with a camber or upward 
convexity equal to the calculated deflection. Owing to the yielding 
of joints when a beam is first loaded a smaller modulus of elasticity 
should be taken than for a solid bar. For riveted girders E is about 
17,500,000 lb per sq. in. for first loading. W. J. M. Rankine gives 
the approximate rule 
f Working deflection = S = Plio,oooh, 

where I is the span and h the depth of the beam, the stresses 
being those usual in bridgework, due to the total dead and live 
load. (W. C. U.) 

BRIDGET, SAINT, more properly Brigid (c. 452-523), one 
of the patron saints of Ireland, was born at Faughart in county 
Louth, her father being a prince of Ulster. Refusing to marry, 
she chose a life of seclusion, making her cell, the first in Ireland, 
under a large oak tree, whence the place was called Kil-dara, 
" the church of the oak." The city cf Kildare is supposed to 
derive its name from St Brigid's cell. The year of her death is 
generally placed in 523. She was buried at Kildare, but her 
remains were afterwards translated to Downpatrick, where they 
were laid beside the bodies of St Patrick and St Columba. Her 
feast is celebrated on the 1st of February. A large collection of 
miraculous stories clustered round her name, and her reputation 
was not confined to Ireland, for, under the name of St Bride, 
she became a favourite saint in England, and numerous churches 
were dedicated to her in Scotland. 

See the five lives given in the Bollandist Ada Sanctorum, Feb. 1, 
i. 99, 119, 950. Cf. Whitley-Stokes, Three Middle-Irish Homilies 
on the Lives of Saint Patrick, Brigit and Columba (Calcutta, 1874) ; 
Colgan, Acta SS. Hiberniae; D. O'Hanlon, Lives of Irish Saints, vol. 
ii.; Knowles, Life of St Bfigid (1907); further bibliography in 
Ulysse Chevalier, Repertoire aes sources hist. Bio.-Bibl. (2nd ed., 
Paris, 1905), s.v. 

BRIDGET, Brigitta, Birgitta, OF SWEDEN, SAINT (c. 1302- 
i373)> the most celebrated saint of the northern kingdoms, was 
the daughter of Birger Persson, governor and lagman (provincial 
judge) of Uppland, and one of the richest landowners of the 
country. In 13 16 she was married to Ulf Gudmarson, lord of 
Nericia,' to whom she bore eight children, one of whom was 



afterwards honoured as St Catherine of Sweden. Bridget's 
saintly and charitable life soon made her known far and wide; 
she gained, too, great religious influence over her husband, with 
whom (1341-1343) she went on pilgrimage to St James of 
Compostella. In 1344, shortly after their return, Ulf died in 
the Cistercian monastery of Alvastra in East Gothland, and 
Bridget now devoted herself wholly to religion. As a child she 
had already believed herself to have visions; these now became 
more frequent, and her records of these " revelations," which 
were tanslated into Latin by Matthias, canon of Linkoping, and 
by her confessor, Peter, prior of Alvastra, obtained a great 
vogue during the middle ages. It was about this time that she 
founded the order of St Saviour, or Bridgittines (q.v.), of which 
the principal house, at Vadstena, was richly endowed by King 
Magnus II. and his queen. About 1350 she went to Rome; 
partly to obtain from the pope the authorization of the new 
order, partly in pursuance of her self-imposed mission to elevate 
the moral tone of the age. It was not till 1370 that Pope 
Urban V. confirmed the rule of her order; but meanwhile 
Bridget had made herself universally beloved in Rome by her 
kindness and good works. Save for occasional pilgrimages, 
including one to Jerusalem in 1373, she remained in Rome till 
her death on the 23rd of July 1373. She was canonized in 1391 
by Pope Boniface IX., and her feast is celebrated on the 9th of 
October. 

Bibliography. — Cf. the Bollandist Acta Sanctorum, Oct. 8, iv. 
368-560; the Vita Sanctae Brigittae, edited by C. Annerstedt in 
Scriptores rerum Suedicarum medii aevi, iii. 185-244 (Upsala, 1871). 
The best modern work on the subject is by the comtesse Catherine 
de Flavigny, entitled Sainte Brigitte de Suede, sa vie, ses revSlalions 
et son muvre (Paris, 1892), which contains an exhaustive bibliography. 
The Revelations are contained in the critical edition of St Bridget's 
works published by the Swedish Historical Society and edited by 
G. E. Klemming (Stockholm, 1857-1884, 11 vols.). For full biblio- 
graphy (to 1904) see Ulysse Chevalier, Repertoire des sources hist. 
Bio.-Bibl., s.v. " Brigitte. 

BRIDGETON, a city, port of entry, and the county-seat of 
Cumberland county, New Jersey, U.S.A., in the south part of the 
state, on Cohansey creek, 38 m. S. of Philadelphia. Pop. (1890) 
11,424; (1900) 13,913, of whom 653 were foreign-born and 701 
were negroes; (1905) 13,624; (1910) 14,209. It is served by the 
West Jersey & Sea Shore and the Central of New Jersey railways', 
by electric railways connecting with adjacent towns, and by 
Delaware river steamboats on Cohansey creek, which is navigable 
to this point. It is an attractive residential city, has a park of 
650 acres and a fine public library, and is the seat of West Jersey 
academy and of Ivy Hall, a school for girls. It is an important 
market town and distributing centre for a rich agricultural 
region; among its manufactures are glass (the product, chiefly 
glass bottles, being valued in 1905 at $1,252,795 — 42-3% of 
the value of all the city's factory products — and Bridgeton 
ranking eighth among the cities of the United States in ; this 
industry), machinery, clothing, and canned fruits and vegetables; 
it also has dyeing and finishing works. Though Bridgeton is a 
port of entry, its foreign commerce is relatively unimportant. 
The first settlement in what is now Bridgeton was made toward 
the close of the 18th century. A pioneer iron- works was estab- 
lished here in 1814. The city of Bridgeton, formed by the union 
of the township of Bridgeton and the township of Cohansey 
(incorporated in 1845 and 1848 respectively), was chartered 
in 1864. 

BRIDGETT, THOMAS EDWARD (1829- 1899), Roman 
Catholic priest and historical writer, was born at Derby on the 
20th of January 1829. He was brought up a Baptist, but in his 
sixteenth year joined the Church of England. In 1847 he entered 
St John's College, Cambridge, with the intention of taking orders. 
Being unable to subscribe to the Thirty-Nine Articles he could 
not take his degree, and in 1850 became a Roman Catholic, soon 
afterwards joining the Congregation of the Redemptorists. He 
went through his novitiate at St Trond in Belgium, and after 
a course of five years of theological study at Wittem, in Holland, 
was ordained priest. He returned to England in 1856, and for 
over forty years led an active life as a missioned in England and 
Ireland, preaching in over 80 missions and 140 retreats to the 



S5» 



BRIDGEWATER— -BRIDGITTINES 



clergy and to nuns. His stay' in Limerick was particularly 
successful, and he founded a religious confraternity of laymen 
which numbered 5000 members. Despite his arduous life as a 
priest, Bridgett found time to produce literary works of value, 
chiefly dealing with the history of the Reformation in England; 
among these are The Life of Blessed John Fisher, Bishop of 
Rochester (18S8); The Life and Writings of Sir Thomas More 
(1890); History of the Eucharist in Great Britain (2 vols., 1881); 
Our Lady's Dowry (1875, 3rd ed. 1890). He died at Clapham on 
the 17 th of February 1899. 

For a complete list of Bridgett's works see The Life of Father 
Bridgett, by C. Ryder (London, 1906). 

BRIDGEWATER, FRANCIS EGERTON, 3 rp Duke of (1736- 
1803), the originator of British inland navigation, younger son 
of the 1st duke, was born on the 21st of May 1736. Scroop, 1st 
duke of Bridgewater (1681-1745), was the son of the 3rd earl of 
Bridgewater, and was created a duke in 1720; he was the great- 
grandson of John Egerton, 1st earl of Bridgewater (d. 1649; cr. 
1617), whose name is associated with the production of Milton's 
Comus; and the latter was the son of Sir Thomas Egerton 
(1540-1617), Queen Elizabeth's lord keeper and James I.'s lord 
chancellor, who was created baron of Ellesmere in 1603, and in 
1616 Viscount Brackley (q.v.). 

Francis Egerton succeeded to the dukedom at the age of twelve 
on the death of his brother, the 2nd duke. As a child he was 
sickly and of such unpromising intellectual capacity that at 
one time the idea of cutting the entail was seriously entertained. 
Shortly after attaining his majority he became engaged to the 
beautiful duchess of Hamilton, but her refusal to give up the 
acquaintance of her sister, Lady Coventry, led to the breaking 
off of the match. Thereupon the duke broke up his London 
establishment, and retiring to his estate at Worsley, devoted 
himself to the making of canals. The navigable canal from 
Worsley to Manchester which he projected for the transport of 
the coal obtained on his estates was (with the exception of the 
Sankey canal) the first great undertaking of the kind executed 
in Great Britain in modern times. The construction of this 
remarkable work, with its famous aqueduct across the Irwell, 
was carried out by James Brindley, the celebrated engineer. 
The completion of this canal led the duke to undertake a still 
more ambitious work. In 1762 he obtained parliamentary 
powers to provide an improved waterway between Liverpool 
and Manchester by means of a canal. The difficulties 
encountered in the execution of the latter work were still more 
formidable than those of the Worsley canal, involving, as they 
did, the carrying of the canal over Sale Moor Moss. But the 
genius of Brindley, his engineer, proved superior to all obstacles, 
and though at one period of the undertaking the financial re- 
sources of the duke were almost exhausted, the work was carried 
to a triumphant conclusion. The untiring perseverance displayed 
by the duke in surmounting the various difficulties that retarded 
the accomplishment of his projects, together with the pecuniary 
restrictions he imposed on himself in order to supply the necessary 
capital (at one time he reduced his personal expenses to £400 
a year), affords an instructive example of that energy and self- 
denial on which the success of great undertakings so much 
depends. Both these canals were completed when the duke 
was only thirty-six years of age, and the remainder of his life 
was spent in extending them and in improving his estates ; 
and during the latter years of his life he derived a princely 
income from the success of his enterprise. Though a steady 
supporter of Pitt's administration, he never took any prominent 
part in politics. 

He died unmarried on the 8th of March 1803, when the ducal 
title became extinct, but the earldom of Bridgewater passed to a 
cousin, John William Egerton, who became 7th earl. By his 
will he devised his canals and estates on trust, under which 
his nephew, the marquess of Stafford (afterwards first duke of 
Sutherland) , became the first beneficiary, and next his son Francis 
Leveson Gower (afterwards first earl of Ellesmere) and his issue. 
In order that the trust should last as long as possible, an extra- 
ordinary use was made of the legal rule that property may be 



settled for the duration of lives in being and twenty-one years 
after, by choosing a great number of persons connected with 
the duke and their living issue and adding to them the peers 
who had taken their seats in the House of Lords on or before 
the duke's decease. Though the last of the peers died in 1857, 
one of the commoners survived till the 19th of October 1883, and 
consequently the trust did not expire till the 19th of October 
1903, when the whole property passed under the undivided 
control of the earl of Ellesmere. The capals, however, had in 
1872 been transferred to the Bridgewater Navigation Company, 
by whom they were sold in 1887 to the Manchester Ship Canal 
Company. 

BRIDGEWATER, FRANCIS HENRY EGERTON, 8th Earl of 
(1756-182Q), was educated at Eton and Christ Church, Oxford, 
and became fellow of All Souls in 1780, and F.R.S. in 1781. He 
held the rectories of Middle and Whitchurch in Shropshire, 
but the duties were performed by a proxy. He succeeded his 
brother (see above) in the earldom in 1823, and spent the latter 
part of his life in Paris. He was a fair scholar, and a zealous 
naturalist and antiquarian. When he died in February 1829 
the earldom became extinct. He bequeathed to the British 
Museum the valuable Egerton MSS. dealing with the literature 
of France and Italy, and also £1 2,000. He also left £8000 at the 
disposal of the president of the Royal Society, to be paid to the 
author or authors who might be selected to write and publish 
1000 copies of a treatise " On the Power, Wisdom and Goodness 
' of God, as manifested in the Creation." Mr Davies Gilbert, 
who then filled the office, selected eight persons, each to under- 
take a branch of this subject, and each to receive £1000 as his 
reward, together with any benefit that might accrue from the 
sale of his work, according to the will of the testator. 

The Bridgewater treatises were published as follows: — 1. The 
Adaptation of External Nature to the Moral and Intellectual Condition 
of Man, by Thomas Chalmers, D. D. 2. The Adaptation of External 
Nature to the Physical Condition of Man, by John Kidd, M. D. 
3. Astronomy and General Physics considered with reference to Natural 
Theology, by William Whewell, D. D. 4. The Hand, its Mechanism 
and Vital Endowments as evincing Design, by Sir Charles Bell. 
5. Animal and Vegetable Physiology considered with reference to Natural 
Theology, by Peter Mark Roget. 6. Geology and Mineralogy con- 
sidered with reference to Natural Theology, by William Buckland, D.D. 
7. The Habits and Instincts of Animals with reference to Natural 
Theology, by William Kirby. 8. Chemistry, Meteorology, and the 
Function of Digestion, considered with reference to Natural Theology, 
by William Prout, M.D. The works are of unequal merit; several 
of them took a high rank in apologetic literature. They first appeared 
during the years 1833 to r 840, and afterwards in Bohn's Scientific 
Library. 

BRIDGITTINES, an order of Augustinian canonesses founded 
by St Bridget of Sweden (q.v.) c. 1350, and approved by Urban V. 
in 1370. It was a " double order," each convent having attached 
to it a small community of canons to act as chaplains, but under 
the government of the abbess. The order spread widely in 
Sweden and Norway, and played a remarkable part in promoting 
culture and literature in Scandinavia; to this is to be attributed 
the fact that the head house at Vastein, by Lake Vetter, was 
not suppressed till 1595. There were houses also in other lands, 
so that the total number amounted to 80. In England, the 
famous Bridgittine convent of Syon at Isleworth, Middlesex, 
was founded and royally endowed by Henry V. in 1415, and 
became one of the richest and most fashionable and influential 
nunneries in the country. It was among the few religious houses 
restored in Mary's reign, when nearly twenty of the old com- 
munity were re-established at Syon. On Elizabeth's accession 
they migrated to the Low Countries, and thence, after many 
vicissitudes, to Rouen, and finally in 1 594 to Lisbon. Here they 
remained, always recruiting their numbers from England, till 
1 861, when they returned to England. Syon House is now 
established at Chudleigh in Devon, the only English community 
that can boast an unbroken conventual existence since pre- 
Reformation times. Some six other Bridgittine convents exist 
on the Continent, but the order is now composed only of women. 

See Helyot, Histoire des ordres religieux (171 5), iv. c. 4; Max 
Heimbucher, Orden u. Kongregationen (1907), ii. § 83; Herzog- 
Hauck, Realencyklopadie (ed. 3), art. " Birgitta "; A. Hamilton in 
Dublin Review, 1888, " The Nuns of Syon." (E. C. B.) 



BRIDGMAN— BRIDGNORTH 



559 



BRIDGMAN, FREDERICK ARTHUR (1847- •), American 
artist, was born at Tuskegee, Alabama, on the 10th of November 
1847. He began as a draughtsman in New York for the American 
Bank Note Company in 1864-1865, and studied art in the same 
years at the Brooklyn Art School and at the National Academy 
of Design; but he went to Paris in 1866 and became a pupil of 
J. L. Ger6me. Paris then became his headquarters. A trip to 
Egypt in 1873-1874 resulted in pictures of the East that attracted 
immediate attention, and his large and important composition, 
" The Funeral Procession of a Mummy on the Nile," in the Paris 
Salon (1877), bought by James Gordon Bennett, brought him 
the cross of the Legion of Honour. Other paintings by him were 
"An American Circus in Normandy," "Procession of the Bull 
Apis " (now in the Corcoran Art Gallery, Washington), and a 
" Rumanian Lady " (in the Temple collection, Philadelphia). 

BRIDGMAN, LAURA DEWEY (1829-1889), American blind 
deaf-mute, was born on the 21st of December 1829 at Hanover, 
New Hampshire, U.S.A., being the third daughter of Daniel 
Bridgman (d. 1868), a substantial Baptist farmer, and his wife 
Harmony, daughter of Cushman Downer, and grand-daughter 
of Joseph Downer, one of the five first settlers (1761) of Thetford, 
Vermont. Laura was a delicate infant, puny and rickety, and 
was subject to fits up to twenty months old, but otherwise 
seemed to have normal senses; at two years, however, she had 
a very bad attack of scarlet fever, which destroyed sight and 
hearing, blunted the sense of smell, and left her system a wreck. 
Though she gradually recovered health she remained a blind 
deaf-mute, but was kindly treated and was in particular made a 
sort of playmate by an eccentric bachelor friend of the Bridgmans, 
Mr Asa Tenney, who as soon as she could walk used to take her 
for rambles a-field. In 1837 Mr James Barrett, of Dartmouth 
College, saw her and mentioned her case to Dr Mussey, the head 
of the medical department, who wrote an account which attracted 
the attention of Dr S. G. Howe (q.v.), the head of the Perkins 
Institution for the Blind at Boston. He determined to try to 
get the child into the Institution and to attempt to educate her; 
her parents assented, and in October 1837 Laura entered the 
school. Though the loss of her eye-balls occasioned some 
deformity, she was otherwise a comely child and of a sensitive 
and affectionate nature; she had become familiar with the 
world about her, and was imitative in so far as she could follow 
the actions of others; but she was limited in her communication 
with others to the narrower uses of touch — patting her head 
meant approval, rubbing her hand disapproval, pushing one way 
meant to go, drawing another to come. Her mother, preoccupied 
with house-work, had already ceased to be able to control her, 
and her father's authority was due to fear of superior force, not 
to reason. Dr Howe at once set himself to teach her the alphabet 
by touch. It is impossible, for reasons of space, to describe his 
efforts in detail. He taught words before the individual letters, 
and his first experiment consisting in pasting upon several 
common articles such as keys, spoons, knives, &c, little paper 
labels with the names of the articles printed in raised letters, 
which he got her to feel and differentiate; then he gave her the 
same labels by themselves, which she learnt to associate with the 
articles they referred to, until, with the spoon or knife alone 
before her she could find the right label for each from a mixed 
heap. The next stage was to give her the component letters and 
teach her to combine them in the words she knew, and gradually 
in this way she learnt all the alphabet and the ten digits, &c. 
The whole process depended, of course, on her having a human 
intelligence, which only, required stimulation, and her own 
interest in learning became keener as she progressed. On the 
24th of July 1830 she first wrote her own name legibly. Dr 
Howe devoted himself with the utmost patience and assiduity 
to her education and was rewarded by increasing success. On 
the 20th of June 1840 she had her first arithmetic lesson, by the 
aid of a metallic case perforated with square holes, square types 
Deing used; and in nineteen days she could add a column of 
ngures amounting to thirty. She was in good health and happy, 
*nd was treated by Dr Howe as his daughter. Her case already 
began to interest the public, and others were brought to Dr Howe 



for treatment. In 1841 Laura began to keep a journal, in which 
she recorded her own day's work and thoughts. In January 
1842 Charles Dickens visited the Institution, and afterwards 
wrote enthusiastically in American' Notes of Dr Howe's success 
with Laura. In 1843 funds were obtained for devoting a special 
teacher to her, and first Miss Swift, then Miss Wight, and then 
Miss Paddock, were appointed; Laura by this time was learning 
geography and elementary astronomy. By degrees she v is 
given religious instruction, but Dr Howe was intent upon not 
inculcating dogma before she had grasped the essential moral 
truths of Christianity and the story of the Bible. She grew up 
a gay, cheerful girl, loving, optimistic, but with a nervous system 
inclining to irritability, and requiring careful education in self- 
control. In i860 her eldest sister Mary's death helped to bring 
on a religious crisis, and through the influence of some of her 
family she was received into the Baptist church; she became 
for some years after this more self-conscious and rather pietistic. 
In 1867 she began writing compositions which she called poems; 
the best-known is called " Holy Home." In 1872, Dr Howe 
having been enabled to build some separate cottages (each under 
a matron) for the blind girls, Laura was moved from the larger 
house of the Institution into one of them, and there she continued 
her quiet life. The death of Dr Howe in 1876 was a great grief 
to her; but before he died he had made arrangements by which 
she would be financially provided for in her home at the Institu- 
tion for the rest of her life. In 1887 her jubilee was celebrated 
there, but in 1889 she was taken ill, and she died on the 24th of 
May. She was buried at Hanover. Her name has become 
familiar everywhere as an example of the education of a blind 
deaf-mute, leading to even greater results in Helen Keller. 

See Laura Bridgman, by Maud Howe and Florence Howe Hal! 
(1903), which contains a bibliography; and Life and Education of 
Laura Dewey Bridgman (1878), by Mary S. Lamson. (H. Ch.) 

BRIDGNORTH, a market town and municipal borough in the 
Ludlow parliamentary division of Shropshire, England, 150 m. 
N.W. by W. from London by the Great Western railway, on 
the Worcester-Shrewsbury line. Pop. (1901) 6052. The river 
Severn separates the upper town on the right bank from the 
lower on the left. A steep line of rail connects them. The upper 
town is built on the acclivities and summit of a rock which rises 
abruptly from the river to the height of 180 ft., and gives the 
town a very picturesque appearance. The railway passes under 
by a long tunnel. On the summit is the tower of the old castle, 
leaning about 17 from the perpendicular. There are also two 
parish churches. That of St Leonard, formerly collegiate, was 
practically rebuilt in 1862. This parish was held by Richard 
Baxter, the famous divine, in 1640. St Mary's church is in classic 
style of the late 18th century. The picturesque half-timbered 
style of domestic building is frequently seen in the streets. In 
this style are the town hall (1652), and a house dated 1580, in 
which was born in 1729 Thomas Percy, bishop of Dromore, the 
editor of the Reliques of Ancient English Poetry. The grammar 
school, founded in 1503, occupies an Elizabethan building; 
there are also a college of divinity, a blue-coat school, and a 
literary institute with library and school of art. There are 
large charities. Near the town is a curious ancient hermitage 
cave, in the sandstone. At Quatford, 1 m. south-east, the site 
of a castle dating from 1085 may be traced. This dominated 
the ancient Forest of Morf. Here Robert de Belesme originally 
founded the college which was afterwards moved to Bridgnorth. 
Bridgnorth manufactures carpets; brewing is carried on, and 
there is trade in agricultural produce. The town is governed 
by a mayor, 4 aldermen and 12 councillors. Area, 3018 acres. 

The early history of Bridgnorth is connected with ^Ethelfleda, lady 
of the Mercians, who raised a mound there in 912 as part of her 
offensive policy against the Danes of the five boroughs. After the 
Conquest William I. granted the manor of Bridgnorth to Earl Roger 
of Shrewsbury, whose son Robert de Belesme transferred his castle 
and borough from Quatford to Bridgnorth, but on Robert's attainder 
in 1 102 the town became a royal borough. It is probable that 
Henry I. granted the burgesses certain privileges, for Henry II. 
confirmed to them all the franchises and customs which they had 
in the time of Henry I. King John in 1215 granted them freedom 
from toll throughout England except the city of London, and in 



56o 



BRIDGWATER— BRIDPORT, LORD 



1227 Henry III. conferred several new rights and liberties, among 
which were a gild merchant with a hanse. These early charters were 
confirmed by several succeeding kings, Henry VI. granting in addi- 
tion assize of bread and ale and other privileges. Bridgnorth was 
incorporated by James I. in 1546. The burgesses returned two 
members to parliament in 1295, an d continued to do so until 1867, 
when they were assigned only one member. The town was dis- 
franchised in 1885. A yearly fair on the feast of the Translation of 
St Leonard and three following days was granted to the burgesses in 
1359, and in 1630 Charles I. granted them licence to hold another 
fair on the Thursday before the first week in Lent and two following 
days. 

BRIDGWATER, a market town, port and municipal borough 
in the Bridgwater parliamentary division of Somerset, England, 
on the river Parret, 10 m. from its mouth, and 151J m. by the 
Great Western railway W. by S. of London. Pop. (1901) 15,209. 
It is pleasantly situated in a level and well-wooded country, 
having on the east the Mendip range and on the west the 
Quantock hills. The town lies along both sides of the river, 
here crossed by a handsome iron bridge. Among several places 
of worship the chief is St Mary Magdalene's church; this has 
a north porch and windows dating from the 14th century, 
besides a lofty and slender spire; but it has been much altered 
by restoration. It possesses a fine painted reredos. A house 
in Blake Street, largely restored, was the birthplace of Admiral 
Blake in 1598. Near the town are the three fine old churches 
of Weston Zoyland, Chedzoy and Middlezoy, containing some 
good brasses and carved woodwork. The battlefield of Sedge- 
moor, where the Monmouth rebellion was finally crushed in 
1685, is within 3 m.; while not far off is Charlinch, the home 
of the Agapemonites (?.».). Bridgwater has a considerable 
coasting trade, importing grain, coal, wine, hemp, tallow and 
timber, and exporting Bath brick, farm produce, earthenware, 
cement and plaster of Paris. The river is navigable by vessels 
of 700 tons, though liable, when spring- tides are flowing, to a bore 
which rises, in rough weather, to a height of 9 ft. Bath brick, 
manufactured only here, and made of the mingled sand and clay 
deposited by every tide, is the staple article of commerce; 
iron-founding is also carried on. The town is governed by a 
mayor, 6 aldermen and 18 councillors. Area, 926 acres. 

A settlement probably grew up in Saxon times at Bridgwater 
{Briges, Briggewalteri, Brigewauter) , owing its origin as a trade centre 
to its position at the mouth of the chief river in Somerset. It became 
a mesne borough by the charter granted by John in 1201, which 
provided that the town should be a free borough, the burgesses to be 
free and quit of all tolls, and made William de Briwere overlord. 
Other charters were granted by Henry III. in 1227 (confirmed in 
1318, 1370, 1380), which gave Bridgwater a gild merchant. It was 
incorporated by charter of Edward IV. (1468), confirmed in 1554, 
1586, 1629 and 1684. Parliamentary representation began in 1295 
and continued until the Reform Act of 1870. A Saturday market 
and a fair on the 24th of June were granted by the charter of 1201. 
Another fair at the beginning of Lent was added in 1468, and a 
second market on Thursday, and fairs at Midsummer and on the 
21st of September were added in 1554. Charles II. granted another 
fair on the 29th of December. The medieval importance of these 
markets and fairs for the sale of wool and wine and later of cloth 
has gone. The shipping trade of the port revived after the con- 
struction of the new dock in 1841, and corn and timber have been 
imported for centuries. 

See S. G. Jarman, " History of Bridgwater," Historical MSS. 
Commission, Report 9, Appendix; Victoria County History: Somerset, 
vol. ii. 

BRIDLINGTON, a market town, municipal borough and 
seaside resort in the Buckrose parliamentary division of the 
East Riding of Yorkshire, England, 31 m. N.N.E. from Hull 
by a branch of the North Eastern railway. Pop. (1891) 8919; 
(1901) 12,482. It is divided into two parts, the ancient market 
town lying about 1 m. from the coast, while the modern houses 
of Bridlington Quay, the watering-place, fringe the shore of 
Bridlington Bay. Southward the coast becomes low, but 
northward it is steep and very fine, where the great spur of 
Flambprough Head (q.v.) projects eastward. In the old town of 
Bridlington the church of St Mary and St Nicholas consists 
of the fine Decorated and Perpendicular nave, with Early 
English portions, of the priory church of an Augustinian founda- 
tion of the time of Henry I. There remains also the Perpen- 
dicular gateway, serving as the town-hall. The founder of the 
priory was Walter de Gaunt, about n 14, and the institution 



flourished until 1537, when the last prior was executed; for. taking 
part in the Pilgrimage of Grace. A Congregational society was 
founded in 1662, and its old church, dating from 1702, stood until 
1906. At Bridlington Quay there is excellent sea-bathing, and 
the parade and ornamental gardens provide pleasant promenades. 
Extensive works have been carried out along the sea front. 
There is a chalybeate spring. The harbour is enclosed by 
two stone piers, and there is good anchorage in the bay. The 
municipal borough is under a mayor, 6 aldermen and 18 coun- 
cillors, and has an area of 2751 acres. 

The mention of four burgesses at Bridlington (Brellington, Burling- 
ton) in the Domesday survey shows it to have been a borough before 
the Conquest. With the rest of the north of England, Bridlington 
suffered from the ravages of the Normans, and decreased in value 
from £32 in the reign of Edward the Confessor, when it formed part 
of the possessions of Earl Morcar, to 8s. at the time of the Domesday 
survey. By that time it was in the hands of the king by the forfeiture 
of Earl Morcar. It was granted by William II. to Gilbert de Gaunt, 
whose son and heir Walter founded the priory and endowed it with 
the manor of Bridlington and other lands. From this date the 
importance of the town steadily increased. Henry I. and several 
succeeding kings confirmed Walter de Gaunt's gift, Stephen granting 
in addition the right to have a port. In 1546 Henry IV. granted the 
prior and convent exemption from fifteenths, tenths and subsidies, 
in return for prayer for himself and his queen in every mass sung at 
the high altar. After the Dissolution the manor remained with the 
crown until 1624, when Charles I. granted it to Sir John Ramsey, 
whose brother and heir, Sir George Ramsey, sold it in 1633 to thirteen 
inhabitants of the town on behalf of all the tenants of the manor. 
The thirteen lords were assisted by twelve other inhabitants chosen 
by the freeholders, and when the number of lords was reduced to six, 
seven others were chosen from the assistants. A chief lord was chosen 
every year. This system still holds good. It is evident from the 
fact of thirteen inhabitants being allowed to hold the manor that 
the town had some kind of incorporation in the 17th century, 
although its incorporation charter was not granted until 1899, 
when it was created a municipal borough. In 1200 King John 
granted the prior of Bridlington a weekly market on Saturday and 
ah annual fair on the vigil, feast and morrow of the Assumption of the 
Virgin Mary. Henry VI. in 1446 granted the prior three new fairs 
yearly on the vigil, day and morrow of the Nativity of the Virgin 
Mary, the Deposition of St John, late prior of Bridlington, and the 
Translation of the same St John. All fairs and markets were sold 
with the manor to the inhabitants of the town. 

See J. Thompson, Historical Sketches of Bridlington (1821); 
Victoria County History: Yorkshire. 

BRIDPORT, ALEXANDER HOOD, Viscount (1727-1814), 
British admiral, was the younger brother of Samuel, Lord Hood; 
and cousin of Sir Samuel and Captain Alexander Hood. Entering 
the navy in January 1741, he was appointed lieutenant of the 
" Bridgewater " six years later, and in that rank served for ten 
years in various ships. He was then posted to the " Prince," 
the flag-ship of Rear- Admiral Saunders (under whom Hood 
had served as a lieutenant) and in this command served in 
the Mediterranean for some time. 'Returning home, he was 
appointed to the " Minerva " frigate, in which he was present 
at Hawke's great victory in Quiberon Bay (20th November 1750) •■ 
In 1 761 the " Minerva " recaptured, after a long struggle, the 
" Warwick " of equal force, and later in the same year Captain 
Alexander Hood went in the " Africa " to the Mediterranean, 
where he served until the conclusion of peace. From this time 
forward he was in continuous employment afloat and ashore, 
and in the " Robust " was present at the battle of Ushant in 
1778. Hood was involved in the court-martial on Admiral 
(afterwards Viscount) Keppel which followed this action, and 
although adverse popular feeling was aroused by the course 
which he took in Keppel's defence, his conduct does not seem 
to have injured his prof essional career. Two years later he was 
made rear-admiral of the white, and succeeded Kempenfeldt 
as one of Howe's flag-officers, and in the "Queen" (90) he was 
present at the relief of Gibraltar in 1782. For a time he sat 
in the House of Commons. Promoted vice-admiral in ^87, 
he became K.B. in the following year, and on the occasion of 
the Spanish armament in 1790 flew his flag again for a short time. 
On the outbreak of the war with France in 1793 Sir Alexander 
Hood once more went to sea, this time as Howe's second in 
command, and he had. his share in the operations which cul- 
minated in the " Glorious First of June," and for his services 
was made Baron Bridport of Cricket St Thomas in Somerset 



BRIDPORT— BRIEF 



561 



in the Irish peerage. Henceforth Bridport was practically in 
independent command. In 1795 he fought the much-criticized 
partial action of the 23rd of June off Belle-Ile, which, however 
unfavourably it was regarded in some quarters, was counted as 
a great victory by the public. Bridport's peerage was made 
English, and he became vice-admiral of England. In 1706-1707 
he practically directed the war from London, rarely hoisting 
his flag afloat save at such critical times as that of the Irish 
expedition in 1797. In the following year he was about to put 
to sea when the Spithead fleet mutinied. He succeeded at first 
in pacifying the crew of his flag-ship, who had no personal grudge 
against their admiral, but a few days later the mutiny broke out 
afresh, and this time was uncontrollable. For a whole week the 
mutineers were supreme, and it was only by the greatest exertions 
of the old Lord Howe that order was then restored and the men 
returned to duty. After the mutiny had been suppressed, 
Bridport took the fleet to sea as commander-in-chief in name as 
well as in fact, and from 1798 to 1800 personally directed the 
blockade of Brest, which grew stricter and stricter as time went 
on. In 1800 he was relieved by St Vincent, and retired from 
active duty after fifty-nine years' service. In reward for his 
fine record his peerage was made a viscounty. He spent the 
remaining years of his life in retirement. He died on the 2nd of 
May 18 14. The viscounty in the English peerage died with him; 
the Irish barony passed to the younger branch of his brother's 
family, for whom the viscounty was recreated in 1868. 

See Charnock, Biographia Navalis, vi. 153; Naval Chronicle, i. 
265 ; Ralfe, Nav. Biog. i. 202. 

BRIDPORT, a market town and municipal borough in the 
Western parliamentary division of Dorsetshire, England, 18 m. 
N.W. of Dorchester, on a branch of the Great Western railway. 
Pop. (1901) 5710. It is pleasantly situated in a hilly district on 
the river Brit, from which it takes its name. The main part of 
the town is about a mile from the sea, with which it is connected 
by a winding street, ending at a quay surrounded by the fishing 
village of West Bay, where the railway terminates. The church 
of St Mary is a handsome cruciform Perpendicular building. 
The harbour is accessible only to small vessels. There is some 
import trade in flax, timber and coal. The principal articles 
of manufacture have long been sailcloth, cordage, linen and 
fishing-nets. The municipal borough is under a mayor, 6 
aldermen and 18 councillors. Area, 593 acres. 

Bridport was evidently of some importance before the Conquest, 
when it consisted of 120 houses rated for all the king's services and 
paying geld for five hides. By 1086 the number of houses had 
decreased to 100, and of these 20 were in such a wretched condition 
that they could not pay geld. The town is first mentioned as a 
borough in the Pipe Roll of 1 189, which states that William de 
Bendenges owed fy: 10s. for the ancient farm of Bridport, and that 
the men of the town owed tallage to the amount of 53s. iod. Henry 
III. granted the first charter in 1252-1253, making the town a free 
borough and granting the burgesses the right to hold it at the 
ancient fee farm with an increase of 40s., and to choose two bailiffs 
to answer at the exchequer for the farm. A deed of 1381 shows that 
Henry III. also granted the burgesses freedom from toll. Bridport 
was incorporated by James I. in 1619, but Charles II. granted a new 
charter in 1667, and by this the town was governed until 1835. The 
first existing grant of a market and fairs to Bridport is dated 1593, 
but it appears from the Quo Warranto Rolls that Edward I. possessed 
a market there. The town was noted for the manufacture of ropes 
and cables as early as 12 13, and an act of parliament (21 Henry 
VIII.) shows that the inhabitants had " from time out of mind 
made the cables, ropes and hawsers for the royal navy and for most 
of the other ships. Bridport was represented in parliament by two 
members from 1395 to 1867. In the latter year the number was 
reduced to one, and in 1885 the town was disfranchised. 

BRIE (Briegus saltus, from Celtic briek, clay), an agricultural 
district of northern France, to the E. of Paris, bounded W. and 
S. by the Seine, N. by the Marne. It has an area of 2400 sq. m., 
comprising the greater part of the department of Seine-et-Marne, 
together with portions of the departments of Seine, Seine-et-Oise, 
Aisne, Marne and Aube. The western portion was known as the 
Brie franc.aise, the eastern portion as the Brie champenoise. 
The Brie forms a plateau with few eminences, varying in altitude 
between 300 and 500 ft. in the west, and between 500 and 650 ft. 
in the east. Its scenery is varied by forests of some size — the 



chief being the ForSt de Senart, the ForSt de Cr6cy and the Foret 
d'Armainvilliers. The surface soil is clay in which are embedded 
fragments of siliceous sandstone, used for millstones and con- 
structional purposes; the subsoil is limestone. The Yeres, a 
tributary of the Seine, and the Grand Morin and Petit Morin, 
tributaries of the Marne, are the chief rivers, but the region is 
not abundantly watered and the rainfall is only between 20 and 
24 in. The Brie is famous for its grain and its dairy products, 
especially cheeses. 

BRIEF (Lat. brevis, short) , in English legal practice, the written 
statement given to a barrister to form the basis of his case. It 
was probably so called from its at first being only a copy of the 
original writ. Upon a barrister devolves the duty of taking 
charge of a case when it comes into court, but all the preliminary 
work, such as the drawing up of the case, serving papers, mar- 
shalling evidence, &c, is performed by a solicitor, so that a brief 
contains a concise summary for the information of counsel of the 
case which he has to plead, with all material facts in chronological 
order, and frequently such observations thereon as the solicitor 
may think fit to make, the names of witnesses, with the " proofs," 
that is, the nature of the evidence which each witness is ready 
to give, if called upon. The brief may also contain suggestions 
for the use of counsel when cross-examining witnesses called by 
the other side. Accompanying the brief may be copies of the 
pleadings (see Pleading), and of all documents material to the 
case. The brief is always endorsed with the title of the court 
in which the action is to be tried, with the title of the action, and 
the names of the counsel and of the solicitor who delivers the 
brief. Counsel's fee is also marked. The delivery of a brief to 
counsel gives him authority to act for his client in all matters 
which the litigation involves. The result of the action is noted 
on the brief by counsel, or if the action is compromised, the terms 
of the compromise are endorsed on each brief and signed by the 
leading counsel on the opposite side. In Scotland a brief is called 
a memorial. 

In the United States the word has, to a certain extent, a 
different meaning, a brief in its English sense not being required, 
for the American attorney exercises all the functions distributed 
in England between barristers and solicitors. A lawyer sometimes 
prepares for his own use what is called a " trial brief " for use 
at the trial. This corresponds in all essential particulars with 
the " brief " prepared by the solicitor in England for the use of 
counsel. But the more distinctive use of the term in America is 
in the case of the brief " in error or appeal," before an. appellate 
court. This is a written or printed document, varying according 
to circumstances, but embodying the argument on the question 
affected. Most of the appellate courts require the filing of printed 
briefs for the use of the court and opposing counsel at a time 
designated for each side before hearing. In the rules of the 
United States Supreme Court and circuit courts of appeals 
the brief is required to contain a concise statement of the case, 
a specification of errors relied on, including the substance of 
evidence, the admission or rejection of which is to be reviewed, 
or any extract from a charge excepted to, and an argument 
exhibiting clearly the points of law or fact to be discussed. 
This form of brief, it may be added, is also adopted for use at 
the trial in certain states of the Union which require printed 
briefs to be delivered to the court. 

In English ecclesiastical law a brief meant letters patent issued 
out of chancery to churchwardens or other officers for the 
collection of money for church purposes. Such briefs were 
regulated by a statute of 1704, but are now obsolete, though they 
are still to be found named in one of the rubrics in the Communion 
service of the Book of Common Prayer. 

The brief-bag, in which counsel's papers are carried to and 
from court, now forms an integral part of a barrister's outfit, 
but in the early part of the 19th century the possession of a 
brief-bag was strictly confined to those who had received one 
from a king's counsel. King's counsel were then few in number, 
were considered officers of the court, and had a salary of £40 
a year, with a supply of paper, pens and purple bags. These 
bags they distributed among rising juniors of their acquaintance. 



5&2 



BRIEG— BRIENZ 



whose bundles of briefs were getting inconveniently large to be 
carried in their hands. These perquisites were abolished in 1830. 
English brief -bags are now either blue or red. Blue bags are those 
with which barristers provide themselves when first called, and 
it is a breach of etiquette to let this bag be visible in court. The 
only brief-bag allowed to be placed on the desks is the red bag, 
which by English legal etiquette is given by a leading counsel 
to a junior who has been useful to him in some important case. 

BRIEG, a town of Germany, in the Prussian province of 
Silesia, on the left bank of the Oder, and on the Breslau and 
Beuthen railway, 27 m. S.E. of the former city. Pop. (1900) 
24,090. It has a castle (the residence of the old counts of Brieg) , 
a lunatic asylum, a gymnasium with a good library, several 
churches and hospitals, and a theatre. Its fortifications were 
destroyed by the French in 1807, and are now replaced by 
beautiful promenades. Brieg carries on a considerable trade, 
its chief manufactures being linen, embroideries, cotton and 
woollen goods, ribbons, leather, machinery, hats, pasteboard 
and cigars. Important cattle-markets are held here. Brieg, or, 
as it is called in early documents, Civitas Altae Ripae, obtained 
municipal rights in 1250 from Duke Henry III. of Breslau, and 
was fortified in 1297; its name is derived from the Polish Brzeg 
(shore). Burned by the Hussites in 1428, the town was soon 
afterwards rebuilt, and in 1595 it was again fortified by Joachim 
Frederick, duke of Brieg. In the Thirty Years' War it suffered 
greatly; in that of the Austrian succession it was heavily 
bombarded by the Prussian forces; and in 1807 it was captured 
by the French and Bavarians. From 1311 to 1675 Brieg was 
the capital of an independent line of dukes, a cadet branch of 
the Polish dukes of Lower Silesia, by one of whom the castle was 
built in 1341. In 1537 Frederick II., duke of Liegnitz, Brieg 
and Wohlau, concluded with Joachim II., elector of Branden- 
burg, a treaty according to which his duchy was to pass to the 
house of Brandenburg in the event of the extinction of his line. 
On the death of George William the last duke in 1675, however, 
Austria refused to acknowledge the validity of the treaty and 
annexed the duchies. It was the determination of Frederick H*. 
of Prussia to assert his claim that led in 1740 to the war that 
ended two years later in the cession of Silesia to Prussia. 

See Stokvis, Manuel d'histoire, iii. pp. 54, 64. 

BRIEG, often now spelt Brig (Fr. Brigue, Ital. Briga), a 
picturesque small town in the Swiss canton of the Valais, situated 
at the foot of the northern slope of the Simplon Pass, on the 
right bank of the Saltine stream, and a little above its junction 
with the Rhone. Its older houses are very Italian in appearance, 
while its most prominent buildings (castle, former Jesuits' 
college and Ursuline convent) all date from the 17th century, 
and are due to the generosity of a single member of the local 
Stockalper family. The prosperity of Brieg is bound up with 
the Simplon Pass (?.».), so that it gradually supplanted the more 
ancient village of Naters opposite, becoming a separate parish 
(the church is at Glis, a few minutes from the town) in 1517. 
Its medieval name was Briga dives. The opening of the carriage 
road across the Simplon (1807) and of the tunnel beneath the 
pass (1906), as well as the fact that above Brieg is the steeper 
and less fertile portion of the Upper Valais (now much frequented 
by tourists), have greatly increased the importance and size 
of the town. The opening of the railway tunnel beneath the 
Lotschen Pass, affording direct communication with Bern and 
the Bernese Oberland, is calculated still further to contribute 
to its prosperity. The new town extends below the old one 
and is closer to the right bank of the Rhone. In 1900 the 
population was 2182, almost all Romanists, while 1316 were 
German-speaking, 719 Italian-speaking (the Simplon tunnel 
workmen), and 142 French-speaking, one person only speaking 
Romonsch. (W. A. B. C.) 

BRIELLE (Briel or Bril), a seaport in the province of South 
Holland, Holland, on the north side of the island of Voorne, 
at the mouth of the New Maas, 5^ m. N. of Hellevoetsluis. 
Pop. (1900) 4107. It is a fortified place and has a good harbour, 
arsenal, magazine and barracks. It also possesses a quaint town 
hall, and an orphanage dating from 1 533. The tower of the Groote 



Kerk of St Catherine serves as a lighthouse. Most of the trade 
of Brielle was diverted to Hellevoetsluis by the cutting of the 
Voornsche Canal in 1829, but it still has some business in corn 
and fodder, as well as a few factories. A large number of the 
inhabitants are also engaged in the fisheries and as pilots. 

The chief event in the history of Brielle is its capture by the 
Gueux sur Mer, a squadron of privateers which raided the Dutch 
coast under commission of the prince of Orange. This event, 
which took place on the 1st of April 1572, was the first blow in the 
long war of Dutch independence, and was followed by a general 
outbreak of the patriotic party (Motley, Rise of the Dutch Re- 
public, part iii. chapter vi.). " The Brill " was one of the four 
Dutch towns handed over to Queen Elizabeth in 1 584 as security 
for English expenses incurred in aiding the Dutch. Brielle is 
the birthplace of the famous admiral Martin van Tromp, and 
also of Admiral van Almonde, a distinguished commander of 
the early 18th century. 

BRIENNE-LE-CHATEAU, a town of north-eastern France, 
in the department of Aube, 1 m. from the right bank of the Aube 
and 26 m. N.E. of Troyes on the Eastern railway. Pop. (1906) 
1761. The chateau, which overlooks the town, is an imposing 
building of the latter half of the 18th century, built by the 
cardinal de Brienne (see below). It possesses an important 
collection of pictures, many of them historical portraits of the 
17th and 1 8th centuries. The church dates from the 16th 
century and contains good stained glass. A statue of Napoleon 
commemorates his sojourn at Brienne from 1779 to 1784, when 
he was studying at the military school suppressed in 1790. 
In 1814 Brienne was the scene of fighting between Napoleon 
and the Allies (see Napoleonic Campaigns). Brewing is 
carried on in the town. Brienne-la-Vieille, a village if m. 
south of Brienne-le-Chateau, has a church of the 12th and 
1 6th centuries with fine stained windows. The portal once 
belonged to the ancient abbey of Bassefontaine, the ruins of 
which are situated near the village. 

Counts of Brienne. — Under the Carolingian dynasty Brienne- 
le-Chateau was the capital town of a French countship. In 
the 10th century it was captured by two adventurers named 
Engelbert and Gobert, and from the first of these sprang the 
noble house of Brienne. In 1210 John of Brienne (1148-1237) 
became king of Jerusalem, through his marriage with Mary of 
Montferrat, heiress of the kingdom of Jerusalem. He led a 
crusade in Egypt which had no lasting success; and when in 
1229 he was elected emperor of the East, for the period of 
Baldwin II. 's minority, he fought and conquered the Greek 
emperor John III. (Batatzes or Vatatzes). Walter V., count of 
Brienne and of Lecce (Apulia) and duke of Athens, fought against 
the Greeks and at first drove them from Thessaly, but was 
eventually defeated and killed near Lake Copais in 131 1. His 
son, Walter VI., after having vainly attempted to reconquer 
Athens in 1331, served under Philip of Valois against the English. 
Having defended Florence against the Pisans he succeeded in 
obtaining dictatorial powers for himself in the republic; but 
his tyrannical conduct brought about his expulsion. He was 
appointed constable of France by John the Good, and was killed 
at the battle of Poitiers in 1356. His sister and heiress Isabelle 
married Walter of Enghien, and so brought Brienne to the house 
of Enghien, and, by his marriage with Margaret of Enghien, John 
of Luxemburg-St Pol (d. about 1397) became count of Brienne. 
The house of Luxemburg retained the countship until Margaret 
Charlotte of Luxemburg sold it to a certain Marpon, who ceded 
it to Henri Auguste de Lomenie (whose wife, Louise de Beon, 
descended from the house of Luxemburg-Brienne) in 1640. 
The Limousin house of Lomenie (the genealogies which trace 
this family to the 15th century are untrustworthy) produced 
many well-known statesmen, among others the celebrated 
cardinal Etienne Charles de Lomenie de Brienne (1727-1794), 
minister of Louis XV.; and the last lords of Brienne were 
members of this family. (M. P.*) 

BRIENZ, LAKE OF, in the Swiss canton of Bern, the first lake 
into which the river Aar expands. It lies in a deep hollow 
between the village of Brienz on the east (2580 inhabitants, the 



BRIERLEY— -BRIGANDAGE 



563 



chief centre of the Swiss wood-carving industry) and, on the west, 
Bonigen (1515 inhabitants), close to Interlaken. Its length is 
about 9 m., its width i| m., and its maximum depth 856 ft., 
while its area is 115 sq. m., and the surface is 1857 ft. above the 
sea-level. On the south shore are the Giessbach Falls and the 
hamlet of Iseltwald. On the north shore are a few small villages. 
The character of the lake is gloomy and sad as compared with its 
neighbour, that of Thun. Its chief affluent is the Liitschine 
(flowing from the valleys of Grindelwald and Lauterbrunnen). 
The first steamer was placed on the lake in 1839. (W. A. B. C.) 

BRIERLEY, BENJAMIN (1825-1896), English weaver and 
writer in Lancashire dialect, was born near Manchester., the son 
of humble parents, and started life in a textile factory, educating 
himself in his spare time. At about the age of thirty he began 
to contribute articles to local papers, and the republication of 
some of his sketches of Lancashire character in A Summer Day 
in Daisy Nook (1859) attracted attention. In 1863 he definitely 
took to journalism and literature as his work, publishing in 1863 
his Chronicles of Waverlow, and in 1864 a long story called The 
Layrock of Langley Side (afterwards dramatized), followed by 
others. He started in 1869 Ben Brierley's Journal, a weekly, 
which continued till 1891, and he gave public readings from his 
own writings, visiting America in 1880 and 1884. His various 
Ab-o'-th'-Yate sketches (about America, London, &c), and his 
pictures of Lancashire common life, were very popular, and were 
collected after his death. In 1884 he lost his savings by the 
failure of a building society, and a fund was raised for his support. 
He died on the 18th of January 1896, and two years later a statue 
was erected to him in Queen's Park, Manchester. 

BRIERLY, SIR OSWALD WALTERS (1817-1894), English 
marine painter, who came of an old Cheshire family, was born at 
Chester. He entered Sass's art-school in London, and after 
studying naval architecture at Plymouth he exhibited some 
drawings of ships at the Royal Academy in 1839. He had a 
passion for the sea, and in 1841 started round the world with 
Benjamin Boyd (1796-1851), afterwards well known as a great 
Australian squatter, in the latter's ship " Wanderer," and having 
got to New South Wales, made his home at Auckland for ten 
years. Brierly Point is called after him. He added to his sea 
experiences by voyages on H.M.S. " Rattlesnake " in 1848, and 
with Sir Henry Keppel on the " Meander " in 1850; he returned 
to England in 1851 on this ship, and illustrated Keppel's book 
about his cruise (1853). He was again with Keppel during the 
Crimean War, and published in 1855 a series of lithographs 
illustrating " The English and French fleets in the Baltic." He 
was now taken up by Queen Victoria and other members of the 
royal family, and was attached to the suites of the duke of 
Edinburgh and the prince of Wales on their tours by sea, the 
results being seen in further marine pictures by him; and in 1874 
he was made marine-painter to the queen. He exhibited at the 
Academy, but more largely at the Royal Water-colour Society, 
his more important works including the historical pictures, 
" The Retreat of the Spanish Armada" (1871) and " The Loss 
of the Revenge " (1877). In 1885 he was knighted, and he died 
on the 14th of December 1894. He was twice married and had 
an active and prosperous life, but was no great artist; his best 
pictures are at Melbourne and Sydney. 

BRIEUX, EUGENE (1858- ), French dramatist, was born 
in Paris of poor parents on the 19th of January 1858. A one-act 
play, Bernard Palissy, written in collaboration with M. Gaston 
Salandri, was produced in 1879, but he had to wait eleven years 
before he obtained another hearing, his Menage d' artistes being 
produced by Antoine at the Theatre Libre in 1890. His plays 
are essentially didactic, being aimed at some weakness or iniquity 
of the social system. Blanchette (1892) pointed out the evil results 
of education of girls of the working classes; M. de Reboval (1892) 
was directed against pharisaism; L' Engrenage (1894) against 
corruption in politics ; Les Bienfaiteurs (1896) against the frivolity 
of fashionable charity; and L' Evasion (1896) satirized an indis- 
criminate belief in the doctrine of heredity. Les Trots Filles 
de M. Dupont (1897) is a powerful, somewhat brutal, study of 
the miseries imposed on Door middle-class girls by the French 



system of dowry; Le Resultat des courses (1898) shows the evil 
results of betting among the Parisian workmen; La Robe rouge 
(1900) was directed against the injustices of the law; Les 
Remplacantes (1901) against the practice of putting children out 
to nurse. Les Avariis (1901), forbidden by the censor, on account 
of its medical details, was read privately by the author at the 
Theatre Antoine; and Petite amie (1902) describes the life of a 
Parisian shop-girl. Later plays are La Couvte (1903, acted 
privately at Rouen in 1893), MaterniU (1904), La Dtserteuse 
(1904), in collaboration with M. Jean Sigaux, and Les Hannetons, 
a comedy in three acts (1906). 

BRIGADE (Fr. and Ger. brigade, Ital. brigata, Span, brigada; 
the English use of the word dates from the early 17th century), 
a unit in military organization commanded by a major-general, 
brigadier-general or colonel, and composed of two or more 
regiments of infantry, cavalry or artillery. The British infantry 
brigade consists as a rule of four battalions (or about 4000 
bayonets) with supply, transport and medical units attached; 
the cavalry brigade of two or three regiments of cavalry. An 
artillery " brigade " (field, horse, and heavy) is in Great Britain 
a smaller unit, forming a lieut. -colonel's command and consisting 
of two or three batteries. (See Army, Artillery, Infantry, 
and Cavalry.) The staff of an infantry or cavalry brigade 
usually consists of the brigadier commanding, his aide-de-camp, 
and the brigade-major, a staff officer whose duties are inter- 
mediate between those of an adjutant and those of a general 
staff officer. 

BRIGANDAGE. The brigand is supposed to derive his name 
from the O. Fr. brigan, which is a form of the Ital. brigante, 
an irregular or partisan soldier. There can be no doubt as to 
the origin of the word " bandit," which has the same meaning. 
In Italy, which is not unjustly considered the home of the most 
accomplished European brigands, a bandito was a man declared 
outlaw by proclamation, or bando, called in Scotland " a decree 
of horning " because it was delivered by a blast of a horn at the 
town cross. The brigand, therefore, is the outlaw who conducts 
warfare after the manner of an irregular or partisan soldier by 
skirmishes and surprises, who makes the war support itself by 
plunder, by extorting blackmail, by capturing prisoners and 
holding them to ransom, who enforces his demands by violence, 
and kills the prisoners who cannot pay. In certain conditions 
the brigand has not been a mere malefactor. " It is you who are 
the thieves " — " / Ladroni, siete voi," — was the defence of the 
Calabrian who was tried as a brigand by a French court-martial 
during the reign of Murat in Naples. Brigandage may be, and 
not infrequently has been, the last resource of a people subject 
to invasion. The Calabrians who fought for Ferdinand of 
Naples, and the Spanish irregukir levies, which maintained the 
national resistance against the French from 1808 to 1814, were 
called brigands by their enemies. In the Balkan peninsula, under 
Turkish rule, the brigands (called klephts by the Greeksand hayduks 
or haydutzi by the Slavs) had some claim to believe themselves 
the representatives of their people against oppressors. The only 
approach to an attempt to maintain order was the permission 
given to part of the population to carry arms in order to repress 
the klephts. They were hence called " armatoli." As a matter 
of fact the armatole were rather the allies than the enemies of 
the klephts. The invader who reduces a nation to anarchy, and 
then x suffers from the disorder he creates, always calls his 
opponents brigands. It is a natural consequence of such a war, 
but a very disastrous one, for the people who have to have 
recourse to these methods of defence, that the brigand acquires 
some measure of honourable prestige from his temporary associa- 
tion with patriotism and honest men. The patriot band attracts 
the brigand proper, who is not averse to continue his old courses 
under an honourable pretext. " Viva Fernando yvamosrobando" 
(Long life to Ferdinand, and let us go robbing) has been said by 
not unfair critics to have been the maxim of many Spanish 
gucrrilleros. Italy and Spain suffered for a long time from the 
disorder developed out of the popular resistance to the French. 
Numbers of the guerrilleros of both countries, who in normal 
conditi3ns might have been honest, had acquired a preference 



5^4 



BRIGANDAGE 



for living on the country, and for occasional booty, which they 
could not resign when the enemy had retired. Their countrymen 
had to work for a second deliverance from their late defenders. 
In the East the brigand has had a freer scope, and has even 
founded kingdoms. David's following in the cave of Adullam 
was such material as brigands are made of. " And every one 
that was in distress, and every one that was in debt, and every 
one that was discontented, gathered themselves unto him, and 
he became a captain over them: and there were with him about 
four hundred men." Nadir Shah of Persia began in just such 
a cave of Adullam, and lived to plunder Delhi with a host of 
Persians and Afghans. 

The conditions which favour the development of brigandage 
may be easily summed up. They are first bad administration, 
and then, in a less degree, the possession cf convenient hiding- 
places. A country of mountain and forest is favourable to the 
brigand. The highlands of Scotland supplied a safe refuge 
to the " gentlemen reavers," who carried off the cattle of the 
Sassenach landlords. The Apennines, the mountains of Calabria, 
the Sierras of Spain, were the homes of the Italian " banditos " 
and the Spanish " bandoleros " (banished men) and " saltea- 
dores " (raiders). The forests of England gave cover to the out- 
laws, whose very much flattered portrait is to be found in the 
ballads of Robin Hood. The" maquis,"».e. the bush of Corsica, 
and its hills, have helped the Corsican brigand, as the bush of 
Australia covered the bushranger. But neither forest thicket 
nor mountain is a lasting protection against a good police, 
used with intelligence by the government, and supported by 
the law-abiding part of the community. The great haunts of 
brigands in Europe have been central and southern Italy and 
the worst-administered parts of Spain, except those which fell 
into the hands of the Turks. " Whenever numerous troops of 
banditti, multiplied by success and impunity, publicly defy, 
instead of eluding, the justice of their country, we may safely 
infer that the excessive weakness of the government is felt 
and abused by the lowest ranks of the community;" is the judg- 
ment passed by Gibbon on the disorders of Sicily in the reign 
of the emperor Gallienus. This weakness has not always been 
a sign of real feebleness in the government. England was vigor- 
ously ruled in the reign of William III., when " a fraternity of 
plunderers, thirty in number according to the lowest estimate, 
squatted near Waltham Cross under the shades of Epping Forest, 
and built themselves huts, from which they sallied forth with 
sword and pistol to bid passengers stand." It was not because 
the state was weak that the Cubbings (so called in contempt 
from the trimmings and refuse of fish) infested Devonshire 
for a generation from their headquarters near Brent Tor, on the 
edge of Dartmoor. It was because England had not provided 
herself with a competent rural police. In relatively unsettled 
parts of the United States there has been a considerable amount 
of a certain kind of brigandage. In early days the travel routes 
to the far West were infested by highwaymen, who, however, 
seldom united into bands, and such outlaws, when captured, were 
often dealt with in an extra-legal manner, e.g. by " vigilance com- 
mittees." The Mexican brigand Cortina made incursions into 
Texas before the Civil War. In Canada the mounted police have 
kept brigandage down, and in Mexico the " Rurales " have made 
an end of the brigands. Such curable evils as the highwaymen of 
England, and their like in the States, are not to be compared with 
the " Ecorcheurs," or Skinners, of France in the 15th century, or 
the " Chauffeurs " of the revolutionary epoch. The first were 
large bands of discharged mercenary soldiers who pillaged the 
country. The second were ruffians who forced their victims 
to pay ransom by holding their feet in fires. Both flourished 
because the government was for the time disorganized by foreign 
invasion or by revolution. These were far more terrible evils 
than the licence of criminals, who are encouraged by a fair 
prospect of impunity because there is no permanent force 
always at hand to check them, and to bring them promptly to 
justice. At the same time it would be going much too far to 
say that the absence of an efficient police is the sole cause of 
brigandage in countries not subject to foreign invasion, or where 



the state is not very feeble. The Sicilian peasants of whom 
Gibbon wrote were not only encouraged by the hope of impunity, 
but were also maddened by an oppressive System of taxation 
and a cruel system of land tenure. So were the Gauls and 
Spaniards who throughout the 3rd and 4th centuries were a 
constant cause of trouble to the empire, under the name of 
Bagaudae, a word of uncertain origin. In the years preceding 
the French Revolution, the royal government commanded 
the services of a strong army, and a numerous marechaussle 
or gendarmerie. Yet it was defied by the troops of smugglers 
and brigands known as faux saulniers, unauthorized salt-sellers, 
and gangs of poachers haunted the king's preserves round Paris. 
The salt monopoly and the excessive preservation of the game 
were so oppressive that the peasantry were provoked to violent 
resistance and to brigandage. They were constantly suppressed, 
but as the cause of the disorder survived, so its effects were con- 
tinually renewed. The offenders enjoyed a large measure of public 
sympathy, and were warned or concealed by the population, 
even when they were not actively supported. The traditional 
outlaw who spared the poor and levied tribute on the rich 
was, no doubt, always a creature of fiction. The ballad which 
tells us how " Rich, wealthy misers were abhorred, By brave, 
free-hearted Bliss " (a rascal hanged for highway robbery at 
Salisbury in 1695) must have been a mere echo of the Robin 
Hood songs. But there have been times and countries in which 
the law and its administration have been so far regarded as 
enemies by people who were not themselves criminals, that all 
who defied them have been sure of a measure of sympathy. 
Then and there it was that brigandage has flourished, and has 
been difficult to extirpate. Schinder-Hannes, Jack the Skinner, 
whose real name was Johann Buckler, and who was born at 
Muklen on the Rhine, flourished from 1797 to 1802 because 
there was no proper police to stop him; it is also true that as 
he chiefly plundered the Jews he had a good deal of Christian 
sympathy. When caught and beheaded he had no successors. 

The brigandage of Greece, southern Italy, Corsica and Spain 
had deeper roots, and has never been quite suppressed. All four 
countries are well provided with hiding-places in forest and 
mountain. In all the administration has been bad, the law and 
its officers have been regarded as dangers, if not as deliberate 
enemies, so that they have found little native help, and, what 
is not the least important cause cf the persistence of brigandage, 
there have generally been local potentates who found it to 
their interest to protect the brigand. The case of Greece under 
Turkish rule need not be dealt with. Whoever was not a klepht 
was the victim of some official extortioner. It would be grossly 
unfair to apply the name brigand to the Mainotes and similar 
clans, who had to choose between being flayed by the Turks 
or living by the sword under their own law. When it became 
independent Greece was extremely ill administered under a 
nominal parliamentary government by politicians who made 
use of the brigands for their own purposes. The result was the 
state of things described with only pardonable exaggeration 
in Edmond About's amusing Roi de la montagne. An authentic 
and most interesting picture of the Greek brigands will be found 
in the story of the captivity of S. Soteropoulos, an ex-minister 
who fell into their hands. It was translated into English under 
the title of The Brigands of the Morea, by the Rev. J. 0. Bagdon 
(London, 1868). The misfortunes of Soteropoulos led to the 
adoption of strong measures which cleared the Morea, where 
the peasantry gave active support to the troops when they saw 
that the government was in earnest. But brigandage was not 
yet extinct in Greece. In 1870 an English party, consisting of 
Lord and Lady Muncaster, Mr Vyner, Mr Lloyd, Mr Herbert, 
and Count de Boyl, was captured at Oropos, near Marathon, and 
a ransom of £25,000 was demanded. Lord and Lady Muncaster 
were set at liberty to seek for the ransom, but the Greek 
government sent troops in pursuit of the brigands, and the other 
prisoners were then murdered. The scoundrels were hunted 
down, caught, and executed, and Greece has since then been 
tolerably free from this reproach. In the Balkan peninsula, 
under Turkish rule, brigandage continued to exist in connexion 



BRIGANDAGE 



with Christian revolt against the Turk, and the race conflicts 
of Albanians, Walachians, Pomuks, Bulgarians and Greeks. 
In Corsica the " maquis " has never been without its brigand 
hero, because industry has been stagnant, family feuds persist, 
and the government has never quite succeeded in persuading the 
people to support the law. The brigand is always a hero to at 
least one faction of Corsicans. 

The conditions which favour brigandage have been more 
prevalent, and for longer, in Italy than elsewhere in western 
Europe, with the standing exception of Corsica, which is Italian 
in all but political allegiance. Until the middle of the 19th 
century Italy was divided into small states, so that the brigand 
who was closely pursued in one could flee to another. Thus it 
was that Marco Sciarra of the Abruzzi, when hard pressed by the 
Spanish viceroy of Naples — just before and after 1600 — could 
cross the border of the papal states and return on a favourable 
opportunity. When pope and viceroy combined against him he 
took service with Venice, from whence he could communicate 
with his friends at home, and pay them occasional visits. On 
one such visit he was led into a trap and slain. Marco Sciarra 
had terrorized the country far and wide at the head of 600 men. 
He was the follower and imitator of Benedetto Mangone, of whom 
it is recorded that, having stopped a party of travellers which 
included Torquato Tasso, he allowed them to pass unharmed out 
of his reverence for poets and poetry. Mangone was finally 
taken, and beaten to death with hammers at Naples. He and 
his like are the heroes of much popular verse, written in ottava 
rima, and beginning with the traditional epic invocation to the 
muse. A fine example is " The most beautiful history of the 
life and death of Pietro Mancino, chief of Banditti," which has 
remained popular with the people of southern Italy. It begins : — 
" Io canto li ricatti, e il fiero ardire 
Del gran Pietro Mancino fuoruscito " 
(Pietro Mancino that great outlawed man 
I sing, and all his rage.) 

In Naples the number of competing codes and jurisdictions, 
the survival of the feudal power of the nobles, who sheltered 
banditti, just as a Highland' chief gave refuge to "caterans" 
in Scotland, and the helplessness of the peasantry, made brigand- 
age chronic, and the same conditions obtained in Sicily. The 
Bourbon dynasty reduced brigandage very much, and secured 
order on the main high-roads. But it was not extinguished, and 
it revived during the French invasion. This was the flourishing 
time of the notorious Fra Diavolo, who began as brigand and 
blossomed into a patriot. Fra Diavolo was captured and 
executed by the French. When Ferdinand was restored on the 
fall of Napoleon he employed an English officer, General Sir 
Richard Church, to suppress the brigands. General Church, who 
kept good order among his soldiers, and who made them pay 
for everything, gained the confidence of the peasantry, and re- 
stored a fair measure of security. It was he who finally brought 
to justice the villainous Don Ciro Anicchiarico — priest and 
brigand— -who declared at his trial with offhand indifference that 
he supposed he had murdered about seventy people first and last. 
When a brother priest was sent to give him the consolations 
of religion, Ciro cut him short, saying, " Stop that chatter, we 
are two of a trade: we need not play the fool to one another " 
(Lasciate queste chiacchiere, siamo dell' istessa professione: non 
ci burliamo fra noi). Every successive revolutionary disturb- 
ance in Naples saw a recrudescence of brigandage down to the 
unification of 1860-1861, and then it was years before the Italian 
government rooted it out. The source of the trouble was the 
support the brigands received from various kinds of " manu- 
tingoli " (maintainers) — great men, corrupt officials, political 
parties, and the peasants who were terrorized, or who profited 
by selling the brigands food and clothes. In Sicily brigandage 
has been endemic. In 1866 two English travellers, Mr E. J. C. 
Moens and the Rev. J. C. Murray Aynesley, were captured and 
held to ransom. Mr Moens found that the " manutengoli " of 
the brigands among the peasants charged famine prices for food, 
and extortionate prices for clothes and cartridges. What is 
true of Naples and Sicily is true of other parts of Italy mutatis 



mutandis. In Tu'scany, Piedmont and Lombardy the open 
country has been Orderly, but the borders infested with brigands. 
The worst district outside Calabria has been the papal states. 
The Austrian general, Frimont, did, however, partly clear the 
Romagna about 1820, though at a heavy cost of life to- his 
soldiers — mostly Bohemian Jagers — from the malaria. 

The history of brigandage in Spain is very similar. It may 
be said to have been endemic in and south of the Sierra Morena. 
In the north it has flourished when government was weak,, and 
after foreign invasion and civil wars. But it has always been 
put down easily by a capable administration. It reached its 
greatest heights in Catalonia, where it began in the strife of the 
peasants against the feudal exactions of the landlords. It had 
its traditional hero, Roque Guinart, who figures in the. second 
part of Don Quixote. The revolt against the house of Austria 
in 1640, and the War of the Succession (i7oo-i7i4),gaveagreat 
stimulus to Catalan brigandage. But it was then put down 
in a way for which Italy offers no precedent. A country gentle- 
man named Pedro Veciana, hereditary balio (military and 
civil lieutenant) of the archbishop of Tarragona in the town of 
Vails, armed his farm-servants, and resisted the attacks of the 
brigands. With the help of neighbouring country gentlemen he 
formed a strong band, known as the Mozos (Boys) of Veciana. 
The brigands combined to get rid of him by making an attack 
on the town of Vails, but were repulsed with great loss. The 
government of Philip V. then commissioned Veciana to raise 
a special corps of police, the " escuadra de Cataluna," which 
still exists. For five generations the colonel of the escuadra was 
always a Veciana. At all times in central and northern Spain 
the country population has supported the police when the 
government would act firmly. Since the organization of the 
excellent constabulary called ." La Guardia Civil " by the duke 
of Ahumada, about 1844, brigandage has been well kept down. 
At the close of the Carlist War in 1874 a few bands infested 
Catalonia, but one of the worst was surprised, and all its members 
battered to death with boxwood cudgels by a gang of charcoal- 
burners on the ruins of the castle of San Martin de Centellas. 
In such conditions as these brigandage cannot last. More sym- 
pathy is felt for " bandoleros " in the south, and there also they 
find Spanish equivalents for the " manutengoli " of Italy. The 
tobacco smuggling from Gibraltar keeps alive a lawless class 
which sinks easily into pure brigandage. Perhaps the influence 
of the Berber blood in the population helps to prolong this 
barbarism. The Sierra Morena, and the Serrania de Ronda, 
have produced the bandits whose achievements form the subject 
of popular ballads, such as Francisco Esteban El Guapo (Francis 
Stephen, the Buck or Dandy) , Don Juan de Serralonga, Pedranza, 
&c. The name of Jose Maria has been made familiar to all the 
world by Merimee's story, Carmen, and by Bizet's opera. Jose 
Maria, called El Tempranillo (the early bird)* was a historical 
personage, a liberal in the rising against Ferdinand VII., 1820- 
1823, then a smuggler, then a " bandolero." He was finally 
bought off by the government, and took a commission to suppress 
the other brigands. Jose Maria was at last shot by one of them, 
whom he was endeavouring to arrest. The civil guard prevents 
brigandage from reaching any great height in normal times, but 
in 1905 a bandit of the old stamp, popularly known as "El 
Vivillo " (the Vital Spark), haunted the Serrania de Ronda. 

The brigand life has been made the subject of much romance. 
But when stripped of fiction it appears that the bands have 
been mostly recruited by men who had been guilty of homicide, 
out of jealousy or in a gambling quarrel, and who remained in 
them not from love of the life, but from fear of the gallows. 
A reformed brigand, known as Passo di Lupo (Wolf's Step), 
confessed to Mr McFarlane about 1820 that the weaker members 
of the band were terrorized and robbed by the bullies, and that 
murderous conflicts were constant among them. 

The " dacoits " or brigands of India were of the same stamp 
as their European colleagues. The Pindaris were more than 
brigands, and the Thugs were a religious sect. 

Authorities. — The literature of brigandage, apart from pure 
romances, or official reports of trials, is naturally extensive. Mr 



5 66 



BRIGANDINE— BRIGGS 



McFarlane's Lives and Exploits of Banditti and Robbers (London, 
1837) is a useful introduction to the subject. The author saw a part 
of what he wrote about, and gives many references, particularly for 
Italy. A good bibliography of Spanish brigandage will be found in 
the Resena Historica de la Guardia Civil of Eugenio de la Iglesia 
(Madrid, 1898). For actual pictures of the life, nothing is better 
than the English Travellers and Italian Brigands of W. J. C. Moens 
(London, 1866), and The Brigands of the Morea, by S. Soteropoulos, 
translated by the Rev. J. O. Bagdon (London, 1868). (D. H.) 

BRIGANDINE, a French word meaning the armour for the 
brigandi or brigantes, light-armed foot soldiers; part of the 
armour of a foot soldier in the middle ages, consisting of a padded 
tunic of canvas, leather, &c, and lined with closely sewn scales 
or rings of iron. 

BRIGANTES (Celtic for " mountaineers " or " free, privi- 
leged "), a people of northern Britain, who inhabited the 
country from the mouth of the Abus (Humber) on the east 
and the Belisama (Mersey; according to others, Ribble) on 
the west as far northwards as the Wall of Antoninus. Their 
territory thus included most of Yorkshire, the whole of Lanca- 
shire, Durham, Westmorland, Cumberland and part of Northum- 
berland. Their chief town was Eburacum (or Eboracum ; York) . 
They first came into contact with the Romans during the reign 
of Claudius, when they were defeated by Publius Ostorius 
Scapula. Under Vespasian they submitted to Petillius Cerealis, 
but were not finally subdued till the time of Antoninus Pius 
(Tac. Agricola, 17; Pausan. viii. 43. 4). The name of their 
eponymous goddess Brigantia is found on inscriptions {Corp. 
Inscr. Lat. vii. 200, 875, 1062; F. Haverfield in Archaeological 
Journal, xlix., 1892), and also that of a god Bergans = Brigans 
{Ephemeris Epigraphica, vii. Nfi. 920). A branch of the Brigantes 
also settled in the south-east corner of Ireland, near the river 
Birgus (Barrow). 

See A. Holder, Altceltischer Sprachschatz, i. (1896), for ancient 
authorities; J. Rhys, Celtic Britain (3rd ed., 1904); Pauly-Wissowa, 
Realencyclopddie, iii. pt. i. (1897). 

BRIGG (properly Glanford Briggs or Glamford Bridge), 
a market town in the North Lindsey or Brigg parliamentary 
division of Lincolnshire, England, situated on the river Ancholme, 
which affords water communication with the Humber. Pop. of 
urban district (1901) 3137. It is 23 m. by road north of Lincoln, 
and is served by the Grimsby line of the Great Central railway. 
Trade is principally agricultural. In 1885 a remarkable boat, 
assigned to early British workmanship, was unearthed near the 
river; it is hollowed out of the trunk of an oak, and measures 
48 ft. 6 in. by about 5 ft. Other prehistoric relics have also 
been discovered. 

BRIGGS, CHARLES AUGUSTUS (1841- ), American 
Hebrew scholar and theologian, was born in New York City 
on the 1 5th of January 1841. He was educated at the university 
of Virginia (1857-1860), graduated at the Union Theological 
Seminary in 1863, and studied further at the university of 
Berlin. He was pastor of the Presbyterian church of Roselle, 
New Jersey, 1869-1874, and professor of Hebrew and cognate 
languages in Union Theological Seminary 1874-1891, and of 
Biblical theology there from 1891 to 1904, when he became 
professor of theological encyclopaedia and symbolics. From 
1880 to 1890 he was an editor of the Presbyterian Review. In 
1892 he was tried for heresy by the presbytery of New York 
and acquitted. The charges were based upon his inaugural 
address of the preceding year. In brief they were as follows: 
that he had taught that reason and the Church are each a 
" fountain of divine authority which apart from Holy Scripture 
may and does savingly enlighten men "; that " errors may have 
existed in the original text of the Holy Scripture "; that " many 
of the Old Testament predictions have been reversed by history " 
and that " the great body of Messianic prediction has not and can- 
not be fulfilled "; that " Moses is not the author of the Penta- 
teuch," and that " Isaiah is not the author of half of the book 
which bears his name "; that " the processes of redemption 
extend to the world to come " — he had considered it a fault 
of Protestant theology that it limits redemption to this world— 
and that " sanctification is not complete at death." The general 
assembly, to which the case was appealed, suspended Dr Briggs 



in 1893, being influenced, it would seem, in part, by the manner 
and tone of his expressions — by what his own colleagues in 
the Union Theological Seminary called the " dogmatic and 
irritating " nature of his inaugural address. He was ordained 
a priest of the Protestant Episcopal Church in 1899. His 
scholarship procured for him the honorary degree of D.D. from 
Edinburgh (1884) and from Glasgow (1901), and that of Litt. D, 
from Oxford (1901). With S. R. Driver and Francis Brown he 
prepared, a revised Hebrew and English Lexicon (1891-1905), 
and with Driver edited the " International Commentary Series." 
His publications include Biblical Study: Its Principles, Methods 
and History (1883); Hebrew Poems of the Creation (1884); 
American Prcsbyterianism: Its Origin and Early History (1885); 
Messianic Prophecy (1886); Whither? A Theological Question 
for the Times (1889); The Authority of the Holy Scripture (1891); 
The Bible, the Church and the Reason (1892) ; The Higher Criticism 
of the Hcxateuch (1893); The Messiah of the Gospels (18.94),' 
The Messiah of the Apostles (1894); New Light on the Life 
of Jesus (1904); The Ethical Teaching of Jesus (1904); A 
Critical and Exegetical Commentary on the Book of Psalms 
(2 vols., 1906-1907), in which he was assisted by his daughter:; 
and The Virgin Birth of Our Lord (1909). 

BRIGGS, HENRY (1556-1630), English mathematician, was 
born at Warley Wood, near Halifax, in Yorkshire, He graduated 
at St John's College, Cambridge, in 1581, and obtained, a fellow- 
ship in 1588. In 1592 he was made reader of the physical lecture 
founded by Dr Thomas Linacre, and in 1596 first professor of 
geometry in Gresham House (afterwards College), London. In 
his lectures at Gresham House he proposed the alteration of the 
scale of logarithms from the hyperbolic form which John Napier 
had given them, to that in which unity is assumed as the 
logarithm of the ratio of ten to one; and soon afterwards he 
wrote to the inventor on the subject. In 1616 he paid a visit 
to Napier at Edinburgh in order to discuss the suggested change; 
and next year he repeated his visit for a similar purpose. During 
these conferences the alteration proposed by Briggs was agreed 
upon; and on his return from his second visit to Edinburgh in 
1617 he accordingly published the first chiliad of his logarithms. 
(See Napier, John.) In 1619 he was appointed Savilian professor 
of geometry at Oxford, and resigned his professorship of Gresham 
College on the 25th of July 1620. Soon after his settlement at 
Oxford he was incorporated master of arts. In 1622 he pub- 
lished a small tract on the N orth-W est Passage to the South Seas, 
through the Continent of Virginia and Hudson's Bay; and in 
1624 his Arithmetica Logarithmica, in folio, a work containing 
the logarithms of thirty thousand natural numbers to fourteen 
places of figures besides the index. He also completed a table 
of logarithmic sines and tangents for the hundredth part of every 
degree to fourteen places of figures besides the index, with a 
table of natural sines to fifteen places, and the tangents and 
secants for the same to ten places; all of which were printed at 
Gouda in 1631 and published in 1633 under the title of Trigono- 
metric Britannica (see Table, Mathematical). Briggs died on 
the 26th of January 1630, and was buried in Merton College 
chapel, Oxford. Dr Smith, in his Lives of the Gresham Professors, 
characterizes him as a man of great probity, a contemner of 
riches, and contented with his own station, preferring a studious 
retirement to all the splendid circumstances of life. 

His works are : A Table to find the Height of the Pole, the Magnetical 
Declination being given (London, 1602, 4to) ; " Tables for the 
Improvement of Navigation," printed in the second edition of 
Edward Wright's treatise entitled Certain Errors in Navigation 
detected and corrected (London, 1610, 4to) ; A Description of an 
Instrumental Table to find the part proportional, devised by Mr Edward 
Wright (London, 1616 and 1618, i2mo); Logarithmorum Chilias 
prima (London, 1617, 8vo); Lucubrationes et Annotationes in opera 
posthuma J. Neperi (Edinburgh, 1619, 4to) ; Euclidis Elementorum 
VI. libri priores (London, 1620, folio) ; A Treatise on the_ North-West 
Passage to the South Sea (London, 1622, 4to), reprinted in Purchas's 
Pilgrims, vol. iii. p. 852; Arithmetica Logarithmica (London, 1624, 
folio); Trigonometria Britannica (Goudae, 1663, folio); two Letters 
to Archbishop Usher; Mathematica ab Antiquis minus cognita. 
Some other works, as his Commentaries on the Geometry of Peter 
Ramus, and Remarks on the Treatise of Longomontanus respecting the 
Quadrature of the Circle, have not been published. 



BRIGHOUSE— BRIGHT 



BRIGHOUSE, a municipal borough in the Elland parliamentary 
division of the West Riding of Yorkshire, England, 5! m. N. 
of Huddersfield by the Lancashire & Yorkshire railway, on the 
river Calder. Pop. (1901) 21,735. It is i n the heart of the 
manufacturing district of the West Riding, and has large woollen 
and worsted factories; carpets, machinery and soap are also 
produced. The town was incorporated in 1893, and is governed 
by a mayor, 8 aldermen and 24 councillors. Area, 2231 acres. 

BRIGHT, SIR CHARLES TILSTON (1832-1888), English 
telegraph engineer, who came of an old Yorkshire family, was 
born on the 8th of June 1832, at Wanstead, Essex. At the age 
of fifteen he became a clerk under the Electric Telegraph Com- 
pany, His talent for electrical engineering was soon shown, 
and his progress was rapid; so that in 1852 he was appointed 
engineer to the Magnetic Telegraph Company, and in that 
capacity superintended the laying of lines in various parts of the 
British Isles, including in 1853 the first cable between Great 
Britain and Ireland, from Portpatrick to Donaghadee. His 
experiments convinced him of the practicability of an electric 
submarine cable connexion between Ireland and America; 
and having in 1855 already discussed the question with Cyrus 
Field, who with J. W. Brett controlled the Newfoundland 
Telegraph Company on the other side of the ocean, Bright 
organized with them the Atlantic Telegraph Company in 1856 
for the purpose of carrying out the idea, himself becoming 
engineer-in-chief. The story of the first Atlantic cable is told 
elsewhere (see Telegraph), and it must suffice here to say that 
in 1858, after two disappointments, Bright successfully accom- 
plished what to many had seemed an impossible feat, and within 
a few days of landing the Irish end of the line at Valentia he was 
knighted in Dublin. Subsequently Sir Charles Bright super- 
vised the laying of submarine cables in various regions of the 
world, and took a leading part as pioneer in other developments 
of the electrical industry. In conjunction with Josiah Latimer 
Clark, with whom he entered into partnership in 1861, he invented 
improved methods of insulating submarine cables, and a paper on 
electrical standards read by them before the British Association 
in the same year led to the establishment of the British Associa- 
tion committee on that subject, whose work formed the founda- 
tions of the system still in use. From 1865 to 1868 he was 
Liberal M.P. for Greenwich. He died on the 3rd of May 1888, at 
Abbey Wood, near London. 

See Life Story of Sir C. T. Bright, by his son Charles Bright (revised 
ed. 1908). 

BRIGHT, JOHN (1811-1889), British statesman, was born at 
Rochdale on the 16th of November 1811. His father, Jacob 
Bright, was a much-respected Quaker, who had started a cotton- 
mill at Rochdale in 1809. The family had reached Lancashire by 
two migrations Abraham Bright was a Wiltshire yeoman, who, 
early in the 18th century, removed to Coventry, where his 
descendants remained, and where, in 1775, Jacob Bright was 
born. Jacob Bright was educated at the Ackworth school of the 
Society of Friends, and was apprenticed to a fustian manu- 
facturer at New Mills. He married his employer's daughter, and 
settled with his two brothers-in-law at Rochdale in 1802, going 
into business for himself seven years later. His first wife died 
without children, and in 1809 he married Martha Wood, daughter 
of a tradesman of Bolton-le-Moors. She had been educated at 
Ackworth school, and was a woman of great strength of character 
and refined taste. There were eleven children of this marriage, 
of whom John Bright was the second, but the death of his elder 
brother in childhood made him the eldest son. He was a delicate 
child, and was sent as a day-scholar to a boarding-school near his 
home, kept by Mr William Littlewood. A year at the Ackworth 
school, two years at a school at York, and a year and a half at 
Newton, near Clitheroe, completed his education. He learned, 
he himself said, but little Latin and Greek, but acquired a great 
love of English literature, which his mother fostered, and a 
love of outdoor pursuits. In his sixteenth year he entered his 
father's mill, and in due time became a partner in the business. 
Two agitations were then going on in Rochdale — the first (in 
which Jacob Bright was a leader) in opposition to a local church- 



rate, and the second for parliamentary reform, by which Rochdale 
successfully claimed to have a member allotted to it under the 
Reform Bill. In both these movements John Bright took part. 
He was an ardent Nonconformist, proud to number among his 
ancestors John Gratton, a friend of George Fox, and one of the 
persecuted and imprisoned preachers of the Society of Friends. 
His political interest was probably first kindled by the Preston 
election in 1830, in which Lord Stanley, after a long struggle, 
was defeated by " Orator" Hunt. But it was as a member of 
the Rochdale Juvenile Temperance Band that he first learned 
public speaking. These young men went out into the villages, 
borrowed a chair of a cottager, and spoke from it at open-air 
meetings. In Mrs John Mills's life of her husband is an account 
of John Bright's first extempore speech. It was at a temperance 
meeting. Bright got his notes muddled, and broke down. The 
chairman gave out a temperance song, and during the singing 
told Bright to put his notes aside and say what came into his 
mind. Bright obeyed, began with much hesitancy, but found his 
tongue and made an excellent address. On some early occasions, 
however, he committed his speech to memory. In 1832 he called 
on the Rev. John Aldis, an eminent Baptist minister, to accom- 
pany him to a local Bible meeting. Mr Aldis described him as 
a slender, modest young gentleman, who surprised him by his 
intelligence and thoughtfulness, but who seemed nervous as they 
walked to the meeting together. At the meeting he made a 
stimulating speech, and on the way home asked for advice. 
Mr Aldis counselled him not to learn his speeches, but to write 
out and commit to memory certain passages and the peroration. 
Bright took the advice, and acted on it all his life. 

This " first lesson in public speaking," as Bright called it, was 
given in his twenty-first year, but he had not then contemplated 
entering on a public career. He was a fairly prosperous man of 
business, very happy in his home, and always ready to take part 
in the social, educational and political life of his native town. 
He was one of the founders of the Rochdale Literary and Philo- 
sophical Society, took a leading part in its debates, and on 
returning from a holiday journey in the East, gave the society 
a lecture on his travels. He first met Richard Cobden in 1836 
or 1837. Cobden was an alderman of the newly formed Man- 
chester corporation, and Bright went to ask him to speak at an 
education meeting in Rochdale. " I found him," said Bright, 
" in his office in Mosley Street, introduced myself to him, and told 
him what I wanted." Cobden consented, and at the meeting 
was much struck by Bright's short speech, and urged him to 
speak against the Corn Laws. His first speech on the Corn Laws 
was made at Rochdale in 1838, and in the same year he joined 
the Manchester provisional committee which in 1839 founded 
the Anti- Corn Law League He was still only the local public 
man, taking part in all public movements, especially in opposi- 
tion to John Feilden's proposed factory legislation, and to the 
Rochdale church-rate. In 1839 he built the house which he 
called " One Ash," and married Elizabeth, daughter of Jonathan 
Priestman of Newcastle-on-Tyne. In November of the same 
year there was a dinner at Bolton to Abraham Paulton, who had 
just returned from a successful Anti-Corn Law tour in Scotland. 
Among the speakers were Cobden and Bright, and the dinner is 
memorable as the first occasion on which the two future leaders 
appeared together on a Free Trade platform. Bright is described 
by the historian of the League as " a young man then appearing 
for the first time in any meeting out of his own town, and giving 
evidence, by his energy and by his grasp of the subject, of his 
capacity soon to take a leading part in the great agitation." 
But his call had not yet come. In 1840 he led a movement 
against the Rochdale church-rate, speaking from a tombstone 
in the churchyard, where it looks down on the town in the valley 
below. A very happy married life at home contented him, and 
at the opening of the Free Trade hall in January 1840 he sat with 
the Rochdale deputation, undistinguished in the body of the 
meeting. A daughter, Helen, was born to him; but his young 
wife, after a long illness, died of consumption in September 1841. 
Three days after her death at Leamington, Cobden called to see 
him. " I was in the depths of grief," said Bright, when unveiling 



5 68 



BRIGHT 



the statue of his friend at Bradford in 1877, " I mignt almost say 
of despair, for the life and sunshine of my house had been 
extinguished." Cobden spoke some words of condolence, but 
" after a time he looked up and said, ' There are thousands of 
homes in England at this moment where wives, mothers and 
children are dying of hunger. Now, when the first paroxysm of 
your grief is past, I would advise you to come with me, and we 
will never rest till the Corn Laws are repealed.' I accepted his 
invitation," added Bright, " and from that time we never ceased 
to labour hard on behalf of the resolution which we had made." 
At the general election in 1841 Cobden was returned for Stock-? 
port, and in 1843 Bright was the Free Trade candidate at a 
by-election at Durham. He was defeated, but his successful 
competitor was unseated on petition, and at the second contest 
Bright was returned. He was already known in the country 
as Cobden 's chief ally, and was received in the House of Commons 
with a suspicion and hostility even greater than had met Cobden 
himself. In the Anti-Corn Law movement the two speakers 
were the complements and correlatives of each other. Cobden 
had the calmness and confidence of the political philosopher, 
Bright had the passion and the fervour of the popular orator. 
Cobden did the reasoning, Bright supplied the declamation, but 
like Demosthenes he mingled argument with appeal. No orator 
of modern times rose more rapidly to a foremost place. He was 
not known beyond his own borough when Cobden called him 
to his side in 1841, and he entered parliament towards the end 
of the session of 1843 with a formidable reputation as an agitato*. 
He had been all over England and Scotland addressing vast 
meetings and, as a rule; carrying them with him; he had taken 
a leading part in a conference held by the Anti-Corn Law League 
in London, had led deputations to the duke of Sussex, to Sir 
jairies Graham, then home secretary, and to Lord Ripon and 
Mr Gladstone, the secretary and under secretary of the Board 
of Trade ; and he was universally recognized as the chief orator 
of the Free Trade movement. Wherever " John Bright of 
Rochdale " was announced to speak, vast crowds assembled. 
He had been so announced, for the last time; at the first great 
meeting in Drury Lane theatre on 15th March 1843; henceforth 
his name was enough. He took his seat in the House of Commons 
as one of the members for Durham on 28th July 1843, and on 
7th August delivered his maiden speech in support of a motion 
by Mr Ewart for reduction of import duties. He was there, 
he said, " not only as one of the representatives of the city of 
Durham, but also as one of the representatives of that benevolent 
organization, the Anti-Corn Law League." A member who 
heard the speech described Bright as " about the middle size, 
rather firmly and squarely built, with a fair, clear complexion, 
and an intelligent and pleasing expression of countenance. 
His voice is good, his enunciation distinct, and his delivery free 
from any unpleasant peculiarity or mannerism." He wore the 
usual Friend's coat, and was regarded with much interest and 
hostile curiosity on both sides of the House. 

Mr Ewart's motion was defeated, but the movement of which 
Cobden and Bright were the leaders continued to spread. In 
the autumn the League resolved to raise £100,000; an appeal 
was made to the agricultural interest by great meetings in the 
farming counties, and in November The Time's startled the world 
by declaring, in a leading article, " The League is a great fact. 
It would be foolish, nay, rash, to deny its importance." In 
London great meetings were held in Covent Garden theatre, 
at which William Johnson Fox was the chief orator, but Bright 
and Cobden were the leaders of the movement. Bright publicly 
deprecated the popular tendency to regard Cobden and himself 
as the chief movers in the agitation, and Cobden told a Rochdale 
audience that he always stipulated that he should speak first, 
and Bright should follow. His " more stately genius," as Mr 
John Morley calls it, was already making him the undisputed 
master of the feelings of his audiences. In the House of Commons 
his progress was slower. Cobden's argumentative speeches were 
regarded more sympathetically than Bright's more rhetorical 
appeals, and in a debate on Villiers's annual motion against 
the Corn Laws Bright was heard with so much impatience that 



he was obliged to sit down. In the next session (1845) h& moved 
for an inquiry into the operation of the Game Laws. At a 
meeting of county members earlier in the day Peel had advised 
them not to be led into discussion by a violent speech from the 
member for Durham, but to let the committee be granted without 
debate; Bright was not violent, and Cobden said that he did his 
work admirably, and won golden opinions from all men. The 
speech established his position in the House of Commons. In 
this session Bright and Cobden came into opposition, Cobdeo 
voting for the Maynooth Grant and Bright against it. On only 
one other occasion — a vote for South Kensington— did they go 
into opposite lobbies, during twenty-five years of parliamentary 
life. In the autumn of 1845 Bright retained Cobden in the public 
career to which Cobden had invited him four years before. 
Bright was in Scotland when a letter came from Cobden announ- 
cing his determination, forced on him by business difficulties, 
to retire from public work. Bright replied that if Cobden retired 
the mainspring of the League was gone. " I can in no degree take 
your place," he wrote. " As a second I can fight, but there are' 
incapacities about me, of which I am fully conscious, which 
prevent my being more than second in such a work as we have 
laboured in." A few days later he set off for Manchester, posting 
in that wettest of autumns through "the rain that rained away 
the Corn Laws," and on his arrival got his friends together, and 
raised the money which tided Cobden over the emergency. The 
crisis of the struggle had come. Peel's budget in 1845 was a first 
step towards Free Trade. The bad harvest and the potato disease 
drove him to the repeal of the Corn Laws, and at a meeting in 
Manchester on 2nd July 1 846 Cobden moved and B right seconded 
a motion dissolving the league. A library of twelve hundred 
volumes was presented to Bright as a memorial of the struggle. 
Bright married, in June 1847, Miss Margaret Elizabeth 
Leatham, of Wakefield, by whom he had seven children, Mr John 
Albert Bright being the eldest: In the succeeding July he was 
elected for Manchester, with Mr Milner Gibson, without a contest. 
In the new parliament, as in the previous session, he opposed 
legislation restricting the hours of labour, and, as a Noncon- 
formist, spoke against clerical control of national education. 
In 1848 he voted for Hume's household suffrage motion, and 
introduced a bill for the repeal of the Game Laws. When Lord 
John Russell brought forward his Ecclesiastical Titles Bill, 
Bright opposed it as "a little, paltry, miserable measure," 
and foretold its failure. In this parliament he spoke much on 
Irish questions. In a speech in favour of the government bill 
for a rate in aid in 1849, he won loud cheers from both sides, 
and was complimented by Disraeli for having sustained the 
reputation of that assembly. From this time forward he had the 
ear of the House, and took effective part in the debates. He 
spoke against capital punishment, against church-rates, against 
flogging in the army, and against the Irish Established Church. 
He supported Cobden's motion for the reduction of public 
expenditure, and in and out of parliament pleaded for peace. 
In the election of 1852 he was again returned for Manchester 
on the principles of free trade, electoral reform and religious 
freedom. But war was in the air, and the most impassioned 
speeches he ever delivered were addressed to this parliament 
in fruitless opposition to the Crimean War. Neither the House 
nor the country would listen. " I went to the House on Monday, " 
wrote Macaulay in March 1854, " and heard Bright say every- 
thing I thought." His most memorable speech, the greatest he 
ever made, was delivered on the 23rd of February 1855. " The 
angel of death has been abroad throughout the land. You may 
almost hear the beating of his wings," he said, and concluded 
with an appeal to the prime minister that moved the House 
as it had never been moved within living memory. There was 
a tremor in Bright's voice in the touching parts of his great 
speeches which stirred the feelings even of hostile listeners. 
It was noted for the first time in this February speech, but the 
most striking instance was in a speech on Mr Osborne Morgan's 
Burials Bill in April 1875, in which he described a Quaker 
funeral, and protested against the " miserable superstition of 
the phrase 'buried like a dog.'" "In that sense," he said, 



BRIGHT 



569 



" I shall be buried like a dog, and all those with whom I am best 
acquainted, whom I best love and esteem, will be ' buried like 
a dog.' Nay mole, my own ancestors, who in past time suffered 
persecution for what is now held to be a righteous cause, have 
all been buried like dogs, if that phrase is true." The tender, 
half-broken tones in which these words were said, the inexpress- 
ible pathos of his voice and manner, were never forgotten by 
those who heard that Wednesday morning speech. 

Bright was disqualified by illness during the whole of 1856 and 
1857. In Palmerston's penal dissolution in the latter year, 
Bright was rejected by Manchester, but in August, while ill and 
absent, Birmingham elected him without a contest. He returned 
to parliament in 1858, and in February seconded the motion which 
threw out Lord Palmerston's government. Lord Derby thereupon 
came into office for the second time, and Bright had the satisfac- 
tion of assisting in the passing of two measures which he had long 
advocated — the admission of Jews to parliament and the transfer 
of the government of India from the East India Company to the 
crown. He was now restored to full political activity, and in 
October addressed his new constituents, and started a movement 
for parliamentary reform. He spoke at great gatherings at 
Edinburgh, Glasgow, Bradford, and Manchester, and his speeches 
filled the papers. For the next nine years he was the protagonist 
of Reform. Towards the close of the struggle he told the House 
of Commons that a thousand meetings had been held, that at 
every one the doors were open for any man to enter, yet that 
an almost unanimous vote for reform had been taken. In the 
debates on the Reform Bills submitted to the House of Commons 
from 1859 to 1867, Bright's was the most influential voice Ho 
rebuked Lowe's "Botany Bay view," and described Horsman 
as retiring to his "cave of Adullam," and hooking in Lowe. 
"The party of two," he said, "reminds me of the Scotch terrier, 
which was so covered with hair that you could not tell which was 
the head and which was the tail." These and similar phrases, such 
as the excuse for withdrawing the Reform Bill in the year of the 
great budget of i860—" you cannot get twenty wagons at once 
through Temple Bar "—were in all men's mouths. It was one 
of the triumphs of Bright's oratory that it constantly produced 
these popular cries. The phrase " a free breakfast table " was 
his; and on the rejection of Forster's Compensation for Dis* 
turbance Bill he used the phrase as to Irish discontent, " Force 
is not a remedy." 

During his great reform agitation Bright had vigorously 
supported Cobden in the negotiations for the treaty of commerce 
with France, and had taken, with his usual vehemence, the side 
of the North in the discussions in England on the American Civil 
War. In March 1865 Cobden died, and Bright told the House of 
Commons he dared not even attempt to express the feelings 
which oppressed him, and sat down overwhelmed' with grief. 
Their friendship was one of the most characteristic features of 
the public life of their time. " After twenty years of intimate 
and almost brotherly friendship with him," said Bright, " I 
little knew how much I loved him till I had lost him." In June 
1865 parliament was dissolved, and Bright was returned for 
Birmingham without opposition. Palmerston's death in the early 
autumn brought Lord John Russell into power, and for the first 
time Bright gave his support to the government. Russell's 
fourth Reform Bill was introduced, was defeated by the Adul- 
lamites, and the Derby-Disraeli ministry was installed. Bright 
declared Lord Derby's accession to be adeclaration of war against 
the working classes, and roused the great towns in the demand for 
reform. Bright was the popular hero of the time. As a political 
leader the winter of 1866-1867 was the culminating point in his 
career. The Reform Bill was carried with a clause for minority 
representation, and in the autumn of 1868 Bright, with two 
Liberal colleagues, was again returned for Birmingham. Mr 
Gladstone came into power with a programme of Irish reform 
in church and land such as Bright had long urged, and he accepted 
the post of president of the Board of Trade. He thus became a 
member of the privy council, with the title of Right Honourable, 
and from this time forth was a recognized leader of the Liberal 
party in parliament and in the country. He made a great speech 



on the second reading of the Irish Church Bill, and wrote a letter 
on the House of Lords, in which he said, " In harmony with the 
nation they may go on for a long time, but throwing themselves 
athwart its course they may meet with accidents not pleasant 
for them to think of." He also spoke strongly in the same 
session in favour of the bill permitting marriage with a deceased 
wife's sister. The next session found him disqualified by a severe 
illness, which caused his retirement from office at the end of the 
year, and kept him out of public life for four years. In August 
1873 Mr Gladstone reconstructed his cabinet, and Bright returned 
to it as chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster. But his hair had 
become white, and though he spoke again with much of his former 
vigour, he was now an old man. In the election in January 1874 
Bright and his colleagues were returned for Birmingham without 
opposition. When Mr Gladstone resigned the leadership .of his 
party in 1875, Bright was chairman of the party meeting which 
chose Lord Harrington as his successor. He took a less prominent 
part in political' discussion,till the Eastern Question brought Great 
Britain to the verge of war with Russia, and his old energy 
flamed up afresh. In the debate on the vote of credit in February 
1878, he made one of his impressive speeches, urging the govern- 
ment not to increase the difficulties manufacturers had in finding 
employment for their workpeople by any single word or act 
which could shake confidence in business. The debate lasted 
five days. On the fifth day a telegram from Mr, Layard was 
published announcing that the Russians were nearing Constanti- 
nople. The day, said The Times, " was crowded with rumours, 
alarms, contradictions, fears, hopes, resolves, uncertainties." 
In both Houses Mr Layard's despatch was read, and in the 
excited Commons Mr Forster's resolution opposing the vote of 
credit was withdrawn. Bright, however, distrusted the am- 
bassador at the Porte, and gave reasons for doubting the alarming 
telegram. While he was speaking a note was put into the hands 
of Sir Stafford Nprthcote, and when Bright sat down he read it 
to the House. It Was a confirmation from the Russian prime 
minister of Bright's doubts: " There is not a word of truth in the 
rumours which have reached you." At the general election in 
1 880 he was re-elected at Birmingham, and joined Mr Gladstone's 
new government as. chancellor of. the duchy of Lancaster. For 
two sessions he spoke and voted with his colleagues, but after the 
bombardment. of the Alexandria forts he left the ministry and 
never held office again. He felt most painfully the severance 
from his old and trusted leader, but it was forced on him by his 
conviction of the danger and impolicy of foreign entanglements. 
He, however, gave a general support to Mr Gladstone's govern- 
ment. In 1883 he took the chair at a meeting of the Liberation 
Society in Mr Spurgeon's chapel; and in June of that year was 
the object of an unparalleled demonstration at Birmingham to 
celebrate his twenty-five years of service as its representative. 
At this celebration he spoke strongly of " the Irish rebel party," 
and accused the Conservatives of " alliance " with them, but 
withdrew the imputation when Sir Stafford NortEcote moved 
that such language was a breach of the privileges of the House 
of Commons. At a banquet to Lord' Spencer he accused the 
Irish members of having " exhibited a boundless sympathy for 
criminals and murderers." He refused in the House of Commons 
to apologise for these words, and was supported in his refusal 
by both sides of the House. At the Birmingham election in 1885 
he stood for the central division of the redistributed constituency; 
he was opposed by Lord Randolph Churchill, but was elected by 
a large majority. In the new parliament he voted against the 
Home Rule Bill, and it was generally felt that in the election of 
1886 which followed its defeat, when he was re-elected without 
opposition, his letters told with fatal effect against the Home Rule 
Liberals. His contribution to the discussion was a suggestion 
that the Irish members should form a grand committee to which 
every Irish bill should go after first reading. The break-up of 
the Liberal party filled him with gloom. His last speech at 
Birmingham was on 29th March 1888, at a banquet to celebrate 
Mr Chamberlain's return from his peace mission to the United 
States. He spoke, of imperial federation as a " dream and an 
absurdity." In May his illness returned, he took to his bed in 



57° 



BRIGHTLINGSEA— BRIGHT'S DISEASE 



October, and died on the 27 th of March 1889. He was buried in 
the graveyard of the meeting-house of the Society of Friends in 
Rochdale. 

Bright had much literary and social recognition in his later 
years. In 1882 he was elected lord rector of the university of 
Glasgow, and Dr Dale wrote of his rectorial address : " It was not 
the old Bright." " I am weary of public speaking," he had told 
Dr Dale; " my mind is almost a blank." He was given an 
honorary degree of the university of Oxford in 1886, and in 1888 
a statue of him was erected at Birmingham. The 3rd marquess of 
Salisbury said of him, and it sums up his character as a public 
man: " He was the greatest master of English oratory that 
this generation — I may say several generations — has seen. . . . 
At a time when much speaking has depressed, has almost exter- 
minated eloquence, he maintained that robust, powerful and 
vigorous style in which he gave fitting expression to the burning 
and noble thoughts he desired to utter." 

See The Life and Speeches of the Right Hon. John Bright, M.P., 
by George Barnett Smith, 2 vols. 8vo (1881); The Life of John 
Bright, M.P., by John M'Gilchrist, in Cassell's Representative 
Biographies (1868); John Bright, by C. A. Vince (1898); Speeches 
on Parliamentary Reform by John Bright, M.P., revised by Himself 
(1866); Speeches on Questions of Public Policy, by John Bright, 
M.P., edited by J. E. Thorold Rogers, 2 vols. 8vo (1868); Public 
Addresses, edited by J. E. Thorold Rogers, 8vo (1879); Public 
Letters of the Right Hon. John Bright, M.P., collected by H. T- Leech 
(1885). • (P. W. C.) 

BRIGHTLINGSEA (pronounced Brittlesea), a port and fish- 
ing station in the Harwich parliamentary division of Essex, 
England, on a creek opening from the east shore of the Colnc 
estuary, the terminus of a branch from Colchester of the Great 
Eastern railway, 625 m. E.N.E. of London. Pop. of urban 
district (1901) 4501. The Colchester oyster beds are mainly 
in this part of the Colne, and the oyster fishery is the chief 
industry. Boat-building is carried on. This is also a favourite 
yachting centre. The church, of All Saints, principally Per- 
pendicular, has interesting monuments and brasses, and a fine 
lofty tower and west front. Brightlingsea, which appears in 
Domesday, is a member of the Cinque Port of Sandwich in Kent. 
Near the opposite shore of the creek is St Osyth's priory, which 
originated as a nunnery founded by Osyth, a grand-daughter of 
Penda, king of Mercia, martyred (c. 653) by Norse invaders. 
A foundation for Augustinian canons followed on the site early 
in the 12th century. The remains, incorporated with a modern 
residence, include a late Perpendicular gateway, abbots' tower, 
clock tower and crypt. The gateway, an embattled structure 
with flanking turrets, is particularly fine, the entire front being 
panelled and ornamented with canopied niches. The church of 
St Osyth, also Perpendicular in the main, is of interest. 

BRIGHTON, a watering-place of Bourke county, Victoria, 
Australia, 7§ m. by rail S.E. of Melbourne, of which it is practi- 
cally a suburb. It stands on the east shore of Port Phillip, and 
has two piers, a great extent of sandy beach and numerous 
beautiful villas. Pop. (1901) 10,029. 

BRIGHTON, a municipal, county and parliamentary borough 
of Sussex, England, one of the best-known seaside resorts in the 
United Kingdom, 51 m. S. from London by the London, Brighton 
& South Coast railway. Pop. (1901) 123,478. Its ready access- 
ibility from the metropolis is the chief factor in its popularity. 
It is situated on the seaward slope of the South Downs; the 
position is sheltered from inclement winds, and the climate 
is generally mild. The sea-front, overlooking the English 
Channel, stretches nearly 4 m. from Kemp Town on the east to 
Hove (a separate municipal borough) on the west. Inland, 
including the suburb of Preston, the town extends some 2 m. 
The tendency of the currents in the Channel opposite Brighton 
is to drive the shingle eastward, and encroachments of the sea 
were frequent and serious until the erection of a massive sea-wall, 
begun about 1830, 60 ft. high, 23 ft. thick at the base, and 3 ft. 
at the summit. There are numerous modern churches and 
chapels, many of them very handsome; and the former parish 
church of St Nicholas remains, a Decorated structure containing 
a Norman font and a memorial to the great duke of Wellington. 
The incumbency of Trinity Chapel was held by the famous 



preacher Frederick William Robertson (1847-1853). The town 
hall and the parochial offices are the principal administrative 
buildings. Numerous institutions contribute to the entertain- 
ment of visitors. Of these the most remarkable is the Pavilion, 
built as a residence for the prince regent (afterwards George IV.) 
and remodelled in 1819 by the architect, John Nash, in a 
grotesque Eastern style of architecture. In 1849 it was purchased 
by the town for £53,000, and is devoted to various public uses, 
containing a museum, assembly-rooms and picture-galleries. 
The detached building, formerly the stables, is converted into 
a fine concert hall; it is lighted by a vast glazed dome approach- 
ing that of St Paul's cathedral, London, in dimensions. There 
are several theatres and music-halls. The aquarium, the property 
of the corporation, contains an excellent marine collection, but 
is also used as a concert hall and winter garden, and a garden 
is laid out on its roof. The Booth collection of British birds, 
bequeathed to the corporation by E. T. Booth, was opened in 
1893. There are two piers, of which the Palace pier, near the 
site of the old chain pier (1823), which was washed away in 1896, 
is near the centre of the town, while the West pier is towards 
Hove. Preston and Queen's parks are the principal of several 
public recreation grounds; and the racecourse at Kemp Town 
is also the property of the town. Educational establishments 
are numerous, and include Brighton College, which ranks high 
among English public schools. There are municipal schools of 
science, technology and art. St Mary's Hall (1836) is devoted to 
the education of poor clergymen's daughters. Among many 
hospitals, the county hospital (1828), " open to the sick and lame 
poor of every country and nation," may be mentioned. There 
are an extensive mackerel and herring fishery, and motor 
engineering works. The parliamentary borough, which includes 
the parish of Hove, returns two members. The county borough 
was created in 1888. The municipal borough is under a mayor, 
14 aldermen and 42 councillors. Area, 2536 acres. 

Although there is evidence of Roman and Saxon occupation 
of the site, the earliest mention of Brighton (Bristelmeston, 
Brichelmestone, Brighthelmston) is the Domesday Book record 
that it? three manors belonged to Earl Godwin and were held by 
William de Watenne. Of these, two passed to the priories of 
Lewes and Michelham respectively, and after the dissolution 
of the monasteries were subject to frequent sale and division. 
The third descended to the earls of Arundel, falling to the share 
of the duke of Norfolk in 141 5, and being divided in 1502 between 
the families of Howard and Berkeley. That Brighton was a 
large fishing village in 1086 is evident from the rent of 4000 
herrings; in 1285 it had a separate constable, and in 1333 it was 
assessed for a tenth, and fifteenth at £5:4:6!, half the assess- 
ment of Shoreham. In 1340 there were no merchants there, only 
tenants of lands, but its prosperity increased during the 15th- 
and 1 6th centuries, and it was assessed at £6:12:8 in 1534. 
There is, however, no indication that it was a borough. In 1580 
commissioners sent to decide disputes between the fishermen 
and landsmen found that from time immemorial Brighton had 
been governed by two head boroughs sitting in the borough 
court, and assisted by a council called the Twelve. This con- 
stitution disappeared before 1772, when commissioners .were 
appointed. Brighton refused a charter offered by George,' 
prince of Wales, but was incorporated in 1854. It had become 
a parliamentary borough in 1832. From a fishingtown in 1656 
it became a fashionable resort in 1756; its popularity increased 
after the visit of the prince of Wales (see Georce IV.) to the 
duke of Cumberland in 1783, and was ensured by his building 
the Pavilion in 1784-1787, and his adoption of it as his principal 
residence; and his association with Mrs Fitzherbcrt at Brighton 
was the starting-point of its fashionable repute. 

See Victoria County History-^-Sussex; Sussex Archaeological Society 
Transactions, vol. ii. ; L. Melville, Brighton^ its History, its Follies and, 
its Fashions (London, 1909). 

BRIGHT'S DISEASE, a term in medicine applied to a class 
of diseases of the kidneys (acute and chronic nephritis) which 
have as their most prominent symptom the presence of albumen 
in the urine, and frequently also the coexistence of dropsy. 



BRIGNGLES— BRINDISI 



57i 



These associated symptoms in connexion with kidney disease 
were first described in 1827 by Dr Richard Bright (1 789-1858). 
Since that period it has been established that the symptoms, 
instead of being, as was formerly supposed, the result of one form 
of disease of the kidneys, may be dependent on various morbid 
conditions of those organs (see Kidney Diseases) . Hence the 
term Bright's disease, which is retained in medical nomenclature 
in honour of Dr Bright, must be understood as having a generic 
application. 

The symptoms are usually of a severe character. Pain in 
the back, vomiting and febrile disturbance commonly usher 
in the attack. Dropsy, varying in degree from slight puffiness 
of the face to an accumulation of fluid sufficient to distend the 
whole body, and to occasion serious embarrassment to respiration, 
is a very common accompaniment. The urine is reduced in 
quantity, is of dark, smoky or bloody colour, and exhibits to 
chemical reaction the presence of a large amount of albumen, 
while, under the microscope, blood corpuscles and casts, as above 
mentioned, are found in abundance. 

This state of acute inflammation may by its severity destroy 
life, or, short of this, may by continuance result in the establish- 
ment of one of the chronic forms of Bright's disease. On the 
other hand an arrest of the inflammatory action frequently 
occurs, and this is marked by the increased amount of the urine, 
and the gradual disappearance of its albumen and other abnormal 
constituents; as also by the subsidence of the dropsy and the 
rapid recovery of strength. 

In the treatment of acute Bright's disease, good results are 
often obtained from local depletion, from warm baths and from 
the careful employment of diuretics and purgatives. Chronic 
Bright's disease is much less amenable to treatment, but by 
efforts to maintain the strength and improve the quality of the 
blood by strong nourishment, and at the same time by guarding 
against the risks of complications, life may often be prolonged 
in comparative comfort, and even a certain measure of improve- 
ment be experienced. 

BRIGNOLES, a town in the department of Var in the S.E. 
of France, 36 m. by rail N. of Toulon. Pop. (1906) 3639. It 
is built at a height of 754 ft. above the sea-level, in a fertile 
valley, and on the right bank of the Carami river. It contains 
the old summer palace of the counts of Provence, and has an 
active trade, especially in prunes, known as prunes de Brignoles. 
Its old name was Villa Puerorum, as the children of the counts 
of Provence were often brought up here. It was sacked on 
several occasions during the religious wars in the 16th century. 
Twelve miles to the N.W. is St Maximin (with a fine medieval 
church), which is one of the best starting-points for the most 
famous pilgrimage resort in Provence, the SainteBaume, wherein 
St Mary Magdalene is said to have taken refuge. This is 20 m. 
distant by road. (W. A. B. C.) 

BRIHASPATI, or Brahmanaspati (" god of strength "), a 
deity of importance in early Hindu mythology. In the Rig- 
veda he is represented as the god of prayer, aiding Indra in his 
conquest of the cloud-demon, and at times appears to be identified 
with Agni, god of fire. He is the offspring of Heaven and Earth, 
the two worlds; is the inspirer of prayer and the guide and 
protector of the pious. He is pictured as having seven mouths, 
a hundred wings and horns and is armed with bow and arrows 
and an axe. He rides in a chariot drawn by red horses. In 
the later scriptures he is represented as a Rishi or seer. 

See A. A. Macdonell, Vedic Mythology (Strassburg, 1897). 

BRIL, PAUL (1554-1626), Flemish painter, was born at 
Antwerp. The success of his elder brother Matthew (1 550-1584) 
in the Vatican induced him to go to Rome to live. On the death 
of Matthew, Paul, who far surpassed him as an artist, succeeded 
to his pensions and employments. He painted landscapes with 
a depth of chiaroscuro then little practised in Italy, and intro- 
duced into them figures well drawn and finely coloured. One 
of his best compositions is the " Martyrdom of St Clement," 
in the Sala Clementina of the Vatican. 

BRILL, the name given to a flat-fish (Psetta laevis, or Rhombus 
laevis) which is a species closely related to the turbot, differing 



from it in having very small scales, being smaller in size, having 
no bony tubercules in the skin, and being reddish in colour. 
It abounds on parts of the British coast, and is only less favoured 
for the table than the turbot itself. 

BRILLAT-SAVARIN, ANTHELME (1755-1826), French gas- 
tronomist, was born at Belley, France, on the 1st of April 1755. 
In 1789 he was a deputy, in 1793 mayor of Belley. To escape 
proscription he fled from France to Switzerland, and went 
thence to the United States, where he played in the orchestra 
of a New York theatre. On the fall of Robespierre he returned 
to France, and in 1 797 became a member of the court of cassation. 
He wrote various volumes on political economy and law, but his 
name is famous for his Physiologic du gout, a compendium of the 
art of dining. Many editions of this work have been published. 
Brillat-Savarin died in Paris on the 2nd of February 1826. 

BRIMSTONE, the popular name of sulphur (</.».), particularly 
of the commercial " roll sulphur." The word means literally 
"burning stone"; the first part being formed from the stem 
of the Mid. Eng. brennen, to burn. Earlier forms of the word 
are brenstone, bernstone, brynsione, &c. 

BRIN, BENEDETTO (1833-1898), Italian naval administrator, 
was born at Turin on the 17th of May 1833, and until the age 
of forty worked with distinction as a naval engineer. In 1873 
Admiral Saint-Bon, minister of marine, appointed him under- 
secretary of state. The two men completed each other; Saint- 
Bon conceived a type of ship, Brin made the plans and directed 
its construction. On the advent of the Left to power in 1876, 
Brin was appointed minister of marine by Depretis, a capacity 
in which he continued the programme of Saint-Bon, while en- 
larging and completing it in such way as to form the first organic 
scheme for the development of the Italian fleet. The huge 
warships " Italia " and " Dandolo " were his work, though he 
afterwards abandoned their type in favour of smaller and faster 
vessels of the " Varese " and the " Garibaldi " class. By his 
initiative Italian naval industry, almost non-existent in 1873, 
made rapid progress. During his eleven years' ministry (1876- 
1878 with Depretis, 1884-1891 with Depretis and Crispi, 1896- 
1898 with Rudini), he succeeded in creating large private ship- 
yards, engine works and metallurgical works for the production of 
armour, steel plates and guns. In 1892 he entered the Giolitti 
cabinet as minister for foreign affairs, accompanying, in that 
capacity, the king and queen of Italy to Potsdam, but showed 
weakness towards France on the occasion of the massacre of 
Italian workmen at Aigues-Mortes. He died on the 24th of 
May 1898, while minister of marine in the Rudini cabinet. He, 
more than any other man, must be regarded as the practical 
creator of the Italian navy. 

BRINDABAN, a town of British India, in the Muttra district 
of the United Provinces, on the right bank of the Jumna, 6 m. 
N.of Muttra. Pop. (1901) 22,717. Brindabanisoneof themost 
popular places of pilgrimage in India, being associated with the 
cult of Krishna as a shepherd. It contains bathing-stairs, tanks 
and wells, and a great number of handsome temples, of which the 
finest is that of Govind Deva, a cruciform vaulted building of 
red sandstone, dating from 1590. The town was founded earlier 
in the same century. 

BRINDISI (anc. Brundisium, q.v.), a seaport town and 
archiepiscopal see of Apulia, Italy, in the province of Lecce, 
24 m. N.W. by rail from the town of Lecce, and 346 m. from 
Ancona. Pop. (1861) 8000; (1871) 13,75s; (1001) 25,317. 
The chief importance of Brindisi is due to its position as a 
starting-point for the East. The inner harbour, admirably 
sheltered and 27 to 30 ft. in depth, allows ocean steamers to lie 
at the quays. Brindisi has, however, been abandoned by the 
large steamers of the Peninsular & Oriental Steam Navigation 
Company, which had called there since 1870, but since 1898 call 
at Marseilles instead; small express boats, carrying the mails, 
still leave every week, connecting with the larger steamers at 
Port Said; but the number of passengers leaving the port, which 
for the years 1893-1897 averaged 14,728, was only 7608 in 1905, 
and only 943 of these were carried by the P. & O. boats. The 
harbour railway station was not completed until 1905 (Consular 



572 



BRINDLEY— BRIONIAN ISLANDS 



Report, No. 3672, 1906, pp. 13 sqq.). The port was cleared in 
1905 by 1492 vessels of 1,486,269 tons. The imports represented 
a value of £629,892 and the exports a value of £663,201— an 
increase of £84,077 and £57,807 respectively on the figures of 
the previous year, while in 1899 the amounts, which were below 
the average, were only £298,400 and £253,000. The main imports 
are coal, flour, sulphur, timber and metals; and the ' main 
exports, wine and spirits, oil and dried fruits. 

Frederick II. erected a castle, with huge round towers, to guard 
the inner harbour; it is now a convict prison. The cathedral, 
ruined by earthquakes, was restored in 1 743-1 749, but has some 
remains of its mosaic pavement ( 1 1 7 8) . The baptismal church of 
S. Giovanni al Sepolcro (nth century) is now a museum. The 
town was captured in 836 by the Saracens, and destroyed by 
them; but was rebuilt in the nth century by Lupus the proto- 
spatharius, Byzantine governor. In 107 1 it fell into the hands of 
the Normans, and frequently appears in the history of the Crusades, 
Early in the 14th century the inner port was blocked by Giovanni 
Orsini, prince of Taranto; the town was devastated by pestilence 
in 1348, and was plundered in 1352 and 1383; but even greater 
damage was done by the earthquake of 1456: (T. As,) 

BRINDLEY, JAMES (1716-1772), English engineer, was born 
at Thornsett, Derbyshire, in 1716. His parents were in very 
humble circumstances, and he received little or no education, At 
the age of seventeen he was apprenticed to a millwright near 
Macclesfield, and soon after completing his apprenticeship he 
set up in business for himself as a wheelwright at Leek, quickly 
becoming known for his ingenuity and skill in repairing all kinds 
of machinery. In 1752 he designed and set up an engine for 
draining some coal-pits at Clifton in Lancashire. Three years 
later he extended his reputation by completing the machinery 
for a silk-mill at Colleton. In 1759, when the duke of Bridge- 
water was anxious to improve the outlets for the coal on his 
estates, Brindley advised the construction of a canal from Worsley 
to Manchester. The difficulties in the Way were great, but all 
were surmounted by his genius, and his crowning triumph was 
the construction of an aqueduct to carry the canal at ah elevation 
of 39 ft. over the river Irwell at Barton. The great success of 
this canal encouraged similar projects, and Brindley was soon 
engaged in extending his first work to the Mersey, at Runcorn. 
He then designed and nearly completed what he called the Grand 
Trunk Canal, connecting the Trent and Humber with the Mersey. 
The Staffordshire andWorcestershire, the Oxford and the Chester- 
field Canals were also planned by him, and altogether he laid out 
over 360 m. of canals. He died at Turnhurst, Staffordshire, on 
the 30th of September 1772. Brindley retained to the last a 
peculiar roughness of character and demeanour; but his innate 
power of thought more than compensated for his lack of training. 
It is told of him that when in any difficulty he used to retire to 
bed, and there remain thinking out his problem until the solution 
became clear to him. His mechanical ingenuity and fertility 
of resource were very remarkable, and he undoubtedly possessed 
the engineering faculty in a very high degree. He was ' an 
enthusiastic believer in canals, and his reported answer, when 
asked the use of navigable rivers, " To feed canals," is character- 
istic, if not altogether authentic. 

BRINTON, DANIEL GARRISON (1837-1899), American 
archaeologist and ethnologist, was born at Thorhbury, Pehn+ 
sylvania, on the 13th of May 1837. He graduated at Yale in 
1858, studied for two years in the Jefferson Medical College, and 
then for one year travelled in Europe and continued his studies 
at Paris and Heidelberg. From 1862 to 1865, during the Civil 
War in America, he was a surgeon in the Union army, acting for 
one year, 1864-1865, as surgeon in charge of the U.S. Army 
general hospital at Quincy, Illinois. After the war he practised 
medicine at Westchester, Pennsylvania, for several years; was 5 
the editor of a weekly periodical, the Medical and Surgical 
Reporter, in Philadelphia, from 1874 to 1887; became professor 
of ethnology and archaeology in the Academy of Natural Sciences 
in Philadelphia in 1884, and was professor of American lin- 
guistics and archaeology in the university of Pennsylvania from 
1886 until his death at Philadelphia on the 31st of July 1899. 



He was a member of numerous learned societies in the United 
States and in Europe) and was president at different times of the 
Numismatic and Antiquarian Society of Philadelphia, < of the 
American Folk-Lore Society and of the American Association 
for the Advancement of Science. During the period from 1859 
(when he published hfe first book) to 1899, he wrote a score of 
books, several of them of great value, and a large number of 
pamphlets, brochures; addresses and magazine articles. His 
principal works are: — The Myths of the New World (1868), the 
first attempt to analyse and correlate, according to true 
scientific principles, the mythology of the American Indians; The 
■Religious Sentiment: Its Sources and Aim: A Contribution to 
the Science and Philosophy of Religion (1876); American Hero 
Myths (1882); Essays of an Americanist (1890); Races and 
Peoples (1890); The American Race (1891); The Pursuit of 
Happiness (1893); and Religions of Primitive People (1897). 
In addition, he- edited and published a Library of American 
Aboriginal Literature (8 vols. 1882-1890), a valuable contribution 
to the science of anthropology in America. Of the eight volumes; 
six were edited by Brinton himself, one by Horatio Hale and 
one by A. S. Gatschet. ■ 

BRINVILLIERS, MARIE MADELEINE MARGUERITE 
D'AUBRAY, Marquise de (c. 1630-1676), French poisoner, 
daughter of Dreux d'Aubray, civil lieutenant of Paris, was born 
in Paris about 1630. In 1651 she married the marquis de 
Brinvilliers, then serving in the regiment of Normandy. Con- 
temporary evidence describes the marquise at this time as a 
pretty and much-courted little woman, with a fascinating air 
of childlike innocence. In 1659 her husband introduced her 
to his friend Godin de Sainte-Croix, a handsome young cavalry 
officer of extravagant tastes and bad reputation, whose mistress 
she became* Their relations soon created a public scandal, arid 
as the marquis de Brinvilliers, who had left France to avoid his 
creditors, made no effort to terminate them, M. d'Aubray 
secured the arrest of Sainte-Croix on a Uttrede cachet. For a year 
Sainte-Croix remained a prisoner in the Bastille, where he is 
popularly supposed to have acquired' a knowledge of poisons 
from his fellow-prisoner, the Italian poisoner Exili. When he 
left the Bastille, he plotted with his willing mistress his revenge 
upon her father. She cheerfully undertook to experiment with 
the poisons which Sainte-Croix,possibly with the help of a chemist, 
Christopher Glaser, prepared, and found subjects ready to hand 
in the poor who sought her charity, and the sick whom she 
visited in the hospitals. Meanwhile Sainte-Croix, completely 
ruined financially, enlarged his original idea, and determined 
that not only M. Dreux d'Aubray but also the latter's two sons 
and other daughter should be poisoned, so that the marquise de 
Brinvilliers and: himself might come into possession of the large 
family fortune. In February 1666, satisfied with the efficiency 
of Sainte- Croix's preparations and with the ease with which they 
could be administered without detection, the marquise poisoned 
her father, and in 1670, with the connivance of their valet La 
CKaussee, her two brothers. A post-mortem examination 
suggested the real cause of death, but no suspicion Was directed 
to the murderers. Before any attempt could be made on' the 
life of Mile Therese d'Aubray, Sainte-Croix suddenly died. As 
he left no heirs the police' were called in, and discovered among 
his: belongings documents seriously incriminating the marquise 
and La Ciiaiissee.: The latter was arrested, tortured into a 
complete confession, and broken alive on the wheel (1673), but 
the marquise escaped, taking refuge first probably in England, 
then in Germany, and finally in a convent at Liege, whence she 
was decoyed by a police emissary disguised as a priest. A full 
account of her life and crimes was found among her papers. 
Her attempt to commit suicide was frustrated, and she was 
taken to Paris, where she was beheaded and her body burned on 
the 16th. of July 1676. 

See G. Roullier.La Marquise de Brinvilliers (Paris, 1883) ; Toiseleur, 
Trois enigmes historiques (Paris, 1882). 

BRIONIAN ISLANDS, a group of small islands, in the Adriatic 
Sea, off the west coast of Istria, from which they are separated 
by the narrow Canale di Fasana. They belong to Austria and 



BRIOSGO^BRISBANE, SIR T. M. 



573 



are twelve in number. Up to a recent period they were chiefly 
noted for their quarries, which have been worked for centuries 
and have supplied material not only for the palaces and bridges 
of Venice and the whole Adriatic coast, but latterly for Vienna 
and Berlin also. As they command the entrance to the naval 
harbour of Pola, a strong fortress, ■"■ Fort Tegctthoff;" has been 
erected on the largest of them (Brioni), together with minor 
fortifications on some of the others. The islands are inhabited 
by about 100 Italian quarrymen. 

BRIOSCO, ANDREA (c. 1470-1532), Italian sculptor and 
architect,known as Riccio (" curly-headed "), was born at Padua. 
In architecture he is known by the church of Sta Giustina in his 
native city, but he is most famous as a worker in metal. His 
masterpieces are the bronze Paschal candelabrum (n ft. high) 
in the choir of the Santo (S. Antonio) at Padua (1515), and the 
two bronze reliefs (1507) of " Da'vid dancing before the Ark " 
and " Judith and Holofernes " in the same church. His bronze 
and marble tomb of the physician Girolamo della Torre in San 
Fermo at Verona was beautifully decorated with reliefs, which 
were taken away by the French and are now in the Louvre. A 
number of other works which emanated from his workshop are 
attributed to him; and he has been suggested, but doubtfully, as 
the author of a fine bronze relief, a " Dance of Nymphs," in 
the Wallace collection at Hertford House, London. 

BRIOUDE, a town of central France, capital of an arrondisse- 
ment in the department of Haute-Loire, on the left bank of the 
Allier, 1467 ft. above the sea, 47 m. N.W. of Le Puy on the Paris- 
Lyon railway. Pop. (1906) 4581. Brioude has to a great extent 
escaped modernization and still has many old' houses and 
fountains. Its streets are narrow and irregular, but the town 
is surrounded by wide boulevards lined with trees. The only 
building of consequence is the church of St Julian (12th and 13th 
centuries) in the Romanesque style of Auvergne, of which the 
choir, with its apse and radiating chapels and the mosaic orna- 
mentation of the exterior, is a fine example. Brioude is the seat 
of a sub-prefect, and of tribunals of first instance and of com- 
merce. The plain in which it is situated is of great fertility; 
the grain trade of the town is considerable, and market-gardening 
is carried on in the outskirts. The industries include brewing, 
saw-milling, lace-making and antimony mining and founding. 

Brioude, the ancient Brivas, was formerly a place of consider- 
able importance. It was in turn besieged and captured by 
the Goths (532), the Burgundians, the Saracens (733) and the 
Normans. In 1181 the viscount of Polignac, who had sacked 
the town two years previously, made public apology in front of 
the church, and established a body of twenty-five knights to 
defend the relics of St Julian. For some time after 1361 the 
town was the headquarters of Berenger, lord of Castelnau, 
who was at the head of one of the bands of military adventurers 
which then devastated France. The knights (or canons, as they 
afterwards became) of St Julian bore the title of counts of 
Brioude, and for a long time opposed themselves to the civic 
liberties of the inhabitants. 

BRIQUEMAULT (or Briquemattt), FRANCOIS DE BEAU- 
VAIS, Seigneur de (c. 1502-1572), leader of the Huguenots 
during the first religious wars, was the son of Adrien de Brique- 
mault and Alexane de Sainte Ville, and was born about 1502. 
His first campaign was under the count of Brissac in the Pied- 
montese wars. On his return to France in 1554 he joined 
Admiral Coligny. Charged with the defence of Rouen, in 1562, 
he resigned in favour of Montgomery, to -whom the prince of 
Conde had entrusted the task, and went over to England, where 
he concluded the treaty of Hampton Court on the 20th of 
September. He then returned to France, and took Dieppe 
from the Catholics before the conclusion of peace. If his share 
in the second religious war was less important, he played a very 
active part in the third. He fought at Jarnac, Roche-Abeille 
and Montcontour, assisted in the siege of Poitiers, was nearly 
captured by the Catholics at Bourg-Dieu, re-victualled Vezelay, 
and almost surprised Bourges. In 1570, being charged by 
Coligny to stop the army of the princes in its ascent of the 
Rhone valley, he crossed Burgundy and effected his junction 



with the admiral at St'Etienne in May. On the 21st of the 
following June he assisted in achieving the victory of Arnay- 
le-Duc, and was then employed to negotiate a marriage between 
the prince of Navarre and Elizabeth of England. Being in Paris 
on the night of St Bartholomew he took refuge in the house 
of the English ambassador, but was arrested there. With his 
friend Arnaud de Cavagnes he was delivered over to the parle- 
ment, and failed in courage when confronted with his judges, 
seeking to escape death by unworthy means. He was con- 
demned, nevertheless, on the 27th of October 1572, to the last 
penalty and to the confiscation of his property, and on the 20th 
of October he and Cavagnes were executed. 

See Histoire eccUsiaslique des Ugliscs rfformSes au royaume de 
France , (new edition, 1884), vol. ii. ; La France protestante (2nd 
edition), vol. ii., article " Beauvais." 

BRIQUETTE (diminutive of Fr. brique, brick), a form of fuel, 
known also as " patent fuel," consisting of small coal compressed 
into solid blocks by the aid of some binding material. For 
making briquettes the small coal, if previously washed, is dried 
to reduce the moisture to at most 4% , and if necessary crushed 
in a disintegrator. It is then incorporated in a pug mill with 
from 8 to 10% of gas pitch, and softened by heating to between 
70° and 90° C. to a plastic mass, which is moulded into blocks 
and compacted by a pressure of f to 2 tons per sq. in. in a machine 
with a rotating die-plate somewhat like that used in making 
semi-plastic clay bricks. When cold, the briquettes, which 
usually weigh from 7 to 20 lb each, although smaller sizes are 
made for domestic use, become quite hard, and can be handled 
with less breakage than the original coal. Their principal use 
is as fuel for marine and locomotive boilers, the evaporative 
value being about the same as, or somewhat greater than, that 
of coal. The principal seat of the manufacture in Great Britain 
is in South Wales, where the dust and smalls resulting from 
the handling of the best steam coals (which are very brittle) 
are obtainable in large quantities and find no other use. Some 
varieties of lignite, when crushed and pressed at a steam heat, 
soften sufficiently to furnish compact briquettes without requiring 
any cementing material. Briquettes of this kind are made to a 
large extent from the tertiary lignites in the vicinity of Cologne; 
they are used mainly for house fuel on the lower Rhine and in 
Holland, and occasionally come to London. 

BRISBANE, SIR THOMAS MAKDOTJGALL (1773-1860), 
Scottish soldier and astronomer, was born on the 23rd of July 
1773 at Brisbane House, near Largs, in Ayrshire. He entered 
the army ini789 ; , and served in Flanders, the West Indies and 
the Peninsula. In 1814' he was sent to North America; on the 
return of Napoleon from Elba he was recalled, but did not arrive 
in time to take part in the battle of Waterloo. In 182 1 he was 
appointed governor of New South Wales. During the four years 
for ; which he held that office, although he allowed the finances 
of the colony to get into confusion, he endeavoured to improve 
its condition by introducing the vine, sugar-cane and tobacco 
plant, and by encouraging the breeding of horses and the re- 
clamation of land. At his instigation exploring parties were sent 
out, and one of these discovered the Brisbane river which was 
named after him. He established an astronomical observatory 
at Paramatta in 1822, and the Brisbane Catalogue, which was 
printed in 1835 and contained 7385 stars, was the result of 
observations made there in 1822-1826. The observatory was 
discontinued in 1855. After his return to Scotland he resided 
chiefly at Makerstoun in Roxburghshire, where, as at Brisbane 
House, he had a large and admirably equipped observatory. 
Important magnetic observations were begun at Makerstoun 
in 1841, and the results gained him in 1848 the Keith prize of 
the Royal Society of Edinburgh, in whose Transactions they 
were published. In 1836 he was made a baronet, and G.C.B. 
in 1837; and in 1841 he became general. He was elected 
president of the Royal Society of Edinburgh after the death 
of Sir Walter Scott in 1833, and in the following year acted 
as president of the British Association. He died at Brisbane 
House on the 27th of January i860. He founded two gold 
medals for the encouragement of scientific research, one in the 



574 



BRISBANE— BRISSON 



award of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and the other in that 
of the Scottish Society of Arts. 

BRISBANE, the capital of Queensland, Australia. It is situ- 
ated in Stanley county, on the banks of the river Brisbane, 25 m. 
from its mouth in Moreton Bay. It is built on a series of hills 
rising from the river-banks, but some parts of it, such as Wool- 
longabba and South Brisbane, occupy low-lying flats, which have 
sometimes been the scene of disastrous floods. The main streets 
and principal buildings of the city are situated on a tongue of 
land formed by a southward bend of the river. The extremity of 
the tongue, however, is open. Here, adjoining one another, are 
the botanical gardens, the grounds surrounding Government 
House, the official residence of the governor of the colony, and 
the Houses of Parliament, and Queen's Park, which is used as 
a recreation ground. From this park Albert Street runs for 
about three-quarters of a mile through the heart of the city, 
leading to Albert Park, in which is the observatory. Queen's 
Street, the main thoroughfare of Brisbane, crosses Albert Street 
midway between the two parks and leads across the Victoria 
Bridge to the separate city of South Brisbane on the other side 
of the river. The Victoria Bridge is a fine steel structure, which 
replaced the bridge swept away by floods in February 1893. 
Brisbane has a large number of buildings of architectural merit, 
though in some cases their effect is marred by the narrowness of 
the streets in which they stand. Among the most prominent 
are the Houses of Parliament, the great domed custom-house 
on the river-bank, the lands office, the general post-office, the town 
halls of Brisbane and South Brisbane, and the opera house. The 
Roman Catholic cathedral of St Stephen (Elizabeth Street) is 
an imposing building, having a detached campanile containing 
the largest bell in Australia. The foundatten-stone of the Angli- 
can cathedral, on an elevated site in Ann Street, was laid by the 
prince of Wales (as duke of York) in 1901. The city is the seat of 
a Roman Catholic archbishop and of an Anglican bishop.. Many 
of the commercial and private buildings are also worthy of notice, 
especially the Queensland National Bank, a classic Italian struc- 
ture, the massive treasury buildings, one of the largest erections 
in Australia, the Queensland Club with its wide colonnades in 
Italian Renaissance style, and the great buildings of the Brisbane 
Newspaper Company. Brisbane is well provided with parks and 
open spaces; the Victoria Park and Bowen Park are the largest; 
the high-lying Mount Coot-tha commands fine views, and there 
are other parks and numerous recreation grounds in various 
parts of the city, besides the admirable botanical gardens and 
the gardens of the Acclimatization Society. Electric tramways 
and omnibuses serve all parts of the city, and numerous ferries 
ply across the river. There is railway communication to north, 
south and west. By careful dredging, the broad river is navig- 
able as far as Brisbane for ocean-going vessels, and the port is 
the terminal port for the Queensland mail steamers to Europe, 
and is visited by steamers to China, Japan and America, and 
for various inter-colonial lines. There is wharf accommodation 
on both banks of the river, a graving dock which can be used by 
vessels up to 5000 tons, and two patent slips which can take up 
ships of 1000 and 400 tons respectively. The exports are chiefly 
coal, sheep, tallow, wool, frozen meat and hides. The annual 
value of imports and exports exceeds seven and nine millions' 
sterling respectively. There are boot factories, soap works, 
breweries, tanneries, tobacco works, &c. The climate is on the 
whole dry and healthy, but during summer the temperature is 
high, the mean shade temperature being about 70 F. 

Brisbane was founded in 1825 as a penal settlement, taking 
its name from Sir Thomas Brisbane, then governor of Australia; 
in 1842 it became a free settlement and in 1859 the capital of 
Queensland, the town up to that time having belonged to: New 
South Wales. It was incorporated in the same year. South 
Brisbane became a separate city in 1 003 . The municipal govern- 
ment of the city, and also of South Brisbane, is in the hands of 
a mayor and ten aldermen; the suburbs are controlled by shire 
councils and divisional boards. The chief suburbs are Kangaroo 
Point, Fortitude Valley, New Farm, Red Hill, Paddington, 
Milton, Toowong, Breakfast Creek, Bulimba, Woollongabba, 



Highgate and Indooroopilly. The population of the metropolitan 
area in 1901 was 119,907; of the city proper, 28,953; 0I South 
Brisbane, 25,481. 

BRISEUX, CHARLES ETIENNE (c. 1680-1754), French 
architect. He was especially successful as a designer of internal 
decorations — mantelpieces, mirrors, doors and overdoors, ceilings, 
consoles, candelabra, wall panellings and other fittings, chiefly 
in the Louis Quinze mode. He was also an industrious writer 
on architectural subjects. His principal works are: — L'Archu 
tecture moderne (2 vols., 1728); L'Art de bdlir les maisons de 
campagne (2 vols., 1743); Traiti du beau essentiel dans les arts, 
appliqui particulierement a I' architecture (1752); and Traits des 
proportions harmoniques. 

BRISSAC, DUKES OF. The fief of Brissac in Anjou was 
acquired at the end of the 15 th century by a noble French family 
named Cosse belonging to th'e same province. Rene de Cosse 
married into the Gouffier family, just then very powerful at 
court, and became premier panelier (chief pantler) to Louis XII. 
Two of his sons were marshals of France. Brissac was made a 
countship in 1560 for Charles, the eldest, who was grandmaster 
of artillery, and governor of Piedmont and of Picardy. The 
second, Artus, who held the offices of grand panetier of France and 
superintendent of finance, distinguished himself in the religious 
wars. Charles II. de Cosse fought for the League, and as 
governor of Paris opened the gates of that town to Henry IV., 
who created him marshal of France in 1594. Brissac was raised 
to a duchy in the peerage of France in 161 1. Louis Hercule 
Timoleon de Coss6, due de Brissac, and commandant of the con- 
stitutional guard of Louis XVI., was killed at Versailles on the 
9th of September 1792 for his devotion to the king. (M. P.*) 

BRISSON, EUGENE HENRI (1835- ), French statesman, 
was born at Bourges on the 31st of July 1835. He followed his 
father's profession of advocate, and having made himself con- 
spicuous in opposition during the last days of the empire, was 
appointed deputy-mayor of Paris after its overthrow. He was 
elected to the Assembly on the 8th of February 1 87 1 , as a member 
of the extreme Left. While not approving of the Commune, he 
was the first to propose amnesty for the condemned (on the 13th 
of September 1871), but the proposal was voted down. He 
strongly supported obligatory primary education, and was a 
firm anti-clerical. He was president of the chamber from 1881 — 
replacing Gambetta— to March 1885, when he became prime 
minister upon the resignation of Jules Ferry; but he resigned 
when, after the general elections of that year, he only just 
obtained a majority for the vote of credit for the Tongking 
expedition. He remained conspicuous as a public man, took a 
prominent part in exposing the Panama scandals, was a powerful 
candidate for the presidency after the murder of President 
Carnot in 1894, and was again president of the chamber from 
December 1894 to 1898. In June of the latter year he formed 
a cabinet when the country was violently excited over the Dreyfus 
affair^ his firmness and honesty increased the respect in which 
he was already held by good citizens, but a chance vote on an 
occasion of especial excitement overthrew his ministry in October. 
As one of the leaders of the radicals he actively supported, the 
ministries of Waldeck-Rousseau and Combes, especially con- 
cerning the laws on the religious orders and the separation of 
church and state. Ini899hewas a candidate for the presidency. 
In May 1906 he was elected president of the chamber of deputies 
by 500 out of 581 votes. 

BRISSON, MATHURIN JACQUES (1 723-1806), French 
zoologist and natural philosopher, was born at Fontenay le 
Comte on the 30th of April 1723. The earlier part of his life was 
spent in the pursuit of natural history, his published works in 
this department including Le Regne animal (1756) and Ornitho- 
logie (1760). After the death of R. A. F. Reaumur (1683-1757), 
whose assistant he was, he abandoned natural history, and was 
appointed professor of natural philosophy at Navarre and later 
at Paris. His most important work in this department was his 
Poids specifiques des corps (1787), but he published several other 
books on physical subjects which were in considerable repute for a 
time. He died at Croissy near Paris, on the 23rd of June 1806. 



BRISSOT— BRISTOL, EARLS AND MARQUESSES OF 575 



BRISSOT, JACQUES PIERRE (1734-1793), who assumed the 
name of de Warville, a celebrated French Girondist, was born 
at Chartres, where his father was an inn-keeper, in January 1754. 
Brissot received a good education and entered the office of a 
lawyer at Paris. His first works, Th&orie dfs lois criminelles 
(1781) and Bibliotheque philosophique du Mgislateur (1782), were 
on the philosophy of law, and showed how thoroughly Brissot 
was imbued with the ethical precepts of Rousseau. The first 
work was dedicated to Voltaire, and was received by the old 
philosophe with much favour. Brissot became known as a facile 
and able writer, and was engaged on the Mercure, on the Courrier 
de I'Europe, and on other papers. Ardently devoted to the 
service of humanity, he projected a scheme for a general con- 
course of all the savants in Europe, and started in London a 
paper, Journal du Lycee de Londres, which was to be the organ 
of their views. The plan was unsuccessful, and soon after his 
return to Paris Brissot was lodged in the Bastille on the charge 
of having published a work against the government. He obtained 
his release after four months, and again devoted himself to 
pamphleteering, but had speedily to retire for a time to London. 
On this second visit he became acquainted with some of the 
leading Abolitionists, and founded later in Paris a Societ6 des 
Amis des Noirs, of which he was president during 1790 and 1791. 
As an agent of this society he paid a visit to the United States 
in 1788, and in 1791 published his Nouveau Voyage dans les 
Etats-Unis de V Amerique Seplentrionale (3 vols.). 

From the first, Brissot threw himself heart and soul into the 
Revolution. He edited the Patriote francais from 1789 to 1793, 
and being a well-informed and capable man took a prominent 
part in affairs. Upon the demolition of the Bastille the keys 
were presented to him. Famous for his speeches at the Jacobin 
club, he was elected a member of the municipality of Paris, then 
of the Legislative Assembly, and later of the National Convention. 
During the Legislative Assembly his knowledge of foreign affairs 
enabled him as member of the diplomatic committee practically 
to direct the foreign policy of France, and the declaration of war 
against the emperor on the 20th of April 1792, and that against 
England on the 1st of July 1793, were largely due to him. It was 
also Brissot who gave these wars the character of revolutionary 
propaganda. He was in many ways the leading spirit of the 
Girondists, who were also known as Brissotins. Vergniaud 
certainly was far superior to him in oratory, but Brissot was 
quick, eager, impetuous, and a man of wide knowledge. But he 
was at the same time vacillating, and not qualified to struggle 
against the fierce energies roused by the events of the Revolution. 
His party fell before the Mountain; sentence of arrest was 
passed against the leading members of it on the 2nd of June 1793. 
Brissot attempted to escape in disguise, but was arrested at 
Moulins. His demeanour at the trial was quiet and dignified; 
and on the 31st of October 1793 he died bravely with several 
other Girondists. 

See Memoires de Brissot, sur ses contemporains et la Revolution 
francaise, published by his sons, with notes by F. de Montrol (Paris, 
1830); Helena Williams, Souvenirs de la Revolution francaise (Paris, 
1827) ; F. A. Aulard, Les Orateurs de la Legislative et de la Convention 
2nd ed., Paris, 1905); F. A. Aulard, Les Portraits litteraires a la 
fin du XVIII' siecle, pendant la Revolution (Paris, 1883). 

BRISTOL, EARLS AND MARQUESSES OF. This English 
title has been held in the Hervey family since 17 14, though 
previously an earldom of Bristol, in the Digby family, is 
associated with two especially famous representatives, of whom 
separate biographies are given. The Herveys are mentioned 
during the 13th century as seated in Bedfordshire, and afterwards 
in Suffolk, where they have held the estate of Ickworth since the 
15th century. John Hervey (1616-1679) was the eldest son of 
Sir William Hervey (d. 1660), and was born on the 18th of August 
1616. He held a high position in the household of Catherine, 
wife of Charles II., and was for many years member of parliament 
for Hythe. He married Elizabeth, the only surviving child of 
his kinsman, William, Lord Hervey of Kidbrooke (d. 1642), 
but left no children when he died on the 18th of January 1679, 
and his estates passed to his brother, Sir Thomas Hervey. Sir 
Thomas, who was member of parliament for Bury St Edmunds, 



died on the 27th of May 1694, and was succeeded by his sou, 
John, who became the 1st earl of Bristol. 

John Hervey, 1st earl of Bristol (1665-1751), born on the 
27th of August 1665, was educated at Clare Hall, Cambridge, 
and became member of parliament for Bury St Edmunds in 
March 1694. In March 1703 he was created Baron Hervey of 
Ickworth, and in October 1714 was made earl of Bristol as a 
reward for his zeal in promoting the principles of the revolution 
and supporting the Hanoverian succession. He died on the 
20th of January 1751. By his first wife, Isabella (d. 1693), 
daughter of Sir Robert Carr, Bart., of Sleaford, he had one son, 
Carr, Lord Hervey (1691-1723), who was educated at Clare Hall, 
Cambridge, and was member for Bury St Edmunds from 17 13 
to 1722. (It has been suggested that Carr, who died unmarried 
on the 14th of November 1723, was the father of Horace Walpole.) 
He married secondly Elizabeth (d. 1741), daughter and co-heiress 
of Sir Thomas Felton, Bart., of Playford, Suffolk, by whom he 
had ten sons and six daughters. His eldest son, John (1696- 
1743), took the courtesy title of Lord Hervey on the death of 
his half-brother, Carr, in 1723, and gained some renown both as 
a writer and a politician (see Hervey or Ickworth). Another 
son, Thomas (1699-1775), was one of the members for Bury 
from 1733 to 1747; held various offices at court; and eloped 
with Elizabeth, wife of Sir Thomas Hanmer. He had very poor 
health, and his reckless life frequently brought him into pecuniary 
and other difficulties. He wrote numerous pamphlets, and when 
he died Dr Johnson said of him, " Tom Hervey, though a vicious 
man, was one of the genteelest men who ever lived." Another 
of the 1st earl's sons, Felton (1712-1773), was also member for 
the family borough of Bury St Edmunds. Having assumed the 
additional name of Bathurst, Felton's grandson, Felton Elwell 
Hervey-Bathurst (1782-1819), was created a baronet in 1818, 
and on his death a year later the title descended to his brother, 
Frederick Anne (1783-1824), the direct ancestor of the present 
baronet. The 1st earl died in January 1751, the title and estates 
descending to his grandson. 

George William Hervey, 2nd earl of Bristol (1721-1775), 
the eldest son of John, Lord Hervey of Ickworth, by his marriage 
with Mary (1 700-1 768), daughter of Nicholas Lepell, was born 
on the 31st of August 1721. He served for some years in the 
army, and in 1755 was sent to Turin as envoy extraordinary. 
He was ambassador atMadridfromi758toi76i, filling a difficult 
position with credit and dignity, and ranked among the followers 
of Pitt. Appointed lord-lieutenant of Ireland in 1766, he never 
visited that country during his short tenure of this office, and, 
after having served for a short time as keeper of the privy seal, 
became groom of the stole to George III. in January 1770. 
He died unmarried on the 18th or 20th of March 1775, and was 
succeeded by his brother. 

Augustus John Hervey, 3rd earl of Bristol (1724-1779), 
was born on the 19th of May 1724, and entered the navy, where 
his promotion was rapid. He distinguished himself in several 
encounters with the' French, and was of great assistance to 
Admiral Hawke in 1759, although he had returned to England 
before the battle of Quiberon Bay in November 1759. Having 
served with distinction in the West Indies under Rodney, his 
active life at sea ceased when the peace of Paris was concluded 
in February 1763. He was, however, nominally commander-in- 
chief in the Mediterranean in this year, and was made vice- 
admiral of the blue in January 1778. Hervey was member of 
parliament for Bury from 1757 to 1763, and after being for 
a short time member for Saltash, again represented Bury from 
1768 until he succeeded his brother in the peerage in 1775. 
He often took part in debates in parliament, and was a frequent 
contributor to periodical literature. Having served as a lord 
of the admiralty from 1771 to 1775 he won some notoriety as an 
opponent of the Rockingham ministry and a defender of Admiral 
Keppel. In August 1 744 he had been secretly married to Elizabeth 
Chudleigh (1720-1788), afterwards duchess of Kingston (q.v.), 
but this union was dissolved in 1769. The earl died in London 
on the 23rd of December 1779, leaving no legitimate issue, 
and having, as far as possible, alienated his property from the 



576 



BRISTOL, 2nd EARL OP 



title. He Was succeeded by his brother. Many of his letters 
are in the Record Office, and his journals in the British Museum. 
Other letters are printed in the Grenville Papers, vols. iii. and iv. 
(Londun, 1852-1853), and the Life of Admiral Keppel, by the 
Hun. T. Keppel (London, 1852). 

Frederick Augustus Hervey, bishop of Derry (1730-1803), 
who now became 4th earl of Bristol, was bom on the 1st of 
August 1 730, and educated at Westminster school and Corpus 
Christi College, Cambridge, graduating in 1754. Entering the 
church he became a royal chaplain; and while waiting for 
other preferment spent some time in Italy, whither he was 
led by his great interest in art. In February 1767, while his 
brother, the 2nd earl, was lord-lieutenant of Ireland, he was 
made bishop of Cloyne, and having improved the property of 
the see he was translated to the rich bishopric of Derry a year 
later. Here again he was active and philanthropic. While 
not neglecting his luxurious personal tastes he spent large sums 
of money on making roads and assisting agriculture, and his 
munificence was shared by the city of Londonderry. He built 
splendid residences at Downhill and Ballyscullion, which he 
adorned with rare works of art. As a bishop, Hervey was in- 
dustrious and vigilant; he favoured complete religious equality, 
and was opposed to the system of tithes. In December 1779 he 
became earl of Bristol, and in spite of his brother's will succeeded 
to a considerable property. Having again passed some time 
in Italy, he returned to Ireland and in 1782 threw himself 
ardently into the Irish volunteer movement, quickly attaining 
a prominent position among the volunteers, and in great state 
attending the convention held in Dublin in November 1783. 
Carried away by his position and his popularity he talked loudly 
of rebellion, and his violent language led the government to 
contemplate his arrest. Subsequently he took no part in politics, 
spending his later years mainly on the continent of Europe. 
In 1798 he was imprisoned by the French at Milan, remaining 
in custody for eighteen months. He died at Albano on the 8th 
of July 1803, and was buried in Ickworth church. Varying 
estimates have been found of his character, including favourable 
ones by John Wesley and Jeremy Bentham. He was undoubtedly 
clever and cultured, but licentious and eccentric. In later life 
he openly professed materialistic opinions; he fell in love with 
the countess Lichtenau, mistress of Frederick William II., 
king of Prussia; and by his bearing he gave fresh point to the 
saying that " God created men, women and Herveys." In 1752 
he had married Elizabeth (d. 1800), daughter of Sir Jermyn 
Davers, Bart., by whom he had two sons and three daughters. 
His elder son, Augustus John, Lord Hervey (1757-1796), had 
predeceased his father, and he was succeeded in the title by his 
younger son. 

Frederick William Hervey, 5th earl and 1st marquess of 
Bristol (1769-1859), was born on the 2nd of October 1769. 
He married Elizabeth Albana (d. 1844), daughter of Clotworthy, 
1st Baron Templetown, by whom he had six sons and three 
daughters. In 1826 he was created marquess of Bristol and 
Earl Jermyn, and died on the 15 th of February 1859. He was 
succeeded by his son Frederick William (1800-1864), M.P. for 
Bury St Edmunds 1830-1859, as 2nd marquess; and by the 
latter's son Frederick William John (1834-1007), M.P. for West 
Suffolk 1859-1864, as 3rd marquess. The latter's nephew, 
Frederick William Fane Hervey (b. 1863), who succeeded as 
4th marquess, served with distinction in the royal navy, and 
was M.P. for Bury St Edmunds from 1906 to 1907. 

See John, Lord Hervey, Memoirs of the Reign of George II., edited 
by J. W. Croker (London, 1884); John Hervey, 1st earl of Bristol, 
Diary (Wells, 1894); and Letter Books of Bristol; with Sir T. 
Hervey's Letters during Courtship and Poems during Widowhood 
(Wells, 1894). Also the articles in the Dictionary of National 
Biography, vol. xxvi. (London, 1891). 

BRISTOL, GEORGE DIGBY, 2ND Earl of 1 (1612-1677), 
eldest son of the 1st earl (see below), was born in October 161 2. 
At the age of twelve he appeared at the bar of the House of 
Commons and pleaded for his father, then in the Tower, when his 
youth, graceful person and well-delivered speech made a great 
1 I. e. in the Digby line ; for the Herveys see above. 



impression. He was admitted to Magdalen College, Oxford, 
on the 15th of August 1626, where he was a favourite pupil of 
Peter Heylin, and became M.A. in 1636. He spent the following 
years in study and in travel, from which he returned, according 
to Clarendon, " the most accomplished person of our nation or 
perhaps any other nation," and distinguished by a remarkably 
handsome person. In 1638 and 1639 were written the Letters 
between Lord George Digby and Sir Kenelm Digby, Knt. concerning 
Religion (publ. 1651), in which Digby attacked Roman Catholi- 
cism. In June 1634 Digby was committed to the Fleet till July 
for striking Crofts, a gentleman of the court, in Spring Gardens; 
and possibly his severe treatment and the disfavour shown to his 
father were the causes of his hostility to the court. He was 
elected member for Dorsetshire in both the Short and Long 
parliaments in 1640, and in conjunction with Pym and Hampden 
he took an active part in the opposition to Charles. He moved 
on the 9th of November for a committee to consider the " deplor- 
able state " of the kingdom, and on the nth was included in the 
committee for the impeachment of Strafford, against whom he 
at first showed great zeal. He, however, opposed the attainder, 
made an eloquent speech on the 21st of April 1641, accentuating 
the weakness of Vane's evidence against the prisoner, and showing 
the injustice of ex post facto legislation. He was regarded in 
consequence with great hostility by the parliamentary party, 
and was accused of having stolen from Pym's table Vane's notes 
on which the prosecution mainly depended. On the 15th of 
July his speech was burnt by the hangman by the order of the 
House of Commons. Meanwhile on the 8th of February he had 
made an important speech in the Commons advocating the 
reformation and opposing the abolition of episcopacy. On the 
8th of June, during the angry discussion on the army plot, he 
narrowly escaped assault in the House; and the following day, 
in order to save him from further attacks, the king called him up 
to the Lords in his father's barony of Digby. 

He now became the evil genius of Charles, who had the 
incredible folly to follow his advice in preference to such men 
as Hyde and Falkland. In November he is recorded as perform- 
ing " singular good service," and " doing beyond admiration," 
in speaking in the Lords against the instruction concerning evil 
counsellors. He suggested to Charles the impeachment of the five 
members, and urged upon him the fatal attempt to arrest them 
on the 4th of January 1642; but he failed to play his part in 
the Lords in securing the arrest of Lord Mandeville, to whom on 
the contrary he declared that " the king was very mischievously 
advised " ; and according to Clarendon his imprudence was 
responsible for the betrayal of the king's plan. Next day he 
advised the attempt to seize them in the city by force. The same 
month he was ordered to appear in the Lords to answer a charge 
of high treason for a supposed armed attempt at Kingston, but 
fled to Holland, where he joined the queen, and on the 26th of 
February was impeached. Subsequently he visited Charles at 
York disguised as a Frenchman, but oh the return voyage to 
Holland he was captured and taken to Hull, where he for some 
time escaped detection; and at last he cajoled Sir John Hotham, 
after discovering himself, into permitting his escape. Later he 
ventured on a second visit to Hull to persuade Hotham to 
surrender the place to Charles, but this project failed. He was 
present at Edgehill, and greatly distinguished himself at Lich- 
field, where he was wounded while leading the assault. He soon, 
however, threw down his commission in consequence of a quarrel 
with Prince Rupert, and returned to the king at Oxford, over 
whom he obtained more influence as the prospect became more 
gloomy. On the 28th of September 1643 he was appointed 
secretary of state and a privy councillor, and on the 31st of 
October high steward of Oxford University. He now supported 
the queen's disastrous policy of foreign alliances and help from 
Ireland, and engaged in a series of imprudent and ill-conducted 
negotiations which greatly injured the king's affairs, while his 
fierce disputes with Rupert and his party further embarrassed 
them. On the 14th of October 1645 he was made lieutenant 
general of the royal forces north of the Trent, with the object 
of pushing through to join Montrose, but he was defeated or 



BRISTOL, ist EARL. OF 



577 



the 15th at Sherburn, where his correspondence was captured, 
disclosing the king's expectations from abroad and from Ireland 
and his intrigues with the Scots; and after reaching Dumfries, 
he found his way barred. He escaped on the 24th to the Isle 
of Man, thence crossing to Ireland, where he caused Glamorgan 
to be arrested. Here, on this new stage, he believed he was 
going to achieve wonders. " Have I not carried my body 
swimmingly," he wrote to Hyde in irrepressible good spirits, 
" who beingbefore so irreconcilably hated by the Puritan party, 
have thus seasonably made myself as odious to the Papists?" 1 
His project now was to bring over Prince Charles to head a 
royalist movement in the island; and having joined Charles 
at Jersey in April 1646, he intended to entrap him on board, 
but was dissuaded by Hyde. He then travelled to Paris to gain 
the queen's consent to his scheme, but returned to persuade 
Charles to go to Paris, and accompanied him thither, revisiting 
Ireland on the 29th of June once more, and finally escaping to 
France on the surrender of the island to the parliament. At 
Paris amongst the royalists he found himself in a nest of enemies 
eager to pay off old scores. Prince Rupert challenged him, and 
he fought a duel with Lord Wilmot. He continued his adventures 
by serving in Louis XIV. 's troops in the war of the Fronde, in 
which he greatly distinguished himself. He was appointed in 
1651 lieutenant-general in the French army, and commander of 
the forces in Flanders. These new honours, however, were soon 
lost. During Mazarin's enforced absence from the court Digby 
aspired to become his successor; and the cardinal, who had 
from the first penetrated his character and regarded him as a 
mere adventurer, 2 on his restoration to power sent Digby away 
on an expedition in Italy; and on his return informed him that 
he was included in the list of those expelled from France, in 
accordance with the new treaty with Cromwell. In August 1656 
he joined Charles II. at Bruges, and desirous of avenging himself 
upon the cardinal offered his services to Don John of Austria in 
the Netherlands, being instrumental in effecting the surrender 
of the garrison of St Ghislain to Spain in 1657. On the ist of 
January 1657 he was appointed by Charles II. secretary of state, 
but shortly afterwards, having become a Roman Catholic — 
probably with the view of adapting himself better to his new 
Spanish friends — he was compelled to resign office. Charles, 
however, on account of his " jollity " and Spanish experience 
took him with him to Spain in 1659, though his presence was 
especially deprecated by the Spanish; but he succeeded in 
ingratiating himself, and was welcomed by the king of Spain 
subsequently at Madrid. 

By the death of his father Digby had succeeded in January 
1659 to the peerage as 2nd earl of Bristol, and had been made 
K.G. the same month. He returned to England at the restora- 
tion, when he found himself excluded from office on account 
of his religion, and relegated to only secondary importance. 
His desire to make a brilliant figure induced a restless and 
ambitious activity in parliament. He adopted an attitude of 
violent hostility to Clarendon. In foreign affairs he inclined 
strongly to the side of Spain, and opposed the king's marriage with 
Catherine of Portugal. He persuaded Charles to despatch him 
to Italy to view the Medici princesses, but the royal marriage 
and treaty with Portugal were settled in his absence. In June 
1663 he made an attempt to upset Clarendon's management 
of the House of Commons, but his intrigue was exposed to the 
parliament by Charles, and Bristol was obliged to attend the 
House to exonerate himself, when he confessed that he had 
" taken the liberty of enlarging," and his" comedian-like speech " 
excited general amusement. Exasperated by these failures, in a 
violent scene with the king early in July, he broke out into 
fierce and disrespectful reproaches, ending with a threat that 
unless Charles granted his requests within twenty-four hours 
" he would do somewhat that should awaken him out of his 
slumbers, and make him look better to his own business." 
Accordingly on the 10th he impeached Clarendon in the Lords 
of high treason, and on the charge being dismissed renewed 

1 Clarendon Stale Papers, ii. 201. 
■ M&moires du Cardinal de Retz (1859), app. iii. 437, 442. 

rv. 19 



his accusation, and was expelled from the court, only avoiding 
the warrant issued for his apprehension by a concealment of 
two years. In January 1664 he caused a new sensation by his 
appearance at his house at Wimbledon, where he publicly 
renounced before witnesses his Roman Catholicism, and declared 
himself a Protestant, his motive being probably to secure 
immunity from the charge of recusancy preferred against him. 3 
When, however, the fall of Clarendon was desired, Bristol was 
again welcomed at court. He took his seat in the Lords on the 
29th of July 1667. " The king," wrote Pepys in November, 
" who not long ago did say of Bristoll that he was a man able 
in three years to get himself a fortune in any kingdom in the 
world and lose all again in three months, do now hug him and 
commend his parts everywhere above all the world." 4 He 
pressed eagerly for Clarendon's commital, and on the refusal 
of the Lords accused them of mutiny and rebellion, and entered 
his dissent with "great fury." 5 In March 1668 he attended 
prayers in the Lords. On the 15th of March 1673 though still 
ostensibly a Roman Catholic, he spoke in favour of the Test Act, 
describing himself as " a Catholic of the church of Rome, not 
a Catholic of the court of Rome," and asserting the unfitness 
of Romanists for public office. His adventurous and erratic 
career closed by death on the 20th of March 1677. 

Bristol was one of the most striking and conspicuous figures 
of his time, a man of brilliant abilities, a great orator, one who 
distinguished himself without effort in any sphere of activity 
he chose to enter, but whose natural gifts were marred by a 
restless ambition and instability of character fatal to real great- 
ness. Clarendon describes him as " the only man I ever knew 
of such incomparable parts that was none the wiser for any 
experience or misfortune that befell him," and records his extra- 
ordinary facility in making friends and making enemies. Horace 
Walpole characterized him in a scries of his smartest antitheses 
as "a singular person whose life was one contradiction." "He 
wrote against popery and embraced it ; he was a zealous opposer 
of the court and a sacrifice for it ; was conscientiously converted 
in the midst of his prosecution of Lord Strafford and was most 
unconscientiously a persecutor of Lord Clarendon. With great 
parts, he always hurt himself and his friends; with romantic 
bravery, he was always an unsuccessful commander. He spoke 
for the Test Act, though a Roman Catholic; and addicted him- 
self to astrology on the birthday of true philosophy." Besides 
his youthful correspondence with Sir K. Digby on the subject of 
religion already mentioned, he was the author of an Apologie 
(1643, Thomason Tracts, E. 34 (32)), justifying his support of 
the king's cause; of Elvira . . . a comedy (1667), printed in 
R. Dodsley's Select Collect, of Old English Plays (Hazlitt, 1876), 
vol. xv., and of Worse and Worse, an adaptation from the Spanish, 
acted but not printed. Other writings are also ascribed to him, 
including the authorship with Sir Samuel Tuke of The Adventures 
of Five Hours (1663). His eloquent and pointed speeches, 
many of which were printed, are included in the article in the 
Biog. Brit, and among the Thomason Tracts; see also the general 
catalogue in the British Museum. The catalogue of his library 
was published in 1680. He married Lady Anne Russell, daughter 
of Francis, 4th earl of Bedford, by whom, besides two daughters, 
he had two sons, Francis, who predeceased him unmarried, 
and John, who succeeded him as 3rd earl of Bristol, at whose 
death without issue the peerage became extinct. 

Authorities. — See the article in Did. Nat. Biog.; Wood's Ath. 
Oxon. (Bliss), iii. 1100-1105; Biograpkia Brit. (Kippis), v. 210-238; 
H. Walpole's Royal and Noble Authors (Park, 1806), iii. 191 ; Roscius 
Anglicanus, by J. Downes, pp. 31, 36 (1789) ; Cunningham's Lives of 
Eminent Englishmen (1837), iii. 29; Somers Tracts (1750), iii. (1809), 
iv. ; Harleian Miscellany (1808), v., vi. ; Life by T. H. Lister (1838) ; 
State Papers. (P. C, Y.) 

BRISTOL, JOHN DIGBY, ist Earl of 8 (1580-1653) English 
diplomatist, son of Sir George Digby of Coleshill, Warwickshire, 
and of Abigail, daughter of Sir Arthur Henningham, was, born in 

3 Pepys's Diary, iv. 51. lb. vii. 199. 

6 lb. 207; Protests of the Lords, by J. E. T. Rogers, i. 36. 

6 I.e. in the Digby line; for the Herveys see above- 



57» 



BRISTOL, ist EARL OF 



1580, and entered Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1595 (M.A. 1605), 
becoming a member of the Inner Temple in 1598. In 1605 he 
was sent to James to inform him of the safety of the princess 
Elizabeth at the time of the Gunpowder Plot. He gained his 
favour, was made a gentleman of the privy chamber and one of 
the king's carvers, and was knighted in 1607. From 1610 to 161 1 
he was member of parliament for Heydon. In 16 n he was sent 
as ambassador to Spain to negotiate a marriage between Prince 
Henry and the infanta Anne, and to champion the cause of the 
English merchants, for whom he obtained substantial concessions, 
and arranged the appointment of consuls at Lisbon and Seville. 
He also discovered a list of the English pensioners of the Spanish 
court, which included some of the ministers, and came home 
in 1613 to communicate this important intelligence to the king. 
In 1614 he again went to Spain to effect a union between the 
infanta Maria and Charles, though he himself was in favour of a 
Protestant marriage, and desired a political and not a matrimonial 
treaty. In 16 16, on the disgrace of Somerset, he was recalled 
home to give evidence concerning the latter's connexions with 
Spain, was made vice-chamberlain and a privy councillor, and 
obtained from James the manor of Sherborne forfeited by the 
late favourite.. In 16 18 he went once more to Spain to reopen 
the negotiations, returning in May, and being created Baron 
Digby on the 25 th of November. He endeavoured to avoid a 
breach with Spain on the election of the elector palatine, the 
king's son-in-law, to the Bohemian throne; and in March 162 1, 
after the latter's expulsion from Bohemia, Digby was sent to 
Brussels to obtain a suspension of hostilities in the Palatinate. 
On the 4th of July he went to Vienna and drew up a scheme 
of pacification with the emperor, by which Frederick was to 
abandon Bohemia and be secured in his hereditary territories, 
but the agreement could never be enforced. After raising 
money for the defence of Heidelberg he returned home in October, 
and on the 21st of November explained his policy to the parlia- 
ment, and asked for money and forces for its execution. The 
sudden dissolution of parliament, however, prevented " the 
adoption of any measure of support, and entirely ruined Digby's 
plans. In 1622 he returned to Spain with nothing on which 
to rely but the goodwill of Philip IV., and nothing to offer but 
entreaties. 

On the 1 5th of September he was created earl of Bristol. He 
urged on the marriage treaty, believing it would include favour- 
able conditions for Frederick, but the negotiations were taken out 
of his control, and finally wrecked by the arrival of Charles 
himself and Buckingham in March 1623. He incurred their 
resentment, of which the real inspiration was Buckingham's 
implacable jealousy, by a letter written to James informing him 
of Buckingham's unpopularity among the Spanish ministers, 
and by his endeavouring to maintain the peace with Spain after 
their departure. In January 1624 he left Spain, and on arriving 
at Dover in March, Buckingham and Charles having now com- 
plete ascendancy over the king, he was forbidden to appear at 
court and ordered to confine himself at Sherborne. He was 
required by Buckingham to answer a series of interrogatories, 
but he refused to inculpate himself and demanded a trial by 
parliament. On the death of James he was removed by Charles I. 
from the privy council, and ordered to absent himself from his 
first parliament. On his demand in January 1626 to be present 
at the coronation Charles angrily refused, and accused him of 
having tried to pervert his religion in Spain. In March 1626, 
after the assembling of the second parliament, Digby applied to 
the Lords, who supported his rights, and Charles sent him his 
writ accompanied by a letter from Lord Keeper Coventry desiring 
him not to use it. Bristol, however, took his seat and demanded 
justice against Buckingham (Thomason Tracts, E. 126 (20)). 
The king endeavoured to obstruct his attack by causing Bristol 
on the ist of May to be himself brought to the bar, on an accusa- 
tion of high treason by the attorney-general. The Lords, how- 
ever, ordered that both charges should be investigated simul- 
taneously. Further proceedings were stopped by the dissolution 
of parliament on the 15th of June; a prosecution was ordered 
by Charles in the Star Chamber, and Bristol was sent to the 



Tower, where he remained till the 17th of March 1628, when the 
peers, on the assembling of Charles's third parliament, insisted 
on his liberation and restoration to his seat in the' Lords. 

In the discussions upon the Petition of Right, Bristol supported 
the use of the king's prerogative in emergencies, and asserted 
that the king besides his legal had a regal power, but joined in 
the demand for a full acceptance of the petition by the king after 
the first unsatisfactory answer. He was now restored to favour, 
but took no part in politics till the outbreak of the Scottish 
rebellion, when he warned Charles of the danger of attacking with 
inadequate forces. He was the leader in the Great Council held 
at York, was a commissioner to treat with the Scots in September 
1640 at Ripon, and advised strongly the summoning of the 
parliament. In February 1641 he was one of the peers who 
advocated reforms in the administration and were given seats 
in the council. Though no friend to Strafford, he endeavoured 
to save his life, desiring only to see him excluded from office, 
and as a witness was excused from voting on the attainder. 
He was appointed gentleman of the bedchamber on the king's 
departure for Scotland, and on the 27th of December he was 
declared an evil counsellor by the House of Commons, Cromwell 
on the 28th moving an address to the king to dismiss him from 
his councils, on the plea that he had advocated the bringing up 
of the northern army to overawe parliament in the preceding 
spring. There is no evidence to support the charge, but Digby 
was regarded by the parliamentary party with special hatred 
and distrust, of which the chief causes were probably his Spanish 
proclivities and his indifference on the great matter of religion, 
to which was added the unpopularity reflected from his mis- 
guided son. On the 28th of March 1642 he was sent to the Tower 
for having failed to disclose to parliament the Kentish petition. 
Liberated in April, he spoke in the Lords on the 20th of May 
in favour of an accommodation, and again in June in vindication 
of the king; but finding his efforts ineffectual, and believing all 
armed rebellion against the king a wicked violation of the most 
solemn oaths, he joined Charles at York, was present at Edgehill - 
and accompanied him to Oxford. On the ist of February 1643 
he was named with Lord Herbert of Raglan for removal from 
the court and public office for ever, and in the propositions of 
November 1644 was one of those excepted from pardon. In 
January he had endeavoured to instigate a breach of the Inde- 
pendents with the Scots. Bristol, however, was not in favour 
of continuing the war, and withdrew to Sherborne, removing in 
the spring of 1644 to Exeter, and after the surrender of the city 
retiring abroad on the nth of July by order of the Houses, which 
rejected his petition to compound for his estate. He took up 
his residence at Caen, passing the rest of his life in exile and 
poverty, find occasionally attending the young king. In 1647 
he printed at Caen An Apology, defending his suppprt of the 
royal cause. This was reprinted in 1656 (Thomason Tracts, 
E. 897, 6). He died at Paris on the 16th of January 1653.. 

He is described by Clarendon as " a man of grave aspect, of a. 
presence that drew respect, and of great parts and ability, but 
passionate and supercilious and too voluminous a discourser 
in council." His aim was to effect a political union between 
England and Spain apart from the religious or marriage questions 
— a policy which would probably have benefited both English 
and European interests; but it was one understood neither ir_ 
Spain -nor in England, and proved impracticable. He was a 
man of high character, who refused to compound with falsehood 
and injustice, whose misfortune it was to serve two Stuart 
sovereigns, and whose firm resistance to the king's tyranny led 
the way to the great movement which finally destroyed it. 
Besides his Apology, he was the author of several printed speeches 
and poems, and translated A Defence of the Catholic Faith by 
Peter du Moulin (1610). He married Beatrix, daughter of 
Charles Walcot, and widow of Sir John Dyve, and besides two 
daughters left two sons, George, who succeeded him as 2nd 
earl of Bristol, and John, who died unmarried. 

Bibliography.— The best account of Bristol will be found in the 
scattered notices of him in the Hist, of England and of the Civil War, 
by S. R. Gardiner, who also wrote the short sketch of his career in 



BRISTOL 



579 



the Diet, of Nat. Biog., and who highly eulogizes his character and 
diplomacy. For lives, see Biographia Britannica (Kippis), v. 199; 
Wood's Ath. Oxon. (Bliss), iii. 338; D. Lloyd's Memoires (1668), 579; 
Collins's Peerage (Brydges, 1812), v. 362; Fuller's Worthies (Nichols, 
1811), ii. 412; H. Walpole's Royal and Noble Authors (Park, 1806), 
iii. 49 ; also Clarendon's Hist, of the Rebellion, esp. vi. 388 ; Clarendon 
State Papers and Cal. of CI. State Papers ; Old Parliamentary History ; 
Cabala (1691; letters); Camden Soc, Miscellany, vol. vi. (1871); 
Defence of his Spanish Negotiations, ed. by S. R. Gardiner ; Somers 
Tracts (1809), ii. 501; Thomason Tracts in Brit. Museum; Hard- 
wicke State Papers, i. 494. The MSS. at Sherborne Castle, of which 
a selection was transcribed and deposited in the Public Record 
Office, were calendared by the Hist. MSS. Commission in Rep. viii. 
app. i. p. 213 and 10th Rep. app. i. p. 520; there are numerous 
references to Bristol in various collections calendared in the same 
publication and in the Cal. of State Papers, Dom. Series; see also 
Harleian MSS., Brit. Mus. 1580, art. 31-48, and Add. MSS. indexes 
and calendars. (P. C. Y.) 

BRISTOL, a township of Hartford county, Connecticut, 
U.S.A., in the central part of the state, about 16 m. S.W. of 
Hartford. It has an area of 27 sq. m., and contains the village 
of Forestville and the borough of Bristol (incorporated in 1893). 
Both are situated on the Pequabuck river, and are served by the 
western branch of the midland division of the New York, New 
Haven & Hartford railway, and by electric railway to Hartford, 
New Britain and Terryville. Pop. (1890) 7382; (1900) 9643, in- 
cluding that of the borough, 6268 (1910) 13,502 (borough, 9527). 
Among the manufactures of the borough of Bristol are clocks, 
woollen goods, iron castings, hardware, brass ware, silverplate 
and bells. Bristol clocks, first manufactured soon after the 
War of Independence, have long been widely known. Bristol, 
originally a part of the township of Farmington, was first settled 
about 1727, but did not become an independent corporation 
until the formation, in 1742, of the first church, known after 
1744 as the New Cambridge Society. In 1748 a Protestant 
Episcopal Church was organized, and before and during the War 
of Independence its members belonged to the Loyalist party; 
their rector, Rev. James Nichols, was tarred and feathered by the 
Whigs, and Moses Dunbar, a member of the church, was hanged 
for treason by the Connecticut authorities. Chippen's Hill 
(about 3 m. from the centre of the township) was a favourite 
rendezvous of the local Loyalists; and a cave there, known as 
"The Tories' Den," is a well-known landmark. In 1785 New 
Cambridge and West Britain, another ecclesiastical society of 
Farmington, were incorporated as the township of Bristol, but 
in 1806 they were divided into the present townships of Bristol 
and Burlington. 

BRISTOL, a city, county of a city, municipal, county and 
parliamentary borough, and seaport of England, chiefly in 
Gloucestershire but partly in Somersetshire, 1185 m. W. of 
London. Pop. (1901) 328,945. The Avon, here forming the 
boundary between Gloucestershire and Somerset, though entering 
the estuary of the Severn (Bristol Channel) only 8 m. below the 
city, is here confined between considerable hills, with a narrow 
valley-floor on which the nucleus of the city rests. Between 
Bristol and the Channel the valley becomes a gorge, crossed at 
a single stride by the famous Clifton Suspension Bridge. Above 
Bristol the hills again close in at Keynsham, so that the city 
lies in a basin-like hollow some 4 m. in diameter, and extends 
up the heights to the north. The Great Western railway, striking 
into the Avon valley near Bath, serves Bristol from London, 
connects it with South Wales by the Severn tunnel, and with 
the southern and south-western counties of England. Local 
lines of this company encircle the city on the north and the south, 
serving the outports of Avonmouth and Portishead on the 
Bristol Channel. A trunk line of the Midland railway connects 
Bristol with the north of England by way of Gloucester, 
Worcester, Birmingham and Derby. Both companies use the 
central station, Temple Meads. 

The nucleus of Bristol lies to the north of the river. The 
business centre is in the district traversed by Broad Street, 
High Street, Wine Street and Corn Street, which radiate from 
a centre close to the Floating Harbour. To the south of this 
centre, connected with it by Bristol Bridge, an island is formed 
between the Floating Harbour and the New Course of the Avon, 



and here are Temple Meads station, above Victoria Street, 
two of the finest churches (the Temple and St Mary Redcliffe) 
the general hospital and other public buildings. Immediately 
above the bridge the little river Frome joins the Avon. Owing 
to the nature of the site the streets are irregular; in the inner 
part of the city they are generally narrow, and sometimes, with 
their ancient gabled houses, extremely picturesque. The prin- 
cipal suburbs surround the city to the west, north and east. 

Churches, &*c.— In the centre of Bristol a remarkable collection 
of architectural antiquities is found, principally ecclesiastical. 
This the city owes mainly to a few great baronial families, 
such as the earls of Gloucester and the Berkeleys, in its early 
history, and to a few great merchants, the Canyngs, Shipwards 
and Framptons, in its later career. The see of Bristol, founded 
by Henry VIII. in 1542, was united to that of Gloucester in 
1836; but again separated in 1896. The diocese includes parts 
of Gloucestershire and Wiltshire, and a small but populous 
portion of Somerset. The cathedral, standing above the so- 
called Canons' Marsh which borders the Floating cathedral 
Harbour, is pleasantly situated on the south side of 
College Green. It has two western towers and a central tower, 
n,ave, short transepts, choir with aisles, an eastern Lady chapel 
and other chapels; and on the south, a chapter-house and 
cloister court. The nave is modern (by Street, 1877), imitating 
the choir of the 14th century, with its curious skeleton-vaulting 
in the aisles. Besides the canopied tombs of the Berkeleys with 
their effigies in chain mail, and similarly fine tombs of the 
crosiered abbots, there are memorials to Bishop Butler, to " 
Sterne's Eliza (Elizabeth Draper), and to Lady Hesketh (the 
friend of Cowper), who are all interred here. There is also here 
William Mason's fine epitaph to his wife (d. 1767), beginning 
"Take, holy earth, all that my soul holds dear." Of Fitz- 
Harding's abbey of St Augustine, founded in 1142 (of which the 
present cathedral was the church), the stately entrance gateway, 
with its sculptured mouldings, remains hardly injured. The 
abbot's gateway, the vestibule to the chapter-house, and the 
chapter-house itself, which is carved with Byzantine exuberance 
of decoration, and acknowledged to be one of the finest Norman 
chambers in Europe, are also perfect. On the north side of 
College Green is the small but ornate Mayor's chapel (originally 
St Mark's), devoted to the services of the mayor and corporation. 
It is mainly Decorated and Perpendicular. Of the churches 
within the centre of the city, the following are found within a 
radius of half-a-mile from Bristol Bridge. St Stephen's church, 
built between 1450 and 1490, is a dignified structure, chiefly 
interesting for its fan-traceried porch and stately tower. It 
was built entirely by the munificence of John Shipward, a 
wealthy merchant. The tower and spire of St John's (15th 
century) stand on one of the gateways of the city. This church 
is a parallelogram, without east or west windows or aisles, 
and is built upon a fine groined crypt. St James's church, the 
burial place of its founder, Robert, earl of Gloucester, dates 
from 1 130, and fine Norman work remains in the nave. The 
tower is of the 14th century. St Philip's has an Early English 
tower, but its external walls and windows are for the most part 
debased Perpendicular. Robert FitzHamon's Norman tower of 
St Peter, the oldest church tower in Bristol, still presents its 
massive square to the eye. This church stands in Castle Street, 
which commemorates the castle of Robert, earl of Gloucester, 
the walls of which were 25 ft. thick at the base. Nothing 
remains of this foundation, but there still exist some walls and 
vaults of the later stronghold, including a fine Early English 
cell. Adjacent to the church is St Peter's hospital, a picturesque 
gabled building of Jacobean and earlier date, with a fine court 
room. St Mary le Port and St Augustine the Less are churches 
of the Perpendicular era, and not the richest specimens of their 
kind. St Nicholas church is modern, on a crypt of the date 
1503, and earlier. On the island south of the Floating Harbour 
are two of the most interesting churches in the city. Temple 
church, with its leaning tower, 5 ft. off the perpendicular, 
retains nothing of the Templars' period, but is a fine building 
of the Decorated and Perpendicular periods. The church of 



5 8o 



BRISTOL 



St Mary Redcliffe, for grandeur of proportion and elaboration 
of design and finish, is the first ecclesiastical building in Bristol, 
and takes high rank among the parish churches of England. It 
was built for the most part in the latter part of the 14th century 
by William Canyng or Canynges (q.v.), but the sculptured north 
porch is externally Decorated, and internally Early English. 
The fine tower is also Decorated, on an Early English base. 
The spire, Decorated in style, is modem. Among numerous 
monuments is that of Admiral Penn (d. 17 18), the father of the 
founder of Pennsylvania. The church exhibits the rare feature 
of transeptal aisles. Of St Thomas's, in the vicinity, only the' 
tower (15th century) remains of the old structures. All Hallows 
church has a modern Italian campanile, but is in the main 
of the 15th century, with the retention of four Norman piers 
in the nave; and ii interesting from its connexion with the 
ancient gild of calendars, whose office it was " to convert Jews, 
instruct youths," and keep the archives of the town. Theirs 
was the first free library in the city, possibly in England. The 
records of the church contain a singularly picturesque repre- 
sentation of the ancient customs of the fraternity. 

Among conventual remains, besides those already mentioned, 
there exist of the Dominican priory the Early English refectory 
and dormitory, the latter comprising a row of fifteen original 
windows and an oak roof of the same date; and of St Bar- 
tholomew's hospital there is a double arch, with intervening 
arcades, also Early English. These, with the small chapel 
of the Three Kings of Cologne, Holy Trinity Hospital, both 
Perpendicular, and the remains of the house of the Augustinian 
canons attached to the cathedral, comprise the whole of the 
monastic relics. 

There are many good specimens of ancient domestic archi- 
tecture— -notably some arches of a grand Norman hall and some 
Tudor windows of Colston's house, Small Street; and Canyng's 
house, with good Perpendicular oak roof. Of buildings to which 
historic interest attaches, there are the Merchant Venturers' 
almshouses (1699), adjoining their hall. This gild was established 
in the 16th century. A small house near St Mary Redcliffe was 
the school where the poet Chatterton received his education. 
His memorial is in the churchyard of St Mary, and in the church 
a chest contains the records among which he claimed to have 
discovered some of the manuscripts which were in reality his 
own. A house in Wine Street was the birthplace of the poet- 
laureate Robert Southey (1744). 

Public Buildings, &c— The public buildings are somewhat 
overshadowed in interest by the ecclesiastical. The council 
house, at the " Cross " of the four main thoroughfares, dates 
from 1827, was enlarged in 1894, and contains the city archives 
and many portraits, including a Van Dyck and a Kneller. The 
Guildhall is close by — a modern Gothic building. The exchange 
(used as a corn-market) is a noteworthy building by the famous 
architect of Bath, John Wood (1743). Edward Colston, a 
revered citizen and benefactor of the city (d. 17 21), is com- 
memorated by name in several buildings and institutions, notably 
in Colston Hall, which is used for concerts and meetings. A 
bank close by St Stephen's church claims to have originated in 
the first savings-bank established in England (181 2). Similarly, 
the city free library (1613) is considered to be the original of its 
kind. The Bristol museum and reference library were transferred 
to the corporation in 1893. Vincent Stuckey Lean (d. 1899) 
bequeathed to the corporation of Bristol the sum of £50,000 for 
the further development of the free libraries of the city, and with 
especial regard to the formation and sustenance of a general 
reference library of a standard and scientific character. The 
central library was opened in 1906. An art gallery, presented by 
Sir William Henry Wills, was opened in 1905. 

Among educational establishments, the technical college of 
the Company of Merchant Venturers (1885) supplies scientific, 
technical and commercial education. The extensive buildings 
of this institution were destroyed by fire in 1906. University 
College (1876) forms the nucleus of the university of Bristol(char^ 
tered 1909). Clifton College, opened m 1862 and incorporated 
in 1877, includes a physical science school, with laboratories, 



a museum and observatory. 1 Colston's girls' day school (1891) 
includes domestic economy and calisthenics. Among the many 
charitable institutions are the general hospital, opened in 1858, 
and since repeatedly enlarged; royal hospital for sick children 
and women, Royal Victoria home, and the Queen Victoria 
jubilee convalescent home. 

Of the open spaces jn and near Bristol the most extensive are 
those bordering the river in the neighbourhood of the gorge, 
Durdham and Clifton Downs, on the Gloucestershire side (see 
Clifton). Others are Victoria Park, south of the river, near 
the Bedminster station, Eastville Park by the Frome, on the 
north-east of the city beyond Stapleton Road station, St 
Andrew's Park near Montpelier station to the north, and Brandon 
Hill, west of the cathedral, an abrupt eminence commanding a 
fine view over the city, and crowned with a modern tower 
commemorating the "fourth centenary of the discovery of 
America by John Cabot, and sons Lewis, Sebastian and Sanctus." 
Other memorials in the city are the High Cross on College Green 
(1850), and statues of Queen Victoria (1888), Samuel Morley 
(1888), Edmund Burke (1894), and Edward Colston (1895), in 
whose memory are held annual Colston banquets. 

Harbour and Trade. — Bristol harbour was formed in 1809 
by the conversion of the Avon and a branch of the Frome into 
" the Float," by the cutting of a new channel for the Avon and 
the formation of two basins. Altogether the water area, at fixed 
level, is about 85 acres. Four dry docks open into the floating 
harbour. In 1884 the Avonmouth and Portishead docks at the 
river entrance were bought up by the city; and the port extends 
from Hanham Mills on the Avon to the mouth of the river, and 
for some distance down the estuary of the Severn. The city 
docks have a depth of 22 ft., while those at Avonmouth are 
accessible to the largest vessels. In 1902 the construction of 
the extensive Royal Edward dock at Avonmouth wLs put in 
hand by the corporation, and the dock was opened by King 
Edward VII. in 1908. It is entered by a lock 875 ft. long and 
100 ft. wide, with a depth of water on the sill of 46 ft. at ordinary 
spring, and 36 ft. at ordinary neap tides. The dock itself has a 
mean length of n 20 ft. and a breadth of 1000 ft., and there is a 
branch and passage connecting with the old dock. The water 
area is about 30 acres, and the dock is so constructed as to be 
easily capable of extension. Portishead dock, on the Somerset 
shore, has an area of 12 acres. The port has a large trade with 
America, the West Indies and elsewhere, the principal imports 
being grain, fruit, oils, ore, timber, hides, cattle and general 
merchandise; while the exports include machinery, manu- 
factured oils, cotton goods, tin and salt. The Elder Dempster, 
Dominion and other large steamship companies trade at the port. 
The principal industries are shipbuilding, ropewalks, chocolate 
factories, sugar refineries, tobacco mills and pipe-making, glass 
works, potteries, soaperies, shoe factories, leather works and' 
tanneries, chemical works, saw mills, breweries, copper, lead 
and shot works, iron works, machine works, stained-paper works, 
anchors, chain cables, sail-cloth, buttons. A coalfield extending 
16 m. south-east to Radstock avails much for Bristol manu- 
factures. 

The parliamentary borough is divided into four divisions, each 
returning one member. The government of the city is in the 
hands of a lord mayor, 22 aldermen and 66 councillor The 
area in 1901 was 11,705 acres; but in 1904 it was increased to 
17,004 acres. 

History. — Bristol (Brigstow, Bristou, Bristow, Bristole) is one 
of the best examples of a town that has owed its greatness 
entirely to trade. It was never a shire town or the site of a 
great religious house, and it owed little to its position as the 
head of a feudal lordship, or as a military post. Though it is 
near both British and Roman camps, there is no evidence of a 
British or Roman settlement. It was the western limit of the 
Saxon invasion of Britain, and about the year 1000 a Saxon 
settlement began to grow up at the junction of the rivers Frome 
and Avon, the natural advantages of the situation favouring 
the growth of the township. Bristol owed much to Danish rule, 
and during, the reign of Canute, when the wool trade with 



BRISTOL 



58i 



Ireland began, it became the market for English slaves. In the 
reign of Edward the Confessor the town was included in the 
earldom of Sweyn Godwinsson, and at the date of the Domesday 
survey it was already a royal borough governed by a reeve 
appointed by the king as overlord, the king's geld being assessed 
at no marks. There was a mint at the time of the Conquest, 
which proves that Bristol must have been already a place of 
some size, though the fact that the town was a member of the 
royal manor of Baston shows that its importance was still of 
recent growth. One-third of the geld was paid to Geoffrey de 
Coutances, bishop of Exeter, who threw up the earthworks of the 
castle. He joined in a rebellion against William II., and after 
his death the king granted the town and castle, as part of the 
honour of Gloucester, to Robert FitzHamon, whose daughter 
Mabel, marryihg Earl Robert of Gloucester in 11 19, brought 
him Bristol as her dowry. Earl Robert still further strengthened 
the castle, probably with masonry, and involved Bristol in the 
rebellion against Stephen. From the castle he harried the whole 
neighbourhood, threatened Bath, and sold his prisoners as 
slaves to Ireland. A contemporary chronicler deseribes Bristol 
castle as " seated on a mighty mound, and garrisoned with 
knights and foot soldiers or rather robbers and raiders," and he 
calls Bristol the stepmother of England. 

The history of the charters granted to Bristol begins about 
this time. A charter granted by Henry II. in 1 1 7 2 exempted the 
burgesses of Bristol from certain tolls throughout the kingdom, 
and confirmed existing liberties. Another charter of the same 
year granted the city of Dublin to the men of Bristol as a colony 
with the same liberties as their own town. 

As a result probably of the close connexion between Bristol 
and Ireland the growth of the wool trade was maintained. 
Many Bristol men settled in Dublin, which for a long time was a 
Bristol beyond the seas, its charters being almost duplicates of 
those granted to Bristol. About this time Bristol began to 
export wool to the Baltic, and had developed a wine trade with 
the south of France, while soap-making and tanning were 
flourishing industries. Bristol was still organized manorially 
rather than municipally. Its chief courts were the "weekly 
hundred court and the court leet held three times a year, and 
presided over by the reeve appointed by the earl of Gloucester. 
By the marriage of Earl John with the heiress of Earl William 
of Gloucester, Bristol became part of the royal demesne, the 
rent payable to the king being fixed, and the town shook off the 
feudal yoke. The charter granted by John in 1100 was an 
epoch in the history of the borough. It provided that no 
burgess should be impleaded without the walls, that no non- 
burgess should sell wine, cloth, wool, leather or corn in Bristol, 
that all should hold by burgage tenure, that corn need not be 
ground at the lord's mill, and that the burgesses should have all 
their reasonable gilds. At some uncertain date soon after this 
a commune was established in Bristol on the French model, 
Robert FitzNichol, the first mayor of Bristol, taking the oath in 
1 200. The mayor was chosen, not, like the reeve whom he had 
displaced, by the overlord, but by the merchants of Bristol who 
were members of the merchant gild. The first documentary 
evidence of the existence of the merchant gild appears in 1242. 
In addition, there were many craft gilds (later at least twenty- 
six were known to exist), the most important being the gilds of 
the weavers, tuckers and fullers, and the Gild of the Kalendars 
of Bristol, which devoted itself to religious, educational and 
social work. The mayor of Bristol was helped by two assistants, 
who were called provosts until 1267, and from 1267 to 13 n were 
known as stewards, and after that date as bailiffs. Before this 
time many religious houses had been founded. Earl Robert of 
Gloucester established the Benedictine priory of St James; there 
wereDominican and Franciscan priories,amonastery of Carmelites, 
and an abbey of St Augustine founded by Robert FitzHardinge. 

In the reign of John, Bristol began the struggle to absorb the 
neighbouring manor of Bedminster, the eastern half of which 
was held by the Templars by gift of Earl Robert of Gloucester, 
and the western half, known as Redcliffe, was sold by the same 
earl to Robert FitzHardinge, afterwards Lord Berkeley. The 



Templars acquiesced without much difficulty, but the wealthy 
owners of the manor of Redcliffe, who had their own manorial 
courts, market, fair and quay, resisted the union for nearly 
one hundred years. In 1247 a new course was cut for the river 
Frome which vastly improved the harbour, and in the same year 
a stone bridge was built over the Avon, bringing Temple and 
Redcliffe into closer touch with the city. The charter granted 
by Henry III. in 1256 was important. It gave the burgesses the 
right to choose coroners, and as they already farmed the geld 
payable to the king, Bristol must have been practically inde- 
pendent of the king. The growing exclusiveness of the merchant 
gild led to the great insurrection of 13 12. The oligarchical 
party was supported by the Berkeleys, but the opposition con- 
tinued their rebellion until 13 13, when the town was besieged 
and taken by the royal forces. During the reign of Edward III. 
cloth manufacture developed in Bristol. Thomas Blanket set 
up looms in 1337, employing many foreign workmen, and in 
J 353 Bristol was made one of the Staple towns, the office of 
mayor of the staple being held by the mayor of the town. 

The charter of 1373 extended the boundaries of the town to 
include Redcliffe (thus settling the long-standing dispute) and 
the waters of the Avon and Severn up to the Steep and Flat 
Holmes; and made Bristol a county in itself, independent of 
the county courts, with an elected sheriff, and a council of forty 
to be chosen by the mayor and sheriff. The town was divided 
into five wards, each represented by an alderman, the aldermen 
alone being eligible for the mayoralty. This charter (confirmed 
in 1377 and 1488) was followed by the period of Bristol's greatest 
prosperity, the era of William Canyng, of the foundation of the 
Society of Merchant Venturers, and of the voyages of John and 
Sebastian Cabot. William Canyng (1399-1474) was five times 
mayor and twice represented Bristol in parliament; he carried 
on a huge cloth trade with the Baltic and rebuilt St Mary Red- 
cliffe. At the same time cloth was exported by Bristol merchants 
to France, Spain and the Levant. The records of the Society 
of Merchant Venturers began in 1467, and the society increased 
in influence so rapidly that in 1500 it directed all the foreign 
trade of the city and had a lease of the port dues. It was in- 
corporated in 1552, and received other charters in 1638 and 
1662. Henry VII. granted Bristol a charter in 1499 (confirmed 
in 1510) which removed the theoretically popular basis of the 
corporation by the provision that the aldermen were to be 
elected by the mayor and council. At the dissolution of the 
monasteries the diocese of Bristol was founded, which included 
the counties of Bristol and Dorset. The voyages of discovery 
in which Bristol had played a conspicuous part led to a further 
trade development. In the 16th century Bristol traded with 
Spain, the Canaries and the Spanish colonies in America, 
shared in . the attempt to colonize Newfoundland, and began 
the trade in African slaves which flourished during the 
17th century. Bristol took a great share in the Civil War 
and was three times besieged. Charles II. granted a formal 
charter of incorporation in 1664, the governing body being 
the mayor, 12 aldermen, 30 common councilmen, 2 sheriffs, 
2 coroners, a town clerk, clerk of the peace and 39 minor officials, 
the governing body itself filling up all vacancies in its number. 
In the 1 8th century the cloth trade declined owing to the com- 
petition of Ireland and to the general migration of manufactures 
to the northern coalfields, but the prosperity of the city was 
maintained by the introduction of manufactures of iron, brass, 
tin and copper, and by the flourishing West Indian trade, sugar 
being taken in exchange for African slaves. 

The hot wells became fashionable in the reign of Anne (who 
granted a charter in 1710), and a little later Bristol was the 
centre of the Methodist revival of Whitefield and Wesley. The 
city was small, densely populated and dirty, with dark, narrow 
streets, and the mob gained an unenviable notoriety for violence 
in the riots of 1708, 1753, 1767 and 1831. At the beginning of 
the 19th century it was obvious that the prosperity of Bristol 
was diminishing, comparatively if not actually, owing to (1) 
the rise of Liverpool, which had more natural facilities as a port 
than Bristol could offer, (2) the abolition of the slave trade, 



5 82 



BRISTOL— BRISTOW, B. H. 



which ruined the West Indian sugar trade, and (3) the extor- 
tionate rates levied by the Bristol Dock Company, incorporated 
in 1803. These rates made competition with Liverpool and 
London impossible, while other tolls were levied by the Merchant 
Venturers and the corporation. The decline was checked by 
the efforts of the Bristol chamber of commerce (founded in 1823) 
and by the Municipal Reform Act of 1 83 5. The new corporation, 
consisting of 48 councillors and 16 aldermen who elected the 
mayor, being themselves chosen by the burgesses of each ward, 
bought the docks in 1848 and reduced the fees. In 1877-1880 
the docks at the mouth of the river at Avonmouth and Portishead 
were made, and these were bought by the corporation in 1884. 
A revival of trade, rapid increase of population and enlargement 
of the boundaries of the city followed. The chief magistrate 
became a lord mayor in 1899. 

See J. Corry, History of Bristol (Bristol, 1816); J. Wallaway, 
Antiquities (1834) ; J. Evans, Chronological History of Bristol (1824) ; 
Bristol vol. of Brit. Archaeol. Inst.; J. F. Nicholl and J. Taylor, 
Bristol Past and Present (Bristol and London, 1882); W. Hunt, 
Bristol, in " Historic Towns " series (London, 1887) ; J. Latimer, 
Annals of Bristol (various periods) ; G. E. Weare, Collectanea relating 
to the Bristol Friars (Bristol, 1893) ; Samuel Seyer, History of Bristol 
and Bristol Charters (1812); The Little Red Book of Bristol (1900); 
The Maior's Kalendar (Camden Soc, 1872) ; Victoria County History, 
Gloucester. 

BRISTOL, a borough of Bucks county, Pennsylvania, U.S.A., 
on the Delaware river, opposite Burlington, New Jersey, 20 m. 
N.E. of Philadelphia. Pop. (1890) 6553; (1900) 7104 ("34 
foreign-born); (1910) 9256. It is served by the Pennsylvania 
railway. The borough is built on level ground elevated several 
feet above the river, and in the midst of an attractive farming 
country. The principal business houses are on Mill Street; 
while Radcliffe Street extends along the river. Among Bristol's 
manufacturing establishments are machine shops, rolling mills, 
a planing mill, yarn, hosiery and worsted mills, and factories 
for making carpets, wall paper and patent leather. Bath 
Springs are located just outside the borough limits; though not 
so famous as they were early in the 18th century, these springs 
are still well known for the medicinal properties of their chaly- 
beate waters. Bristol was one of the first places to be settled 
in Pennsylvania after William Penn received his charter for the 
province in 1681, and from its settlement until 1725 it was the 
seat of government of the county. It was laid out in 1697 and 
was incorporated as a borough in 1720; the present charter, 
however, dates only from 1851. 

BRISTOL, the shire-township of Bristol county, Rhode Island, 
U.S.A., about 15 m. S.S.E. of Providence, between Narragansett 
Bay on the W. and Mount Hope Bay on the E., thus being a 
neninsula. Pop. (1900) 6901, of whom 1923 were foreign-born; 
(1905; state census) 7512; (1910) 8565; area 12 sq. m. It is 
served by the New York, New Haven & Hartford, and the 
Rhode Island Suburban railways, and is connected with the 
island of Rhode Island by ferry. Mount Hope (216 ft.), on the 
eastern side, commands delightful views of landscape, bay and 
river scenery. Elsewhere in the township the surface is gently 
undulating and generally well adapted to agriculture, especially 
to the growing of onions. A small island, Hog Island, is included 
in the township. The principal village, also known as Bristol, 
is a port of entry with a capacious and deep harbour, has manu- 
factories of rubber and woollen goods, and is well known as a 
yacht-building centre, several defenders of the America's Cup, 
including the " Columbia " and the " Reliance," having been 
built in the Herreshoff yards here. At the close of King Philip's 
War in 1676, Mount Hope Neck (which had been the seat of the 
vanquished sachem), with most of what is now the township of 
Bristol, was awarded to Plymouth Colony. In 1680, immediately 
after Plymouth had conveyed the " Neck " to a company of four, 
the village was laid out; the following year, in anticipation of 
future commercial importance, the township and the village 
were named Bristol, from the town in England. The town- 
ship became the shire-township in 1685, passed under the juris- 
diction of Massachusetts in 1692, and in 1747 was annexed to 
Rhode Island. During the War of Independence the village was 
bombarded by the British on the 7th of October 1775, but 



suffered little damage; on the 25th of May 1778 it was visited 
and partially destroyed by a British force. 

BRISTOL, a city of Sullivan county, Tennessee, and Wash- 
ington county, Virginia, U.S.A., 130 m. N.E. of Knoxville, 
Tennessee, at an altitude of about 1700 ft. Pop. (1880) 3209; 
(1890) 6226; (1900) 9850 (including 1981 negroes) ; (1910) 13,395, 
of whom 7 148 were in Tennessee and 6 247 were in Virginia. Bristol 
is served by the Holston Valley, the Southern, the Virginia & 
South- Western, and the Norfolk & Western railways, and is a 
railway centre of some importance. It is near the great mineral 
deposits of Virginia, Tennessee, West Virginia, Kentucky and 
North Carolina; an important distributing point for iron, coal 
and coke; and has tanneries and lumber mills, iron furnaces, 
tobacco factories, furniture factories and packing houses. It is 
the seat of Sullins College (Methodist Episcopal, South; 1870) 
for women, and Of the Virginia Institute for Women (Baptist, 
1884), both in the state of Virginia, and of a normal college for 
negroes, on the Tennessee side of the state line. The Tennessee- 
Virginia boundary line runs through the principal street, dividing 
the place into two separate corporations, the Virginia part, 
which before 1890 (when it was chartered as a city) was known 
as Goodson, being administratively independent of the county 
in which it is situated. Bristol was settled about 1835, and the 
town of Bristol, Tennessee, was first incorporated in 1856. 

BRISTOW, BENJAMIN HELM (1832-1896), American lawyer 
and politician, was born in Elkton, Kentucky, on the 20th of 
June 1832, the son of Francis Marion Bristow (1804-1864), a 
Whig member of Congress in 1854-1855 and 1859-1861. He 
graduated at Jefferson College, Canonsburg, Pennsylvania, in 
1851, studied law under his father, and was admitted to the 
Kentucky bar in 1853. At the beginning of the Civil War he 
became lieutenant-colonel of the 25th Kentucky Infantry; was 
severely wounded at Sliiloh; helped to recruit the 8th Kentucky 
Cavalry, of which he was lieutenant-colonel and later colonel; 
and assisted at the capture of John H. Morgan in July 1863. 
In 1863-1865 he was state senator; in 1865-1866 assistant 
United States district-attorney, and in 1866-1870 district- 
attorney for the Louisville district; and in 1870-1872, after a few 
months' practice of law with John M. Harlan, was the (first 
appointed) solicitor-general of the United States. In 1873 
President Grant nominated him attorney-general of the United 
States in case George H. Williams were confirmed as chief justice 
of the United States, — a contingency which did not arise. As 
secretary of the treasury (1874-1876) he prosecuted with vigour 
the so-called " Whisky Ring," the headquarters of which was at 
St Louis, and which, beginning in 1870 or 1871, had defrauded 
the Federal government out of a large part of its rightful revenue 
from the distillation of whisky. Distillers and revenue officers in 
St Louis, Milwaukee, Cincinnati and other cities were implicated, 
and the illicit gains — which in St Louis alone probably amounted 
to more than $2,500,000 in the six years 1870-1876 — were divided 
between the distillers and the revenue officers, who levied assess- 
ments on distillers ostensibly for a Republican campaign fund 
to be used in furthering Grant's re-election. Prominent among 
the ring's alleged accomplices at Washington was Orville E. 
Babcock, private secretary to President Grant, whose personal 
friendship for Babcock led him to indiscreet interference in the 
prosecution. Through Bristow's efforts more than 200 men were 
indicted, a number of whom were convicted, but after some 
months' imprisonment were pardoned. Largely owing to friction 
between himself and the president, Bristow resigned his portfolio 
in June 1876; as secretary of the treasury he advocated the 
resumption of specie payments and at least a partial retirement 
of "greenbacks"; and he was also an advocate of civil service 
reform. He was a prominent candidate for the Republican 
presidential nomination in 1876. After 1878 he practised law 
in New York City, where he died on the 22nd of June 1896. 

See Memorial of Benjamin Helm Bristow, largely prepared by 
David Willcox (Cambridge, Mass., privately printed, 1897) ;Whishey 
Frauds, 44th Cong., 1st Sess., Mis. Doc. No. 186; Secrets of the Great 
Whiskey Ring (Chicago, 1880), by John McDonald, who for nearly 
six years had been supervisor of internal revenue at St Louis, — a 
book by one concerned and to be considered in that light. 



BRISTOW, H. W.— BRITAIN 



583 



BRISTOW, HENRY WILLIAM (1817-1889), English geologist, 
son of Major-General H. Bristow, who served in the Peninsular 
War, was born on the 17th of May 1817. He was educated at 
King's College, London, under John Phillips, then professor of 
geology. In 1842 he was appointed assistant geologist on the 
Geological Survey, and in that service he remained for forty-six 
years, becoming director for England and Wales in 1872, and 
retiring in 1888. He was elected F.R.S. in 1862. He died in 
London on the 14th of June 1889. His publications (see Geol. 
Mag., 1889, p. 384) include A Glossary of Mineralogy (i86r) and 
The Geology of the Isle of Wight (1862). 

BRITAIN (Gr. HperavumL vqooi, Bperravia; Lat. Britannia, 
rarely Brittania), the anglicized form of the classical name of 
England, Wales and Scotland, sometimes extended to the British 
Isles as a whole (Britannicae Insulae). The Greek and Roman 
forms are doubtless attempts to reproduce a Celtic original, the 
exact form of which is still matter of dispute. Brittany (Fr. 
Bretagne) in western France derived its name from Britain 
owing to migrations in the 5th and 6th century a.d. The personi- 
fication of Britannia as a female figure may be traced back as far 
as the coins of Hadrian and Antoninus Pius (early 2nd century 
a.d.); its first appearance on modern coins is on the copper 
of Charles II. (see Numismatics). 

In what follows, the archaeological interest of early Britain 
is dealt with, in connexion with the history of Britain in Pre- 
Roman, Roman, and Anglo-Saxon days; this account being 
supplementary to the articles England; English History; 
Scotland, &c. 

Pre-Roman Britain 

Geologists are not yet agreed when and by whom Britain was 
first peopled. Probably the island was invaded by a succession 
of races. The first, the Paleolithic men, may have died out or 
retired before successors arrived. During the Neolithic and 
Bronze Ages we can dimly trace further immigrations. Real 
knowledge begins with two Celtic invasions, that of the Goidels 
in the later part of the Bronze Age, and that of the Brythons and 
Belgae in the Iron Age. These invaders brought Celtic civiliza- 
tion and dialects. It is uncertain how far they were themselves 
Celtic in blood and how far they were numerous enough to absorb 
or obliterate the races which they found in Britain. But it is not 
unreasonable to think that they were no mere conquering caste, 
and that they were of the same race as the Celtic-speaking 
peoples of the western continent. By the age of Julius Caesar all 
the inhabitants of Britain, except perhaps some tribes of the far 
north, were Celts in speech and customs. Politically they were 
divided into separate and generally warring tribes, each under 
its own princes. They dwelt in hill forts with walls of earth or 
rude stone, or in villages of round huts sunk into the ground and 
resembling those found in parts of northern Gaul, or in sub- 
terranean chambered houses, or in hamlets of pile-dwellings con- 
structed among the marshes. But, at least in the south, market 
centres had sprung up, town life was beginning, houses of a better 
type were perhaps coming into use, and the southern tribes 
employed a gold coinage and also a currency of iron bars or 
ingots, attested by Caesar and by surviving examples, which 
weigh roughly, some two-thirds of a pound, some 2§ lb, but mostly 
1 J lb. In religion, the chief feature was the priesthood of Druids, 
who here, as in Gaul, practised magical arts and barbarous rites 
of human sacrifice, taught a secret lore, wielded great influence, 
but, at least as Druids, took ordinarily no part in politics. In 
art, these tribes possessed a native Late Celtic fashion, descended 
from far-off Mediterranean antecedents and more directly 
connected with the La-Tene culture of the continental Celts. 
Its characteristics were a flamboyant and fantastic treatment 
of plant and animal (though not of human) forms, a free use of 
the geometrical device called the " returning spiral," and much 
skill in enamelling. Its finest products were in bronze, but the 
artistic impulse spread to humbler work in wood and pottery. 
The late Celtic age was one which genuinely delighted in beauty 
of form and detail. In this it resembled the middle ages rather 
than the Roman empire or the present day, and it resembled 



them all the more in that its love of beauty, like theirs, was mixed 
with a feeling for the fantastic and the grotesque. The Roman 
conquest of northern Gaul ($7-50 B.C.) brought Britain into 
definite relation with the Mediterranean. It was already closely 
connected with Gaul, and when Roman civilization and its 
products invaded Gallia Belgica, they passed on easily to Britain. 
The British coinage now begins to bear Roman legends, and after 
Caesar's two raids (55, 54 b.c.) the southern tribes were regarded 
at Rome, though they do not seem to have regarded themselves, 
as vassals. Actual conquest was, however, delayed. Augustus 
planned it. But both he and his successor Tiberius realized that 
the greater need was to consolidate the existing empire, and 
absorb the vast additions recently made to it by Pompey, Caesar 
and Augustus. 

Roman Britain 

I. The Roman Conquest. — The conquest of Britain was under- 
taken by Claudius in a.d. 43. Two causes coincided to produce 
the step. On the one hand a forward policy then ruled at Rome, 
leading to annexations in various lands. On the other hand, 
a probably philo-Roman prince, Cunobelin (known to literature 
as Cymbeline), had just been succeeded by two sons, Caractacus 
(q.v.) and Togodumnus, who were hostile to Rome. Caligula, 
the half-insane predecessor of Claudius, had made in respect 
to this event some blunder which we know only through a 
sensational exaggeration, but which doubtless had to be made 
good. An immediate reason . for action was the appeal of a 
fugitive British prince, presumably a Roman partisan and victim 
of Cunobelin's sons. So Aulus Plautius with a singularly well 
equipped army of some 40,000 men landed in Kent and advanced 
on London. Here Claudius himself appeared — the one reigning 
emperor of the 1st century who crossed the waves of ocean, — and 
the army, crossing the Thames, moved forward through Essex 
and captured the native capital, Camulodunum, now Colchester. 
From the base of London and Colchester three corps continued 
the conquest. The left wing, the Second Legion (under Vespasian, 
afterwards emperor), subdued the south; the centre, the Four- 
teenth and Twentieth Legions, subdued the midlands, while 
the right wing, the Ninth Legion, advanced through the eastern 
part of the island. This strategy was at fifst triumphant. The 
lowlands of Britain, with their partly Romanized and partly 
scanty population and their easy physical features, presented 
no obstacle. Within three or four years everything south of 
the Humber and east of the Severn had been either directly 
annexed or entrusted, as protectorates, to native client-princes. 

A more difficult task remained. The wild hills and wilder 
tribes of Wales and Yorkshire offered far fiercer resistance. There 
followed thirty years of intermittent hill fighting (a.d. 47-79). 
The precise steps of the conquest are not known. Legionary 
fortresses were established at Wroxeter (for a time only), Chester 
and Caerleon, facing the Welsh hills, and at Lincoln in the north- 
east. Monmouthshire, and Flintshire with its lead mines, were 
early overrun; in 60 Suetonius Paulinus reached Anglesea. 
The method of conquest was the establishment of small detached 
forts in strategic positions, each garrisoned by 500 or 1000 men, 
and it was accompanied by a full share of those disasters which 
vigorous barbarians always inflict on civilized invaders. Pro- 
gress was delayed too by the great revolt of Boadicea (q.v.) and 
a large part of the nominally conquered Lowlands. Her rising 
was soon crushed, but the government was obviously afraid for 
a while to move its garrisons forward. Indeed, other needs of 
the empire caused the withdrawal of the Fourteenth Legion 
about 67. But the decade a.d. 70-80 was decisive. A series of 
three able generals commanded an army restored to its proper 
strength by the addition of Legio II. Adiutrix, and achieved 
the final subjugation of Wales and the first conquest of Yorkshire, 
where a legionary fortress at York was substituted for that at 
Lincoln. 

The third and best-known, if not the ablest, of these generals, 
Julius Agricola, moved on in a.d. 80 to the conquest of the 
farther north. He established between the Clyde and Forth 
a frontier meant to be permanent, guarded by a line of forts, 



5«4 



BRITAIN 



two of which are still traceable at Camelon near Falkirk, and at 
Bar Hill. He then advanced into Caledonia and won a " famous 
victory " at Mons Graupius (sometimes, but incorrectly, spelt 
Grampius), probably near the confluence of the Tay and the Isla, 
where a Roman encampment of his date, Inchtuthill, has been 
partly examined (see Galgacus). He dreamt even of invading 
Ireland, and thought it an easy task. The home government 
judged otherwise. Jealous possibly of a too brilliant general, 
certainly averse from costly and fruitless campaigns and needing 
the Legio II. Adiutrix for work elsewhere, it recalled both 
governor and legion, and gave up the more northerly of his 
nominal conquests. The most solid result of his campaigns 
is that his battlefield, misspelt Grampius, has provided to anti- 
quaries, and through them to the world, the modern name of the 
Grampian Hills. 

What frontier was adopted after Agricola's departure, whether 
Tweed or Cheviot or other, is unknown. For thirty years (a.d. 
85-115) the military history of Britain is a blank. When we 
recover knowledge we are in an altered world. About 1 1 5 or 1 20 
the northern Britons rose in revolt and destroyed the Ninth 
Legion, posted at York, which would bear the brunt of any 
northern trouble. In 122 the second reigning emperor who 
crossed the ocean, Hadrian, came himself to Britain, brought 
the Sixth Legion to replace the Ninth, and introduced the frontier 
policy of his age. For over 70 m. from Tyne to Solway, more 
exactly from Wallsend to Bowness, he built a continuous rampart, 
more probably of turf than of stone, with a ditch in front of it, 
a number of small forts along it, one or two outposts a few miles 
to the north of it, and some detached forts (the best-known is 
on the hill above Maryport) guarding the Cumberland coast 
beyond its western end. The details of his work are imperfectly 
known, for though many remains survive, it is hard to separate 
those of Hadrian's date from others that are later. But that 
Hadrian built a wall here is proved alike by literature and by 
inscriptions. The meaning of the scheme is equally Certain. 
It was to be, as it were, a Chinese wall, marking the definite 
limit of the Roman world. It was now declared, not by the secret 
resolutions of cabinets, but by the work of the spade marking 
the solid earth for ever, that the era of conquest was ended. 

But empires move, though rulers bid them stand still. 
Whether the land beyond Hadrian's wall became temptingly 
peaceful or remained in vexing disorder, our authorities do 
not say. We know only that about 142 Hadrian's successor, 
Antoninus Pius, acting through his general Lollius Urbicus, 
advanced from the Tyne and Solway frontier to the narrower 
isthmus between Forth and Clyde, 36 m. across, which Agricola 
had fortified before him. Here he reared a continuous rampart 
with a ditch in front of it, fair-sized forts, probably a dozen in 
number, built either close behind it or actually abutting on it, 
and a connecting road running from end to end. An ancient 
writer states that the rampart was built of regularly laid 
sods (the same method which had probably been employed 
by Hadrian), and excavations in 1 891- 1893 have verified the 
statement. The work still survives visibly, though in varying 
preservation, except in the agricultural districts near its two 
ends. Occasionally, as on Croyhill (near Kilsyth), at Wester- 
wood, and in the covers of Bonnyside (3 m. west of Falkirk), 
wall and ditch and even road can be distinctly traced, and the 
sites of many of the forts are plain to practised eyes. Three 
of these forts have been excavated. All three show the ordinary 
features of Roman castella, though they differ more than one 
would expect in forts built at one time by one general. Bar Hill, 
the most completely explored, covers three acres — nearly five 
times as much as the earlier fort of Agricola on the same site. 
It had ramparts of turf, barrack-rooms of wood, and a head- 
quarters building, storehouse and bath in stone: it stands a 
few yards back from the wall. Castle Cary covers nearly four 
acres: its ramparts contain massive and well-dressed masonry- 
its interior buildings, though they agree in material, do not 
altogether agree in plan with those of Bar Hill, and its north face 
falls in line with the frontier wall. Rough Castle, near Falkirk, 
is very much smaller; it is remarkable for the astonishing 



strength of its turf -built and earthen rampaftsi and raveliriBj'fcnd 
for a remarkable series of defensive pits, reminiscent of Caesar's 
lilia at Alesia, plainly intended to break an enemy's charge, and 
either provided with stakes to impale the assailant or covered 
over with hurdles or the like to deceive him. Besides the dozen 
forts on the wall, one or two outposts may have been held at 
Ardoch and Abernethy along the natural route which runs by 
Stirling and Perth to the lowlands of the east coast. This frontier 
was reached from the south by two roads. One, known in 
medieval times as Dere Street and misnamed Watling Street by 
modern antiquaries, ran from Corbridge on the Tyne past Otter- 
burn, crossed Cheviot near Makendon Camps, and passed by'an 
important fort at Newstead near Melrose, and another at Inveresk 
(outside of Edinburgh) , to the eastern end of the wall. The other, 
starting from Carlisle, ran to Birrens, a Roman fort near Eccle* 
fechan, and thence, by a line not yet explored and indeed not at 
all certain, to Carstairs and the west end of the wall. This wall 
was in addition to, and not instead of , the wall of Hadrian. Both 
barriers were held together, and the district between them was 
regarded as a military area, outside the range of civilization. ' 

The work of Pius brought no long peace. Sixteen years liater 
disorder broke, out in north Britain, apparently in the district 
between the Cheviots and the Derbyshire hills, and was repressed 
with difficulty after four or five years' fighting. Eighteen or 
twenty years later (180-185) a new war broke out with' a dif- 
ferent issue. The Romans lost everything beyond Cheviot, and 
perhaps even more. The government of Commodus, feeble in 
itself and vexed by many troubles, could not repair the loss, 
and the civil wars which soon raged in Europe (193-197) 
gave the Caledonians further chance. It was not till 208 that 
Septimius Severus, the ablest emperor of his age, could turn his 
attention to the island. He came thither in person, invaded 
Caledonia, commenced the reconstruction of the wall of Hadrian, 
rebuilding it from end to end in stone, and then in the fourth 
year of his operations died at York. Amid much that is un- 
certain and even legendary about his work in Britain, this is 
plain, that he fixed on the line of Hadrian's wall as his substan- 
tive 'frontier. His successors, Caracalla and Severus Alexander 
(211-235), accepted the position, and many inscriptions refer 
to building or rebuilding executed by them for the greater 
efficiency of the frontier defences. The conquest of Britain was 
at last over. The wall of Hadrian remained for nearly two 
hundred years more the northern limit of Roman power in the 
extreme west. 

II. The Province of Britain and its Military System.— Geo- 
graphically, Britain consists of two parts: (1) the comparatively 
flat lowlands of the south, east and midlands, suitable to agricul- 
ture and open to easy intercourse with the continent, i.e. with 
the rest of the Roman empire; (2) the district consisting of the 
hills of Devon and Cornwall, of Wales and of northern England, 
regions lying more, and often very much more, than 600 ft. above 
the sea, scarred with gorges and deep valleys, mountainous in 
character, difficult for armies to traverse, ill fitted to the peaceful 
pursuits in agriculture. These two parts of the province differ 
also in their history. The lowlands, as we have seen, were con- 
quered easily and quickly. The uplands were hardly subdued 
completely till the end of the 2nd century. They differ, thirdly, 
in the character of their Roman occupation. 1 The lowlands were 
the scene of civil life. Towns, villages and country houses were 
their prominent features; troops were hardly seen in them 
save in some fortresses on the edge of the hills and in a 
chain of forts built in the 4th century to defend the south-east 
coast, the so-called Saxon Shore. The uplands of Wales and the 
north presented another spectacle. Here civil life was almost 
wholly absent. No country town or country house has been 
found more than 20 m. north of York or west of Monmouthshire. 
The hills were one extensive military frontier, covered with forts 
and strategic roads connecting them, and devoid of town life, 
country houses, farms or peaceful civilized industry. This 
geographical division was not reproduced by Rome in any 
administrative partitions of the province. At first the whole 
was governed by one legatus Augusti of consular standing. 



ROMAN BRITAIN 



Scale, 1:3,000,000 




J3 Longitude West 2 of Greenwich 



EmtryWalker jc 



BRITAIN 



585 



Septimius Severus made it two provinces, Superior and Inferior, 
with a boundary which probably ran from Humber to Mersey, 
but we do not know how long this arrangement lasted. In the 
5th century there were five provinces, Britannia Prima and 
Secunda, Flavia and Maxima Caesariensis and (for a while) 
Valentia, ruled by praesides and consulares under a vicarius, 
but the only thing known of them is that Britannia Prima 
included Cirencester. • 

The army which guarded or coerced the—pro vin.ce Con- 
sisted, from the time of Hadrian onwards, of (1) three legions, 
the Second at Isca Silurum (Caerleon-on-Usk, q.v.), the Ninth 
at Eburacum {q.v.; now York), the Twentieth at Deva (q.v.; 
now Chester), a total of some 15,000 heavy infantry; and (2) 
a large but uncertain number of auxiliaries, troops of the second 
grade, organized in infantry cohorts or cavalry aloe, each 500 
or 1000 strong, and posted in castella nearer the frontiers than 
the legions. The legionary fortresses were large rectangular 



GREAT WALL 




others; principally (it seems) forts built before 150, wood is 
used freely and only the few principal buildings seem to have 
been constructed throughout of stone. 

We may illustrate their character from Ho«£ifcteads, which, 
in the form in which we know it, perhaps dates from Septimius 
Severus; This fort measures about 360 by 600 ft. and covers 
a trifle less than 5 acres. . Its ramparts are of stone, and its north 
rampart coincides with the great wall of Hadrian. Its interior 
is filled with stone buildings. Chief among these (see fig. 1), and 
in the centre of the whole fort, is the Headquarters, in Lat. 
Principia or, as it is often (though perhaps less correctly) styled 
by moderns, Praetorium. This is a rectangular structure with 
only one entrance which gives access, first, to a small cloistered 
court (x. 4), then to a second open court (x. 7), and finally to a 
row of five rooms (x. 8-12) containing the shrine for official 
worship, the treasury and other offices. Close by were officers' 
quarters, generally built round a tiny cloistered court £ix., xi., xii.), 



NORTH GATE 
f 



ffTTTCTHn 



WEST 
GATE 



IV. 




b r 


i:::::n::" 



H JJUI I Hff J 



SCALE It* FEET 20 40 60 .80 100 ISO 






BORCOVICIUM (homesteads) 



Fig. i . — Plan of Housesteads (BorcGvicium) on Hadrian's Wall. 



enclosures of 50 or 60 acres, surrounded by strong walls of which 
traces can still be seen in the lower courses of the north and east 
town- walls of Chester, in the abbey gardens at York, and on; 
the south side of Caerleon. The auxiliary castella were hardly 
a tenth of the size, varying generally from three to six acres 
according to the size of the regiment and the need for stabling. 
Of these upwards of 70 are known in England and some 20 
more in Scotland. Of the English examples a few have been 
carefully excavated, notably Gellygaer between Cardiff and 
Brecon, one of the most perfect specimens to be found anywhere 
in the Roman empire of a Roman fort dating from the end of 
the 1st century a.d.; Hardknott, on a Cumberland moor over- 
hanging Upper Eskdale; and Housesteads on Hadrian's wall. 
In Scotland excavation has been more active, in particular 
at the forts of Birrens, Newstead near Melrose, Lyne near 
Peebles, Ardoch between Stirling and Perth, and Castle Cary, 
Rough Castle and Bar Hill on the wall of Pius. The internal 
arrangements of all these forts follow one general plan. But in 
some, of them the internal buildings are all of stone, while in 



and substantially built storehouses with buttresses and dry base- 
ments (viii.). These filled the middle third of the fort. At 
the two ends were barracks for the soldiers (i.-vi., xiii.-xviii.). 
No space was allotted to private religion or domestic life. The 
shrines which voluntary worshippers might visit, the public 
bath-house, and the cottages of the soldiers' wives, camp 
followers, &c, lay outside the walls. Such were nearly all the 
Roman forts in Britain. They differ somewhat from Roman 
forts in Germany or other provinces, though most of the differ- 
ences arise from the different usage of wood and of stone in 
various places. 

Forts of this kind were dotted all along the military roads of 
the Welsh and northern hill-districts. In Wales a road ran from 
Chester past a fort at Caer-hyn (near Conway) to a fort at 
Carnarvon (Segontium). A similar road ran along the south 
coast from Caerleon-on-Usk past a fort at Cardiff and perhaps 
others, to Carmarthen. A third, roughly parallel to the shore 
of Cardigan Bay, with forts at Llanio and Tommen-y-mur (near 
Festiniog), connected the northern and southern roads, while 



5 86 



BRITAIN 



the interior was held by a system of roads and forts not yet well 
understood but discernible at such points as Caer-gai on Bala 
Lake, Castle Collen near Llandrindod Wells, the Gaer near 
Brecon, Mertbyx and Gellygaer. In the north of Britain we 
find three principal roads. One led due north from York past 
forts at Catterick Bridge, Piers Bridge, Binchester, Lanchester, 
Ebchester to the wall and to Scotland, while branches through 
Chester-le-Street reached the Tyne Bridge (Pons Aelius) at 
Newcastle and the Tyne mouth at South Shields. Asecondroad, 
turning north-west from Catterick Bridge, mounted the Pennine 
Chain by way of forts at Rokeby, Bowes and Brough-under- 
Stainmoor, descended into the Eden valley, reached Hadrian's 
wall near Carlisle (Luguvallium) , and passed on to Birrens. The 
third route, starting from Chester and passing up the western 
coast, is more complex, and exists in duplicate, the result 
perhaps of two different schemes of road-making. Forts in plenty 
can be detected along it, notably Manchester (Mancunium or 
Mamucium), Ribchester (Bremetennacum), Brougham Castle 
(Brocavum), Old Penrith (Voreda), and on a western branch, 
Watercrook near Kendal, Waterhead near the hotel of that name 
on Ambleside, Hardknott above Eskdale, Maryport (Uxello- 
dunum), and Old Carlisle (possibly Petriana). In addition, two 
or three cross roads, not yet sufficiently explored, maintained 
communication between the troops in Yorkshire and those in 
Cheshire and Lancashire. This road system bears plain marks 
of having been made at different times, and with different objec- 
tives, but we have no evidence that any one part was abandoned 
when any other was built. There are signs, however, that various 
forts were dismantled as the country grew quieter. Thus, 
Gellygaer in South Wales and Hardknott in Cumberland have 
yielded nothing later than the opening of the 2nd century. 

Besides these detached forts and their connecting roads, the 
north of Britain was defended by Hadrian's wall (figs. 2 and 3). 
The history of this wall has been given above. The actual works 
are threefold. First, there is that which to-day forms the most 
striking feature in the whole, the wall of stone 6-8 ft. thick, and 
originally perhaps 14 ft. high, with a deep ditch in front, and 
forts and " mile castles " and turrets and a connecting road 
behind it. On the high moors between Chollerford andGilsland 
its traces are still plain, as it climbs from hill to hill and winds 
along perilous precipices. Secondly, there is the so-called 
" Vallum," in reality no vallum at all, but a broad flat-bottomed 
ditch out of which the earth has been cast up on either side into 



turf and Severus reconstructed it in stone. The reconstruction 
probably followed in general the line of Hadrian's wall in order 
to utilize the existing ditch, and this explains why the turf wall 
itself survives only at special points. In general it was destroyed 
to make way for the new wall in stone. Occasionally (as at 
Birdoswald) there was a deviation, and the older work survived. 




SOUTH 



Fig. 3. — Section of Hadrian's Wall. 




From Social England, by permission of Casselt & Co., Ltd. 

Fig. 2. — Hadrian's Wall. 

regular and continuous mounds that resemble ramparts. 
Thirdly, nowhere very clear on the surface and as yet detected 
only at a few points, there are the remains of the " turf wall," 
constructed of sods laid in regular courses, with a ditch in front. 
This turf wall is certainly older than the stone wall, and, as our 
ancient writers mention two wall-builders, Hadrian and Septimius 
Severus, the natural inference is that Hadrian built his wall of 



This conversion of earthwork into stone in the age of Severus 
can be paralleled from other parts of the Roman empire. 

The meaning of the vallum is much more doubtful. John 
Hodgson and Bruce, the local authorities of the 19th century, 
supposed that it was erected to defend the wall from southern 
insurgents. Others have ascribed it to Agricola, or have thought 
it to be the wall of Hadrian, or even assigned it to pre-Roman 
natives. The two facts that are clear about it are, that it is a 
Roman work, no older than Hadrian (if so old), and that it was 
not intended, like the wall, for military defence. Probably it 
is contemporaneous with either the turf wall or the stone wall, 
and marked some limit of the civil province of Britain. Beyond 
this we cannot at present go. 

III. The Civilization of Roman Britain. — Behind these 
formidable garrisons, sheltered from barbarians and in easy con- 
tact with the Roman empire, stretched the lowlands of southern 
and eastern Britain. Here a civilized life grew up, and Roman 
culture spread. This part of Britain became Romanized. In 
the lands looking on to the Thames estuary (Kent, Essex, Middle- 
sex) the process had perhaps begun before the Roman conquest. 
It was continued after that event, and in two ways. To some 
extent it was definitely encouraged by the Roman government, 
which here, as elsewhere, founded towns peopled with Roman 
citizens — generally discharged legionaries — and endowed them 
with franchise and constitution like those of the Italian munici- 
palities. It developed still more by its own automatic growth. 
The coherent civilization of the Romans was accepted by the 
Britons, as it was by the Gauls, with something like enthusiasm. 
Encouraged perhaps by sympathetic Romans, spurred on still 
more by their own instincts, and led no doubt by their nobles, 
they began to speak Latin, to use the material resources of 
Roman civilized life, and in time to consider themselves not 
the unwilling subjects of a foreign empire, but the British 
members of the Roman state. The steps by which these 
results were reached can to some extent be dated. Within 
a few years of the Claudian invasion a colonia, or muni- 
cipality of time-expired soldiers, had been planted in the 
old native capital of Colchester (Camulodunum), and though 
it served at first mainly as a fortress and thus provoked 
British hatred, it came soon to exercise a civilizing in- 
fluence. At the same time the British town of Verulamium 
(St Albans) was thought sufficiently Romanized to deserve 
the municipal status of a municipium, which at this period 
differed little from that of a colonia. Romanized Britons 
must now have begun to be numerous. In the great revolt 
of Boadicea (60) the nationalist party seem to have mas- 
sacred many thousands of them along with actual Romans. 
Fifteen or twenty years later, the movement increases. 
Towns spring up, such as Silchester, laid out in Roman 
fashion, furnished with public buildings of Roman type, and 
filled with houses which are Roman in fittings if not in plan. 
The baths of Bath (Aquae Sulis) are exploited. Another 
colonia is planted at Lincoln (Lindum), and a third at 
Gloucester (Glevum) in 96. A new " chief judge " is appointed 
for increasing civil business. The tax-gatherer and recruit- 
ing officer begin to make their way into the hills. During 
the 2nd century progress was perhaps slower, hindered doubt- 
less by the repeated risings in the north. It was not till the 
3rd century that country houses and farms became common 
in most parts of the civilized area. In the beginning of the 



BRITAIN 



5«7 



4th century the skilled artisans and builders, and the cloth and 
corn of Britain were equally famous on the continent. This 
probably was the age when the prosperity and Romanization of 
the province reached its height. By this time the town popula- 
tions and the educated among the country-folk spoke Latin, and 
Britain regarded itself as a Roman land, inhabited by Romans 
and distinct from outer barbarians. 

The civilization which had thus spread over half the island 
was genuinely Roman, identical in kind with that of the other 
western provinces of the empire, and in particular with that of 
northern Gaul. But it was defective in quantity. The elements 
which compose it are marked by smaller size, less wealth and less 
splendour than the same elements elsewhere. It was also uneven 
in its distribution. Large tracts, in particular Warwickshire 
and the adjoining midlands, were very thinly inhabited. Even 
densely peopled areas like north Kent, the Sussex coast, west 
Gloucestershire and east Somerset, immediately adjoin areas 
like the Weald of Kent and Sussex where Romano-British 
remains hardly occur. 

The administration of the civilized part of the province, while 
subject to the governor of all Britain, was practically entrusted 
to local authorities. Each Roman municipality ruled itself . 
and a territory perhaps as large as a small county which 
belonged to it. Some districts belonged to the Imperial 
Domains, and were administered by agents of the emperor. 
The rest, by far the larger part of the country, was 
divided up among the old native tribes or cantons, some 
ten or twelve in number, each grouped round some country 
town where its council (ordo) met for cantonal business. 
This cantonal system closely resembles that which we find 
in Gaul. It is an old native element recast in Roman form, 
and well illustrates the Roman principle of local government west 
by devolution. 

In the general framework of Romano-British life the two 
chief features were the town, and the villa. The towns of the 
province, as we have already implied, fall into two classes. 
Five modern cities, Colchester, Lincoln, York, Gloucester CATe 
and St Albans, stand on the sites, and in some fragmentary 
fashion bear the names of five Roman municipalities, 
founded by the Roman government with special charters 
and constitutions. All of these reached a considerable 
measure of prosperity. None of them rivals the greater 
municipalities of other provinces. Besides them we trace a 
larger number of country towns, varying much in size, but 
all possessing in some degree the characteristics of a 
town. The chief of these seem to be cantonal capitals, 
probably developed out of the market centres or capitals 
of the Celtic tribes before the Roman conquest. Such are 
Isurium Brigantum, capital of the Brigantes, 12 m. north-west of 
York and the most northerly Romano-British town; Ratae, now 
Leicester, capital of the Coritani; Viroconium, now Wroxeter, 
near Shrewsbury, capital of the Cornovii; Venta Silurum, 
now Caerwent, near Chepstow; Corinium, now Cirencester, 
capital of the Dobuni; Isca Dumnoniorum, now Exeter, 
the most westerly of these towns; Durnovaria, now Dor- 
chester, in Dorset, capital of the Durotriges; Venta Belgarum, 
now Winchester; Calleva Atrebatum, now Silchester, 10 m. 
south of Reading; Durovernum Cantiacorum, now Canter- 
bury; and Venta Icenorum, now Caistor-by-Norwich. Besides 
these country towns, Londinium (London) was a rich and 
important trading town, centre of the road system, and 
the seat of the finance officials of the province, as the re- 
markable objects discovered in it abundantly prove, while 
Aquae Sulis (Bath) was a spa provided with splendid baths, 
and a richly adorned temple of the native patron deity, Sul or 
Sulis, whom the Romans called Minerva. Many smaller places, 
too, for example, Magna or Kenchester near Hereford, Durobrivae 
or Rochester in Kent, another Durobrivae near Peterborough, 
a site of uncertain name near Cambridge, another of uncertain 
name near Chesterford, exhibited some measure of town life. 

As a specimen we may take Silchester, remarkable as the one 
town in the whole Roman empire which has been completely 



and systematically uncovered. As we see it to-day, it is an 
open space of 100 acres, set on a hill with a wide prospect east 
and south and west, in shape an irregular hexagon, silchester 
enclosed in a circuit of a mile and a half by the massive 
ruins of a city wall which still stands here and there some 20 ft. 
high (fig. 4). Outside, on the north-east, is the grassy hollow 
of a tiny amphitheatre; on the west a line of earthworks runs in 
wider circuit than the walls. The area within the walls is a vast 
expanse of cultivated land, unbroken by any vestige of antiquity; 
yet the soil is thick with tile and potsherd, and in hot summers 
the unevenly growing corn reveals the remains of streets beneath 
the surface. Casual excavations were made here in 1744 and 
1833 ; more systematic ones intermittently between 1864 and 
1884 by the Rev. J. G. Joyce and others; finally, in May 189c, 
the complete uncovering of the whole site was begun by Mr 
G. E. Fox and others. The work was carried on with splendid 
perseverance, and the uncovering of the interior was completed 
in 1908. 

The chief results concern the buildings. Though these have 
vanished wholly from the surface, the foundations and lowest courses 
of their walls survive fairly perfect below ground : thus the plan of 




Fig. 4. — General Plan of Silchester (Calleva Atrebatum). 

the town can be minutely recovered, and both the character of thfc 
buildings which make up a place like Calleva, and the character 
of Roma no- British buildings generally, become plainer. Of the 
buildings the chief are : — 

1. Forum. — Near the middle of the town was a rectangular block 
covering two acres. It comprised a central open court, 132 ft. by 
140 ft. in size, surrounded on three sides by a corridor or cloister, 
with rooms opening on the cloister (fig. 5). On the fourth side was 
a great hall, with rooms opening into it from behind. This hall was 
270 ft. long and 58 ft. wide; two rows of Corinthian columns ran 
down the middle, and the clerestory roof may have stood 50 ft. above 
the floor; the walls were frescoed or lined with marble, and for 
ornament there were probably statues. Finally, a corridor ran round 
outside the whole block. Here the local authorities had their offices, 
justice was administered, traders trafficked, citizens and idlers 
gathered. Though we cannot apportion the rooms to their precise 
uses, the great hall was plainly the basilica, for meetings and business ; 
the rooms behind it were perhaps law courts, and some of the rooms 
on the other three sides of the quadrangle may have been shops. 
Similar municipal buildings existed in most towns of the western 
Empire, whether they were full municipalities or (as probably 
Calleva was) of lower rank. The Callevan Forum seems in general 
simpler than others, but its basilica is remarkably large. Probably 
the British climate compelled more indoor life than the sunnier 
south. 

2. Temples. — Two small square temples, of a common western- 
provincial type, were in the east of the town; the cella of the larger 
measured 42 ft. sq., and was lined with Purbeck marble. A third, 
circular temple stood between the forum and the south gate. A 
fourth, a smaller square shrine found in too? a Uttle past «>f *J>» 



5 88 



BRITAIN 



forum, yielded some interesting inscriptions, which relate to a gild 
(collegium) and incidentally confirm the name Calleya. 

3. Christian Church. — Close outside the south-east angle of the 
forum was a small edifice, 42 ft. by 27 ft., consisting of a nave and 
two aisles which ended at the east in a porch as wide as the building, 
and at the west in an apse and two flanking chambers. The nave 
and porch were floored with plain red tesserae: in the apse was a 
simple mosaic panel in red, black and white. Round the building 




STREET 

30 100 ^ ' 7.00 300 

t , ,_> — 1 1 — 1 

Fig. 5.— Plan of Forum, Basilica and surroundings, Silchester. 

was a yard, fenced with wooden palings; in it were a well itear the 
apse, and a small structure of tile with a pit near the east end. 
No direct proof of date or use was discovered. But the ground plan 
is that of an early Christian church of the " basilican " type. This 
type comprised nave and aisles, ending at one end in an apse and two 
chambers resembling rudimentary transepts, and at the other end 
in a porch (narthex). Previous to about a.d. 420 the porch was often 
at the east end and the apse at the west, and the altar, often movable, 
stood in the apse — as at Silchester, perhaps, on the mosaic panel. 
A court enclosed the whole ; near the porch was a laver for the ablu- 
tions of intending worshippers. Many such churches have been 
found in other countries, especially in Roman Africa; no other 
satisfactory instance is known in Britain. 

4. Town Baths. — A suite of public baths stood a little east of the 
forum. At the entrance were a peristyle court for loungers and a 
latrine: hence the bather passed into the Apodyterium (dressing- 
room), the Frigidarium (cold room) fitted with a cold bath for use 
at the end of the bathing ceremony, and a series of hot rooms — the 
whole resembling manyjmodern Turkish baths. In their first form the 
baths of Silchester were about 160 ft. by 80 ft., but they were later 
considerably extended. 

5. Private Houses. — The private houses of Silchester are of two 
types. They consist either of a row of rooms, with a corridor along 
them, and perhaps one or two additional rooms at one or both ends, 
or of three such corridors and rows of rooms, forming three sides 
of a large square open yard. They are detached houses, standing 
each in its own garden, and not forming terraces or rows. The 
country houses of Roman Britain have long been recognized as 
embodying these (or allied) types ; now it becomes plain that they 
were the normal types throughout Britain. They differ widely from 
the town houses of Rome and Pompeii : they are less unlike some of 
the country houses of Italy and Roman Africa ; but their real . 
parallels occur in Gaul, and they may be Celtic types modified 
to Roman use — like Indian bungalows. Their internal fittings— 
hypocausts, frescoes, mosaics — are everywhere Roman; those at 
Silchester are average specimens, and, except for one mosaic, not 
individually striking. The largest Silchester house, with a special 
annexe for baths, is usually taken to be a guest-house or inn for 
travellers between London and the west (fig. 6). Altogether, the 
town probably did not contain more than seventy or eighty houses 
of any size, and large spaces were not built over at all. This fact 
and the peculiar character of the houses must have given to Silchester 
rather the appearance of a village with scattered cottages, each in 
its own plot facing its own way, than a town with regular and 
continuous streets. ',■... 

6. Industries. ^-Shops are conjectured in the forum and elsewhere, 



but were not numerous. Many dyers' furnaces, a little silver refinery, 
and perhaps a bakery have also been noticed. 

7. Streets, Roads, 6"c— The streets were paved with gravel: 
they varied in width up to 28J ft. They intersect regularly at right 
angles, dividing the town into square blocks, like modern Mannheim 
or Turin, according to a Roman system usual in both Italy and the 
provinces: plainly they were laid out all at once, possibly by 
Agricola (TaC. Agr. 21) and most probably about his time. There 
were four chief gates, not quite symmetrically placed. The town- 
walls are built of flint and concrete bonded with ironstone, and are 
backed with earth. In the plans, though not in the reports, of the 
excavations, they are shown as built later than the streets. No 
traces of meat-market, theatre or aqueduct have come to light; 
water Was got from wells lined with wooden tubs, and must have 
been scanty in dry summers. Smaller objects abound — coins, 
pottery, window and bottle and cup glass, bronze ornaments, iron 
tools, &c. — and many belong to the beginnings of Calleva, but few 
pieces are individually notable. Traces of late Celtic art are singu- 
larly absent; Roman fashions rule supreme, and inscriptions show 
that even the lower classes here spoke and wrote Latin. Outside 
the walls were the cemeteries, not yet explored. Of suburbs we 
have as yet no- hint. Nor indeed is the neighbourhood of Calleva 
at all rich in Roman remains. In fact, as well as in Celtic etymology, 
it was " the town in the forest." A similar absence of remains may 
be noticed outside other Romano-British towns, and is significant 
of their economic position. Such doubtless were most of the towns 
of Roman Britain — thoroughly Romanized, peopled with Roman- 
speaking citizens, furnished with Roman appurtenances, living in 
Roman ways, but not very large, not very rich, a humble witness 
to the assimilating power of the Roman civilization in Britain. 

The country, as opposed to the towns, of Roman Britain 
seems to have been divided into estates, commonly (though 
perhaps incorrectly) known as " villas." Many examples sur- 
vive, some of them large and luxurious country-houses, some 
mere farms, constructed usually on one of the two patterns 
described in the account of Silchester above. The inhabitants 
were plainly as various — a few of them great nobles and wealthy 
landowners, others small farmers or possibly bailiffs. Some of 
these estates were worked on the true " villa " system, by which 
the lord occupied the " great house," and cultivated the land 
close round it by slaves, while he let the rest to half-free co'loni. 
But other systems may have prevailed as well. Among the most 
important country-houses are those of Bignor in west Sussex, 
and Woodchester and Chedworth in Gloucestershire. 

The wealth of the country was principally agrarian. Wheat 
and wool were exported in the 4th century, when, as we have said, 
Britain was especially prosperous. But the details of the trade 
are unrecorded. More is known of the lead and iron mines 
which, at least in the first two centuries, were worked in many 

STREET 



SC*ALE 
?o 100 
I i 1 



IN 



FEET 
loo 



500 




Fig. 6. — Plan of supposed Inn and Baths at Silchester. 

districts— le^d in Somerset, Shropshire, Flintshire and Derby- 
shire; iron in the west Sussex Weald, the Forest of Dean, and 
(to a slight extent) elsewhere. Other minerals were less notable. 
The gold mentioned by Tacitus proved scanty. The Cornish 
tin, according to present evidence, was worked comparatively 
little, and perhaps most in the later Empire. 

Lastly, the roads. Here we must put aside all idea of " Four 
Great Roads." That category is probably the invention of 



BRITAIN 



589 



antiquaries, and certainly unconnected with Roman Britain (see 
Ermine Street). Instead, we may distinguish four main 
groups of roads radiating from London, and a fifth which runs 
obliquely. One road ran south-east to Canterbury and the 
Kentish ports, of which Richborough (Rutupiae) was the most 
frequented. A second ran west to Silchester, and thence by 
various branches to Winchester, Exeter, Bath, Gloucester and 
South Wales. - A third, known afterwards to the English as 
Watling Street, ran by St Albans Wall near Lichfield (Letocetum) , 
to Wroxeter and Chester. It also gave access by a branch to 
Leicester and Lincoln. A fourth served Colchester, the eastern 
counties, Lincoln and York. The fifth is that known to the 
English as the Fosse, which joins Lincoln and Leicester with 
Cirencester, Bath and Exeter. Besides these five groups, an 
obscure road, called by the Saxons Akeman Street, gave alterna- 
tive access from London through Alchester (outside of Bicester) 
to Bath, while another obscure road winds south from near 
Sheffield, past Derby and Birmingham, and connects the lower 
Severn with the Humber. By these roads and their various 
branches the Romans provided adequate communications 
throughout the lowlands of Britain. 

IV. The End of Roman Britain.— Early in the 4th century 
it was necessary to establish a special coast defence, reaching 
from the Wash to Spithead, against Saxon pirates: there were 
forts at Brancaster, Borough Castle (near Yarmouth), Bradwell 
(at the mouth of the Colne and Blackwater), Reculver, Rich- 
borough, Dover and Lymme (all in Kent), Pevensey in Sussex, 
Porchester near Portsmouth, and perhaps also at Felixstowe 
in Suffolk. After about 350, barbarian assaults, not only of 
Saxons but also of Irish (Scoti) and Picts, became commoner 
and more terrible. At the end of the century Magnus Maximus, 
claiming to be emperor, withdrew many troops from Britain 
and a later pretender did the same. Early in the 5th century 
the Teutonic conquest of Gaul cut the island off from Rome. 
This does not mean that there was any great " departure of 
Romans." The central government simply ceased to send the 
usual governors and high officers. The Romano-British were 
left to themselves. Their position was weak. Their fortresses 
lay in the north and west, while the Saxons attacked the east and 
south. Their trained troops, and even their own numbers, must 
have been few. It is intelligible that they followed a precedent 
set by Rome in that age, and hired Saxons to repel Saxons, 
But they could not command the fidelity of their mercenaries, 
and the Saxon peril only grew greater. It would seem as if the 
Romano-Britons were speedily driven from the east of the 
island. Even Wroxeter on the Welsh border may have been 
finally destroyed before the end of the 5th century. It seems 
that the Saxons though apparently unable to maintain their 
hold so far to the west, were able to prevent the natives from 
recovering the lowlands. Thus driven from the centres of 
Romanized life, from the region of walled cities and civilized 
houses, into the hills of Wales and the north-west, the provincials 
underwent an intelligible change. The Celtic element, never 
quite extinct in those hills and, like most forms of barbarism, 
reasserting itself in this wild age — not without reinforcement 
from* Ireland— challenged the remnants of Roman civilization 
and in the end absorbed them. The Celtic language reappeared; 
the Celtic art emerged from its shelters in the west to develop 
in. new and medieval fashions. 

Authorities. — The principalreferences to early Britain in classical 
writers occur in Strabo, Diodorus, Julius Caesar, the elder Pliny, 
Tacitus, Ptolemy and Cassius Dio, and in the lists of the Antonine 
Itinerary (probably about a.d. 210-230; ed. Parthey, 1848), the 
Notitia Dignitatum (about a.d. 400; ed. Seeck, 1876), and the 
Ravennas (7th-century rechauffe; ed. Parthey i860). The chief 
passages are collected, in Petrie's Monumenta Hist. Britann. (1848), 
and (alphabetically )in Holder's Altkeltische Sprachschatz(i8c)6~i<)0$) . 
The Roman inscriptions have been collected by Hiibner, Corpus 
Inscriptionum Latin, vii. (1873), and in supplements by Hiibner and 
Haverfield in the periodical Ephemeris epigraphica ; see also Hiibner, 
Inscript. Britann. Christianae(\8-j6, now out of date), and J. Rhys on 
Pictish, &c, inscriptions, Proceedings Soc.Antiq. Scotland, xxvi., xxxii. 
Of modern works the best summary for Roman Britain and for 
Caesar's invasions is T. R. Holmes, Ancient Britain {1907), who cites 
numerous authorities. See also Sir John Evans, Stone Implements, 



Bronze Implements, and Ancient British Coins (with suppl.) ; Boyd 
Dawkins, Early Man in Britain (1880) ; J. Rhys, Celtic Britain 
(3rd ed., 1904). For late Celtic art see' J. M. Kemble and A. W. 
Franks' Horae Ferales (1863), and Arthur J. Evans in Archaeologia, 
vols, lii.-lv. Celtic ethnology and philology (see Celt) are still in 
the " age of discussion." For ancient earthworks see A. Hadrian 
Allcroft, Earthwork of England (1909). 

For Roman Britain see, in general, Prof. F. Haverfield, The 
Romanization of Roman Britain (Oxford, 1906), and his articles in 
the Victoria County History ; clso the chapter in Mommsen's Roman 
Provinces; and an article 'in the Edinburgh Review, 1899. For the 
wall of Hadrian see John Hodgson, History of Northumberland 
(1840); J. C. Bruce, Roman Walliyd ed., 1867); reports of excava- 
tions by Haverfield in the Cumberland Archaeological Society Transac- 
tions (1894-1904) ; and R. C. Bosanquet, Roman Camp at Housesteads 
(Newcastle, 1904). For the Scottish Excavations see Proceedings of 
the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland, xx.-xl., and especially J. 
Macdonald, Bar Hill (reprint, Glasgow, 1906). For other forts see 
R. S. Ferguson, Cumberland Arch. Soc. Trans, xii., on Hardknott; and 
J. Ward, Roman Fort of Gellygaer (London, 1903). For the Roman 
occupation of Scotland see Haverfield in Antonine Wall Report 
(1899J; J. Macdonald, Roman' Stones in Hunterian Mus. (1897); 
and, though an older work, Stuart's Caledonia Romana (1852). 
For Silchester, Archaeologia (1890-1908) ; for Caerwent (ib. 1901- 
1908); for London, Charles Roach Smith, Roman London (1859); 
for Christianity in Roman Britain, Engl. Hist. Rev. {1896); for the 
villages, Gen. Pitt- Rivers' Excavations in Cranborne Chase, &c. 
(4 vols., 1887-1908), and Proc. Soc. of Ant. xviii. For the end of 
Roman Britain see Engl. Hist. Rev. (1904) ; Prof. Bury's Life of St 
Patrick (1905); Haverfield's Rom.anization (cited above); and P. 
Vinogradoff, Growth of the Manor (1905), bk. i. (F. J. H.) 

Anglo-Saxon Britain 

1. History. — The history of Britain after the withdrawal of. 
the Roman troops is extremely obscure, but there can be little 
doubt that for many years the inhabitants of the provinces were 
exposed to devastating raids by the Picts and Scots. ' According 
to Gildas it was for protection against these incursions that the 
Britons decided to call in the Saxons. Their allies soon obtained 
a decisive victory; but subsequently they turned their arms 
against the Britons themselves, alleging that they had not 
received sufficient payment for their services. A somewhat 
different account, probably of English origin, may be traced in 
the Historia Brittonum, according to which the first leaders of 
the Saxons, Hengest and Horsa, came as exiles, seeking the 
protection of the British king, Vortigern. Having embraced his 
service they quickly succeeded in expelling the northern invaders. 
Eventually, however, they overcame the Britons through 
treachery, by inducing the king to allow them to send for large 
bodies of their own countrymen. It was to these adventurers, 
according to tradition, that the kingdom of Kent owed its origin. 
The story is in itself by no means improbable, while the dates 
assigned to the first invasion by various Welsh, Gaulish and 
English authorities, with one exception all fall within about a 
quarter of a century, viz. between the year 428 and the joint 
reign of Martian and Valentinian III. (450-455). 

For the subsequent course of the invasion our information is 
of the most meagre and unsatisfactory character. According 
to the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle the kingdom of Sussex was founded 
by a certain Ella or ^Elle, who landed in 477, while Wessex owed 
its origin to Cerdic, who arrived some eighteen years later. No 
value, however, can be attached to these dates; indeed, in the 
latter case the story itself is open to suspicion on several grounds 
(see Wessex). For the movements which led to the foundation 
of the more northern kingdoms we have no evidence worth 
consideration, nor do we know even approximately when they 
took place. But the view that the invasion was effected through- 
out by small bodies of adventurers acting independently of one 
another, and that each of the various kingdoms owes its origin 
to a separate enterprise, has little probability in its favour. 
Bede states that the invaders belonged to three different nations, 
Kent and southern Hampshire being occupied by Jutes (q.v.), 
while Essex, Sussex and Wessex were founded by the Saxons, 
and the remaining kingdoms by the Angli (q.v.). The peculiari- 
ties of social organization in Kent certainly tend to show that 
this kingdom had a different origin from the rest; but the 
evidence for the distinction between the Saxons and the Angli 
is of a much less satisfactory character (see Anglo-Saxons). 



59° 



BRITAIN 



The royal family of Essex may really have been of Saxon 
origin (see Essex), but on the other hand the West Saxon royal 
family claimed to be of the same stock as that of Bernicia, and 
their connexions in the past seem to have lain with the Angli. 

We need not doubt that the first invasion was followed by 
a long period of warfare between the natives and the invaders, 
in which the latter gradually strengthened their hold on the 
conquered territories. It is very probable that by the end of 
the 5th century all the eastern part of Britain, at least as far as 
the Humber, was in their hands. The first important check was 
received at the siege of " Mons Badonicus " in the year 517 
(Ann. Cambr.), or perhaps rather some fifteen or twenty years 
earlier. According to Gildas this event was followed by a period 
of peace for at least forty-four years. In the latter part of the 
6th century, however, the territories occupied by the invaders 
seem to have been greatly extended. In the south the West 
Saxons are said to have conquered first Wiltshire and then all 
the upper part of the Thames valley, together with the country 
beyond as far as the Severn. The northern frontier also seems 
to have been pushed considerably farther forward, perhaps into 
what is now Scotland, and it is very probable that the basin of 
the Trent, together with the central districts between the Trent 
and the Thames, was conquered about the same time, though 
of this we have no record. Again, the destruction of Chester 
about 61 S was soon followed by the overthrow of the British 
kingdom of Elmet in south-west Yorkshire, and the occupation 
of Shropshire and the Lothians took place perhaps about the 
same period, that of Herefordshire probably somewhat later. 
In the south, Somerset is said to have been conquered by the 
West Saxons shortly after the middle of the 7 th century. Dorset 
had probably been acquired by them before this time, while part 
of Devon seems to have come into their hands soon afterwards. 

The area thus conquered was occupied by a number of separate 
kingdoms, each with a royal family of its own. The districts 
north of the Humber contained two kingdoms, Bernicia (q.v.) 
and Deira (q.v.), which were eventually united in Northumbria. 
South of the Humber, Lindsey seems to have had a dynasty of 
its own, though in historical times it was apparently always 
subject to the kings of Northumbria or Mercia. The upper basin 
of the Trent formed the nucleus of the kingdom of Mercia (q.v.), 
while farther down the east coast was the kingdom of East Anglia 
(q.v.). Between these two lay a territory called Middle Anglia, 
which is sometimes described as a kingdom, though we do not 
know whether it ever had a separate dynasty. Essex, Kent 
and Sussex (see articles on these kingdoms) preserve the names 
of ancient kingdoms, while the old diocese of Worcester grew 
out of the kingdom of the Hwicce (q.v.), with which it probably 
coincided in area. The south of England, between Sussex and 
" West Wales " (eventually reduced to Cornwall), was occupied 
by Wessex, which originally also possessed some territory to the 
north of the Thames. Lastly, even the Isle of Wight appears to 
have had a dynasty of its own. But it must not be supposed 
that all these kingdoms were always, or even normally, inde- 
pendent. When history begins, ^Ethelberht, king of Kent, was 
supreme over all the kings south of the Humber. He was 
followed by the East Anglian king Raedwald, and the latter again 
by a series of Northumbrian kings with an even wider supremacy. 
Before ^Ethelberht a similar position had been held by the West 
Saxon king Ceawlin, and at a much earlier period, according to 
tradition, by Ella or jElle, the first king of Sussex. The nature 
of this supremacy has been much discussed, but the true explana- 
tion seems to be furnished by that principle of personal allegiance 
which formed such an important element in Anglo-Saxon society. 

2. Government. — Internally the various states seem to have 
been organized on very similar lines. In every case we find 
kingly government from the time of our earliest records, and 
there is no doubt that the institution goes back to a date anterior 
to the invasion of Britain (see Offa; Wermtjnd). The royal 
title, however, was frequently borne by more than one person. 
Sometimes we find one supreme king together with a number 
of under-kings (subreguli); sometimes again, especially in the 
smaller kingdoms, Essex, Sussex and Hwicce, we meet with two 



or more kings, generally brothers, reigning together apparently 
on equal terms. During the greater part of the 8th century 
Kent seems to have been divided into two kingdoms; but as a 
rule such divisions did not last beyond the lifetime of the kings 
between whom the arrangement had been made. The kings were, 
with very rare exceptions, chosen from one particular family 
in each state, the ancestry of which was traced back not only to 
the founder of the kingdom but also, in a remoter degree, to a 
god. The members of such families were entitled to special 
wergilds, apparently six times as great as those of the higher 
class of nobles (see below). 

The only other central authority in the state was the king's 
council or court (peod, witan, plebs, concilium). This body con- 
sisted partly of young warriors in constant attendance on the 
king, and partly of senior officials whom he called together from 
time to time. The terms used for the two classes by Bede are 
milites (ministri) and comites, for which the Anglo-Saxon version 
has pegnas and gesiSas respectively. Both classes alike consisted 
in part of members of the royal family. But they were by no 
means confined to such persons or even to born subjects of the 
king. Indeed, we are told that popular kings like Oswine 
attracted young nobles to their service from all quarters. The 
functions of the council have been much discussed, and it has 
been claimed that they had the right of electing and deposing 
kings. This view, however, seems to involve the existence 
of a greater feeling for constitutionalism than is warranted by 
the information at our disposal. The incidents which have been 
brought forward as evidence to this effect may with at least 
equal probability be interpreted as cases of profession or trans- 
ference of personal allegiance. In other respects the functions 
of the council seem to have been of a deliberative character. 
It was certainly customary for the king to seek their advice and 
moral support on important questions, but there is nothing to 
show that he had to abide by the opinion of the majority. 

For administrative purposes each of the various kingdoms 
was divided into a number of districts under the charge of royal 
reeves (cyninges gerefa, praefectus, praepositus). These officials 
seem to have been located in royal villages (cyninges tun, villa 
regalis) or fortresses (cyninges burg, urbs regis), which served 
as centres and meeting-places (markets, &c.) for the inhabitants 
of the district, and to which their dues, both in payments and 
services had to be rendered. The usual size of such districts in 
early times seems to have been 300, 600 or 1200 hides. 1 In 
addition to these districts we find mention also of much larger 
divisions containing 2000, 3000, 5000 or 7000 hides. To this 
category belong the shires of Wessex (Hampshire, Wiltshire, 
Berkshire, &c), each of which had an earl (aldormon, princeps, 
dux) of its own, at all events from the 8th century onwards. 
Many, if not all, of these persons were members of the royal 
family, and it is not unlikely that they originally bore the kingly 
title. At all events they are sometimes described as subreguli. 

3. Social Organization. — The officials mentioned above, 
whether of royal birth or not, were probably drawn from the 
king's personal retinue. In Anglo-Saxon society, as in that 
of all Teutonic nations in early times, the two most important 
principles were those of kinship and personal allegiance. Tf a 
man suffered injury it was to his relatives and his lord, rather 
than to any public official, that he applied first for protection 
and redress. If he was slain, a fixed sum (wergild), varying 
according to his station, had to be paid to his relatives, while 
a further but smaller sum (manbot) was due to his lord. These 
principles applied to all classes of society alike, and though 
strife within the family was by no means unknown, at all events 
in royal families, the actual slaying of a kinsman was regarded 
as the most heinous of all offences. Much the same feeling 
applied to the slaying of a lord— an offence for which no com- 
pensation could be rendered. How far the armed followers of 
a lord were entitled to compensation when the latter was slain 

1 The hide (hid, kitvisc, familia, tributarius, cassatus, manens, &c.) 
was in later times a measure of land, usually 120 acres. In early 
times, however, it seems to have meant (1) household, (2) normal 
amount of land appertaining to a household. 



BRITAIN 



59 1 



is uncertain, but in the case of a king they received an amount 
equal to the wergild. Another important development of the 
principle of allegiance is to be found in the custom of heriots. 
In later times this custom amounted practically to a system 
of death-duties, payable in horses and arms or in money to the 
lord of the deceased. There can be little doubt, however, that 
originally it was a restoration to the lord of, the military outfit 
with which he had presented his man when he entered his service. 
The institution of thegnhood, i.e. membership of the comitatus 
or retinue of a prince, offered the only opening by which public 
life could be entered. Hence it was probably adopted almost 
universally by young men of the highest classes. The thegn 
was expected to fight for his lord, and generally to place his 
services at his disposal in both war and peace. The lord, on the 
other hand, had to keep his thegns and reward them from time 
to time with arms and treasure. When they were of an age to 
marry he was expected to provide them with the means of doing 
so. If the lord was a king this provision took the form of a grant, 
perhaps normally ten hides, from the royal lands. Such estates 
were not strictly hereditary, though as a mark of favour they 
were not unfrequently re-granted to the sons of deceased holders. 

The structure of society in England was of a somewhat peculiar 
type. In addition to slaves, who in early times seem to have been 
numerous, we find in Wessex and apparently also in Mercia three 
classes, described as twelfhynde, sixhynde and twihynde from the 
amount of their wergilds, viz. 1200, 600 and 200 shillings re- 
spectively. It is probable that similar classes existed also in 
Northumbria, though not under the same names. Besides 
these terms there were others which were probably in use every- 
where, viz. gesv&cund for the two higher classes and ceorlisc for 
the lowest. Indeed, we find these terms even in Kent, though 
the social system of that kingdom seems to have been of an 
essentially different character. Here the wergild of the ceorlisc 
class amounted to 100 shillings, each containing twenty silver 
coins (sceattas), as against 200 shillings of four (in Wessex five) 
silver coins, and was thus very much greater than the latter. 
Again, there was apparently but one gesitScund class in Kent, 
with a wergild of 300 shillings, while, on the other hand, below 
the ceorlisc class we find three classes of persons described as 
laetas, who corresponded in all probability to the liti or freedmen 
of the continental laws, and who possessed wergilds of 80, 60 and 
40 shillings respectively. To these we find nothing analogous 
in the other kingdoms, though the poorer classes of Welsh 
freemen had wergilds varying from 1 20 to 60 shillings. It should 
be added that the differential treatment of the various classes 
was by no means confined to the case of wergilds. We find it 
also in the compensations to which they were entitled for various 
injuries, in the fines to which they were liable, and in the value 
attached to their oaths. Generally, though not always, the pro- 
portions observed were the same as in the wergilds. 

The nature of the distinction between the gesfficund and 
ceorlisc classes is nowhere clearly explained; but it was certainly 
hereditary and probably of considerable antiquity. In general 
we may perhaps define them as nobles and commons, though in 
view of the numbers of the higher classes it would probably be 
more correct to speak of gentry and peasants. The distinction 
between the twelfhynde and sixhynde classes was also in part at 
least hereditary, but there is good reason for believing that it 
arose out of the possession of land. The former consisted of 
persons who possessed, whether as individuals or families, at 
least five hides of land — which practically means a village — 
while the latter were landless, i.e. probably without this amount 
of land. Within the ceorlisc class we find similar subdivisions, 
though they were not marked by a difference in wergild. The 
gafolgelda or Iributarius (tribute-payer) seems to have been a 
ceorl who possessed at least a hide, while the gebur was without 
land of his own, and received his outfit as a loan from his lord. 

4. Payments and Services. — We have already had occasion 
to refer to the dues which were rendered by different classes of 
the population, and which the reeves in royal villages had to 
collect and superintend. The payments seem to have varied 
^!<:atly according to the class from which they were due. Those 



rendered by landowners seem to have been known as feorm or 
fostor, and consisted of a fixed quantity of articles paid in kind. 
In Ine's Laws (cap. 70) we find a list of payments specified for a 
unit of ten hides, perhaps the normal holding of a twelfhynde man 
— though on the other hand it may be nothing more than a mere 
fiscal unit in an aggregate of estates. The list consists of oxen, 
sheep, geese, hens, honey, ale, loaves, cheese, butter, fodder, 
salmon and eels. Very similar specifications are found elsewhere. 
The payments rendered by the gafolgelda {Iributarius) were 
known as gafol (tributum), as his name implies. In Ine's Laws 
we hear only of the hwitel or white cloak, which was to be of the 
value of six pence per household (hide), and of barley, which »vas 
to be six pounds in weight for each worker. In later times we 
meet with many other payments both in money and in kind, some 
of which were doubtless in accordance with ancient custom. 
On the other hand the gebur seems not to have been liable to 
payments of this kind, presumably because the land which he 
cultivated formed part of the demesne {inland) of his lord. The 
term gafol, however, may have been applied to the payments 
which he rendered to the latter. 

The services required of landowners were very manifold in 
character. Probably the most important were military service 
(fird, expeditio) and the repairing of fortifications and bridges — 
the trinoda necessitas of later times. Besides these we find 
reference in charters of the 9th century to the keeping of the 
king's hunters, horses, dogs and hawks, and the entertaining of 
messengers and other persons in the king's service. The duties 
of men of the sixhynde class, if they are to be identified with the 
radcnihtas {radmanni) of later times, probably consisted chiefly 
in riding on the king's (or their lord's) business. The services 
of the peasantry can only be conjectured from what we find in 
later times. Presumably their chief duty was to undertake a 
share in the cultivation of the demesne land. We need scarcely 
doubt also that the labour of repairing fortifications and bridges, 
though it is charged against the landowners, was in reality 
delegated by them to their dependents. 

5. Warfare.— All classes are said to have been liable to the 
duty of military service. Hence, since the ceorls doubtless 
formed the bulk of the population, it has been thought that the 
Anglo-Saxon armies of early times were essentially peasant 
forces. The evidence at our disposal, however, gives little justi- 
fication for such a view. The regulation that every five or six 
hides should supply a warrior was not a product of the Danish 
invasions, as is sometimes stated, but goes back at least to the 
beginning of the 9th century. Had the fighting material been 
drawn from the ceorlisc class a warrior would surely have been 
required from each hide, but for military service no such regula- 
tion is found. Again, the fird (fyrd) was composed of mounted 
warriors during the 9th century, though apparently they fought 
on foot, and there are indications that such was the case also in 
the 7th century. No doubt ceorls took part in military expedi- 
tions, but they may have gone as attendants and camp-followers 
rather than as warriors, their chief business being to make 
stockades and bridges, and especially to carry provisions. The 
serious fighting, however, was probably left to the gesiScund 
classes, who possessed horses and more or less effective weapons. 
Indeed, there is good reason for regarding these classes as 
essentially military. 

The chief weapons were the sword and spear. The former 
were two-edged and on the average about 3 ft. long. The hilts 
were often elaborately ornamented and sometimes these weapons 
were of considerable value. No definite line can be drawn 
between the spear proper and the javelin. The spear-heads 
which have been found in graves vary considerably in both form 
and size. They were fitted on to the shaft by a socket which 
was open on one side. Other weapons appear to have been 
quite rare. Bows and arrows were certainly in use for sporting 
purposes, but there is no reason for believing that they were 
much used in warfare before the Danish invasions. They are 
very seldom met with in graves. The most common article of 
defensive armour was the shield, which was small and circular 
and apparently of quite thin lime-wood, the edge being formed 



592 



BRITAIN 



probably by a thin bana of iron. In the centre of the shield, in 
order to protect the hand which held it, was a strong iron boss, 
some 7 in. in diameter and projecting about 3 in. It is clear 
from literary evidence that the helmet (helm) and eoat of chain 
mail (byrne) were also in common use. They are seldom found 
in graves, however, whether owing to the custom of heriots or 
to the fact that, on account of their relatively high value, they 
were frequently handed on from generation to generation as 
heirlooms. Greaves are not often mentioned. It is worth 
noting that in later times the heriot of an " ordinary thegn " 
(medema pegn) — by which is meant apparently not a king's 
thegn but a man of the tivelfhynde class — consisted of his horse 
with its saddle, &c. and his arms, or two pounds of silver as an 
equivalent of the whole. The arms required were probably a 
sword, helmet, coat of mail and one or two. spears and shields. 
There are distinct indications that a similar outfit was fairly 
common in Ine's time, and that its value was much the same. 
One would scarcely be justified, however, in supposing that it 
was anything like universal; for the purchasing power of such 
a sum was at that time considerable, representing as it did 
about 16-20 oxen or 100-120 sheep. It would hardly be safe 
to credit men of the sixhynde class in general with more than a 
horse, spear and shield. 

6. Agriculture and Village Life. — There is no doubt that a 
fairly advanced system of agriculture must have been known 
to the Anglo-Saxons before they settled in Britain. This is made 
clear above all by the representation of a plough drawn by two 
oxen in one of the very ancient rock-carvings at Tegneby in 
Bohuslan. In Domesday Book -the heavy plough with eight 
oxen seems to be universal, and it can be traced back in Kent to; 
the beginning of the 9th century. In this kingdom the system 
of agricultural terminology was based on it. The unit was the 
suiting (aratrum) or ploughland (from sulh, "plough"), the 
fourth part of which was the geocled or geoc (jugum), originally 
a yoke of oxen. An analogy is supplied by the carucata of the 
Danelagh, the eighth part of which was the bouata or " ox-land." 
In the 10th century the sulung seems to have been identified with 
the hide, but in earlier times it contained apparently two hides. 
The hide itself, which was the regular unit in the other kingdoms, 
usually contained 120 acres in later times and was divided into 
four girda (virgatae) or yardlands. But originally it seems to 
have meant simply the land pertaining to a household, and its 
area in early times is quite uncertain, though probably far less. 
For the acre also there was in later times a standard length and 
breadth, the former being called furklang (furlong) and reckoned 
at one-eighth of a mile, while the aecerbraedu or " acre-breadth " 
(chain) was also a definite measure. We need not doubt, however, 
that in practice the form of the acre was largely conditioned by 
the nature of the ground. Originally it is thought to have been 
the measure of a day's ploughing, in which case the dimensions 
given above would scarcely be reached. Account must also be 
taken of the possibility that in early times lighter teams were in 
general use. If so the normal dimensions of the acre may very 
well have been quite different. 

The husbandry was of a co-operative character. In the nth 
century it was distinctly unusual for a peasant to possess a 
whole team of his own, and there is no reason for supposing the 
case to have been otherwise in early times; for though the 
peasant might then hold a hide, the hide itself was doubtless 
smaller and not commensurate in any way with the ploughland. 
The holdings were probably not compact but consisted of 
scattered strips in common fields, changed perhaps from year to 
year, the choice being determined by lot or otherwise. As for 
the method of cultivation itself there is little or no evidence. 
Both the " two-course system " and the " three-course system " 
may have been in use; but on the other hand it is quite possible 
that in many cases the same ground was not sown more than 
once in three years. The prevalence of the co-operative principle, 
it may be observed, was doubtless due in large measure to the 
fact that the greater part of England, especially towards the 
east, was settled not in scattered farms or hamlets but in compact 
villages with the cultivated lands lying round them. 



The mill was another element which tended to promote the 
same principle. There can be little doubt that before the Anglo- 
Saxons came to Britain they possessed no instrument for grinding 
corn except the quern (cweorn), and in remote districts this 
continued in use until quite late times. The grinding seems to 
have been performed chiefly by female slaves, but occasionally, 
we hear also of a donkey-mill (esokweorn) . The mill proper, 
however, which was derived from the Romans, as its name 
(mylen, from Lat. molina) indicates, must have come into use 
fairly early. In the nth century every village of any size seems 
to have possessed one, while the earliest references go back to 
the 8th century. It is not unlikely that they were in use during 
the Roman occupation of Britain, and consequently that they 
became known to the invaders almost from the first. The mills 
were presumably driven for the most part by water, though we 
have a reference to a windmill as early as the year 833. 

All the ordinary domestic animals were known. Cattle and 
sheep were pastured on the common lands appertaining to the 
village, while pigs, which (especially in Kent) seem to have been 
very numerous, were kept in the woods. Bee-keeping was also 
practised. In all these matters the invasion of Britain had 
brought about no change. The cultivation of fruit and vegetables 
on the other hand was probably almost entirely new. The names 
are almost all derived from Latin, though most of them seem to 
have been known soon after the invasion, at all events by the 
7th century. 

From the considerations pointed out above we can hardly 
doubt that the village possessed a certain amount of corporate 
life, centred perhaps in an ale-house where its affairs were dis- 
cussed by the inhabitants. There is no evidence, however) which 
would justify us in crediting such gatherings with any substantial 
degree of local authority. So far as the limited information at 
our disposal enables us to form an opinion, the responsibility 
both for the internal peace of the village, and for its obligations 
to the outside world, seems to have lain with the lord or his 
steward (gerefa, villicus) from the beginning. A quite opposite 
view has, it is true, found favour with many scholars, viz. that 
the villages were orginally settlements of free kindreds, and that 
the lord's authority was superimposed on them at a later date. 
This view is based mainly on the numerous place-names ending 
in -ing, -ingham, -ington, &c, in which the syllable -ing is thought 
to refer to kindreds of cultivators. It is more probable, however, 
that these names are derived from persons of the twelfhynde 
class to whom the land had been granted. In many cases in- 
deed there is good reason for doubting whether the name is a 
patronymic at all. 

The question how far the villages were really new settlements 
is difficult to answer, for the terminations -ham, -ton, &c. cannot 
be regarded as conclusive evidence. Thus according to the 
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle (ann. 571) Bensington and Eynsham 
were formerly British villages. Even if the first part of Egones- 
ham is English — which is by no means certain — it is hardly 
sufficient reason for discrediting this statement, for Canterbury 
(Cantwaraburg) and Rochester (Hrofes ceaster) were without 
doubt Roman places in spite of their English names. On the 
whole it seems likely that the cultivation of the land was not 
generally interrupted for more than a very few years; hence the 
convenience of utilizing existing sites of villages would be obvious, 
even if the buildings themselves had been burnt. 

7. Towns. — Gildas states that in the time of the Romans 
Britain contained twenty-eight cities (civitates), besides a numbei 
of fortresses (castella). Most of these were situated within the 
territories eventually occupied by the invaders, and reappear 
as towns in later times. Their history in the intervening period, 
however, is wrapped in obscurity. Chester appears to have been 
deserted for three centuries after its destruction early in the 
7th century, and in most of the other cases there are features 
observable in the situation and plan of the medieval town which 
suggest that its occupation had not been continuous. Yet 
London and Canterbury must have recovered a certain amount 
of importance quite early, at all events within two centuries 
after the invasion, and the same is probably true of York, 



BRITAIN 



593 



Lincoln and a few other places. The term applied to both the 
cities and the fortresses of the Romans was ceaster (Lat. castra), 
less frequently the English word burg. There is little or no 
evidence for the existence of towns other than Roman in early 
times, for the word urbs is merely a translation of burg, which 
was used for any fortified dwelling-place, and it is improbable 
that anything which could properly be called a town was known 
to the invaders before their arrival in Britain. The Danish 
settlements at the end of the 9th century and the defensive 
system initiated by King Alfred gave birth to a new series of 
fortified towns, from which the boroughs of the middle ages are 
mainly descended. 

8. Houses. — Owing to the fact that houses were built entirely 
of perishable materials, wood and wattle, we are necessarily 
dependent almost wholly upon literary evidence for knowledge 
of this subject. Stone seems to have been used first for churches, 
but this was not before the 7th century, and we are told that at 
first masons were imported from Gaul. Indeed wood was used 
for many churches, as well as for most secular buildings, until 
a much later period. The walls were formed either of stout 
planks laid together vertically or horizontally, or else of posts 
at a short distance from one another, the interstices being filled 
up with wattlework daubed with clay. It is not unlikely that 
the houses of wealthy persons were distinguished by a good deal 
of ornamentation in carving and painting. The roof was high- 
pitched and covered with straw, hay, reeds or tiles. The regular 
form of the buildings was rectangular, the gable sides prob- 
ably being shorter than the others. There is little evidence for 
partitions inside, and in wealthy establishments the place of 
rooms seems to have been supplied by separate buildings within 
the same enclosure. The windows must have been mere openings 
in the walls or roof, for glass was not used for this purpose before 
the latter part of the 7th century. Stoves were known, but most 
commonly heat was obtained from an open fire in the centre of 
the building. Of the various buildings in a wealthy establish- 
ment the chief were the hall (heall), which was both a dining and 
reception room, and the " lady's bower " (brydbur), which served 
also as a bedroom for the master and mistress. To these we have 
to add buildings for the attendants, kitchen, bakehouse, &c, 
and farm buildings. There is little or no evidence for the use 
of two-storeyed houses in early times, though in the 10th and 1 ith 
centuries they were common. The whole group of buildings 
stood in an enclosure (tun) surrounded by a stockade (burg), 
which perhaps rested on an earthwork, though this is disputed. 
Similarly the homestead of the peasant was surrounded by a 
fence (edor). 

9. Clothes. — The chief material for clothing was at first no 
doubt wool, though linen must also have been used and later 
became fairly common. The chief garments were the coat (roc), 
the trousers (brec), and the cloak, for which there seem to have 
been a number of names (lofta, hacele, sciccing, pad, kwitel). To 
these we may add the hat (haet), belt (gyrdel), stockings (hosa), 
shoes (scoh, gescy, rifeling) and gloves (glof). The crusene was a 
fur coat, while the sere or smoc seems to have been an under- 
garment and probably sleeveless. The whole attire was of 
national origin and had probably been in use long before the 
invasion of Britain. In the great bog-deposit at Thorsbjaerg 
in Angel, which dates from about the 4th century, there were 
found a coat with long sleeves, in a fair state of preservation, 
a pair of long trousers with remains of socks attached, several 
shoes and portions of square cloaks, one of which had obviously 
been dyed green. The dress of the upper classes must have been 
of a somewhat gorgeous character, especially when account is 
taken of the brooches and other ornaments which they wore. It 
is worth noting that according to Jordanes the Swedes in the 6th 
century were splendidly dressed. 

10. Trade. — The few notices of tins subject which occur in 
the early laws seem to refer primarily to cattle-dealing. Hut 
there can be no doubt that a considerable import and export 
trade with the continent had sprung up quite early. In Bede's 
time, if not before, London was resorted to by many merchants 
both by land and by sea. At first the chief export trade was 



probably in slaves. English slaves were to be obtained in Rome 
even before the end of the 6th century, as appears from the 
well-known story of Gregory the Great. Since the standard 
price of slaves on the continent was in general three or four 
times as great as it was in England, the trade must have been 
very profitable. After the adoption of Christianity it was 
gradually prohibited by the laws. The nature of the imports 
during the heathen period may be learned chiefly from the 
graves, which contain many brooches and other ornaments of 
continental origin, and also a certain number of silver, bronze 
and glass vessels. With the introduction of Christianity the 
ecclesiastical connexion between England and the continent 
without doubt brought about a large increase in the imports of 
secular as well as religious objects, and the frequency of pilgrim- 
ages by, persons of high rank must have had the same effect. 
The use of silk (seoluc) and the adoption of the mancus (see below) 
point to communication, direct or indirect, with more distant 
countries. In the 8th century we hear frequently of tolls on 
merchant ships at various ports, especially London. 

11, Coinage. — The earliest coins which can be identified with 
certainty are some silver pieces which bear in Runic letters the 
name of the Mercian kingvEthelred (675-704). There are others, 
however, of the same type and standard (about 21 grains) which 
may be attributed with probability to his father Penda (d. 655). 
But it is clear from the laws of ^Ethelberht that a regular silver 
coinage was in use at least half a century before this time, and 
it is not unlikely that many unidentified coins may go back to 
the 6th century. These are fairly numerous, and are either 
without inscriptions or, if they do bear letters at all, they seem 
to be mere corruptions of Roman legends. Their designs are 
derived from Roman or Frankish coins, especially the former, 
and their weight varies from about 10 to 21 grains, though the 
very light coins are rare. Anonymous gold coins, resembling 
Frankish trientes in type and standard (21 grains), are also 
fairly common, though they must have passed out of use very 
early, as the laws give no hint of their existence. Larger gold 
coins (solidi) are very rare. In the early laws the money actually 
in use appears to have been entirely silver. In Offa's time a 
new gold coin, the mancus, resembling in standard the Roman 
solidus (about 70 grains), was introduced from Mahommedan 
countries. The oldest extant specimen bears a faithfully copied 
Arabic inscription. In the same reign the silver coins underwent 
a considerable change in type, being made larger and thinner, 
while from this time onwards they always bore the name of the 
king (or queen or archbishop) for whom they were issued. The 
design and execution also became remarkably good. Their 
weight was at first unaffected, but probably towards the close 
of Offa's reign it was raised to about 23 grains, at which standard 
it seems to have remained, nominally at least, until the time of 
Alfred. It is to be observed that with the exception of Burgred's 
coins and a few anonymous pieces the silver was never adul- 
terated. No bronze coins were current except in Northumbria, 
where they were extremely common in the 9th century. 

Originally settling (" shilling ") and sceatt seem to have been the 
terms for gold and silver coins respectively. By the time of Ine, 
however, pending, pen(n)ing (" penny "), had already come into 
use for the latter, while, owing to the temporary disappearance 
of a gold Coinage, settling had come to denote a mere unit of 
account. It was, however, a variable unit, for the Kentish 
shilling contained twenty sceattas (pence), while the Mercian 
contained only four. The West Saxon shilling seems originally 
to have been identical with the Mercian, but later it contained 
five pence. Large payments were generally made by weight, 
240-250 pence being reckoned to the pound, perhaps from the 
7th century onwards. The mancus was equated with thirty 
pence, probably from the time of its introduction. This means 
that the value of gold relatively to silver was 10: 1 from the end 
of Offa's reign. There is reason, however, for thinking that in 
earlier times it was as low as 6: 1, or even 5:1. In Northumbria 
a totally different monetary system prevailed, the unit being the 
tryms, which contained three sceattas or pence. As to the value 
of the bronze coins we are without information 



594 



BRITAIN 



The purchasing power of money was very great. The sheep 
was valued at a shilling in both Wessex and Mercia, from early 
times till the nth century. One pound was the normal price of 
a slave and half a pound that of. a horse. The price of a pig was 
twice, and that of an ox six times as great as that of a sheep. 
Regarding the prices of commodities other than live-stock we 
have little definite information, though an approximate estimate 
may be made of the value of arms. It is worth noticing that we 
often hear of payments in gold and silver vessels in place of 
money. In the former case the mancus was the usual unit of 
calculation. 

12. Ornaments. — Of these the most interesting are the brooches 
which were worn by- both sexes and of which large numbers 
have been found in heathen cemeteries. They may be classed 
under eight leading types: (i) circular or ring-shaped, (2) 
cruciform, (3) square-headed, (4) radiated, (5) S-shaped, (6) 
bird-shaped, (7) disk-shaped, (8) cupelliform or saucer-shaped. 
Of these Nos. 5 and 6 appear to be of continental origin, and 
this is probably the case also with No. 4 and in part with No. 7. 
But the last-mentioned type varies greatly, from rude and 
almost plain disks of bronze to magnificent gold specimens 
studded with gems. No. 8 is believed to be peculiar to England, 
and occurs chiefly in the southern Midlands, specimens being 
usually found in pairs. The interiors are gilt, often furnished 
with detachable plates and sometimes set with brilliants. The 
remaining types were probably brought over by the Anglo- 
Saxons at the time of the invasion. Nos. 1 and 3 are widespread 
outside England, but No. 2, though common in Scandinavian 
countries, is hardly to be met with south of the Elbe. It is 
worth noting that a number of specimens were found in the 
cremation cemetery at Borgstedterfeld near Rendsburg. In 
England it occurs chiefly in the more northern counties. Nos. 
2 and 3 vary greatly in size, from i\ to 7 in. or more. The 
smaller specimens are quite plain, but the larger ones are gilt 
and generally of a highly ornamental character. In later times 
we hear of brooches worth as much as six mancusas, i.e. equi- 
valent to six oxen. 

Among other ornaments we may mention hairpins, rings 
and ear-rings, and especially buckles which are often of elaborate 
workmanship. Bracelets and necklets are not very common, 
a fact which is rather surprising, as in early times, before the 
issuing of a coinage, these articles (beagas) took the place of 
money to a large extent. The glass vessels are finely made and 
of somewhat striking appearance, though they closely resemble 
contemporary continental types. Since the art of glass-working 
was unknown, according to Bede, until nearly the end of the 
7 th century, it is probable that these were all of continental 
or Roman-British origin. 

13. Amusements. — It is clear from the frequent references 
to dogs and hawks in the charters that hunting and falconry 
were keenly pursued by the kings and their retinues. Games, 
whether indoor or outdoor, are much less frequently mentioned, 
but there is no doubt that the use of dice (taefl) was widespread. 
At court much time was given to poetic recitation, often accom- 
panied by music, and accomplished poets received liberal 
rewards. The chief musical instrument was the harp (hearpe), 
which is often mentioned. Less frequently we hear of the flute 
(pipe) and later also of the fiddle (JiSele). Trumpets (horn, 
swegelhorn, bytne) appear to have been used chiefly as signals. 

14. Writing. — The Runic alphabet seems to have been the 
only form of writing known to the Anglo-Saxons before the 
invasion of Britain, and indeed until the adoption of Christianity. 
In its earliest form, as it appears in inscriptions on various 
articles found in Schleswig and in Scandinavian countries, it 
consisted of twenty-four letters, all of which occur in abecedaria 
in England. In actual use, however, two letters soon became 
obsolete, but a number of others were added from time to time, 
some of which are found also on the continent, while others 
are peculiar to certain parts of England. Originally the Runic 
alphabet seems to have been used for writing on wooden boards, 
though none of these have survived. The inscriptions which 
have come down to us are engraved partly on memorial stones, 



which are not uncommon in the north of England, and partly 
on various metal objects, ranging from swords to brooches. 
The adoption of Christianity brought about the introduction of 
the Roman alphabet; but the older form of writing did not 
immediately pass out of use, for almost all the inscriptions 
which we possess date from the 7th or following centuries. Coins 
with Runic legends were issued at least until the middle of the 
8 th century, and some of the memorial stones date probably 
even from the 9th. The most important of the latter are the 
column at Bewcastle, Cumberland, believed to commemorate 
Alhfrith, the son of Oswio, who died about 670, and the cross 
at Ruthwell, Dumfriesshire, which is probably about a century 
later. The Roman alphabet was very soon applied to the 
purpose of writing the native language, e.g. in the publication 
of the laws of /Ethelberht. Yet the type of character in which 
even the earliest surviving MSS. are written is believed to be of 
Celtic origin. Most probably it was introduced by the Irish 
missionaries who evangelized the north of England, though 
Welsh influence is scarcely impossible. Eventually this alphabet 
was enlarged (probably before the end of the 7 th century) by the 
inclusion of two Runic letters for th and w. 

15. Marriage. — This is perhaps the subject on which our 
information is most inadequate. It is evident that the rela- 
tionships which prohibited marriage were different from those 
recognized by the Church; but the only fact which we know 
definitely is that it was customary, at least in Kent, for a man to 
marry his stepmother. In the Kentish laws marriage is repre- 
sented as hardly more than a matter of purchase; but whether 
this was the case in the other kingdoms also the evidence at our 
disposal is insufficient to decide. We know, however, that in 
addition to the sum paid to the bride's guardian, it was customary 
for the bridegroom to make a present (morgengifu) to the bride 
herself, which, in the case of queens, often consisted of a residence 
and considerable estates. Such persons also had retinues and 
fortified residences of their own. In the Kentish laws provision 
is made for widows to receive a proportionate share in their 
husbands' property. 

16. Funeral Rites. — Both inhumation and cremation were 
practised in heathen times. The former seems to have prevailed 
everywhere; the latter, however, was much more common in 
the more northern counties than in the south, though cases 
are fairly numerous throughout the valley of the Thames. In 
Beowulf cremation is represented as the prevailing custom. 
There is no evidence that it was still practised when the Roman 
and Celtic missionaries arrived, but it is worth noting that 
according to the tradition given in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, 
Oxfordshire, where the custom seems to have been fairly common, 
was not conquered before the latter part of the 6th century. The 
burnt remains were generally, if not always, enclosed in urns 
and then buried. The urns themselves are of clay, somewhat 
badly baked, and bear geometrical patterns applied with a 
punch. They vary considerably in size (from 4 to 1 2 in. or more 
in diameter) and closely resemble those found in northern 
Germany. Inhumation graves are sometimes richly furnished. 
The skeleton is laid out at full length, generally with the head 
towards the west or north, a spear at one side and a sword and 
shield obliquely across the middle. Valuable brooches and other 
ornaments are often found. In many other cases, however, the 
grave contained nothing except a small knife and a simple 
brooch or a few beads. Usually both classes of graves lie below 
the natural surface of the ground without any perceptible trace 
of a barrow. 

17. Religion. — Here again the information at our disposal 
is very limited. There can be little doubt that the heathen 
Angli worshipped certain gods, among them Ti (Tig), Woden, 
Thunor and a goddess Frigg, from whom the names Tuesday, 
Wednesday, Thursday and Friday are derived. Ti was probably 
the same god of whom early Roman writers speak under the 
name Mars (see Tyr) , while Thunor was doubtless the thunder-god 
(see Thor). From Woden (q.v.) most of the royal families traced 
their descent. Seaxneat, the ancestor of the East Saxon dynasty, 
was also in all probability a god (see Essex, Kingdom of), 



BRITANNICUS— BRITISH CENTRAL AFRICA 



595 



Of anthropomorphic representations of the gods we have 
no clear evidence, though we do hear of shrines in sacred 
enclosures, at which sacrifices were offered. It is clear also 
that there were persons specially set apart for the priesthood, 
who were not allowed to bear arms or to ride except on mares. 
Notices of sacred trees and groves, springs, stones, &c, are 
much more frequent than those referring to the gods. We hear 
also a good deal of witches and valkyries, and of charms and 
magic; as an instance we may cite the fact that certain (Runic) 
letters were credited, as in the North, with the power of loosening 
bonds. It is probable also that the belief in the spirit world 
and in a future life was of a somewhat similar kind to what we 
find in Scandinavian'religion. (See Teutonic Peoples, §6.) 

The chief primary authorities are Gildas, De Excidio Britanniae, 
and Nennius, Historia Brilonum (ed. San-Marte, Berlin, 1844) ; 
Th. Mommsen in Mon. Germ. Hist., Aucl. Antiquiss., torn. xiii. 
(Berlin, 1898); Bede, Hist. Eccl. (ed. C. Plummer, Oxford, 1896); 
the Saxon Chronicle (ed. C. Plummer, Oxford, 1892-1899); and the 
Anglo-Saxon Laws (ed. F. Liebermann, Halle, 1903), and Charters 
(W. de G. Birch, Cartidarium Saxonicum, London, 1885-1893). 
Modern authorities: Sh. Turner, History of the Anglo-Saxons 
(London, 1799-1805; 7th ed., 1852); Sir F. Palgrave, Rise and 
Progress of the English Commonwealth (London, 1831-1832); J. M. 
Kemble, The Saxons in England (London, 1849; 2nd ed., 1876); 
K. Maurer, Kritische Oberschau d. deutschen Geselzgebung u. Rechts- 
wissenschaft, vols, i.-iii. (Munich, 1853-1855); J. M. Lappenberg, 
Geschichte von England (Hamburg, 1834); History of England under 
the Anglo-Saxon Kings (London, 1845; 2nd ed., 1881); J. R. Green, 
The Making of England (London, 1881); T. Hodgkin, History of 
England from the Earliest Times to the Norman Conquest (vol. i. of The 
Political History of England) (London, 1906) ; F. Seebohm, The 
English Village Community (London, 1883); A. Meitzen, Siedelung 
und Agrarwesen d. Westgermanen,u. Ostgermanen, &,c. (Berlin, 1895) ; 
Sir F.Pollockand F.W. Maitland, History of English Law (Cambridge, 
1895; 2nd ed., 1898); F. W. Maitland, Domesday Book and Beyond 
(Cambridge, 1897) ; F. Seebohm, Tribal Custom in Anglo-Saxon Law 
(London, 1903) ; P. VinogradofF, The Growth of the Manor (London, 
1905) ; H. M. Chadwick, Studies on Anglo-Saxon Institutions (Cam- 
bridge, 1905) ; The Origin of the English Nation (ib., 1907) ; M. Heyne, 
liber die Lage und Construction der Halle Heorot (Paderborn, 1864) ; 
R. Henning, Das deutsche Haus {Quellen u. Forschungen, 47) (Strass- 
burg, 1882) ; M. Heyne, Deutsche Hausaltertiimer, i., ii., iii. (Leipzig, 
1900-1903) ; G. Baldwin Brown, The Arts in Early England (London, 
1903) ; C. F. Keary, Catalogue of Anglo-Saxon Coins in the British 
Museum, vol. i. (London, 1887); C. Roach Smith, Collectanea 
Antiqua (London, 1848-1868); R. C. Neville, Saxon Obsequies 
(London, 1852); J. Y. Akerman, Remains of Pagan Saxondom 
(London, 1855); Baron J. de Baye, Industrie anglo-saxonne (Paris, 
1889); The Industrial Arts of the Anglo-Saxons (London, 1893); 
G. Stephens, The Old Northern Runic Monuments (London and 
Copenhagen, 1866-1901); W. Vietor, Die northumbrischen Runen- 
steme (Marburg, 1895). Reference must also be made to the articles 
on Anglo-Saxon antiquities in the Victoria County Histories, and to 
various papers in Archaeologia, the Archaeological Journal, the 
Journal of the British Archaeological Society, the Proceedings of the 
Society of Antiquaries, the Associated Architectural Societies' Reports, 
and other antiquarian journals. (H. M. C.) 

BRITANNICUS, son of the Roman emperor Claudius by his 
third wife Messallina, was born probably a.d. 41. He was 
originally called Claudius Tiberius Germanicus, and received 
the name Britannicus from the senate on account of the conquest 
made in Britain about the time of his birth. Till 48, the date of 
his mother's execution, he was looked upon as the heir presump- 
tive; but Agrippina, the new wife of Claudius, soon persuaded 
the feeble emperor to adopt Lucius Domitius, known later as 
Nero, her son by a previous marriage. After the accession of 
Nero, Agrippina, by playing on his fears, induced him to poison 
Britannicus at a banquet (a.d. 55). A golden statue of the 
young prince was set up by the emperor Titus. Britannicus 
is the subject of a tragedy by Racine. 

Tacitus, Annals, xii. 25, 41, xiii. 14-16; Suetonius, Nero, 33; 
Dio Cassius lx. 32, 34; works quoted under Nero. 

BRITISH CENTRAL AFRICA, the general name given to the 
British protectorates in South Central Africa north of the 
Zambezi river, but more particularly to a large territory lying 
between 8° 25' S. on Lake Tanganyika and 17 6' S. on the 
river Shire, near its confluence with the Zambezi, and between 
36 10' E. (district of Mlanje) and 26 30' E. (river Luengwe- 
Kafukwe). Originally the term " British Central Africa " was 
applied by Sir H, H, Johnston to all the territories under British 



influence north of the Zambezi which were formerly intended 
to be under one administration; but the course of events 
having prevented the connexion of Barotseland (see Barotse) 
and the other Rhodesian territories with the more direct British 
administration north of the Zambezi, the name of British 
Central Africa was confined officially (in 1893) to the British 
protectorate on the Shire and about Lake Nyasa. In 1907 the 
official title of the protectorate was changed to that of Nyasaland 
Protectorate, while the titles " North Eastern Rhodesia " and 
" North Western Rhodesia " (Barotseland) have been given to 
the two divisions of the British South Africa Company's territory 
north of the Zambezi. The western boundary, however, of the 
territory here described has been taken to be a line drawn from 
near the source of the Lualaba on the southern boundary of 
Belgian Congo to the western source of the Luanga river, and 
thence the course of the Luanga to its junction with the Luengwer 
Kafukwe, after which the main course of the Kafukwe delimits 
the territory down to the Zambezi. Thus, besides the Nyasaland 
Protectorate and North Eastern Rhodesia, part of North Western 
Rhodesia is included, and for the whole of this region British 
Central Africa is the most convenient designation. 

Physical Features.— Within these limits we have a territory of 
about 250,000 sq. m., which includes two-thirds of Lake Nyasa, 
the south end of Lake Tanganyika, more than half Lake Mweru, 
and the whole of Lake Bangweulu, nearly the whole courses of the 
rivers Shire and Luangwa (or Loangwa), the whole of the river 
Chambezi (the most remote of the headwaters of the river Congo), 
the right or east bank of the Luapula (or upper Congo) from its exit 
from Lake Bangweulu to its issue from the north end of Lake 
Mweru; also the river Luanga and the whole course of the Kafue 
or Kafukwe. 1 Other lesser sheets of water included within the limits 
of this territory are the Great Mweru Swamp, between Tanganyika 

and Mweru, Moir's Lake (a small mountain tarn possibly a crater 

lake — lying between the Luangwa and the Luapula), Lake Malombe 
(on the upper Shire), and the salt lake Chilwa (wrongly styled Shirwa, 
being the Bantu word Kilwa), which lies on the borders of the 
Portuguese province of Mocambique. The southern border of this 
territory is the north bank of the Zambezi from the confluence 
of the Kafukwe to that of the Luangwa at Zumbo. Eastwards of 
Zumbo, British Central Africa is separated from the river Zambezi 
by the Portuguese possessions; nevertheless, considerably more 
than two-thirds of the country lies within the Zambezi basin, and is 
included within the subordinate basins of Lake Nyasa and of the 
rivers Luangwa and Luengwe-Kafukwe. The remaining portions 
drain into the basins of the river Congo and of Lake Tanganyika, 
and also into the small lake or half-dried swamp called Chilwa, which 
at the present time has no outlet, though in past ages it probably 
emptied itself into the Lujenda river, and thence into the Indian 
Ocean. 

As regards orographical features, much of the country is high 
plateau, with an average altitude of 3500 ft. above sea-level. Only 
a very minute portion of its area — the country along the banks of 
the river Shire — lies at anything like a low elevation; though the 
Luangwa valley may not be more than about 900 ft. above sea-level. 
Lake Nyasa lies at an elevation of 1700 ft. above the sea, is about 
350 m. long, with a breadth varying from 15 to 40 m. Lake Tan- 
ganyika is about 2600 ft. above sea-level, with a length of about 
400 m. and an average breadth of nearly 40 m. Lake Mweru and 
Lake Bangweulu are respectively 3000 and 3760 ft. above sea-level ; 
Lake Chilwa is 1946 ft. in altitude. The highest mountain found 
within the limits previously laid down is Mount Mlanje, in the ex- 
treme south-eastern corner of the protectorate. This remarkable 
and picturesque mass is an isolated " chunk " of the Archean 
plateau, through which at a later date there has been a volcanic 
outburst of basalt. The summit and sides of this mass exhibit 
several craters. The highest peak of Mlanje reaches an altitude of 
9683 ft. (In German territory, near the north end of Lake Nyasa, 
and close to the British frontier, is Mount Rungwe, the altitude 
of which exceeds 10,000 ft.) Other high mountains are Mounts 
Chongone and Dedza, in Angoniland, which reach an altitude of 
7000 ft., and points on the Nyika Plateau and in the Konde Mountains 
to the north-west of Lake Nyasa, which probably exceed a height of 
8000 ft. There are also Mounts Zomba (6900 ft.) and Chiradzulu 
(5500 ft.) in the Shire Highlands. The principal plateaus or high 
ridges are (1) the Shire Highlands, a clump of mountainous country 
lying between the river Shir6, the river Ruo, Lake Chilwa and the 
south end of Lake Nyasa; (2) Angoniland— a stretch of elevated 
country to the west of Lake Nyasa and the north-west of the river 

1 The nomenclature of several of these rivers is perplexing. It 
should be borne in mind that the Luanga (also known as the Lunga) 
is a tributary of the Luengwe-Kafukwe, itself often called Kafue, 
and that the Luangwa (or Loangwa) is an independent affluent of 
the Zambezi {o-V.), 



59 6 



BRITISH CENTRAL AFRICA 



Shire; (3) the Nyika, Plateau, which lies to the north of Angoniland ; 
and (4) the Nyasa-Tanganyika Plateau, between the basin of the 
river Luangwa, the vicinity of Tanganyika and the vicinity of 
Lake Mweru (highest point, 7000-8000 ft.). Finally may be men- 
tioned the tract of elevated country between Lake* Bangweulu and 
the river Luapula, and between Lake Bangweulu and the basin of 
the Luangwa; and also the Lukinga (Mushinga) or Ugwara Moun- 
tains of North Western Rhodesia, which attain perhaps to altitudes 
of 6000 ft. 

The whole of this part of Africa is practically without any stretch 
of desert country, being on the whole favoured with an abundant 
rainfall. The nearest approach to a desert is the rather dry land to 
the east afnd north-east of Lake Mweru. Here, and in parts of the 
lower Shire district, the annual rainfall probably does 1 not exceed an 
average of 35 in. Elsewhere, in the vicinity of the highest mountains, 
the rainfall may attain an average of 75 in., in parts of Mount Mlanje 
possibly often reaching to 100 in. in the year. The average may be 
put at 50 in. per annum, which is also about the average rainfall 
of the Shire Highlands, that part of British Central Africa which at 
present attracts the greatest number of. European settlers. 

Geology. -~ The whole formation is Archean and Primary (with a 
few modern plutonic outbursts), and chiefly consists of granite, 
felspar, quartz, gneiss, schists, amphibolite and other Archean rocks, 
with Primary sandstones and limestones in the basin of Lake Nyasa 
(a great rift depression), the river Shire, and the regions within the 
northern watershed of the Zambezi river. Sandstones of Karroo 
age occur in the basin of the Luangwa (N.E. Rhodesia). . There are 
evidences of recent volcanic activity on the summit of the small 
Mlanje plateau (S.E. corner of the protectorate: here there are two 
extinct craters with a basaltic outflow) , and at the north end of 
Lake Nyasa and the eastern edge of the Tanganyika plateau. Here 
there are many craters and much basalt, or even lava; also hot 
springs. 

Metals and Minerals. — Gold has been found in the Shire High- 
lands, in the hills along the Nyasa-Zambezi waterparting, and 
in the mountainous region west of Lake Nyasa; silver (galena, 
silver-lead) in the hills of the Nyasa-Zambezi waterparting ; lead 
in the same district ; graphite in the western basin of Lake Nyasa ; 
copper (pyrites and pure ore) in the west Nyasa region and in the 
hills of North Western and North Eastern Rhodesia; iron ore 
almost universally ; mica almost universally ; coal occurs in the north 
and west Nyasa districts (especially in the Karroo sandstones of the 
Rukuru valley), and perhaps along the Zambezi-Nyasa waterparting; 
limestone in the Shire basin; malachite in south-west Angoniland 
and North Western Rhodesia; and perhaps petroleum in places 
along the Nyasa-Zambezi waterparting. (See also Rhodesia.) 

Flora. — No part of the country comes within the forest region of 
West Africa. The whole of it may be said to lie within the savannah 
or park-like division of the continent. As a general rule, the land- 
scape is of a pleasing and attractive character, well covered with 
vegetation and fairly well watered. Actual forests of lofty trees, 
forests of a West African, type, are few in number, and are chiefly 
limited to portions of the Nyika, Angoniland and Shire Highlands 
plateaus, and to a few nooks in valleys near the south end of Tangan- 
yika. Patches of forest of tropical luxuriance may still be seen on 
the slopes of Mounts Mlanje and Chiradzulu. On the upper plateaus 
of Mount Mlanje there are forests of a remarkable conifer ( Widdring- 
tonia whytei), a relation of the cypress, which in appearance resembles 
much more the cedar, and is therefore wrongly styled the "Mlanje 
cedar." This tree is remarkable as being the most northern form of 
a group of yew-like conifers confined otherwise to South Africa (Cape 
Colony). Immense areas in the lower-lying plains are covered by 
long, coarse grass, sometimes reaching lo ft. in height. Most of the 
West African forest trees are represented in British Central Africa. 
A full list of the known flora has been compiled by Sir W. Thiselton- 
Dyer and his assistants at Kew, and is given in the first and second 
editions of Sir H. H. Johnston's work on British Central Africa. 
Amongst the principal vegetable products of the country interesting 
for commercial purposes may be mentioned tobacco (partly native 
varieties and partly introduced) ; coffee (wild coffee is said to grow 
in some of the mountainous districts, but the actual coffee cultivated 
by the European settlers h&s been introduced from abroad) ; rubber 
—derived chiefly from the various species of Landolphia, Ficus, 
Clitandra, Carpodinus and Conopharygia, and from other apoey- 
naceous plants; the Strophanthus pod (furnishing a valuable drug); 
ground-nuts (Arachis and Voandzeia) ; the cotton plant; all 
African cultivated cereals (Sorghum,' Pennisetum, maize, rice, wheat 
—cultivated chiefly by Europeans — and Eleusine) ; and 3ix species 
of palms— the oil palm on the n6rth-west (near Lake Nyasa, at the 
south end of Tanganyika and on the Luapula), the Borassus and 
Hyphaene, Phoenix (or wild date), Raphia and the coco-nut palm. 
The last named was introduced by Arabs and Europeans, and is 
found on Lake Nyasa and on the lower Shire. Most of the European 
vegetables have been introduced, and thrive exceedingly well, 
especially the potato. The mango has also been introduced from 
India, and has taken to the Shire Highlands as to a second home. 
Oranges, lemons and limes have been planted by Europeans and 
Arabs in a few districts. European fruit threes do not ordinarily 
flourish, though apples are grown to some extent at Blantyre. The 
vine hitherto has proved a failure. Pineapples give the best result 



among cultivated fruit, and strawberries do well in the higher 
districts. In the mountains the native wild brambles give black- 
berries of large size and excellent flavour. The vegetable product 
through which this protectorate first attracted trade was coffee, 
the export of which, however, has passed through very disheartening 
fluctuations. In 19,05-1906, 773,919 lb of coffee (value £16,123) 
were exported ; but during this twelve months the crop of cotton — 
quite a newly developed product, rose to 776,621 lb, from 285,185 lb 
in 1904^1905. An equally marked increase in tobacco and ground- 
nuts (Arachis) has taken place. Beeswax is a rising export. 

Fattna. — The fauna is on the whole very rich. It has affinities 
in a few respects with the West African forest region, but differs 
slightly from the countries to the north and south by the absena 
of such animals as prefer drier climates, as for instance the oryx 
antelopes, gazelles and the ostrich. There is a complete blank in 
the distribution of this last between the districts to the south of the 
Zambezi and those of East Africa between Victoria Nyanza and the 
Indian Ocean. The giraffe is found in the Luanga Valley ; it is also 
met with in the extreme north-east of the country. The ordinary 
African rhinoceros is still occasionally, but very rarely, seen in the 
Shire Highlands, The African elephant is fairly common throughout 
the whole territory. Lions and leopards are very abundant.; the 
zebra is still found in great numbers, and belongs to the Central 
African variety of Burchell's zebra, which is completely striped 
down to the hoofs, and is intermediate in many particulars between 
the true zebra of the mountains and Burchell's zebra of the plains. 
The principal antelopes found are the sable and the roan (Hippo- 
tragus), five species Of Cobus or waterbuck (the puku, the Senga 
puku, the lechwe, Crawshay's waterbuck and the common water- 
buck); the pallah, tsessebe (Damdliscus), hartebeest, brindled gnu 
(perhaps two species) ,several duykers(including the large Cephalophus 
sylvicultrix)',khpspringer , oribi, steinbok and reedbuck. Among 
tragelaphs are two or more bushbucks, the inyala, the water tragelaph 
(Limnotragus selousi) ,,the kudu and Livingstone's eland. The only 
buffalo is the common Cape species. The hyaena is the spotted kind. 
The hunting dog is present. There are some seven species of monkeys, 
including two baboons and one colobus. The hippopotamus is found 
in the lakes and rivers, and all these sheets of water are infested with 
crocodiles, apparently belonging to but one species, the common Nile 
crocodile. 

Inhabitants. — The human race is represented by only one 
indigenous native type — the Negro. No trace is anywhere 
found of a Hamitic intermixture (unless perhaps at the north 
end of Lake Nyasa, where the physique of the native Awankonde 
recalls that of the Nilotic negro). Arabs from Zanzibar have 
settled in the country, but not, as far as is known, earlier than 
the beginning of the 19th century. As the present writer takes 
the general term " Negro " to include equally the Bantu, 
Hottentot, Bushman and Congo Pygmy, this designation, will 
cover all the natives of British Central Africa. The Bantu races, 
however, exhibit in some parts signs of Hottentot or Bushman 
intermixture, and there are legends in some mountain districts, 
especially Mount Mlanje, of the former existence of unmixed 
Bushman tribes, while Bushman stone implements are found 
at the south end of Tanganyika. At the present day the popula- 
tion is, as a rule, of a black or chocolate-coloured Negro type, 
and belongs, linguistically, entirely and exclusively to the Bantu 
family. The languages spoken offer several very interesting 
forms of Bantu speech, notably in the districts between the north 
end of Lake Nyasa, the south end of Lake Tanganyika, and the 
river Luapula. In the more or less plateau country included 
within these geographical limits, the Bantu dialects are of an 
archaic type, and to the present writer it has seemed as though 
one of them, Kibemba or Kiwemba, came near to the original 
form of the Bantu mother-language, though not nearer than the 
interesting Subiya of southern Barotseland. Through dialects 
spoken on the west and north of Tanganyika, these languages 
of North Eastern Rhodesia and northern Nyasaland and of the 
Kafukwe basin are connected with the Bantu languages of 
Uganda. They also offer a slight resemblance to Zulu-Kaffir, 
and it would seem as though the Zulu-Kaffir race must have come 
straight down from the countries to the north-east of Tanganyika, 
across the Zambezi, to their present home. Curiously enough, 
some hundreds of years after this southward migration, intestine 
wars and conflicts actually determined a north-eastward return 
migration of Zulus. From Matabeleland, Zulu tribes crossed 
the Zambezi at various periods (commencing from about 1820), 
and gradually extended their ravages and dominion over the 
plateaus to the west, north and north-east of Lake Nyasa. The 
Zulu language is still spoken by the dominating caste in West 



BRITISH CENTRAL AFRICA 



597 



Nyasaland (see further Zultjland: Ethnology; Rhodesia: 
Ethnology; and Yaos). As regards foreign settlers in this part 
of Africa, the Arabs may be mentioned first, though they are 
now met with only in very small numbers. The Arabs un- 
doubtedly first heard of this rich country — rich not alone in 
natural products such as ivory, but also in slaves of good 
quality — from their settlements near the delta of the river 
Zambezi, and these settlements may date back to an early 
period, and might be coeval with the suggested pre-Islamite 
Arab settlements in the gold-bearing regions of South East 
Africa. But the Arabs do not seem to have made much progress 
in their penetration of the country in the days before firearms; 
and when firearms came into use they were for a long time 
forestalled by the Portuguese, who ousted them from the Zamr 
bezi. But about the beginning of the 19th century the increasing 
power and commercial enterprise of the Arab sultanate of 
Zanzibar caused the Arabs of Maskat and Zanzibar to inarch 
inland from the east coast. They gradually founded strong 
slave-trading settlements on the east and west coasts of Lake 
Nyasa, and thence westwards to Tanganyika and the Luapula. 
They never came in great numbers, however, and, except here 
and there on the coast of Lake Nyasa, have left no mixed de- 
scendants hi the population. The total native population of all 
British Central Africa is about 2,000,000, that of the Nyasaland 
Protectorate being officially estimated in 1907 at 927,355. Of 
Europeans the protectorate possesses about 600 to 700 settlers, 
including some 100 officials. (For the European population of 
the other territories, see Rhodesia.) The Europeans of British 
Central Africa are chiefly natives of the United Kingdom or 
South Africa, but there are a few Germans, Dutchmen, French, 
Italians and Portuguese. . The protectorate has also attracted 
a number of Indian traders (over 400), besides whom about 150 
British Indian soldiers (Sikhs) are employed as the nucleus of 
an armed force. 1 

Trade and Communications. — The total value of the trade of the 
protectorate in the year 1899-1900 was £255,384, showing an in- 
crease of 75 % on the figures for the previous year, 1898-1899. 
Imports were valued at £176,035, an increase of 62 %, and exports 
at £79,449, an increase 01109 %. In 1905-1906 the imports reached 
£222,581 and the exports £56,778. The value of imports into the 
Rhodesian provinces during the same period was about £50,000, 
excluding railway material, and the exports £18,000. The principal 
exports are (besides minerals) coffee, cotton, tobacco, rubber and 
ivory. A number of Englishmen and Scotsmen (perhaps 200) are 
settled, mainly in the Shire Highlands, as coffee planters. 

From the Chinde mouth of the Zambezi to Port Herald on the 
lower Shire communication is maintained by light-draught steamers, 
though in the dry season (April-November) steamers cannot always 
ascend as far as Port Herald, and barges have to be used to complete 
the voyage. A railway runs from Port Herald to Blantyre, the 
commercial capital of the Shire Highlands. The " Cape to Cairo " 
railway, which crossed the Zambezi in 1905 and the Kafukwe in 
1906, reached the Broken Hill mine in 1907, and in 1909 was^con- 
tinued to the frontier of Belgian Congo. There are regular services 
by steamer between the ports on Lakes Nyasa and Tanganyika. 
The African trans-continental telegraph line (founded by Cecil 
Rhodes) runs through the protectorate, and a branch line has been 
established from Lake Nyasa to Fort Jameson, the present head- 
quarters of the Chartered Company in North Eastern Rhodesia. 

Towns. — The principal European settlement or town is Blantyre 
(?.».), at a height of about 3000 ft. above the sea, in the Shire High- 
lands. This place was named after Livingstone's birthplace, and 
was founded in 1876 by the Church of Scotland mission. The 
government capital of the protectorate, however, is Zomba, at the 
base of the mountain of that name. Other townships or sites of 
European settlements are Port Herald (on the lower Shire), Chiromo 
(at the junction of the Ruo and the Shire), Fort Anderson (on. 
Mount Mlanje), Fort Johnston (near the outlet of the river Shire 
from the south end of Lake Nyasa), Kotakota and Bandawe (on the 
west coast of Lake Nyasa), Likoma (on an island off the east coast of 
Lake Nyasa), Karonga (on the north-west coast of Lake Nyasa), 
Fife (on the Nyasa-Tanganyika plateau), Fort Jameson (capital 
of N.E. Rhodesia, near the river Luangwa), Abercorn (on the south 
end of Lake Tanganyika), Kalungwisi (on the east coast of Lake 
Mweru) and Fort Rosebery (near the Johnston Falls on the Luapula 
[upper Congo]). 

Administration. — The present political divisions of the country 

1 The organized armed forces and police are under the direction 
of the imperial government throughout British Central Africa, and 
number about 880 (150 Sikhs, 730 negroes and 14 British officers). 



are as follows r— The Nyasaland Protectorate, i.e. the district* 
surrounding Lake Nyasa and the Shire province, are administered 
directly under the imperial government by a governor, who acts 
under the orders of the colonial office. The governor is assisted by 
an executive council and by a nominated legislative council, which 
consists of at least three members. The districts to the westward, 
forming the provinces of North Eastern and North Western Rhodesia, 
are governed by two administrators of the British South Africa 
Chartered Company, in consultation with the governor of Nyasaland 
and the colonial office. 

History.— The history of the territory dealt with above is 
recent and slight. Apart from the vague Portuguese wanderings 
during the 16th and 17th centuries, the first European explorer 
of any education who penetrated into this country was the 
celebrated Portuguese official, Dr F. J. M. de Lacerda e Almeida, 
who journeyed from Tete on the Zambezi to the vicinity of Lake 
Mweru. But the real history of the country begins with the 
advent of David Livingstone, who in 1859 penetrated up the 
ShirS river and discovered Lake Nyasa. Livingstone's subse- 
quent journeys, to the sotlth end of Tanganyika, to Lake Mweru 
and to Lake Bangweulu (where he died in 1873), opened up this 
important part of South Central Africa and centred in it British 
interests in a very particular . manner. Livingstone's death was 
soon followed by the entry of various missionary societies, who 
commenced the evangelization of the country; and these 
missionaries, together with a few Scottish settlers, steadily 
opposed the attempts of the Portuguese to extend their sway 
in this direction from the adjoining provinces of Mozambique 
and of the Zambezi. From Out of the missionary societies grew 
a trading company, the African Lakes Trading Corporation. 
This body came into conflict with a number of Arabs who had 
established themselves on the north end of Lake Nyasa. About 
1885 a struggle began between Araband Briton for the possession 
of the country, which was not terminated until the year 1896. 
The African Lakes Corporation in its unofficial war enlisted 
volunteers, amongst whom were Captain (afterwards Sir F. D.) 
Lugard and Mr (afterwards Sir) Alfred Sharpe. Both these 
gentlemen were wounded, and the operations they undertook 
were not crowned with complete success. In 1 889 Mr (afterwards 
Sir ) H. H. Johnston was sent out to endeavour to effect a possible 
arrangement of the dispute between the Arabs and the African 
Lakes Corporation, and also to ensure the protection of friendly 
native chiefs from Portuguese aggression beyond a certain point. 
The outcome of these efforts and the treaties made was the 
creation of the British protectorate and sphere of influence north 
of the Zambezi (see Africa; § 5). In 1891 Johnston returned 
to the country as imperial commissioner and consul-general. 
In the interval between 1889 and 1891 Mr Alfred Sharpe, on 
behalf of Cecil Rhodes, had brought a large part of the country 
into treaty with the British South Africa Company. These 
territories (Northern Rhodesia) were administered for four years 
by Sir Harry Johnston in connexion with the British Central 
Africa protectorate. Between 1891 and 1895 a long struggle 
continued, between the British authorities on the one hand and 
the Arabs and Mahommedan Yaos on the other, regarding the 
suppression of the slave trade. By the beginning of 1896 the 
last Arab stronghold was taken and the Yaos were completely 
reduced to submission. Then followed, during 1896-1898, wars 
with the Zulu (Angoni) tribes, who claimed to dominate and 
harass the native populations to the west of Lake Nyasa. The 
Angoni having been subdued, and the British South Africa 
Company having also quelled the turbulent Awemba and Bashu- 
kulumbwe, there is a reasonable hope of the country enjoying 
a settled peace and considerable prosperity. This prospect has 
been, indeed, already realized to a considerable extent, though 
the increase of commerce has scarcely been as rapid as was 
anticipated. In 1897, on the transference of Sir Harry Johnston 
to Tunis, the commissionership was conferred on Mr Alfred 
Sharpe, who was created a K.C.M.G. in 1903. In 1904 the 
administration of the protectorate, originally directed by the 
foreign office, was transferred to the coloriial office. In 1907, on 
the change in the title of the protectorate, the designation of the 
chief official was altered from commissioner to governor, and 
executive and legislative councils were established. The mineral 



59 8 



BRITISH COLUMBIA 



surveys and railway construction commenced under the foreign 
office were carried on vigorously under the colonial office. The 
increased revenue, from £51,000 in 1001-1002 to £76,000 in 
1905-1906, for the protectorate alone (see also Rhodesia), is 
an evidence of increasing prosperity. Expenditure in excess of 
revenue is met by grants in aid from the imperial exchequer, 
so far as the Nyasaland Protectorate is concerned. The British 
South Africa Company finances the remainder. The native 
population is well disposed towards European rule, having, 
indeed, at all times furnished the principal contingent of the 
armed force with which the African Lakes Company, British 
South Africa Company or the British government endeavoured 
to oppose Arab, Zulu or Awemba aggression. The protectorate 
government maintains three gunboats on Lake Nyasa, and the 
British South Africa Company an armed steamer on Lake 
Tanganyika. 

Unfortunately, though so rich and fertile, the land is not as 
a rule very healthy for Europeans, though there are signs of 
improvement in this respect. The principal scourges are black- 
water fever and dysentery, besides ordinary malarial fever, 
malarial ulcers, pneumonia and bronchitis. The climate is 
agreeable, and except in the low-lying districts is never unbear- 
ably hot; while on the high mountain plateaus frost frequently 
occurs during the dry season. 

See Narrative of an Expedition to the Zambezi, &c, by David and 
Charles Livingstone (1865) ; Last Journals of David Livingstone, 
edited by the Rev. Horace Waller (1874); L. Monteith Fothering- 
ham, Adventures in Nyasaland (1891); Henry Drummond, Tropical 
Africa (4th ed., 1891) ; Rev. D. C. Scott, An Encyclopaedic Dictionary 
of the Mang'anja Language, as spoken in British Central Africa (1891) ; 
Sir H. H. Johnston, British Central Africa (2nd ed., 1898) ; Miss 
A. Werner, The Natives of British Central Africa (1906); John 
Buchanan, The Shire Highlands (1885) ; Lionel Decle, Three Years 
in Savage Africa (1898); H. L. Duff, Nyasaland under the Foreign 
Office (1903) ; J. E. S. Moore, The Tanganyika Problem (1904) ; 
articles on North Eastern and North Western Rhodesia (chiefly by 
Frank Melland) in the Journal of the African Society (1902-1906) ; 
annual Reports on British Central Africa published by the Colonial 
Office; various linguistic works by Miss A. Werner, the Rev. Govan 
Robertson, Dr R. Laws, A. C. Madan, Father Torrend and Monsieur 
E. Jacottet. (H. H. J.) 

BRITISH COLUMBIA, the western province of the Dominion 
of Canada. It is bounded on the east by the continental water- 
shed in the Rocky Mountains, until this, in its north-westerly 
course, intersects 120 W., which is followed north to 60° N., 
thus including within the province a part of the Peace river 
country to the east of the mountains. The southern boundary 
is formed by 49° N. and the strait separating Vancouver Island 
from the state of Washington. The northern boundary is 60° N., 
the western the Pacific Ocean, upon which the province fronts 
for about 600 m., and the coast strip of Alaska for a further 
distarice of 400 m. Vancouver Island and the Queen Charlotte 
Islands, as well as the smaller islands lying off the western coast 
of Canada, belong to the province of British Columbia. 

Physical Features. — British Columbia is essentially a mountainous 
country, for the Rocky Mountains which in the United States lie 
to the east of the Great Basin, on running to the north bear toward 
the west and approach the ranges which border the Pacific coast. 
Thus British Columbia comprises practically the entire width of what 
has been termed the Cordillera or Cordilleran belt of North America, 
between the parallels of latitude above indicated. There are two 
ruling mountain systems in this belt — the Rocky Mountains proper 
on the north-east side, and the Coast Range on the south-west or 
Pacific side. Between these are subordinate ranges to which various 
local names have been given, as well as the " Interior Plateau " — an 
elevated tract of hilly country, the hill summits having an accordant 
altitude, which lies to the east of the Coast Range. The several 
ranges, having been produced by successive foldings of the earth's 
crust in a direction parallel to the border of the Pacific Ocean, have 
a common trend which is south-east and north-west. Vancouver 
Island and the Queen Charlotte Islands are remnants of still another 
mountain range, which runs parallel to the coast but is now almost 
Entirely submerged beneath the waters of the Pacific. The province 
might be said to consist of a series of parallel mountain ranges with 
long narrow valleys lying between them. 

The Rocky Mountains are composed chiefly of palaeozoic sediments 
ranging in age from the Cambrian to the Carboniferous, with sub- 
ordinate infolded areas of Cretaceous which hold coal. The average 
height of the range along the United States boundary is 8000 ft., 
hut the range culminates between the latitudes of 51° and 53°, the 
Mghest peak in the Canadian Rockies being Mount Robson, 13,700 



ft., although the highest peak in British Columbia is Mount Fair- 
weather on the International Boundary, which rises to 15,287 ft. 
Other high peaks in the Rocky Mountains of Canada are Columbia, 
12,740 ft.; Forbes, 12,075; Assiniboine, 11,860; Bryce. 11,686; 
Temple, 11,626; Lyell, 11,463. There are a number of passes over 
the Rocky Mountains, among which may be mentioned, beginning 
from the south, the South Kootenay or Boundary Pass, 7100 ft.; 
the Crow's Nest Pass, 5500 (this is traversed by the southern branch 
of the Canadian Pacific railway and crosses great coal fields) ; the 
Kicking Horse or Wapta Pass, 5300 (which is traversed by the main 
line of the Canadian Pacific railway) ; the Athabasca Pass, 6025 ; 
the Yellow Head Pass, 3733 (which will probably be used by the 
Grand Trunk Pacific railway); the Pine River Pass, 2850; and the 
Peace River Pass, 2000, through which the Peace river flows. 

The Coast Range, sometimes called the Cascade Range, borders 
the Pacific coast for 900 m. and gives to it its remarkable character. 
To its partially submerged transverse valleys are due the excellent 
harbours on the coast, the deep sounds and inlets which penetrate 
far inland at many points, as well as the profound and gloomy fjords 
and the stupendous precipices which render the coast line an ex- 
aggerated reproduction of that of Norway. The coast is, in fact, 
one of the most remarkable in the world, measuring with all its 
indentations 7000 m. in the aggregate, and being fringed with an 
archipelago of innumerable islands, of which Vancouver Island and 
the Queen Charlotte Islands are the largest. 

Along the south-western side of the Rocky Mountains is a very 
remarkable valley of considerable geological antiquity, in which some 
seven of the great rivers of the Pacific slope, among them the 
Kootenay, Columbia, Fraser and Finlay, flow for portions of their 
upper courses. This valley, which is from I to 6 m. in width, can 
be traced continuously for a length of at least 800 m. One of the 
most important rivers of the province is the Fraser, which, rising in 
the Rocky Mountains, flows for a long distance to the north-west, 
and then turning south eventually crosses the Coast Range by a 
deep canton-like valley and empties into the Strait of Georgia, a 
few miles south of the city of Vancouver. The Columbia, which rises 
farther south in the same range, flows north for about 150 m., 
crossing the main line of the Canadian Pacific railway at Donald, 
and then bending abruptly back upon its former course, flows south, 
recrossing the Canadian Pacific railway at Revelstoke, and on 
through the Arrow Lakes in the Kootenay country into the United 
States, emptying into the Pacific Ocean at Astoria in the state 
of Oregon. These lakes, as well as the other large lakes in southern 
British Columbia, remain open throughout the winter. In the 
north-western part of the province the Skeena flows south-west 
into the Pacific, and still farther to the north the Stikine rises in 
British Columbia, but before entering the Pacific crosses the coast 
strip of Alaska. The Liard, rising in the same district, flows east 
and falls into the Mackenzie, which empties into the Arctic Ocean. 
The headwaters of the Yukon are also situated in the northern part 
of the province. All these rivers are swift and are frequently 
interrupted by rapids, so that, as means of communication for com- 
mercial purposes, they are of indifferent value. Wherever lines of 
railway are constructed, they lose whatever importance they may 
have held in this respect previously. 

At an early stage in the Glacial period British Columbia was 
covered by the Cordilleran glacier, which moved south-eastwards 
and north-westwards, in correspondence with the ruling features of 
the country, from a gathering-ground situated in the vicinity of the 
57th parallel. Ice from this glacier poured through passes in the 
coast ranges, and to a lesser extent debouched upon the edge of the 
great plains, beyond the Rocky Mountain range. The great valley 
between the coast ranges and Vancouver Island was also occupied by 
a glacier that moved in both directions from a central point in the 
vicinity of Valdez Island. The effects of this glacial action and of 
the long periods of erosion preceding it and of other physiographic 
changes connected with its passing away, have most important bear- 
ings on the distribution and character of the gold-bearing alluviums 
of the province. 

Climate. — The subjoined figures relating to temperature and pre- 
cipitation are from a table prepared by Mr R. F. Stupart, director 
of the meteorological service. The station at Victoria may be taken 
as representing the conditions of the southern part of the coast of 
British Columbia, although the rainfall is much greater on exposed 
parts of the outer coast. Agassiz represents the Fraser delta and 
Kamloops the southern interior district. The mean temperature 
naturally decreases to the northward of these selected stations, both 
along the coast and in the interior, while the precipitation increases. 
The figures given for Port Simpson are of interest, as the Pacific 
terminus of the Grand Trunk Pacific railway will be in this vicinity. 

Fauna. — Among the larger mammals are the big-horn or mountain 
sheep (Ons canadensis) , the Rocky Mountain goat (Mazama montana), 
the grizzly bear, moose, woodland caribou, black- tailed or mule deer, 
white-tailed deer, and coyote. All these are to be found only on the 
mainland. The black bear, wolf, puma, lynx, wapiti, and Columbian 
or coast deer are common to parts of both mainland and islands. 
Of marine mammals the most characteristic are the sea-lion, fur- 
seal, sea-otter and harbour-seal. About 340 species of birds are 
known to occur in the province, among which, as of special interest, 
may be mentioned the burrowing owl of the dry, interior region, the 



BRITISH COLUMBIA 



599 





Mean Temp., Fahr. 


Absolute 
Temperature. 


Rainfall — Inches. 


Coldest 
Month. 


Warmest 
Month. 


Average 
Annual. 


Highest. 


Lowest. 


Wettest 
Month. 


Driest 
Month. 


Average 
Annual. 


Victoria ' . .' . 
Agassiz s . . . . 
Kamloops 3 . . . 
Port Simpson 4 . 


Jan. 37-5° 
Jan. 33-0° 
Jan. 24-2° 
Jan. 34-9° 


July 6o-3° 

Aug. 64-7° 
Aug. 68-5° 
Aug. 56-9° 


48-8° 
48-9° 
47-1° 
45-i° 


9 °o 
K 

IOI° 

88° 


-l° 
~< 

-10° 


Dec. 7-98 
Dec. 9-43 
July i-6i 
Oct. 12-42 


July -4 
July 1-55 
April -37 
June 4-37 


37-77 
66-85 
11-46 
94-63 



American magpie, Steller's jay and a true nut-cracker, Clark's 
crow (Picicorvus columbianus) . True jays and orioles are also well 
represented. The gallinaceous birds include the large blue grouse 
of the coast, replaced in the Rocky Mountains by the dusky grouse. 
The western form of the " spruce partridge " of eastern Canada is 
also abundant, together with several forms referred to the genus 
Bonasa, generally known as " partridges " or ruffed grouse. 
Ptarmigans also abound in many of the higher mountain regions. 
Of the Anatidae only passing mention need be made. During the 
spring and autumn migrations many species are found in great 
abundance, but in the summer a smaller number remain to breed, 
chief among which are the teal, mallard, wood duck, spoon-bill, 
pin-tail, buffle-head, red-head, canvas-back, scaup-duck, &c. 

Area and Population. — The area of British Columbia is 
357,600 sq. m., and its population by the census of 1901 was 
190,000. Since that date this has been largely increased by the 
influx of miners and others, consequent upon the discovery of 
precious metals in the Kootenay, Boundary and Atlin districts. 
Much of this is a floating population, but the opening up of the 
valleys by railway and new lines of steamboats, together with 
the settlements made in the vicinity of the Canadian Pacific 
railway, has resulted in a considerable increase of the permanent 
population. The white population comprises men of many 
nationalities. There is a large Chinese population, the census 
of 1901 returning 14,201. The influx of Chinamen has, however, 
practically ceased, owing to the tax of $500 per head imposed 
by the government of the dominion. Many Japanese have also 
come in. The Japanese are engaged chiefly in lumbering and 
fishing, but the Chinese are found everywhere in the province. 
Great objection is taken by the white population to the increasing 
number of " Mongolians," owing to their competition with 
whites in the labour markets. The Japanese do not appear to be 
so much disliked, as they adapt themselves to the ways of white 
men, but they are equally objected to on the score of cheap 
labour; and in 1907-1908 considerable friction occurred with 
the Dominion government over the Anti- Japanese attitude of 
British Columbia, which was shown in some rather serious riots. 
In the census of 1901 the Indian population is returned at 
25,488; of these 20,351 are professing Christians and 5137 are 
pagans. The Indians are divided into very many tribes, under 
local names, but fall naturally on linguistic grounds into a few 
large groups. Thus the southern part of the interior is occupied 
by the Salish and Kootenay, and the northern interior by the 
Tinneh or Athapackan people. On the coast are the Haida, 
Tsimshian, Kwakiatl, Nootka, and about the Gulf of Georgia 
various tribes related to the Salish proper. There is no treaty 
with the Indians of British Columbia, as with those of the plains, 
for the relinquishment of their title to the land, but the govern- 
ment otherwise assists them. There is an Indian superintendent 
at Victoria, and under him are nine agencies throughout the 
province to attend to the Indians — relieving their sick and 
destitute, supplying them with seed and implements, settling 
their disputes and administering justice. The Indian fishing 
stations and burial grounds are reserved, and other land has 
been set apart for them for agricultural and pastoral purposes. 
A number of schools have been established for their education. 
They were at one time a dangerous element, but are now quiet 
and peaceable. 

The chief cities are Victoria, the capital, on Vancouver Island; 
and Vancouver on the mainland, New Westminster on the 
Fraser and Nanaimo on Vancouver Island. Rossland and 



1 48°24'N., 123' 

2 49 14' N., 121' 

3 50° 41' N., 120' 
* 54° 34' N., 130' 



19' W., height 85 ft. 
31' W., height 52 ft. 
29' W., height 1 193 ft. 
26' W., height 26 ft. 



Nelson in West Kootenay, as well as Fernie in East Kootenay, 
and Grand Forks in the Boundary district, are also places of 
importance. 

Mining. — Mining is the principal industry of British Columbia. 
The country is rich in gold, silver, copper, lead and coal, and 
has also iron deposits. From 1894 to 1904 the mining output 
increased from $4,225,717 to $18,977,359. In 1905 it had 
reached $22,460,295. The principal minerals, in order of value 
of output, are gold, copper, coal, lead and silver. Between 
1858 — the year of the placer discoveries on the Fraser river and 
in the Cariboo district — and 1882, the placer yields were much 
heavier than in subsequent years, running from one to nearly 
four million dollars annually, but there was no quartz mining. 
Since 1899 placer mining has increased considerably, although 
tSe greater part of the return has been from lode mining. The 
Rossland, the Boundary and the Kootenay districts are the 
chief centres of vein-mining, yielding auriferous and cupriferous 
sulphide ores, as well as large quantities of silver-bearing lead 
ores. Ores of copper and the precious metals are being pro- 
spected and worked also, in several places along the coast and 
on Vancouver Island. The mining laws are liberal, and being 
based on the experience gained in the adjacent mining centres 
of the Western States, are convenient and effective. The most 
important smelting and reducing plants are those at Trail and 
Nelson in the West Kootenay country, and at Grand Forks and 
Greenwood in the Boundary district. There are also numerous 
concentrating plants. Mining machinery of the most modern 
types is employed wherever machinery is required. 

The province contains enormous supplies of excellent coal, 
most of which are as yet untouched. It is chiefly of Cretaceous 
age. The producing collieries are chiefly on Vancouver Island 
and on the western slope of the Rockies near the Crow's* Nest 
Pass in the extreme south-eastern portion of the provinces. 
Immense beds of high grade bituminous coal and semi-anthracite 
are exposed in the Bulkley Valley, south of the Skeena river, 
not far from the projected line of the Grand Trunk Pacific railway. 
About one-h'alf the coal mined is exported to the United States. 

Fisheries. — A large percentage of the commerce is derived from 
the sea, the chief product being salmon. Halibut, cod (several 
varieties), oolachan, sturgeon, herring, shad and many other fishes 
are also plentiful, but with the exception of the halibut these have 
not yet become the objects of extensive industries. There are 
several kinds of salmon, and they run in British Columbia waters at 
different seasons of the year. The quinnat or spring salmon is the 
largest and best table fish, and is followed in the latter part of the 
summer by the sockeye, which runs in enormous numbers up the 
Fraser and Skeena rivers. This is the fish preferred for canning. 
It is of brighter colour, more uniform in size, and comes in such 
quantities that a constant supply can be reckoned upon by the 
canneries. About the mouth of the Fraser river from 1800 to 2600 
boats are occupied during the run. There is an especially large run 
of sockeye salmon in the Fraser river every fourth year, while in the 
year immediately following there is a poor run. The silver salmon 
or cohoe arrives a little later than the sockeye, but is not much used 
for packing except when required to make up deficiencies. The 
dog-salmon is not canned, but large numbers are caught by the 
Japanese, who salt them for export to the Orient. The other 
varieties are of but little commercial importance at present, although 
with the increasing demand for British Columbia salmon, the 
fishing season is being extended to cover the runs of all the varieties 
of this fish found in the waters of the province. 

Great Britain is the largest but not the only market for British 
Columbia salmon. The years vary in productiveness, 1901 having 
been unusually large and 1903 the smallest in eleven years, but the 
average'pack is about 700,000 cases of forty-eight i-lb tins, the greater 
part of all returns being from the Fraser river canneries, the Skeena 
river and the Rivers Inlet coming next in order. There are be- 
tween 60 and 70 canneries, of which about 40 are on the banks of 



6oo 



BRITISH COLUMBIA 



the Fraser river. There is urgent need for the enactment of laws 
restricting the catch of salmon, as the industry is now seriously 
threatened. The fish oils are extracted chiefly from several species 
of dog-fish; and sometimes from the basking shark, as well as from 
the oolachan, which is also an edible fish. , . ' ; i 

The fur-seal fishery is an important industry, though apparently 
a declining one. Owing to the scarcity of seals and international 
difficulties concerning pelagic sealing in Bering Sea,where the greatest 
number have been taken, the business of seal-hunting is losing 
favour. Salmon fish-hatcheries have been established on the chief 
rivers frequented by these fish. Oysters and lobsters from the 
Atlantic coast have been planted in British Columbia waters. 

Timber.'— The province is rich in forest growth, and there is a 
steady demand for its lumber in the other parts of Canada as well 
as in South America, Africa, Australia and China. The following is a 
list of some of the more important trees — large leaved maple (Acer 
macrophyUum) , red alder (Alnus rubra), western larch {Larix occi- 
denthUs), white spruce (Picea alba), Engellmann's spruce (Picea 
Engelmanii) , Menzies's spruce (Picea sitchensis) , white mountain pine 
(Pinus monticola), 'black pine (Pinus murrayana), yellow pine (Pinus 
ponderosa), Douglas fir (Pseudotsuga Douglasiil, western white oak 
(Quercusgarryana), giant cedar (Thuya gigantea), yellow cypress or 
cedar (Thuya excelsa), western hemlock (Tsuga mertensiana). The 
principal timber of commerce is the Douglas fir. The tree is often 
found 300 ft. high and from 8 to 10 ft. in diameter. The wood is 
tough and strong and highly valued for ships' spars as well as for 
building purposes. Red or giant cedar, which rivals the Douglas 
fih in girth, is plentiful, and is used for shingles as well as for interior 
work. The western white spruce is also much employed for various 
purposes. There are about eighty sawmills, large and small, in the 
province. The amount of timber cut on Dominion government 
lands in 1904 was 22,760,222 ft., and the amount cut on provincial 
lands was 325,271,568 ft., giving a total of 348,031,790 ft. In 1905 
the cut on dominion lands exceeded that in 1904, while the amount 
cut on provincial lands reached 45°.3 8 5.554 ft- The cargo shipments 
of lumber for the years 1904 and 1905 were as follows :— 

1904- I9°5- 

Ft. /Ft. 

United Kingdom . . . 7,498,301 13,690,869 

South America .... 15,647,808 13.332,993 . 

Australia 10,045,094 11,596,482 

South Africa .... 2,517,154 7,093,681 

China and Japan . . . 4,802,426 4,787,784 

Germany 983.342 

Fiji Islands 308,332 29,949 

France ...... 1,308,662 



42.199.777 



51,515,100 



There is a very large market for British Columbia lumber in the 
western provinces of Canada. 

Agriculture.— Although mountainous in character the province 
contains many tracts of good farming land. These lie in the long 
valleys between the mountain ranges of the interior, as well as on 
the lower slopes of the mountains and on the deltas of the rivers 
running out to the coast. On Vancouver Island also there is much 
good farming land. The conditions are in most places Best suited to 
mixed farming; the chief crops raised are wheat, oats, potatoes 
and hay. Some areas are especially suited for cattle and sheep 
raising, among which may be mentioned the Yale district and the 
country about Kamloops. Much attention has been given to fruit 
raising, especially in the Okanagan valley. Apples, plums and 
cherries are grown, as well as peaches, apricots* grapes and various 
small fruits, notably strawberries. All these are of excellent quality. 
Hops are also cultivated. A large market for this fruit is opening 
up in the rapidly growing provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan. 

Imports and Exports. — For the year ending June 30th 1905 the 
total exports and imports (showing a slight gradual increase on 
the two preceding years) were valued at $16,677,882 and $12,565,019 
respectively. The exports were classified as follows: — Mines, 
$9,777,423; fisheries, $2,101,533; forests, $1,046,718; animals, 
$471,231; agriculture, $119,426; manufactures, $1,883,777; 
miscellaneous, $1,106,643; coin and bullion, $171,131. 

Railways. — The Pacific division of the Canadian Pacific railway 
enters British Columbia through the Rocky Mountains on the east 
and runs for about 500 m. across the province before reaching the 
terminus at Vancouver, A branch of the same railway leaves the 
main line at Medicine Hat, and running to the south-west, crosses 
the Rocky Mountains through the Crow's Nest Pass,_ and thus 
enters British Columbia a short distance north of the United States 
boundary. This continues across the province, running approxi- 
mately parallel to the boundary as far as Midway in what is known 
as the Boundary district. The line has opened up extensive coal 
fields and crosses a productive mining district. On Vancouver Island 
there are two railways, the Esquimalt & Nanaimo railway (78 jn.) 
connecting the coal fields with the southern ports, and the Victoria & 
Sydney railway, about 16 m. in length. The Great Northern has 
also a number of short lines in the southern portion of the province, 
connecting with its system in the United States. In 1905 there were 



1627 m. of railway in the province, of which 1 187 were owned or 
controlled by the Canadian Pacific railway. 

Shipping. — The Canadian Pacific Railway Company has two lines 
of mail steamer running from Vancouver and Victoria: (l) the 
Ernpress line, which runs to Japan and China once in three weeks, 
and (2) the Australian line to Honolulu, Fiji and Sydney, once a 
month. The same company also has a line of steamers running to 
Alaska, as well as a fleet of coasting steamers. 

Government: — The province is governed by a lieutenant-governor, 
appointed by the governor-general in council for five years, but 
subject to removal, for cause, an executive council of five ministers, 
and a single legislative chamber. The executive council is appointed 
by the lieutenant-governor on the advice of the first minister, and 
retains office so long as it enjoys the support of a majority of the 
legislature. The powers of the lieutenant-governor in regard to 
the provincial government are analogous to those of governor-general 
in respect of the dominion government. 

The British North America Act (1867) confederating the colonies,, 
defines the jurisdiction of the provincial legislature as distinguished: 
from that of the federal parliament, but within its own jurisdiction 
the province makes the laws for its own governance. The act of the 
legislature may be disallowed, within one year of its passage, by the 
governor-general in council, and is also subject to challenge as to its 
legality in the supreme court of Canada or on appeal to the juridical 
committee of the privy council of the United Kingdom. British 
Columbia sends three senators and seven members to the lower 
house of the federal parliament, which sits at Ottawa. 

Justice. — There is a supreme court of British Columbia presided 
over by a chief justice and five puisne judges, and there are also a 
number of county courts. In British Columbia the supreme court 
has jurisdiction in divorce cases, this right having been invested in 
the ,-colony before confederation. 

Religion and Education. — In 1901 the population was divided by 
creeds as follows: Church of England, 40,687; Methodist, 25,047; 
Presbyterian, 34,081; Roman Catholic, 33,639; others, 40,197; 
not stated, 5003; total, 178,654. The educational system of British 
Columbia differs slightly from that of other provinces of Canada. 
There are three classes of schools — common, graded and high — all 
maintained by the government and all free and undenominational. 
There is only one college in the province, the " McGill University 
College of British Columbia " at Vancouver, which is one of the 
colleges of McGill University, whose chief seat is at Montreal. The 
schools are controlled by trustees selected by the ratepayers of 
each school district, and there is a superintendent of education acting 
under the provincial secretary. 

Finance. — Under the terms of union with Canada, British Columbia 
receives from the dominion government annually a certain contribu- 
tion, which in 1905 amounted to $307,076. This, with provincial 
taxes on real property, personal property, income tax, sales of public 
land, timber dues, &c, amounted in the year 1905 to $2,920,461. 
The expenditure for the year was $2,302,417. The gross debt of 
the province in 1905 was $13,252,097, with assets of $4,463,869, 
or a net debt of $8,788,228. These assets do not include new 
legislative buildings or other public works. , The income tax is on a 
sliding scale. In 1899 a fairly close estimate was made of the capital 
invested in the province, which amounted to $307,385,000, including 
timber, $100,000,000; railways and telegraphs, $47,500,000; 
mining plant and smelters, $10,500,000; municipal assessments, 
$45,000,000; provincial assessments, $51,500,000; in addition to 
private wealth, $280,000,000. There are branch offices of one or 
more of the Canadian banks in each of the larger towns. 

History. — The discovery of British Columbia was made by 
the Spaniard Perez in 1774. With Cook's visit the geographical 
exploration of the coast began in 1778. Vancouver,in 1792-1794, 
surveyed almost the entire coast of British Columbia with much 
of that to the north and south, for the British government. 
The interior, about the same time, was entered by Mackenzie 
and traders of the N.W. Company, which in 182 1 became 
amalgamated with the Hudson's Bay Company. For the next 
twenty-eight years the Hudson's Bay Company ruled this 
immense territory with beneficent despotism. In 1849 
Vancouver Island was proclaimed a British colony. In 1858, 
consequent on the discovery of gold and the large influx of 
miners, the mainland territory was erected into a colony under 
the name of British Columbia, and in 1866 this was united with 
the colony of Vancouver Island, under the same name. In 
1 87 1 British Columbia entered the confederation and became 
part of the Dominion of Canada, sending three senators and six 
(now seven) members to the House of Commons of the federal 
parliament. One of the conditions under which the colony 
entered the dominion was the speedy construction of the 
Canadian Pacific railway, and in 1876 the non-fulfilment of this 
promise and the apparent indifference of the government at 
Ottawa to the representations of British Columbia created 



I '" : VNVM3H0XVSSy.?- 

,,^V-- > 




BRITISH EAST AERK2A 



6oi 



strained relations, which were only ameliorated when the 
construction of a transcontinental road was begun. In sub- 
sequent years the founding of the city of Vancouver by the 
G.P.R., the establishment of the first Canadian steamship line 
to China and Japan, and that to Australia, together with the 
disputes with the United States on the subject of pelagic sealing, 
and the discovery of the Kootenay and Boundary mining 
districts, have been the chief events in the history of the province. 
Authorities. — Cook's Voyage to the Pacific Ocean (London, 
1784) ; Vancouver, Voyage of Discovery to the Pacific Ocean (London, 
1798); H. H. Bancroft's works, vol. xxxii., History of British 
Columbia (San Francisco, 1887); Begg's History of British Columbia 
(Toronto, 1894) ; Gosnell, Year Book (Victoria, British Columbia, 
1897 and 1903) ; Annual Reports British Columbia Board of Trade 
(Victoria) ; A nnual Reports of Minister of Mines and other Depart- 
mental Reports of the Provincial and Dominion Governments; 
Catalogue of Provincial Museum (Victoria) ; Reports Geological 
Survey of Canada (from 1 87 1 to date) ; Reports of Canadian Pacific 
(Government) Surveys (1872-1880) ; Reports of Committee of Brit. 
Assn. Adv. Science on N.W. Tribes (1884-1895); Lord, Naturalist 
in Vancouver Island (London, 1866); Bering Sea Arbitration (re- 
print of letters to Times), (London, 1893); Report of Bering Sea 
Commission (London, Government, 1892); A. Metin, La Colombie 
Britannique (Paris, 1908). See also various works of reference under 
Canada. (G. M. D.; M. St J.; F. D. A.) 

BRITISH EAST AFRICA, a term, in its widest sense, including 
all the territory under British influence on the eastern side of 
Africa between German East Africa on the south and Abyssinia 
and the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan on the north. It comprises 
the protectorates of Zanzibar, Uganda and East Africa. Apart 
from a narrow belt of coastland, the continental area belongs 
almost entirely to the great plateau of East Africa, rarely falling 
below an elevation of 2000 ft., while extensive sections rise to a 
height of 6000 to 8000 ft. From the coast lowlands a series of 




steps with intervening plateaus leads to a broad zone of high 
ground remarkable for the abundant traces of volcanic action. 
This broad upland is furrowed by the eastern " rift-valley," 
formed by the subsidence of its floor and occupied in parts by 
lakes without outlet. Towards the west a basin of lower eleva- 
tion is partially occupied by Victoria Nyanza, drained north 
to the Nile, while still farther inland the ground again rises to 
a second volcanic belt, culminating in the Ruwenzori range. 
(See Zanzibar, and for Uganda protectorate see Uganda.) 
The present article treats of the East Africa protectorate only. 

Topography. — The southern frontier, coterminous with the 
northern frontier of German East Africa, runs north-west from 
the mouth of the Umba river in 4 40' S. to Victoria Nyanza, 
which it strikes at 1° S., deviating, however, so as to leave 
Mount Kilimanjaro wholly in German territory. The eastern 
boundary is the Indian Ocean, the coast line being about 400 m : . 
On the north the protectorate is bounded by Abyssinia arid 
Italian Somaliland; on the west by Uganda. It has an area 
of about 240,000 sq. m., and a population estimated at from 
2,000,000 to 4,000,000, including some 25,000 Indians and 3006 
Europeans. Of the Europeans many are emigrants frorn 
South Africa; they include some hundreds .of Boer families. 

The first of the parallel zones— the coast plain or " Temborari "— 
is generally of insignificant width, varying from 2 to 10 m., except 
in the valleys of the main rivers. The shore line is broken by 
bays and branching creeks, often cutting off islands from the main- 
land. Such are Mvita or Mombasa in 4=4' S., and the larger islands 
of Lamu, Manda and Patta (the Lamu archipelago), between 2° 20' 
and 2°S. Farther north the coast becomes straighter, with the 
one indentation of Port Durnford in 1° 10' S., but skirted sea- 
wards by a row of small islands. Beyond the coast plain the 
country rises in a generally well defined step or steps to an alti- 
tude of some 800 ft., forming the wide level plain called " Nyika " 
(uplands), largely composed of quartz. It con- 
tains large waterless areas, such as the Taru 
desert in the Mombasa district. The next stage 
in the ascent is marked by an intermittent line 
of mountains — gneissose or schistose — running 
generally north-north-west, sometimes in parallel 
chains, and representing the primitive axis of 
the continent. Their height varies from 5600 to 
8000 ft. Farther inland grassy uplands extend 
to the eastern edge of the rift-valley, though 
varied with cultivated ground and forest, the 
former especially in Kikuyu, the latter between 
0° and o" 40' S. The most extensive grassy 
plains are those of Kapte or Kapote and Athi, 
between 1° and 2° S. The general altitude of 
these uplands, the surface of which is' largely 
composed of lava, varies from 5000 to 8000 ft. 
This_ zone contains the highest elevations in 
British East Africa, including the volcanic pile 
of Kenya (q.v.) (17,007 ft.), Sattima (13,214 ft.) 
'arid Nandarua (about 12,900 ft.). The Sattima 
(Settima) range, or Aberdare Mountains, has a 
general elevation of fully 10,000 ft. To the west 
the fall to the rift-valley is marked by a line of 
cliffs, of which the best-defined portions are the 
Kikuyu escarpment (8000 ft.), just south of 1° 
S., and the Laikipia escarpment, on the equator. 
One of the main watersheds of East Africa runs 
close to the eastern wall of the rift-valley, sepa- 
rating the basins of inland drainage froni the 
rivers of the east coast, of which the two largest 
wholly within British East Africa are the Sabaki 
and Tana, both separately noticed. The Guaso 
Nyiro rises in the hills north-west of Kenya 
and flows in a north-east direction. After a 
course of over 350 m. the river in about 1° N., 
39 30' E. is lost in a marshy expanse known as 
the Lorian Swamp. 

The rift-valley, though with a generally level 
floor, is divided by transverse ridges into a 
series of basins, each containing a lake without 
outlet. The southernmost section within British 
East Africa is formed by the arid Dogilani plains, 
drained south towards German territory. At 
their north end rise the extinct volcanoes of 
Suswa (7800 ft.) and Longonot (8700), the latter 
on the ridge dividing off the next basin — that of 
Lake t>Iaivasha. This is a small fresh- water lake, 
6135 ft. above the sea, measuring some 13 m. each 
way. Its basin is closed to the north by the ridge 
of Mount BurU, beyond which is the basin of the 



6o2 



BRITISH EAST AFRICA 



still smaller Lakes Nakuro(5845ft.)andElmenteita (5860 ft.),followed 
in turn by that of Lakes Hannington and Baringo (q.v.). Beyond 
Baringo the valley is drained north into Lake Sugota, in 2 N., 
some 35 m. long, while north of this lies the much larger Lake 
Rudolf (q.v.), the valley becoming here somewhat less defined. 

On the west of the rift-valley the wall of cliffs is best marked 
between the equator and i°S., where it is known as the Mau Escarp- 
ment, and about 1° N., where the Elgeyo Escarpment falls to a 
longitudinal valley separated from Lake Baringo by the ridge of 
Kamasia. Opposite Lake Naivasha the Mau Escarpment is over 
8000 ft. high. Its crest is covered with a vast forest. To the south 
the woods become more open, and the plateau falls to anopen country 
drained towards the Dogilani plains. On the west the cultivated 
districts of Sotik and Lumbwa, broken by wooded heights, fall 
towards Victoria Nyanza. The Mau plateau reaches a height of 
9000 ft. on the equator, north of which is the somewhat lower Nandi 
country, well watered and partly forested. In the treeless plateau 
of Uasin Gishu, west of Elgeyo, the land again rises to a height of 
over 8000 ft., and to the west of this is the great mountain mass of 
Elgon (q.v.). East of Lake Rudolf and south of Lake Stefanie is a 
large waterless steppe, mainly volcanic in character, from which rise 
mountain ranges. The highest peak is Mount Kanjora, 6900 ft. 
high. South of this arid region, strewn with great lava stones, are 
tha Rendile uplands, affording pasturage for thousands of camels. 
Running north-west and south-east between Lake Stefanie and the 
Daua tributary of the Tuba is a mountain range with a steep escarp- 
ment towards the south. It is known as the Goro Escarpment, and 
at its eastern end it forms the boundary between the protectorate 
and Abyssinia. South-east of it the country is largely level bush 
covered plain, mainly waterless. 

[Geology. — The geological formations of British East Africa 
occur in four regions possessing distinct physiographical features. 
The coast plain, narrow in the south and rising somewhat 
steeply, consists of recent rocks. The foot plateau which succeeds 
is composed of sedimentary rocks dating from Trias to Jurassic. 
The ancient plateau commencing at Taru extends to the borders 
of Kikuyu and is composed of ancient crystalline rocks on which 
immense quantities of volcanic rocks — post- Jurassic to Recent — 
have accumulated to form the volcanic plateau of Central East 
Africa. 

The formations recognized are given in the following table : — 
Sedimentary. 
( 1. Alluvium and superficial sands. 

Recent . . -j 2. Modern lake deposits, living coral rock. 

( 3. Raised coral rock, conglomerate of Mom- 
basa Island. 

di • <.„„„..„ ( 4- Gravels with flint implements. 

Pleistocene . } * G , adal bgds of Keny ^ 

Jurassic . . 6. Shales and limestones of Changamwe. 



Karroo . 
Carboniferous ? 



( 7. Flags and sandstones. 
• ■ } B. ~ 



Grits and shales of Masara and Taru. 
9. Shales of the Sabaki river. 

. , (10. Schists and quartzites of Nandi. 

Archaean . . J u. Gneisses, schists, granites. 
Igneous and Volcanic. 

Recent . . Active, dormant and extinct volcanoes. 

Post-Jurassic J Kibo and volcanoes of the rift-valley, 
to Pleistocene ( Kimawenzi, Kenya and plateau eruptions. 

Archaean. — These rocks prevail in the districts of Taru, Nandi 
and throughout Ukamba. A course gneiss is the predominant rock, 
but is associated with garnetiferous mica-schists and much intrusive 
granite. Hornblende schists and beds of metamorphic limestone 
are rare. Cherty q uartzites interbedded with mylonites occur on the 
flanks of the Nandi hills, but their age is not known. 

Carboniferous? — From shales on the Sabaki river Dr Gregory 
obtained fish-scales and specimens of Palaeanodonla Fischeri. 

Karroo. — The grits of Masara, near Rabai mission station and 
Mombasa, have yielded specimens of Glossopteris browniana var. 
indica, thus indicating their Karroo age. 

Jurassic. — Shales and limestones of this age are well seen along 
the railway near Changamwe. They contain gigantic ammonites. 
According to Dr Waagen the ammonites show a striking analogy to 
forms from the Acanthicus zone of East India. Belemnites are 
plentiful. 

Pleistocene. — These are feebly represented by some boulder beds 
on the higher slopes of Kilimanjaro and Kenya. They show that in 
Pleistocene times the glaciers of Kilimanjaro and Kenya extended 
much farther down the mountain slopes. 

Recent. — The ancient and more modern lake deposits have so far 
yielded no mammalian or other organic remains of interest. 

Igneous and Volcanic. — A belt of volcanic rocks, over 150,000 sq. 
m. in area, extends from beyond the southern to beyond the northern 
lerritorial limits. They belong to an older and a newer set. The 
older group commenced with a series of fissure eruptions along the 
site of the present rift-valley and parallel with it. From these 
fissures immense and repeated flows of lava spread over the Kapte 
nd Laikipia plateaus. At about the same time, or a little later, 



Kenya and Kimawenzi, Elgon and Chibcharagnani were in eruption. 
The age of these volcanic outbursts cannot be more definitely stated 
than that they are post-Jurassic, and probably extended through 
Cretaceous into early Tertiary times. This great volcanic period 
was followed by the eruptions of Kibo and some of the larger vol- 
canoes of the rift-valley. The flows from Kibo include nepheline 
and leucite basanite lavas rich in soda felspars. They bear a close 
resemblance to the Norwegian " Rhombenporphyrs." The chain of 
volcanic cones along the northern lower slopes of Kilimanjaro, those 
of the Kyulu mountains, Donyo Longonot and numerous craters 
in the rift-valley region, are of a slightly more recent date. A few 
of the volcanoes in the latter region have only recently become 
extinct; a few may be only dormant. Donyo Buru still emits 
small quantities of steam, while Mount Teleki, in the neighbourhood 
of Lake Rudolf, was in eruption at the close of the 19th century.] 

Climate, Flora and Fauna. — In its climate and vegetation 
British East Africa again shows an arrangement of zones parallel 
to the coast. The coast region is hot but is generally more 
healthy than the coast lands of other tropical countries, this 
being due to the constant beeeze from the Indian Ocean and to 
the dryness of the soil. The rainfall on the coast is about 35 in. 
a year, the temperature tropical. The succeeding plains and the 
outer plateaus are more arid. Farther inland the highlands — 
in which term may be included all districts over 5000 ft. high — 
are very healthy, fever being almost unknown. The average 
temperature is about 66° F. in the cool season and 73° F. in the 
hot season. Over 7000 ft. the climate becomes distinctly colder 
and frosts are experienced. The average rainfall in the highlands 
is between 40 and 50 in. The country bordering Victoria Nyanza 
is typically tropical; the rainfall exceeds 60 in. in the year, and 
this region is quite unsuitable to Europeans. The hottest period 
throughout the protectorate is December to April, the coolest, 
July to September. The " greater rains " fall from March to 
June, the " smaller rains " in November and December. The 
rainfall is not, however, as regular as is usual in countries within 
the tropics, and severe droughts are occasionally experienced. 

In the districts bordering Victoria Nyanza the flora resembles 
that of Uganda (q.v.). The characteristic trees of the coast regions 
are the mangrove and coco-nut palm. Ebony grows in the scrtib- 
jungle. Vast forests of olives and junipers are found on the Mau 
escarpment ; the cotton, fig and bamboo on the Kikuyu escarpment ; 
and in several regions are dense forests of great trees whose lowest 
branches are 50 ft. from the ground. Two varieties of the valuable 
rubber-vine, Landolphia florida and Landolphia Kirkii, are found 
near the coast and in the forests. The higher mountains preserve 
distinct species, the surviving remnants of the flora of a cooler period. 

The fauna is not abundant except in large mammals, which are 
very numerous on the drier steppes. They include the camel 
(confined to the arid northern regions}, elephant (more and more 
restricted to unfrequented districts), rhinoceros, buffalo, many kinds 
of antelope, zebra, giraffe, hippopotamus, lion and other carnivora, 
and numerous monkeys. In many parts the rhinoceros is particu- 
larly abundant and dangerous. Crocodiles are common in the larger 
rivers and in Victoria Nyanza. Snakes are somewhat rare, the most 
dangerous being the puff-adder. Centipedes and scorpions, as well 
as mosquitoes and other insects, are also less common than in most 
tropical countries. In some districts bees are exceedingly numerous. 
The birds include the ostrich, stork, bustard and secretary-bird 
among the larger varieties, the guinea fowl, various kinds of spur 
fowl, and the lesser bustard, the wild pigeon, weaver and hornbill. 
By the banks of lakes and rivers are to be seen thousands of cranes, 
pelicans and flamingoes. 

Inhabitants. — The white population is chiefly in the Kikuyu 
uplands, the rift-valley, and in the Kenya region. The whites 
are mostly agriculturists. There are also numbers of Indian 
settlers in the same districts. The African races include repre- 
sentatives of various stocks, as the country forms a borderland 
between the Negro and Hamitic peoples, and contains many 
tribes of doubtful affinities. The Bantu division of the negroes 
is represented chiefly in the south, the principal tribes being the 
Wakamba, Wakikuyu and Wanyika. By the north-east shores 
of Victoria Nyanza dwell the Kavirondo (q.v.), a race remarkable 
among the tribes of the protectorate for their nudity. Nilotic 
tribes, including the Nandi (q.v.), Lumbwa, Suk and Turkana, 
are found in the north-west. Of Hamitic strain are the Masai 
(q.v.), a race of cattle-rearers speaking a Nilotic language, who 
occupy part of the uplands bordering on the eastern rift-valley. 
A branch of the Masai which has adopted the settled life of 
agriculturists is known as the Wakuafi. The Galla section of 
the Hamites is represented, among others, by Borani living 



BRITISH EAST AFRICA 



603 



south of the Goro Escarpment (though the true Boran countries 
are Liban and Dirri in Abyssinian territory), while Somali occupy 
the country between the Tana and Juba rivers. Of the Somali 
tribes the Herti dwell near the coast and are more or less station- 
ary. Further inland is the nomadic tribe of Ogaden Somali. 
The Gurre, another Somali tribe, occupy the country south of 
the lower Daua. Primitive hunting tribes are the Wandorobo 
in Masailand, and scattered tribes of small stature in various 
parts. The coast-land contains a mixed population of Swahili, 
Arab and Indian immigrants, and representatives of numerous 
interior tribes. 

Provinces and Towns. — The protectorate has been divided 
into the provinces of Seyyidie (the south coast province, capital 
Mombasa); Ukamba, which occupies the centre of the pro- 
tectorate (capital Nairobi); Kenya, the district of Mt. Kenya 
(capital Fort Hall) ; Tanaland, to the north of the two provinces 
first named (capital Lamu); Jubaland, the northern region 
(capital Kismayu); Naivasha (capital Naivasha); and Kisumu 
(capital Kisumu) ; each being in turn divided into districts and 
sub-districts. Naivasha and Kisumu, which adjoin the Victoria 
Nyanza, formed at first the eastern province of Uganda, but were 
transferred to the East Africa protectorate on the 1st of April 
1902. The chief port of the protectorate is Mombasa (q.v.) with 
a population of about 30,000. The harbour on the south-west 
side of Mombasa island is known as Kilindini, the terminus of 
the Uganda railway. On the mainland, nearly oppositeMombasa 
town, is the settlement of freed slaves named Freretown, after 
Sir Bartle Frere. Freretown (called by the natives Kisaoni) is 
the headquarters in East Africa of the Church Missionary 
Society. It is the residence of the bishop of the diocese of 
Mombasa and possesses a fine church and mission house . Lamu, 
on the island of the same name, 150 m. north-east of Mombasa, 
is an ancient settlement and the headquarters of the coast Arabs. 
Here are some Portuguese ruins, and a large Arab city is buried 
beneath the sands. The other towns of note on the coast are 
Malindi, Patta, Kipini and Kismayu. At Malindi, the " Melind " 
of Paradise Lost, is the pillar erected by Vasco da Gama when he 
visited the port in 1498. The harbour is very shallow. Kismayu, 
the northernmost port of the protectorate, 320 m. north-east of 
Mombasa, is the last sheltered anchorage on the east coast and 
is invaluable as a harbour of refuge. Flourishing towns have 
grown up along the Uganda railway. The most important, 
Nairobi (q.v.), 327 m. from Mombasa, 257 from Port Florence, 
was chosen in 1907 as the administrative capital of the protec- 
torate. Naivasha, 64 m. north-north-west of Nairobi, lies in the 
rift-valley close to Lake Naivasha, and is 6230 ft. above the sea. 
It enjoys an excellent climate and is the centre of a European 
agricultural settlement. Kisumu or Port Florence (a term 
confined to the harbour) is a flourishing town built on a hill 
overlooking Victoria Nyanza. It is the entrepot for the trade 
of Uganda. 

Communications. — Much has been done to open up the country by 
means of roads, including a trunk road from Mombasa, by Kibwezi 
in the upper Sabaki basin, and Lake Naivasha, to Berkeley Bay on 
Victoria Nyanza. But the most important engineering work under- 
taken in the protectorate was the construction of a railway from 
Mombasa to Victoria Nyanza, for which a preliminary survey was 
executed in 1892, and on which work was begun in 1896. The line 
chosen roughly coincides with that of the road, until the equator 
is reached, after which it strikes by a more direct route across the 
Mau plateau to the lake, which it reaches at Port Florence on 
Kavirondo Gulf. The railway is 584 m. long and is of metre (3-28 ft.) 
gauge, the Sudan, and South and Central African lines being of 3 ft. 
6 in. gauge. The Uganda railway is essentially a mountain line, 
with gradients of one in fifty and one in sixty. From Mombasa it 
crosses to the mainland by a bridge half a mile long, and ascends 
the plateau till it reaches the edge of the rift-valley, 346 m. from its 
starting point, at the Kikuyu Escarpment, where it is 7600 ft. above 
the sea. It then descends across ravines bridged by viaducts to 
the valley floor, dropping to a level of 601 1 ft., and next ascending 
the opposite (Mau) escarpment to the summit, 8321 ft. above sea- 
level — the highest point on the line. In the remaining 100 m. of its 
course the level sinks to 3738 ft., the altitude of the station at Port 
Florence. The railway was built by the British government at a 
cost of £^,331,000, or about £9500 per mile. The first locomotive 
reached Victoria Nyanza on the 26th of December 1901 ; and the 
liermanervt way was r>racticallv completed by M?-vcH IQOJ, wV.ea Sir 



George Whitehouse, the engineer who had been in charge of the con- 
struction from the beginning, resigned his post. The railway, by 
doing away with the carriage of goods by men, gave the final death- 
blow to the slave trade in that part of East Africa. It also facilitated 
the continued occupation and development of Uganda, which was, 
previous to its construction, an almost impossible task, owing to the 
prohibitive cost of the carriage of goods from the coast — £60 per ton. 
The two avowed objects of the railway— the destruction of the slave 
trade and the securing of the British position in Uganda — have 
been attained; moreover, the railway by opening up land suitable 
for European settlement has also done much towards making a 
prosperous colony of the protectorate, which was regarded before 
the advent of the line as little better than a desert (see below, History). 
The railway also shows a fair return on the capital expenditure, the 
surplus after defraying all working expenses being £56,000 in 1905- 
1906 and £76,000 in 1906-1907. 

Mombasa is visited by the boats of several steamship companies, 
the German East Africa line maintaining a fortnightly service from 
Hamburg. There is also a regular service to and from India. A 
cable connecting Mombasa with Zanzibar puts the protectorate in 
direct telegraphic communication with the rest of the world. There 
is also an inland system of telegraphs connecting the chief towns with 
one another and with Uganda. 

Agriculture and other Industries. — In the coast region and by the 
shores of Victoria Nyanza the products are tropical, and cultivation 
is mainly in the hands of the natives or of Indian immigrants. 
There are, however, numerous plantations owned by Europeans. 
Rice, maize and other grains are raised in large quantities; cotton 
and tobacco are cultivated. The coco-nut palm plantations yield 
copra of excellent quality, and the bark of the mangrove trees is 
exported for tanning purposes. In some inland districts beans of 
the castor oil plant, which grows in great abundance, are a lucrative 
article of trade. The sugar-cane, which grows freely in various places, 
is cultivated by the natives. The collection of rubber likewise 
employs numbers of people. 

Among the European settlers in the higher regions much attention 
is devoted to the production of vegetables, and very large crops of 
potatoes are raised. Oats, barley, wheat and coffee are also grown. 
The uplands are peculiarly adapted for the raising of stock, and 
many of the white settlers possess large flocks and herds. Merino 
sheep have been introduced from Australia. Ostrich farms have 
also been established. Clover, lucerne, ryegrass and similar grasses 
have been introduced to improve and vary the fodder. Other 
vegetable products of economic value are many varieties of timber 
trees, and fibre-producing plants, which are abundant in the scrub 
regions between the coast and the higher land bordering the rift- 
valley. Over the greater part of the country the soil is light reddish 
loam; in the eastern plains it is a heavy black loam. As a rule 
it is easily cultivated. While the majority of the African tribes in 
the territory are not averse from agricultural labour, the number of 
men available for work on European holdings is small. Moreover, 
on some of the land most suited for cultivation by white men there 
is no native population. 

In addition to the fibre industry and cotton ginning there are 
factories for the curing of bacon. Native industries include the 
weaving of cloth and the making of mats and baskets. Stone and 
lime quarries are worked, and copper is found in the Tsavo district. 
Diamonds have been discovered in the Thika river, one of the head- 
streams of the Tana. 

Trade. — The imports consist largely of textiles, hardware and 
manufactured goods from India and Europe; Great Britain and 
India between them supplying over 50% of the total imports. Of 
other countries Germany has the leading share in the trade. The 
exports, which include the larger part of the external trade of 
Uganda, are chiefly copra, hides and skins, grains, potatoes, rubber, 
ivory, chillies, beeswax, cotton and fibre. The retail trade is largely 
in the hands of Indians. The value of the exports rose from £89,858 
in 1900-1901 to £234,664 in 1904-1905, in which year the value of 
the imports for the first time exceeded £500,000. In 1906-1907 the 
volume of trade was £1,194,352, imports being valued at £753,647 
and exports at £440,705. The United States takes 33% of the 
exports, Great Britain coming next with 15%. 

Government. — The system of government resembles that of a 
British crown colony. At the head of the administration is a 
governor, who has a deputy styled lieutenant-governor, provincial 
commissioners presiding over each province. There are also execu- 
tive and legislative councils, unofficial nominated members serving 
on the last-named council. In the " ten-mile strip " (see below, 
History), the sultan of Zanzibar being territorial sovereign, the laws 
of Islam apply to the native and Arab population. The extra- 
territorial jurisdiction granted by the sultan to various Powers was 
in 1907 transferred to Great Britain. Domestic slavery formerly 
existed; but on the advice of the British government a decree was 
issued by the sultan on the 1st of August 1890, enacting that no one 
born after that date could be a slave, and this was followed in 1907 
by a decree abolishing the legal status of slavery. In the rest of 
the protectorate slavery is not recognized in any form. Legislation 
is by ordinances made by the governor, with the assent of the 
legislative council. The judicial system is based on Indian models, 
though in cases in which Africans are concerned regard is had to 



6<4 



BRI3FISH EAST f AFRICA 



native sustains, Europeans have the right totrial by jury in serious 
cases. , There is a police force of about 2000 men, and two battalions 
of, the King'$ African Rifles are stationed in the protectorate. 
Revenue is derived chiefly from customs, licences and excise, railway 
earnings, and posts and telegraphs. Natives pay a hut tax. Since 
the completion of the Uganda railway, trade, and consequently 
revenue,, has increased greatly. In 19007-1901 the revenue was 
£64,275 and the expenditure £193,438; in 1904-1905. the figures 
were: revenue £154,756, expenditure £302,559; in 1905-1906 
the totals were £270,362 and £418, 839,. and in 1906-1907 (when the 
railway figures were included for the first time) £461,362 and 
£616,088. The deficiencies were made good by grants-in-aid from 
the imperial exchequer. The standard coin used is the rupee (i6d.). 
Education is chiefly in the hands of the missionary societies, 
which maintain mahy schools where instruction is given in handi- 
crafts, as well as in the ordinary branches of elementary education. 
There are Arab schools in Mombasa, and government schools for 
Europeans and Indians at Nairobi. 

History.— From the 8th century to the 1 1 th Arabs and Persians 
made settlements along the coast and gained political supremacy 
at many places, leading to the formation of the so-called Zenj 
empire. The history of the coast towns from that time until 
the establishment of British rule is identified with that of Zanzibar 
(q. v.). The interior of what is now British East Africa was first 
made known in the middle of the 19th century by the German 
missionaries Ludwig Krapf and Johannes Rebmann, and by 
Baron Karl von der Decken (1833-1865) and others. Von der 
Decken and three other Europeans were murdered by Somali at 
a town called Bardera in October 1865, whilst exploring the Juba 
river. The countries east of Victoria Nyanza (Masailand, &c.) 
were, however, first traversed throughout their whole extent by 
the Scottish traveller Joseph Thomson (q.v.) in 1883-1884. In 
1888 Count S. Teleki (a Hungarian) discovered Lakes Rudolf 
and Stefanie. 

The growth of British interests in the country now forming 
the protectorate arises from its connexion with the sultanate 
of Zanzibar. At Zanzibar British influence was very strong in 
the last quarter of the 19th century, and the seyyid or sultan, 
Bargash, depended greatly on the advice of the British repre- 
sentative, Sir John Kirk. In 1877 Bargash offered to Mr 
(afterwards Sir) William Mackinnon (1823-1893), chairman of 
the British India Steam Navigation Company, a merchant in 
whom he had great confidence, or to a company to be formed by 
him, a lease for 70 years of the customs and administration of 
the whole of the mainland dominions of Zanzibar including, with 
certain reservations, rights of sovereignty. This was declined 
owing to a lack of support by the foreign office, and concessions 
obtained in 1884 by Mr (afterwards Sir) H. H. Johnston in the 
Kilimanjaro district were, at the time, disregarded. The large 
number of 'concessions acquired by Germans in 1884-1885 on 
the East African coast aroused, however, the interest of those 
who recognized the paramount importance of the maintenance 
of British influence in those regions. A British claim, ratified 
by an agreement with Germany in 1886, was made to the districts 
behind Mombasa; and in May 1887 Bargash granted to an 
association formed by Mackinnon a concession for the adminis- 
tration of so much of his mainland territory as lay outside the 
region which the' British government had recognized as the 
German sphere of operations. By, international agreement the 
mainland territories of the sultan were defined as extending 10 m. 
inland from the coast. Mackinnon's association, whose object 
A char- was t0 °P en U P the hinterland as well' as this ten-mile 
tend strip, became the Imperial British East Africa Company 

company by a founder's agreement of April 1888, and received 
formed, a royal charter in September of the same year. To 
this company the sultan made a further concession dated 
October 188$. On the faith of these concessions and the charters 
a sum of £240,000 was subscribed, and the company received 
formal charge of 'their concessions. The path of the company 
vvas speedily beset with difficulties, which in the first instance 
arose out of the aggressions of the German East African Company. 
This company had also received^ grant from the sultan in 
October 188S, and its appearance on' the coast was followed by 
grave .disturbances among the tribes which ha^, welcomed the 
British. This, outbreak led to a joint British -aiad .German 



blockade, which seriously hampered trade operations. It had 
also been anticipated, in reliance on certain assurances of Prince 
Bismarck, emphasized by Lord Salisbury, that German enterprise 
in the interior of the country would be confined to the south 
of Victoria Nyanea. Unfortunately this expectation was not 
realized. Moreover German subjects put forward claims to 
coast districts, notably Lamu, within the company's sphere and 
in many ways obstructed the company's operations. In all these 
disputes the German government countenanced its own subjects, 
while the British foreign office did little or nothing to assist the 
company, sometimes directly discouraging its activity. Moreover, 
the company had agreed by the concession of October 1888 to 
pay a high revenue to the sultan— Bargash had died in the 
preceding March and the Germans were pressing his successor 
to give them a grant of Lamu — in lieu of the customs collected 
at the ports they took over. The disturbance caused by the 
German claims had a detrimental effect on trade and put a 
considerable strain on the resources of the company. The action 
of the company in agreeing to onerous financial burdens was 
dictated partly by regard for imperial interests, which would 
have been seriously weakened had Lamu gone to the Germans. 

By the hinterland doctrine, accepted both by Great Britain 
and Germany in the . diplomatic correspondence of July 1887, 
Uganda would fall within Great Britain's " sphere of influence "; 
but German public opinion did not so regard the matter. German 
maps assigned the territory to Germany, while in England 
public opinion as strongly expected British influence to be 
paramount. In 1889 Karl Peters, a German official, led what 
was practically a raiding expedition into that country, after 
running a blockade of the ports. An expedition under F. J 
Jackson had been sent by the company in the same year tc 
Victoria Nyanza, but with instructions to avoid Uganda. In 
consequence of representations from Uganda, and of tidings he 
received of Peters's doings, Jackson, however, determined to go 
to that country. Peters retired at Jackson's approach, claiming, 
nevertheless, to have made certain treaties which constituted 
'' effective occupation." Peters's treaty was dated the 1st of 
March 1890: Jackson concluded another in April. Meantime 
negotiations were proceeding in Europe; and by the Anglo- 
German agreement of the 1st of July 1890 Uganda was assigned 
to the British sphere. To consolidate their position in Uganda— 
the French missionaries there were hostile to Great Britain — 
the company sent thither Captain F. D. Lugard, who reached 
Mengo, the capital, in December 1890 and established the 
authority of the company despite French intrigues. In July 
1890 representatives of the powers assembled at Brussels had 
agreed on common efforts for the suppression of the slave 
trade. The interference of the company in Uganda had been 
a material step towards that object, which they sought to 
further and at the same time to open up the country by the 
construction of a railway from Mombasa to Victoria Nyanza. 
But their resources being inadequate for such an undertaking 
they sought imperial aid. Although Lord Salisbury, then 
prime minister, paid the highest tribute to the company's labours, 
and a preliminary grant for the survey had been practically 
agreed upon, the scheme was wrecked in parliament. At a later 
date, however, the railway was built entirely at government 
cost (supra, § Communications) . Owing to the financial Strain im- 
posed upon it the company decided to withdraw Captain Lugard 
and his forces in August 1891 ; and eventually the British govern- 
ment assumed a protectorate over the country (see Uganda). 

Further difficulties now arose which led finally to the extinction 
of the company. Its pecuniary interests sustained a severe 
blow owing to the British government — which had 
taken Zanzibar under its protection in November „ qQm d 
1890— declaring (June 1892) the dominions of the thecrown. 
sultan within the free trade zone. This act extinguished 
the treaties regulating all tariffs and duties with foreign powers, 
and gave free trade all along the coast. The result for the 
company was that dues were now swept away without com- 
pensation, and the company was left saddled with the payment 
of the rent, and with the cost, in addition, of administration, 



BRITISH EAST AFRICA 



605 



the necessary revenue for which had been derived from the dues 
thus abolished. Moreover, a scheme of taxation which it drew 
up failed to gain the approval of the foreign office. 

In every direction the company's affairs had drifted into an 
impasse. Plantations had been taken over on the coast and 
worked at a loss, money had been advanced to native traders 
and lost, and expectations of trade had been disappointed. 
At this crisis Sir William Mackinnon, the guiding spirit of the 
company, died (June 1893). At a meeting of shareholders on 
the 8th of May 1894 an offer to surrender the charter to the 
government was approved, though not without strong pretests. 
Negotiations dragged on for over two years, and ultimately the 
terms of settlement were that the government should purchase 
the property, rights and assets of the company in East Africa 
for £250,000. Although the company had proved unprofitable 
for the shareholders (when its accounts were wound up they 
disclosed a total deficit of £193,757) it had accomplished a 
great deal of good work and had brought under British sway 
not only the head waters of the upper Nile, but a rich and 
healthy upland region admirably adapted for European coloniza- 
tion. To the judgment, foresight and patriotism of Sir William 
Mackinnon British East Africa practically owes its foundation. 
Sir William and his colleagues of the company were largely 
animated by humanitarian motives — the desire to suppress 
slavery and to improve the condition of the natives. With 
this aim they prohibited the drink traffic, started industrial 
missions, built roads, and administered impartial justice. In 
the opinion of a later administrator (Sir C. Eliot), their work and 
that of their immediate successors was the greatest philanthropic 
achievement of the latter part of the 19th century. 

On the 1st of July 1895 the formal transfer to the British 
crown of the territory administered by the company took 
place at Mombasa, the foreign office assuming responsibility 
for its administration. The territory, hitherto known as " Ibea," 
from the initials of the company, was now styled the East 
Africa protectorate. The small sultanate of Witu (q.v.) on the 
mainland opposite Lamu, from 1885 to 1890 a German pro- 
tectorate, was included in the British protectorate. Coincident 
with the transfer of the administration to the imperial government 
a dispute as to the succession to a chieftainship in the Mazrui, 
the most important Arab family on the coast, led to a revolt 
which lasted ten months and involved much hard fighting. It 
ended in April 1896 in the flight of the rebel leaders to German 
territory, where they were interned. The rebellion marks an 
important epoch in the history of the protectorate as its sup- 
pression definitely substituted European for Arab influence. 
" Before the rebellion," says Sir C. Eliot, " the coast was a 
protected Arab state; since its suppression it has been growing 
into a British colony.'' . . . 

From 1896, when the building of the Mombasa- Victoria 
Nyanza railway was begun, until 1903, when the line was 
practically completed, the energies of the administra- 
A white t j on were largely absorbed in that great work, and in 
'country. establishing effective control over the Masai, Somali, 
and other tribes. The coast lands apart, the pro- 
tectorate was regarded as valuable chiefly as being the high 
road to Uganda. But as the railway reached the high plateaus 
the discovery was made that there were large areas of land — 
very sparsely peopled — where the climate was excellent and 
where the conditions were favourable to European colonization. 
The completion of the railway, by affording transport facilities, 
made it practicable to open the country to settlers. The first 
application for land was made in April 1902 by the East Africa 
Syndicate — a company in which financiers belonging to the 
Chartered Company of ^ South Africa were interested — which 
sought a grant of 500 sq. m.; and this was followed by other 
applications for considerable areas, a scheme being also pro- 
pounded for a large Jewish settlement. 

During 1903 the arrival of hundreds of prospective settlers, 
chiefly from South Africa, led to the decision to entertain no 
more applications for large areas of land, especially as questions 
were raised concerning the preservation for the Masai of their 



rights of pasturage. In the carrying out of this policy a dispute 
arose between Lord Lansdowne, foreign secretary, and Sir 

Charles Eliot, who had been commissioner since 1900. The 
foreign secretary, believing himself bound by pledges given to 
the syndicate, decided that they should be granted the lease of 
the 500 sq. m. they had applied for; but after consulting 
officials of the protectorate then in London, he refused Sir 

Charles Eliot permission to conclude leases for 50 sq. m. each 
to two applicants from South Africa. Sir Charles thereupon 
resigned his post, and in a public telegram to the prime minister, 
dated Mombasa, the 21st of June 1904, gave as his reason:— 
" Lord Lansdowne ordered me to refuse grants of land to certain 
private persons while giving a monopoly of land on unduly 
advantageous terms to the East Africa Syndicate. I have 
refused to execute these instructions, which I consider unjust 
and impolitic." 1 

On the day Sir Charles sent this telegram the appointment 
of Sir Donald W. Stewart, the chief commissioner of Ashanti, 
to succeed him was announced. Sir Donald induced the Masai 
whose grazing rights were threatened to remove to another 
district, and a settlement of the land claims was arranged. An 
offer to the Zionist Association of land for colonization by Jews 
was declined in August 1905 by that body, after the receipt of a 
report by a commissioner sent to examine the land (6000 sq. m.) 
offered. Sir Donald Stewart died on the rst of October 1905, 
and was succeeded by Colonel Hayes Sadler, the commissioner 
of Uganda. Meantime, in April 1905, the administration of the 
protectorate had been transferred from the foreign.to the colonial 
office. By the close of 1905 considerably over a million acres of 
land had been leased or sold by the protectorate authorities — 
about half of it for grazing purposes. In 1907, to meet the 
demands of the increasing number of white inhabitants, who had 
formeda Colonists' Association 2 for the promotion of their interests, 
a legislative council was established, and on this council repre- 
sentatives of the settlers were given seats. The style of the chief 
official Was also altered, "governor" being substituted for 
" commissioner." In the same year a scheme was drawn up for 
assisting the immigration of British Indians to the regions 
adjacent to the coast and to Victoria Nyanza, districts not 
suitable for settlement by Europeans. 

In general the relations of the British with the tribes of the 
interior have been satisfactory. The Somali in Jubaland have 
given some trouble, but the Masai, notwithstanding their warlike 
reputation, accepted peaceably the control of the whites. This 
was due, in great measure, to the fact that at the period in 
question plague carried off their cattle wholesale and reduced 
them for years to a state of want and weakness which destroyed 
i heir warlike habits. One of the most' troublesome tribes proved 
to ; b'e the Nandi, who occupied the southern part of the plateau 
west of the Mau escarpment. They repeatedly raided their less 
warlike neighbours and committed wholesale thefts from the 
railway and telegraph lines. In September 1905 an expedition 
was sent against them which reduced the tribe to submission in 
the following November; and early in 1906 the Nandi were 
removed into a reserve. The majority of the natives, unaccus- 
tomed to regular work, showed themselves averse from taking 
service under the white farmers. The inadequacy of the labour 
supply was an early cause of trouble to the settlers, while the 
labour regulations enforced led, during 1 907-1 908, to considerable 
friction between the colonists and the administration. 

' For several years after the establishment of the protectorate 
the northern region remained very little known and no attempt 
was made to administer the district. The natives' were fre- 
quently raided by parties of Gallas and Abyssinians, and in the 
absence of a defined frontier Abyssinian government posts were 
pushed south to Lake Rudolf. The Abyssinians also made 
themselves masters of the Boran country. After long negotia- 
tions an agreement as to the boundary line between the lake and 

1 See Correspondence relating to the Resignation of Sir C. Eliot, 
Africa, No. 8 (1904). _ ,_ 

2 The Planters and Farmers' Association, as this organization was 
originally called, dates from 1903. 



6o6 



BRITISH EMPIRE 



the river Juba was signed at Adis Ababa on the 6th of December 

1907, and in 1908-1909 the frontier was delimited by an Anglo- 
Abyssinian commission, Major C. W. Gwynn being the chief 
British representative. Save for its north-eastern extremity 
Lake Rudolf was assigned to the British, Lake Stefanie falling 
to Abyssinia, while from about 4° 20' N. the Daua to its junction 
with the Juba became the frontier. 

Bibliography. — The most comprehensive account of the pro- 
tectorate to the close of 1904, especially of its economic resources, 
is The East Africa Protectorate, by Sir Charles Eliot (London, 1905). 
The progress of the protectorate is detailed in the Reports by the 
governor issued annually by the British government since 1896, and 
in Drumkey's Year Book for East Africa (Bombay), first issued in 

1908. The Precis of Information concerning the British East Africa 
Protectorate (issued by the War Office, London, 1901) is chiefly 
valuable for its historical information. The work of the Imperial 
British East Africa Company is concisely and authoritatively told 
from official documents in British East Africa or Ibea, by P. L. 
McDermont (new ed., London, 1895). Another book, valuable for 
its historical perspective, is The Foundation of British East Africa, 
by J. W. Gregory (London, 1901). Bishop A. R. Tucker's Eighteen 
Years in Uganda and East Africa (London, 1908) contains a summary 
of missionary labours. Of the works of explorers Through Masai 
Land, by Joseph Thomson (London, 1886), is specially valuable. 
For the northern frontier see Capt. P. Maud's report in Africa No. 13 
(1904). For geology see, besides Thomson's book, The Great Rift 
Valley, by J. W. Gregory (London, 1896) ; Across an East African 
Glacier, by Hans Meyer (London and Leipzig, 1890) ; and Report 
relating to the Geology of the East Africa Protectorate, by H. B. Muff 
(Colonial Office, London, 1908). For big game and ornithology see 
On Safari, by A. Chapman (London, 1908). The story of the build- 
ing of the Uganda railway is summarized in the Final Report of the 
Uganda Railway Committee, Africa, No. 11 (1904), published by the 
British government. (F. R. C.) 

BRITISH EMPIRE, the name now loosely given to the whole 
aggregate of territory, the inhabitants of which, under various 
forms of government, ultimately look to the British crown as 
the supreme head. The term " empire " is in this connexion 
obviously used rather for convenience than in any sense equiva- 
lent to that of the older or despotic empires of history. 

The land surface of the earth is estimated to extend over about 
52,500,000 sq. m. Of this area the British empire occupies 
Extent nearly one-quarter, extending over an area of about 
12,000,000 sq. m. By far the greater portion lies 
within the temperate zones, and is suitable for white settlement. 
The notable exceptions are the southern half of India and 
Burma; East, West and Central Africa; the West Indian 
colonies; the northern portion of Australia; New Guinea, 
British Borneo and that portion of North America which extends 
into Arctic regions. The area of the territory of the empire is 
divided almost equally between the southern and the northern 
hemispheres, the great divisions of Australasia and South Africa 
covering between them in the southern hemisphere 5,308,506 
sq. m., while the United Kingdom, Canada and India, including 
the native states, cover between them in the northern hemisphere 
5,271,375 sq. m. The alternation of the seasons is thus complete, 
one-half of the empire enjoying summer, while one-half is in 
winter. The division of territory between the eastern and 
western hemispheres is less equal, Canada occupying alone in 
the western hemisphere 3,653,946 sq. m., while Australasia, 
South Africa, India and the United Kingdom occupy together 
in the eastern hemisphere 6,925,975 sq. m. As a matter of fact, 
however, the eastern portions of Australasia border so nearly 
upon the western hemisphere that the distribution of day and 
night throughout the empire is, like the alternations of the 
seasons, almost complete, one-half enjoying daylight, while the 
other half is in darkness. These alternations of time and of 
seasons, combined with the variety of soils and climates, are 
calculated to have an increasingly important effect upon the 
material and industrial, as well as upon the social and political 
developments of the empire. This will become evident in con- 
sidering the industrial productions of the different divisions, and 
the harvest seasons which permit the summer produce of one 
portion of the empire to supply the winter requirements of its 
other markets, and conversely. 

The empire contains or is bounded by some of the highest 
mountains, the greatest lakes, and the most important rivers 



of the world. Its climates may be said to include all the kno-«ai 
climates of the world; its soils are no less various. In the 
prairies of central Canada it possesses some of the most valuable 
wheat-producing land; in the grass lands of the interior of 
Australia the best pasture country; and in the uplands of South 
Africa the most valuable gold- and diamond-bearing beds which 
exist. The United Kingdom at present produces more coal ihan 
any other single country except the United States. The effect 
of climate throughout the empire in modifying the type of the 
Anglo-Saxon race has as yet received only partial attention, and 
conclusions regarding it are of a somewhat empiric nature. The 
general tendency in Canada is held to be towards somewhat 
smaller size, and a hardy active habit; in Australia to a tall, 
slight, pale development locally known as " cornstalkers," 
characterized by considerable nervous and intellectual activity. 
In New Zealand the type preserves almost exactly the char- 
acteristics of the British Isles. The South African, both Dutch 
and British, is readily recognized by an apparently sun-dried, 
lank and hard habit of body. In the tropical possessions of the 
empire, where white settlement does not take place to any 
considerable extent, the individual alone is affected. The type 
undergoes no modification. It is to be observed in reference to 
this interesting aspect of imperial development, that the multi- 
plication and cheapening of channels of communication and 
means of travel throughout the empire will tend to modify the 
future accentuation of race difference, while the variety of 
elements in the vast area occupied should have an important, 
though as yet not scientifically traced, effect upon the British 
imperial type. 

The white population of the empire 1 reached in 1901 a total 
of over 53,000,000, or something over one-eighth of its entire 
population, which, including native races, is estimated 
at about 400,000,000. The white population includes tfo * # 
some French, Dutch and Spanish peoples, but is 
mainly of Anglo-Saxon race. It is distributed roughly as 
follows: — 

United Kingdom and home dependencies . 41,608,791 

Australasia 4,662,000 

British North America 5,500,000 

Africa (Dutch and British) .... 1,000,000* 

India 169,677 

West Indies and Bermuda .... 100,000 

53,040,468 

The native population of the empire includes types of the 
principal black, yellow and brown races, classing with these the 
high-type races of the East, which may almost be called white. 
The native population of India, mainly high type, brown, was 
returned at the census of 1901 as 294,191,379. The population of 
India is divided into 118 groups on the basis of language. These 
may, however, be collected into the following principal groups: — 

(A) Malayo-Polynesian. 

(B) Indo-Chinese: 

i. Mon-Khmer. 
ii. Tibeto-Burman. 
iii. Siamese-Chinese. 

(C) Dravido-Murida: 

i. Muijda (Kolarian). 
ii. Dravidian. 

(D) Indo-European. 
Indo-Aryan sub-family. 

(E) Semitic. 

(F) Hamitic. 

(G) Unclassed, e.g. Gipsy. 

Eastern Colonies 

Ceylon, high type, brown and mixed ' . . 3,568,824 

Straits Settlements, brown, mixed and Chinese 570,000 

Hong-Kong, Chinese and brown. . . 306,130 

North Borneo, mixed brown and Sarawak . 700,000 

5,144.954 

1 The census returns for 1901 from the various parts of the empire 
were condensed for the first time in 1906 into a blue-book under the 
title of Census of the British Empire, Report with Summary. 

2 The white population of British South Africa according to the 
census of 1904 was 1,132,226. 



BRITISH EMPIRE 



607 



Of the various races which inhabit these Eastern dependencies 
the most important are the 2,000,000 Sinhalese and the 954,000 
Tamil that make up the greater part of the population of Ceylon. 
The rest is made up of Arabs, Malays, Chinese (in the Straits 
Settlements and Hong-Kong), Dyaks, Eurasians and others. 

West Indies. 
The West Indies, including the continental colonies of British 
Guiana and Honduras, and seventeen islands or groups of islands, 
have a total coloured population of about 1,912,655. The 
colonies of this group which have the largest coloured popula- 
tions are : — 

Jamaica — Chiefly black, some brown and yellow 790,000 
Trinidad and Tobago — Black and brown . 250,000 

British Guiana — Black and brown . . . 286,000 

1,326,000 

The populations of the West Indies are very various, being 
made up largely of imported African negroes. In Jamaica 
these contribute four-fifths of the population. There are also 
in the islands a considerable number of imported East Indian 
coolies and some Chinese. The aboriginal races include American 
Indians of the mainland and Caribs. With these there has been 
intermixture of Spanish and Portuguese blood, and many mixed 
types have appeared. The total European population of this 
group of colonies amounts to upwards of 80,000, to which 15,000 
on account of Bermuda may be added. 

Africa. 
Central ( Chiefly black, estimated { ■ ■ ;f£$* 

The aborig'inal races of South Africa were the Bushmen and 
Hottentots. Both these races are rapidly diminishing in 
numbers, and in British South Africa it is expected that they 
will in the course of the twentieth century become extinct. 
Besides these primitive races there are the dark-skinned negroids 
of Bantu stock, commonly known in their tribal groups as Kaffirs, 
Zulu, Bechuana and Damara, which are again subdivided into 
many lesser groups. The Bantu compose the greater part of 
the native population. There are also in South Africa Malays 
and Indians and others, who during the last two hundred years 
have been introduced from Java, Ceylon, Madagascar, Mozam- 
bique and British India, and by intermarriage with each other 
and with the natives have produced a hybrid population generally 
classed together under the heading of the Mixed Races. These 
are of all colours, varying from yellow to dark brown. The tribes 
of Central Africa are as yet less known. Many of them exhibit 
racial characteristics allied to those of the tribes of South 
Africa, but with in some cases an admixture of Arab blood. 

East Africa. 
Protectorate — Black and brown : 

SffiSH^i: : : : : 4 '™Z 

Zanzibar — Black and brown .... 200,000 
Uganda 3,200,000 

Total 7,425,000 

West Africa. 

Estimated. 
Nigeria (including Lagos) — Black and brown 15,000,000 
Gold Coast and hinterland— Chiefly black . 2,700,000 
Sierra Leone „ „ • 1,000,000 

Gambia „ „ • 163,000 

18,863,000 

From east to west across Africa the aboriginal nations are 
mostly of the black negroid type, their varieties being only 
imperfectly known. The tendency of some of the lower negroid 
types has been to drift towards the west coast, where they still 
practise cannibalistic and fetish rites. On the east coast are 
found much higher types approaching to the Christian races 
of Abyssinia, and from east to west there has been a wide 
admixture of Arab blood producing a light-brown type. In 



Uganda and Nigeria a large proportion of the population is 
Arab and relatively light-skinned. 



Australasia. 

Australia — Black, very low type .... 

Chinese and half castes, yellow . 
New Zealand — Maoris, brown, Chinese and half 

castes 

Fiji — Polynesian, black and brown 
Papua — Polynesian, black and brown . 



200,000 
50,000 

53.ooo 
121,000 
400,000 

824,000 



The native races of Australia and the Polynesian groups of 
islands are divided into two main types known as the dark and 
light Polynesian. The dark type, which is black, is of a very 
low order, and in some of the islands still retains its cannibal 
habits. The aboriginal tribes of Australia are of a low-class 
black race, but generally peaceful and inoffensive in their 
habits. The white Polynesian races are of a very superior type, 
and exhibit, as in the Maoris of New Zealand, characteristics 
of a high order. The natives of Papua (New Guinea) are in a 
very low state of civilization. The estimate given of their 
numbers is approximate, as no census has been taken. 

Canada. 
Indians — Brown 100,000 

The only coloured native races of Canada are the Red Indians, 
many in tribal variety, but few in number. 

Summary. 

Native Populations: 

India 294,191,379 

Ceylon and Eastern Colonies . . 5,144,954 

West Indies 1,912,655 

South Africa 5,211,329 

British Central Africa .... 2,000,000 

East Africa 7,425,000 

West Africa 18,863,000 

Australasia and Islands .... 824,000 

Canada 100,000 

335.672,317 
White populations 53,040,468 

Total . 388,712,785 

This is without taking into account the population of the lesser 
crown colonies or allowing for the increase likely to be shown 
by later censuses. Throughout the empire, and notably in the 
United Kingdom, there is among the white races a considerable 
sprinkling of Jewish blood. 

The latest calculation of the entire population of the world, 
including a liberal estimate of 650,000,000 for peoples not brought' 
under any census, gives a total of something over 1,500,000,000. 
The population of the empire may therefore be calculated as 
amounting to something more than one-fourth of the population 
of the world. 

It is a matter of first importance in the geographical distri- 
bution of the empire that the five principal divisions, the United 
Kingdom, South Africa, India, Australia and Canada B / v y s / ons . 
are separated from each other by the three great 
oceans of the world. The distance as usually calculated in 
nautical miles: from an English port to the Cape of Good Hope 
is 5840 m.? from the Cape of Good Hope to Bombay is 4610; 
from Bom,bay to Melbourne is 5630; from Melbourne to Auck- 
land is 1830; from Auckland to Vancouver is 6210; from 
Halifax to Liverpool is 2744. From a British port direct to 
Bombay by way of the Mediterranean it is 6272; from a British 
port by the same route to Sydney 11,548 m. These great 
distances have necessitated the acquisition of intermediate 
ports suitable for coaling stations on the trade routes, and have 
determined the position of many of the lesser crown colonies 
which are held cimply for military and commercial purposes. 
Such are the Bermudas, Gibraltar, Malta, Aden, Ceylon, the 
Straits Settlements, Labuan, Hong-Kong, whic.lf complete the 



6o8 



BRITISH EMPIRE 



chain of oonnexion on the eastern route, and such on other 
routes are the lesser West African stations, Ascension; St. Helena, 
the Mauritius and Seychelles, the Falklands, Tristan da Cunha, 
and the groups of the western Pacific. Other annexations of 
the British empire have been rocky islets of the northern Pacific 
required for the purpose of telegraph stations in connexion with 
an all-British cable. 

For purposes of political administration the empire falls into 
the three sections of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Ireland, with the dependencies of the Channel Islands and the 
Isle of Man; the Indian empire, consisting of British India and 
the feudatory native. states; and the colonial empire, comprising 
all other colonies and dependencies. 

In the modern sense of extension beyond the limits of the 
United Kingdom the growth of the empire is of comparatively 
Orowtb. recen t date. ' The Channel Islands became British 
as a part of the Norman inheritance of William the 
Conqueror. The Isle of Man, which was for a short time held 
in conquest by Edward I. and restored, was sold by its titular 
sovereign to Sir William Scrope, earl of Wiltshire, in 1393,, and 
by his subsequent attainder for high treason and the confiscation 
of his estates, became a fief of the English crown. It was 
granted by Henry TV. in 1406 to Sir John Stanley, K.C., ancestor 
of the earls of Derby, by whom it was held till 1736, when it 
passed to James Murray, 2nd duke of Atholl, as heir-general of 
the loth earl. It was inherited by his daughter Charlotte, wife 
of the 3rd duke of Atholl, who sold, it to the crown for £70,000 
and an annuity of £2000. With these exceptions and the 
nominal possession taken of Newfoundland by Sir Humphrey 
Gilbert in 1583, all the territorial acquisitions of the empire have 
been made in the 17 th and subsequent centuries. 

The following is a list of the British colonies and dependencies 
(other than those belonging to the Indian empire) together with 
a summary statement of the date and method of their acquisition. 
Arranged in chronological order they give some idea of the rate 
of growth of the empire. The dates are not, however, in all 
cases those in which British sovereignty was established. They 
indicate in some instances only the first definite step, such as 
the building of a fort, the opening of a trading station, or other 
act, which led later to the incorporation in the empire of the 
country indicated. In the case of Australian states or Canadian 
provinces originally part of other states or provinces the date 
is that, approximately, of the first settlement of British in the 
district named; e.g. there were British colonists in Saskatchewan 
in the last half of the 1 8th century, but the province was not 
constituted until 1905. Save where otherwise stated, British 
authority has been continuous from the first date mentioned 
in the table. Reference should be made to the articles on the 
various colonies. 



Name. 
Newfoundland 



Barbados 
Bermudas 
Gambia 



Date. Method of Acquisition. 

1583 Possession taken by Sir H. 



Gilbert for the crown. 



17th Century. 



1605-1625 

1609 

c. 1618 



Settlement. 



St Christopher 
Novia Scotia 



Nevis 
Montserrat 
Antigua 
Honduras . 
St Lucia 



Gold Coast 



1623 
1628 



1628 
1632 
1632 
1638 
1638 . 



c. 1650 



A second time in 

1816. 
Did not become 
. wholly British 
until 1713- 
Ceded to France 
1632; recovered 

1:713- 



,, Finally passed to 

Great Britain in 

1803. 

Settlement. Danish forts 

bought l8£0, Dutch forts 

1871. Northern Territories 

added 1897. 



Name. 
St Helena . 



Jamaica 
Bahamas 
Virgin Islands . 
N. W. Territories 
Canada 



of 



Turks and Caicos Is. 



Gibraltar 
New Brunswick 
Prince Edward Is. 
Ontario 
Quebec ... 



Dominica 
St ■ Vincent 
Grenada 
Tobago . 



Date. Method of Acquisition. 

ifth Century (contd.). 

1651 Settled by East India Co. 
Government vested in British 
cr6wn 1833. 

1655 Conquest. 

1666 Settlement. 
. 1666-1672 Settlement and conquest. 

1669 Settlement under royal charter 
of Hudson's Bay Co. Pur- 
chased from imp. gov. 1869, 
and transferred to Canada 
1870. 

1678 Settlement. 

18th Century. 
1704 Capitulation. 
1 7 13 Cession. 
1758 Conquest. 
I 759 _I 79° With New Brunswick and Nova 
I 759 _I 79° Scotia constituted Dominion 
of Canada 1867. Prince 
Edward Is. enters the con- 
federation 1873. In 1880 all 
British possessions (other than 
Newfoundland) in North 
America annexed to the* 
Dominion. ■ ■ ■ ' 

Conquest. 
Capitulation. i 



1761 
1762 
1762 
1763 



Falkland Is. 
Saskatchewan 



Pitcairn I. . 
Straits Settlements 



Sierra Leone 
Alberta . 

New South Wales 
Ceylon . . . 
Trinidad 
Malta . . . 



1765 
1766 



1780 
1786 

to 
1824 



1787 
c. 1788 

1788 

1795 
1797 

1800 



Cession. Afterwards in French 

possession. Reconquered 1803. 
Settlement. Reoccupied 1832. 
Settlement. Separated from 

N.W. Territories of Canada 

1905. 
Settlement. 

Settlement and cession. Vested 
(1858) in crowh by E. I. Co. 

Transferred from Indian to 

colonial possessions 1867. 

Malacca in British occupation 

I795-i8i8. 
Settlement. 
Separated from N.W. Territories 

of Canada 1905. 
Settlement. 
Capitulation. 



British Guiana 

Tasmania . 

Cape of Good Hope 



Seychelles . 
Mauritius . 
Manitoba . 



Ascension and Tristan 
da Cunha 

B. Columbia and Van- 
couver Island 



Natal . . . 

Queensland 

West Australia 
Victoria 

South Australia 
New Zealand . 
Hong-Kong. 



jQih Century. 
1803 Capitulation. 
1803 Settlement. 

1806 Capitulation. Present limits not 
attained until 1895. First 
British occupation 1 795-1803. 
Capitulation. 

Settlement by Red River or 
Selkirk colony. Created 

province of Canada 1870. 

Military occupation. 



1806 
1810 
1811 



Labuan 
Lagos 



Basutoland 
Fiji . 



1815 
1821 

1824 

1824 

1826 
1834 

1836 
1840 
1841 



1846 
1 861 



1868 
1874 



Settlement under Hudson's Bay 
Co. Entered Canadian con- 
federation 1871. 

Settlement. Natal Boers sub- 
mit 1843. 

Separated from New South 
Wales 1859. 

Settlement. 

Separated from New South 
Wales 1 85 1. 

Settlement. 

Settlement and treaty. 

Treaties. Kowloon on the 
mainland added in i860; 
additional area leased 1898. 

Cession. Incorporated in Straits 
Settlements 1906. 

Cession. South Nigeria amal- 
gamated with Lagos, under 
style of Colony and Pro- 
tectorate of Southern Nigeria 
1906. 

Annexation. 

Cession. 



BRITISH EMPIRE 



609 



Name. 



Date. 



Method of Acquisition. 



igth Century (contd.). 
W. Pacific Islands, in- 1877 High commission created by 

eluding Union, Ellice, order in council, giving juris- 

Gilbert, Southern diction over islands not in- 

Solomon, and other eluded in other colonial 

groups governments, nor within 

jurisdiction of other civilized 

powers. Protectorates declared 

over all these islands by 1900. 

Federated Malay States 1 874-1 895 Treaty. 

Cyprus . . . . . 1878 Occupied by treaty. 



North Borneo 



Papua 1884 

Nigeria 1884-18. 



Sotnaliland . 
Beehuanaland 



Zululand 

Sarawak 

Brunei .... 

British East Africa 



Rhodesia 



Treaty and settlement under 
royal charter. Protectorate 
assumed 1888. 

Protectorate declared. 

Treaty, conquest and settlement 
under royal charter. Char- 
tered Co.'s territory trans- 
ferred to crown, and whole 
divided into North and South 
Nigeria 1900. 
1884-1886 Occupation and cession. Pro- 
tectorate declared 1887. 
1885-1891 Protectorate declared. Southern 
portion annexed to. Cape 
Colony 1895. 

Annexation. Incorporated in 
Natal 1897. 

Protectorate declared. 



1887 



Zanzibar 

Uganda . 

Nyasaland . 

Ashanti . 

Wei-hai-wei 

Pacific Islands — 
Christmas, Fanning, 
Penrhyn, Suvarov 
Choiseul and Isabel Is. 

(Solomon Group) 
Tonga and Niue . 

Orange Free State . 

Transvaal and Swazi- 
land 



Kelantan, Trengganu, 
&c. 



18S 
1888 

1888 Treaty, conquest and settlement 
under royal charter. Trans- 
ferred to crown 1895. 
1888-1893 Treaty, conquest and settlement 
under royal charter. 
1890 Protectorate declared. 
1890-1896 Treaty and protectorate. 



1891 Protectorate declared. 
1896; Military occupation. 
1898 Lease from China. 

1898 Annexed for purposes of pro- 

jected Pacific cable. 

1899 Cession. 

1900 Protectorate declared. 

1900 Annexation. Formerly British 

1 848-1 854. 
1900 Annexation. Formerly British 

1877-1881. 

20th Century. 
1909 Cession from Siam. 



In the Pacific are also Bird Island, Bramble Cay, Cato 
Island, Cook Islands, Danger Islands, Ducie Island, Dudosa, 
Rowland Island, Jarvis Island, Kermadec Islands, Macquarie 
Island, Manihiki Islands, Nassau Island, Palmerston Island, 
Palmyra Island, Phoenix Group, Purdy Group, Raine Island, 
Rakaanga Island, Rotumah Island, Surprise Island, Washington 
or New York Island, Willis Group and Wreck Reef. 

In the Indian Ocean there are, besides the colonies already 
mentioned, Rodriguez, the Chagos Islands, St Brandon Islands, 
Amirante Islands, Aldabra, Kuria Muria Islands, Maldive 
Islands and some other small groups. 

In certain dependencies the sovereignty of Great Britain 
is not absolute. The island of Cyprus is nominally still part of 
the Turkish empire, but in 1878 was handed over to Great 
Britain for occupation and administration; Great Britain now 
making to the Porte on account of the island an annual payment 
of £5000. The administration is in the hands of an official 
styled high commissioner, who is invested with the powers 
usually conferred on a colonial governor. In Zanzibar and 
other regions of equatorial Africa the native rulers retain con- 
siderable powers; in the Far East certain areas are held on 
lease from China. 

Egypt, without forming part of the British empire, came 
under the military occupation of Great Britain in 1882. " By 
right of conquest " Great Britain subsequently claimed a share 
in the administration of the former Sudan provinces of Egypt, 
and an agreement of the 19th of January 1899 established the 
IV. 20 



joint sovereignty of Great Britain and Egypt over what is now 
known as the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan. 

The Indian section of the empire was acquired during the 
i7th-i9th centuries under a royal charter granted to the East 
India Company by Queen Elizabeth in 1600. It was transferred 
to the imperial government in 1858, and Queen Victoria was 
proclaimed empress under the Royal Titles Act in 1877. The 
following list gives the dates and method of acquisition of the 
centres of the main divisions of the Indian empire. 'They have, 
in most instances, grown by general process of extension to 
their present dimensions. 



Name. 



Madras 



Date. 

1639 

to 

1748 



Bombay 



Bengal 



United Provinces of 
Agra and Oudh 



1608 

to 

1685 



1633 
to 

1765 



1764 

to 
1856 



Central Provinces 
Eastern Bengal 
Assam 



Burma 
Punjab 



and 



1802-1817 
1825-1826 



. 1824-1852 
1849 



N.-W. Frontier Province 1901 
Ajmere and Merwgra . 1818 

Coorg ...... 1834 , 

British Baluchistan . 1854-1876 
Andaman Islands . . 1858 



Method of Acquisition. 

By treaty and subsequent con- 
quest. Fort St George, the 
foundation of Madras, was the 
first territorial possession of 
the E.I. Co. in India. It was 
acquired by treaty with its 
Indian ruler. Madras was 
raised into a presidency in 
1683; ceded to France 1746; 
recovered 1748. 

Treaty and cession. Trade first 
established 1608. Ceded to 
British crown by Portgaul 
1 66 1. Transferred to E.I. 
Co. 1668. Presidency re- 
moved from Surat 1687. 

Treaty and subsequent con- 
quests. First trade settle- 
ment established by treaty at' 
Pipli in Orissa 1633. Erected 
into presidency by separation 
from Madras 1681. .Virtual 
sovereignty announced by 
E.I. Co., as result of conquests 
of Clive, 1765. 

By conquests and treaty through 
successive stages, of which the 
principal dates were 1801-3 
-14-15. In 1832 the nominal 
sovereignty of Delhi, till then 
retained by the Great Mogul, 
was resigned into the hands of 
the E.I. Co. Oudh, of which 
the conquest may be said to 
have begun with the battle of 
Baxar in 1764, was finally 
annexed in 1856. 

By conquest and treaty. 

Conquest and cession: The 
Bengal portion of the province 
by separation from Bengal in 
1905. 

Conquest and cession. 

Conq uest and annexation. Made 
into distinct province 1 859. 

Subdivision. 

By conquest and cession. 

Conquest and annexation. 

Conquest and treaty. 

Annexation. 



The following is a list of some of the principal Indian states 
which are more or less under the control of the British 
government: — 

1. In direct political relations with the governbr-general in 
council. 
Hyderabad. ' Mysofe. 

Baroda. Kashmiri* •„.,._. 

2. Under the Raj putana agency. '. 
Udaipur. ' Bharatpur. 
Jodhpur, Dholpur. 
Bikanir. Alwar. 
Jaipur (and feudatories). Tonk. 

3. Under the Central Indian agency. 
Indore. Bhopal. 
Rewa. Gwalior. 

4. Under the Bombay government. 

Cutch. Khairpur (Sind). 

Kolhapur (and dependencies). Bhaunagar. 

11 



6jo 



BRITISH EMPIRE 



5. Under the Madras government. 
Travancore. Cochin. 

6. Under the Central Provinces government. 
Bastar. 

7. Under the Bengal government. 
Kuch Behar. Sikkim. 

8. Under United Provinces government. 
Rampur. Garhwal. 

9. Under the Punjab government. 
Patiala. Mandi. 

Bahawalpur. Sirmur (Nahan). 

Jind. Faridkot. 

Nabha. Chamba. 

Kapurthala. 

10. Under the government of Burma. 
Shan states. Karen states. 

In addition to these there are British tracts known as the 
Upper Burma frontier and the Burma frontier. There is also 
a sphere of British influence in the border of Afghanistan. The 
state of Nepal, though independent as regards its internal 
administration, has been since the campaign of 1814-15 in close 
relations with Great Britain. It is bound to receive a British 
resident, and its political relations with other states are controlled 
by the government of India. All these native states have come 
into relative dependency upon Great Britain as a result of con- 
quest or of treaty consequent upon the annexation of the neigh- 
bouring provinces. The settlement of Aden, with its dependencies 
of Perim and Sokotra Island, forms part of the government of 
Bombay. 

This vast congeries of states, widely different in character, 
and acquired by many different methods, holds together under 
the supreme headship of the crown on a generally 
Irafion?" acknowledged triple principle of self-government, 
self-support and self-defence. The principle is more 
fully applied in some parts of the empire than in others; there 
are some parts which have not yet completed their political 
evolution; some others in which the principle is temporarily 
or for special reasons in abeyance; others, again — chiefly those 
of very small extent, which are held for purposes of the defence 
or advantage of the whole — to which it is not applicable; but 
the principle is generally acknowledged as the structural basis 
upon which the constitution of the empire exists. 

In its relation to the empire the home section of the British 
Isles is distinguished from the others as the place of origin of 
the British race and the residence of the crown. The history 
and constitutional development of this portion of the empire 
will be found fully treated under separate headings. (See 
England; Wales; Ireland; Scotland; United Kingdom; 
English History; India; Africa; Australia; Canada; &c.) 

It is enough to say that for purposes of administration 
the Indian empire is divided into nine great provinces and 
four minor commissionerships. The nine great provinces are 
presided over by two governors (Bombay and Madras), five 
lieut. -governors (Bengal, Eastern Bengal and Assam, United 
Provinces [Agra and Oudh], the Punjab and Burma), a chief 
commissioner (the Central Provinces) and an agent to the 
governor-general (the N.-W. Frontier Province) . The four minor 
commissionerships are presided over each by a chief commis- 
sioner. Above these the supreme executive authority in India 
is vested in the viceroy in council. The council consists of six 
ordinary members besides the existing commander-in-chief. 
For legislative purposes the governor-general's council is 
increased by the addition of fifteen members nominated by the 
crown, and has power under certain restrictions to make laws 
for British' India, for British subjects in the native states, and 
for native Indian subjects of the crown in any part of the world. 
The administration of the Indian empire in England is carried 
on by a secretary of state for India assisted by a council of not 
less than ten members. The expenditure of the revenues is 
under the control of the secretary in council. 



The colonial empire comprises over fifty distinct governments. 
It is divided into colonies of three classes and dependencies; 
these, again, are in some instances associated for administrative 
purposes in federated groups. The three classes of colonies are 
crown colonies, colonies possessing representative institutions 
but not responsible government, and colonies possessing repre- 
sentative institutions and responsible government. In crown 
colonies the crown has entire control of legislation, and the public 
officers are under the control of the home government. In 
representative colonies the crown has only a veto on legislation, 
but the home government retains control of the public officers. 
In responsible colonies the crown retains a veto upon legislation, 
but the home government has no control of any public officer 
except the governor. 

In crown colonies — with the exception of Gibraltar and St 
Helena, where laws may be made by the governor alone — laws 
are made by the governor with the concurrence of a council 
nominated by the crown. In some crown colonies, chiefly those 
acquired by conquest or cession, the authority of this council 
rests wholly on the crown; in others, chiefly those acquired by 
settlement, the council is created by the crown under the 
authority of local or imperial laws. The crown council of Ceylon 
may be cited as an example of the first kind, and the crown 
council of Jamaica of the second. 

In colonies possessing representative institutions without 
responsible government, the crown cannot (generally) legislate 
by order in council, and laws are made by the governor with 
the concurrence of the legislative body or bodies, one at least 
of these bodies in cases where a second chamber exists possessing 
a preponderance of elected representatives. The Bahamas, 
Barbados, and Bermuda have two legislative bodies — one elected 
and one nominated by the crown; Malta and the Leeward 
Islands have but one, which is partly elected and partly 
nominated. 

Under responsible government legislation is carried on by 
parliamentary means exactly as at home, with a cabinet 
responsible to parliament, the crown reserving only a right of 
veto, which is exercised at the discretion of the governor in the 
case of certain bills. The executive councils in those colonies, 
designated as at home by parliamentary choice, are appointed 
by the governor alone, and the other public officers only nomin- 
ally by the governor on the advice of his executive council. 

Colonial governors are classed as governors-general; gover- 
nors; lieut.-governors; administrators; high commissioners; 
and commissioners, according to the status of the colony and 
dependency, or group of colonies and dependencies, over which 
they preside. Their powers vary according to the position which 
they occupy. In all cases they represent the crown. 

As a consequence of this organization the finance of crown 
colonies is under the direct control of the imperial government; 
the finance of representative colonies, though not directly 
controlled, is usually influenced in important departures by the 
opinion of the imperial government. In responsible colonies 
the finance is entirely under local control, and the imperial 
government is dissociated from either moral or material responsi- 
bility for colonial debts. 

In federated groups of colonies and dependencies matters 
which are of common interest to a given number of separate 
governments are by mutual consent of the federating com- 
munities adjudged to the authority of a common government, 
which, in the case of self-governing colonies, is voluntarily 
created for the purpose. The associated states form under the 
federal government one federal body, but the parts retain control 
of local matters, and exercise all their original rights of govern- 
ment in regard to these. The two great self-governing groups 
of federated colonies within the empire are the Dominion of 
Canada and the Commonwealth of Australia. In South Africa 
unification was preferred to federation, the then self-governing 
colonies being united in 1910 into one state — the Union of South 
Africa. India, of which the associated provinces are under 
the control of the central government, may be given as an 
example of the practical federation of dependencies. Examples 



BRITISH EMPIRE 



611 



of federated crown colonies and lesser dependencies are to be 
found in the Leeward Island group of the West Indies and the 
federated Malay States. 

This rough system of self-government for the empire has been 
evolved not without some strain and friction, by the recognition 
through the vicissitudes of three hundred years of the value of 
independent initiative in the development of young countries. 
Queen Elizabeth's first patent to Sir Walter Raleigh permitted 
British subjects to accompany him to America, " with guarantee 
of a continuance of the enjoyment of all the rights which her 
subjects enjoyed at home." 

This guarantee may presumably have been intended at the 
time only to assure the intending settlers that they should lose 
no rights of British citizenship at home by taking up their 
residence in America. Its mutual interpretation in a wider 
sense, serving at once to establish in the colony rights of citizen- 
ship equivalent to those enjoyed in England, and to preserve 
for the colonist the status of British subject at home and abroad, 
has formed in application to all succeeding systems of British 
colonization the unconscious charter of union of the empire. 

The first American colonies were settled under royal grants, 
each with its own constitution. The immense distance in time 
which in those days separated America from Great Britain 
secured them from interference by the home authorities. They 
paid their own most moderate governing expenses, and they 
contributed largely to their own defence. From the middle of 
the 17th century their trade was not free, but this was the only 
restriction from which they suffered. The great war with France 
in the middle of the 18th century temporarily destroyed this 
system. That war, which resulted in the conquest of Canada 
and the delivery of the North American colonies from French 
antagonism, cost the imperial exchequer £90,000,000^ The 
attempt to avert the repetition of such expenditure by the 
assertion of a right to tax the colonies through the British 
parliament led to the one great rupture which has marked the 
history of the empire. It has to be noted that at home during 
the latter half of the 17th century and the earlier part of the 
1 8th century parliamentary power had to a great extent taken 
the place of the divine right of kings. But parliamentary 
power meant the power of the English people and taxpayers. 
The struggle which developed itself between the American 
colonies and the British parliament was in fact a struggle on the 
part of the people and taxpayers of one portion of the empire to 
resist the domination of the people and taxpayers of another 
portion. In this light it may be accepted as having historically 
established the fundamental axiom of the constitution of the 
empire, that the crown is the supreme head from which the 
parts take equal dependence. 

The crown requiring advice in the ordinary and constitutional 
manner receives it in matters of colonial administration from 
the secretaries of state for the colonies and for India. After the 
great rupture separate provision in the home government for 
the administration of colonial affairs was at first judged to be 
unnecessary, and the "Council 1 of Trade and Plantations," 
which up to that date had supplied the place now taken by the 
two offices of the colonies and India, was suppressed in 1782. 
There was a reaction from the liberal system of colonial self- 
government, and an attempt was made to govern the colonies 
simply as dependencies. 

In 1 791, not long after the extension of the range of parlia- 
mentary authority in another portion of the empire, by the 
creation in 1784 of the Board of Control for India, Pitt made 
the step forward of granting to Canada representative institu- 
tions, of which the home government kept the responsible 
control. Similar institutions were also given at a later period 
to Australia and South Africa. But the long peace of the early 
part of the 19th century was marked by great colonial develop- 
ments; Australia, Canada and South Africa became important 
communities. Representative institutions controlled by the 
home government were insufficient, and they reasserted the claim 
for liberty to manage their own affairs. 

'Or "Board," as it became in 160s. 



Fully responsible government was granted to Canada in 1840, 
and gradually extended to the other colonies. In 1854 a separate 
secretary of state for the colonies was appointed at home, and 
the colonial office was established on its present footing. In 
India, as in the colonies, there came with the growing needs of 
empire a recognition of the true relations of the parts to each 
other and of the whole to the crown. In 1858, on the complete 
transference of the territories of the East India Company to the 
crown, the board of control was abolished, and the India Council, 
under the presidency of a secretary of state for India, was 
created. It was especially provided that the members of the 
council may not sit in parliament. 

Thus, although it has not been found practicable in the 
working of the British constitution to carry out the full theory 
of the direct and exclusive dependence of colonial possessions 
on the crown, the theory is recognized as far as possible. It is 
understood that the principal sections of the empire enjoy equal 
rights under the crown, and that none is subordinate to another. 
The intervention of the imperial parliament in colonial affairs 
is only admitted theoretically in so far as the support of parlia- 
ment is required by the constitutional advisers of the crown. 
To bring the practice of the empire into complete harmony with 
the theory it would be necessary to constitute, for the purpose 
of advising the crown on imperial affairs, -■ council in which 
all important parts of the empire should be represented. 

The gradual recognition of the constitutional theory of the 
British empire, and the assumption by the principal 
colonies of full self-governing responsibilities, has /sm> 
cleared the way for a movement in favour of a further 
development which should bring the supreme headship of the 
empire more into accord with modern ideas. 

It was during the period of domination of the " Manchester 
school," of which the most effective influence in public affairs 
was exerted for about thirty years, extending from 1845 to 1875, 
that the fullest development of colonial self-government was 
attained, the view being generally accepted at that time that 
self-governing institutions were to be regarded as the preliminary 
to inevitable separation. A general inclination to withdraw 
from the acceptance of imperial responsibilities throughout the 
world gave to foreign nations at the same time an opportunity 
by which they were not slow to profit, and contributed to the 
force of a reaction of which the part played by Great Britain in 
the scramble for Africa marked the culmination. Under ttie 
increasing pressure of foreign enterprise, the value of a federation 
of the empire for purposes of common interest began to be 
discussed. Imperial federation was openly spoken of in New 
Zealand as early as 1852. A similar suggestion was officially put 
forward by the general association of the Australian colonies 
in London in 1857. The Royal Colonial Institution, of which the 
motto " United Empire " illustrates its aims, was founded in 1868. 
First among leading British statesmen to repudiate the old 
interpretation of colonial self-government as a preliminary to 
separation, Lord Beaconsfield, in 1872, spoke of the constitutions 
accorded to the colonies as " part of a great policy of imperial 
consolidation." In 1875 W. E. Forster, afterwards a member 
of the Liberal government, made a speech in which he advocated 
imperial federation as a means by which it might become 
practicable to " replace dependence by association." The founda- 
tion of the Imperial Federation League — in 1884, with Forster 
for its first president, shortly to be succeeded by Lord Rosebery 
— marked a distinct step forward. The Colonial Conferences of 
1887 and subsequent years (the title being changed to Imperial 
Conference in 1907), in which colonial opinion was sought 
and accepted in respect of important questions of imperial 
organization and defence, and the enthusiastic loyalty displayed 
by the colonies towards the crown on the occasion of the jubilee 
manifestations of Queen Victoria's reign, were further indications 
of progress in the same direction. Coincidently with this develop- 
ment, the achievements of Sir George Goldie and Cecil Rhodes, 
who, the one in West Africa and the other in South Africa, 
added between them to the empire in a space of less than twenty 
years a dominion of greater extent than the whole of British 



6 12 



BRITISH EMPIRE 



India, followed by the action of a host of distinguished disciples 
in other parts of the world, effectually stemmed the movement 
initiated by Cobden and Bright. A tendency which had seemed 
temporarily to point towards a complacent dissolution of the 
empire was arrested, and the closing years of the 19th century 
were marked by a growing disposition to appreciate the value 
and importance of the unique position which the British empire 
has created for itself in the world. No stronger demonstration 
of the reality of imperial union could be needed than that which 
was afforded by the support given to the imperial forces by the 
colonies and India in the South African War. It remained 
only to be seen by what process of evolution the further con- 
solidation of the empire would find expression in the machinery 
of government. A step in this direction was taken in 1907, 
when at the Colonial Conference held in London that year it 
was decided to form a permanent secretariat to deal with the 
common interests of the self-governing colonies and the mother- 
country. It was further decided that conferences, to be called 
in future Imperial Conferences, between the home government 
and the governments of the self-governing dominions, should be 
held every four years, and that the prime minister of Great 
Britain should be ex officio president of the conference. No 
executive power was, however, conferred upon the conference. 

The movement in favour of tariff reform initiated by Mr 
Chamberlain (q.v.) in 1903 with the double object of giving a 
preference to colonial goods and of protecting imperial trade by 
the imposition in certain cases of retaliative duties on foreign 
goods, was a natural evolution of the imperialist idea, and of the 
fact that by this time the trade-statistics of the United Kingdom 
had proved that trade with the colonies was forming an increas- 
ingly large proportion of the whole. In spite of the defeat of 
the Unionist party in England in 1906, and the accession to 
power of a Liberal government opposed to anything which 
appeared to be inconsistent with free trade, the movement for 
colonial preference, based on tariff reform, continued to make 
headway in the United Kingdom, and was definitely adopted 
by the Unionist party. And at the Imperial Conference of 1907 
it was advocated by all the colonial premiers, who could point to 
the progress made in their own states towards giving a tariff 
preference to British goods and to those of one another. 

The question of self-government is closely associated with the 
question of self-support. Plenty of good land and the liberty 
to* manage their own affairs were the causes assigned by Adam 
Smith for the marked prosperity of the British colonies towards 
the end of the 18th century. The same causes are still observed 
to produce the same effects, and it may be pointed out that, since 
the date of the latest of Adam Smith's writings, upwards of 
6,000,000 sq. m. of virgin soil, rich with possibilities of agri- 
cultural, pastoral and mineral wealth, have been added to the 
empire. In the same period the white population has grown 
from about 12,000,000 to 53,000,000, and the developments of 
agricultural and industrial machinery have multiplied, almost 
beyond computation, the powers of productive labour. 

It is scarcely possible within this article to deal with so widely 
varied a subject as that of the productions and industry of the 
Thelm- empire. For the purposes of a general statement, 
periai it is interesting to observe that concurrently with the 
factor in acquisition of the vast continental areas during the 
19th century, the progress of industrial science in 
application to means of transport and communica- 
tion brought about a revolution of the most radical character 
in the accepted laws of economic development. Railways 
did away with the old law that the spread of civilization is 
necessarily governed by facilities for water carriage and is 
consequently confined to river valleys and sea-shores. Steam 
and electricity opened to industry the interior of continents 
previously regarded as unapproachable. The resources of these 
vast inland spaces which have lain untouched since history began 
became available to individual enterprise, and over a great 
portion of the earth's surface were brought within the possessions 
of the British empire. The production of raw material within 
the empire increased at a rate which can only be appreciated 



Industry 
and trade. 



by a careful study of figures, and by a comparison of the total 
of these figures with the total figures of the world. The tropical 
and temperate possessions of the empire include every field of 
production which can be required for the use of man. There is 
no main staple of human food which is not grown; there is no 
material of textile industry which is not produced. The British 
empire gives occupation to more than one-third of the persons 
employed in mining and quarrying in the world. It may be 
interesting, as an indication of the relative position in this 
respect of the British empire to the world, to state that at 
present it produces one- third of the coal supply of the world, 
one-sixth of the wheat supply, and very nearly two-thirds of the 
gold supply. But while these figures may be taken as in them- 
selves satisfactory, it is far more important to remember that as 
yet the potential resources of the new lands opened to enterprise 
have been barely conceived, and their wealth has been little 
more than scratched. Population as yet has been only very 
sparsely sprinkled over the surface of many of the areas most 
suitable for white settlement. In the wheat lands of Canada, 
the pastoral country of Australasia, and the mineral fields of 
South Africa and western Canada alone, the undeveloped 
resources are such as to ensure employment to the labour and 
satisfaction to the needs of at least as many millions as they now 
contain thousands of the British race. In respect of this promise 
of the future the position of the British empire is unique. 

It is not too much to say that trade has been at once the most 
active cause of expansion and the most potent bond of union in 
the development of the empire. Trade with the tropical and 
settlement in the temperate regions of the world formed the 
basis upon which the foundations of the empire were laid. 
Trading companies founded most of the American and West 
Indian colonies; a trading company won India; a trading 
company colonized the north-western districts of Canada; 
commercial wars during the greater part of the 18th century 
established the British command of the sea, which rendered the 
settlement of Australasia possible. The same wars gave Great 
Britain South Africa, and chartered companies in the 19th 
century carried the British flag into the interior of the African 
continent from south and east and west. Trading companies 
developed Borneo and Fiji. The bonds of prosperous trade have 
kept the Australasian colonies within the empire. The protection 
of colonial commerce by the imperial navy is one of the strongest 
of material links which connect the crown with the outlying 
possessions of the empire. 

The trade of the empire, like the other developments of imperial 
public life, has been profoundly influenced by the variety of 
local conditions under which it has flourished. In the 
early settlement of the North American colonies their trade 
trade was left practically free; but by the famous policy. 
Navigation Act of 1660 the importation and exporta- 
tion of goods from British colonies were restricted to British 
ships, of which the master and three-fourths of the mariners 
were English. This act, of which the intention was to encourage 
British shipping and to keep the monopoly of British colonial 
trade for the benefit of British merchants, was followed by many 
others of a similar nature up to the time of the repeal of the 
Corn Laws in 1846 and the introduction of free trade into Great 
Britain. The Navigation Acts were repealed in 1849. Thus 
for very nearly two hundred years British trade was subject to 
restrictions, of which the avowed intention was to curtail the 
commercial intercourse of the empire with the world. During 
this period the commercial or mercantile system, of which the 
fallacies were exposed by the economists of the latter half of 
the 18th century, continued to govern the principles of British 
trade. Under this system monopolies were common, and among 
them few were more important than that of the East India 
Company. In 1813 the trade of India was, however, thrown 
open to competition, and in 1846, after the introduction of free 
trade at home, the principal British colonies which had not yet 
at that date received the grant of responsible government were 
specially empowered to abolish differential duties upon foreign 
trade. A first result of the commercial emancipation of the 



BRITISH EMPIRE 



613 



colonies was the not altogether unnatural rise in the manufactur- 
ing centres of the political school known as the Manchester 
school, which was disposed to question the value to Great Britain 
of the, retention of colonies which were no longer bound to give 
her the monopoly of their commercial markets. An equally 
natural desire on the part of the larger colonies to profit by the 
opportunity which was opened to them of establishing local 
manufactures of their own, combined with the convenience in 
new countries of using the customs as an instrument of taxation, 
led to something like a reciprocal feeling of resentment, and there 
followed a period during which the policy of Great Britain was 
to show no consideration for colonial trade, and the policy of 
the principal colonies was to impose heavy duties upon British 
trade. By a gradual process of better understanding, largely 
helped by the development of means of communication, the 
antagonistic extreme was abandoned, and a tendency towards 
a system of preferential duties- within the empire displayed 

itself. At the Colonial Conference held in London in 
Coon/a jgg^ a p r0 p 0sa i was formally submitted by the South 
tereuce. African delegate for the establishment within the 

empire of a preferential system, imposing a duty of 
2% upon all foreign goods, the proceeds to be directed to the 
maintenance of the imperial navy. To this end it was requested 
that certain treaties with foreign nations which imposed restric- • 
tions on the trade of various parts of the empire with each other 
should be denounced. Some years later, a strong feeling having 
been manifested in England against any foreign engagement 
standing in the way of new domestic trade arrangements between 
a colony and the mother-country, the German and Belgian 
treaties in question were denounced (1897). Meanwhile, simul- 
taneously with the movement in favour of reciprocal fiscal 
advantages to be granted within the empire by the many local 
governments to each other, there was a growth of the perception 
that an increase of the foreign trade of Great Britain, carried 
on chiefly in manufactured goods, was accompanied by a corre- 
sponding enlargement of the home markets for colonial raw 
material, and consequently that injury to the foreign trade of 
Great Britain, while as yet it so largely outweighed the trade 
between the United Kingdom and the colonies, must necessarily 
react upon the colonies. This view was definitely expressed 
at the Colonial Conference at Ottawa in 1894, and was one of 
the factors which led to the relinquishment of the demand that 
in return for colonial concessions there should be an imposition 
on the part of Great Britain of a differential duty upon foreign 
goods. Canada was the first important British colony to give 
substantial expression to the new imperial sentiment in com- 
mercial matters by the introduction in 1897 of an imperial tariff, 
granting without any reciprocal advantage a deduction of 25% 
upon customs duties imposed upon British goods. The same 
advantage was offered to all British colonies trading with her 
upon equal terms. In later years the South African states, 
Australia and New Zealand also granted preferential treatment 
to British goods. Meanwhile in Great Britain the system of free 
imports, regarded as" free trade " (though only one-sided free 
trade) , had become the established policy, customs duties being 
only imposed for purposes of revenue on a few selected articles, 
and about half the national income was derived from customs 
and excise. In most of the colonies customs form of necessity 
one of the important sources of revenue. It is, however, worthy 
of remark that in the self-governing colonies, even those which 
are avowedly protectionist, a smaller proportion of the public 
revenue was derived from customs and excise than was derived 
from these sources in the United Kingdom. The proportion in 
Australasia before federation was about one quarter. In Canada 
it is more difficult to estimate it, as customs and excise form the 
principal provision made for federal finance, and note must 
therefore be taken of the separate sources of revenue in the 
provinces. With these reservations it will still be seen that 
customs, or, in other words, a tax upon the movements of trade, 
forms one of the chief sources of imperial revenue. 

The development of steam shipping and electricity gave to 
the movements of trade a stimulus no less remarkable than that 



given by the introduction of railroads and industrial machinery 
to production and manufactures. Whereas at the beginning 
of the 19th century "the journey to Australia occupied eight 
months, and business communications between Sydney and 
London could not receive answers within the year, at the 
beginning of the 20th century the journey could be accomplished 
in thirty-one days, and telegraphic despatches enabled the most 
important business to be transacted within twenty-four hours. 
For one cargo carried in the year at the beginning of the 19th 
century at least six could now be carried by the same ship, and 
from the point of view of trade the difference of a venture which 
realizes its profits in two months, as compared with one which 
occupied a whole year, does not need to be insisted on. The 
increased rapidity of the voyage and the power of daily com- 
munication by telegraph with the most distant markets have 
introduced a wholly new element into the national trade of the 
empire, and commercial intercourse between the southern and 
the northern hemispheres has received a development from the 
natural alternation of the seasons, of which until quite recent 
years the value was not even conceived. Fruit, eggs, butter, 
meat, poultry and other perishable commodities pass in daily 
increasing quantities between the northern and the southern 
hemispheres with an alternate flow which contributes to raise 
in no inconsiderable degree the volume of profitable trade. 
Thus the butter season of Australasia is from October to March, 
while the butter season of Ireland and northern Europe is from 
March to October. In three years after the introduction of 
ice-chambers into the steamers of the great shipping lines, 
Victoria and New South Wales built up a yearly butter trade of 
£1,000,000 with Great Britain without seriously affecting the 
Irish and Danish markets whence the summer supply is drawn. 
These facilities, combined with the enormous additions made 
to the public stock of land and labour, contributed to raise the 
volume of trade of the empire from a total of less than 
£100,000,000 in the year 1800 to a total of nearly £1,500,000,000 
in 1900. The declared volume of British exports to all parts 
of the world in 1800 was £38,120,120, and the value of British 
imports from all parts of the world was £30,570,605; total, 
£68,690,725. As in those days the colonies were not allowed to 
trade with any other country this must be taken as representing 
imperial trade. The exact figures of the trade of India, the 
colonies, and the United Kingdom for 1900 were: imports, 
£809,178,209; exports, £657,899,363; total, £1,467,077,572. 

A question of sovereign importance to the continued existence 
of the empire is the question of defence. A country of which 
the main thoroughfares are the oceans of the world 
demands in the first instance a strong navy. It has defence 
of late years been accepted as a fundamental axiom 
of defence that the British navy should exceed in strength any 
reasonable combination of foreign navies which could be brought 
against it, the accepted formula being the " two-power standard," 
i.e. a 10*% margin over the joint strength of the two next powers. 
The expense of maintaining such a floating armament must be 
colossal, and until within the decade 1890-1900 it was borne 
exclusively by the taxpayers of the United Kingdom. As the 
benefits of united empire have become more consciously appreci- 
ated in the colonies, and the value of the fleet as an insurance for 
British commerce has been recognized, a desire has manifested 
itself on the part of the self-governing colonies to contribute 
towards the formation of a truly imperial navy. In 1895 the 
Australasian colonies voted a subsidy of £126,000 per annum 
for the maintenance of an Australasian squadron, and in 1897 
the Cape Colony also offered a contribution of £30,000 a year 
to be used at the discretion of the imperial government for 
naval purposes. The Australian contribution was in 1902 
increased to £240,000, and that of the Cape to £50,000, while 
Natal voted £35,000 a year and Newfoundland £3000. But 
apart from these comparatively slight contributions, and the local 
up-keep of colonial fortifications,— and the beginning in 1908- 
1909 of an Australian torpedo-boat flotilla provided by the 
Commonwealth,— -the whole cost of the imperial navy, on which 
ultimately the security of the empire rested, remained to be 



6ii 



BRITISH EMPIRE 



borne by the taxpayers in the British islands. The extent of 
this burden was emphasized in 1909 by the revelations as to 
the increase of the German (and the allied Austrian) fleet. At 
this crisis in the history of the two-power standard a wave of 
enthusiasm started in the colonies, resulting in the offer of 
" Dreadnoughts " from New Zealand and elsewhere; and the 
British government called an Imperial Conference to consider 
the whole question afresh. 

Land defence, though a secondary branch of the great question 
of imperial defence, has been intimately connected with the 
development and internal growth of the empire. In the case of 
the first settlement of the American colonies they were expected 
to provide for their own land defence. To some extent in the 
early part of their career they carried out this expectation, and 
even on occasion, as in the taking of Louisburg, which was sub- 
sequently given back at the peace of Aix-la-Chapelle as the price 
of the French evacuation of Madras, rendered public service to 
the empire at large. In India the principle of local self-defence 
was from the beginning carried into practice by the East India 
Company. But in America the claim of the French wars proved 
too heavy for local resources. In 1755 Great Britain intervened 
with troops sent from home under General Braddock, and up to 
the outbreak of the American War the cost of the defence of the 
North American colonies was borne by the imperial exchequer. 
To meet this expense the imperial parliament took upon itself 
the right to tax the American colonies. In 1765 a Quartering 
Act was passed by which 10,000 imperial troops were quartered 
in the colonies. As a result of the American War which followed 
and led to the loss of the colonies affected, the imperial authorities 
accepted the charge of the land defences of the empire, and with 
the exception of India and the Hudson Bay territories, where 
the trading companies determined to pay their own expenses, the 
whole cost of imperial defence was borne, like the cost of the navy, 
by the taxpayers of the United Kingdom. This condition of 
affairs lasted till the end of the Napoleonic Wars. During the 
thirty years' peace which followed there came time for considera- 
tion. The fiscal changes which towards the middle of the 19th 
century gave to the self-governing colonies the command of their 
own resources very naturally carried with them the consequence 
that a call should be made on colonial exchequers to provide for 
their own governing expenses. Of these defence is obviously one 
of the most essential. Coincidently, therefore, with the move- 
ments of free trade at home, the renunciation of what was known 
as the mercantile system and the accompanying grants of con- 
stitutional freedom to the colonies, a movement for the re- 
organization of imperial defence was set on foot. In the decade 
which elapsed between 1846 and 1856 the movement as regards 
the colonies was confined chiefly to calls made upon them to 
contribute to their own defence by providing barracks, fortifica- 
tions, &c, for the accommodation of imperial troops, and in 
some cases paying for the use of troops not strictly required for 
imperial purposes. In 1857 the Australian colonies agreed to pay 
the expenses of the imperial garrison quartered in Australia. 
This was a very wide step from the imperial attempt to tax the 
American colonies for a similar purpose in the preceding century. 
Nevertheless, in evidence given before a departmental committee 
in 1859, it was shown that at that time the colonies of Great 
Britain were free from almost every obligation of contributing 
either by personal service or money payment towards their own 
defence, and that the cost of military expenditure in the colonies 
in the preceding year had amounted in round figures to £4,000,000. 
A committee of the House of Commons sat in 1861 to consider 
the question, and in 1862 it was resolved, without a division, that 
" colonies exercising the right of self-government ought to under- 
take the main responsibility of providing for their own internal 
order and security, and ought to assist in their own external 
defence." The decision was accepted as the basis of imperial 
policy. The first effect was the gradual withdrawing of imperial 
troops from the self-governing colonies, together with, the 
encouragement of the development of local military systems 
by the loan, when desired, of imperial military experts. A call 
was also made for larger military contributions from some of 



the crown colonies. The committee of 1859 na( i emphasized 
in its report the fact that the principal dependence of the colonies 
for defence is necessarily upon the British navy, and in 1865, 
exactly 100 years after the Quartering Act, which had been the 
cause of the troubles that led to the independence of the United 
States, a Colonial Naval Defence Act was passed which gave 
power to the colonies to provide ships of war, steamers, and 
volunteers for their own defence, and in case of necessity to 
place them at the disposal of the crown. In 1868 the Canadian 
Militia Act gave the fully organized nucleus of a local army to 
Canada. In the same year the imperial troops were withdrawn 
from New Zealand, leaving the colonial militia to deal with the 
native war still in progress. In 1870 the last imperial troops 
were withdrawn from Australia, and in 1873 it was officially 
announced that military expenditure in the colonies was almost 
" wholly for imperial purposes." In 1875 an imperial officer 
went to Australia to report for the Australian government 
upon Australian defence. The appointment in 1879 of a royal 
commission to consider the question of imperial defence, which 
presented its report in 1882, led to a considerable development 
and reorganization of the system of imperial fortifications. 
Coaling stations were also selected with reference to the trade 
routes. In 1885 rumours of war roused a very strong feeling in 
• connexion with the still unfinished and in many cases unarmed 
condition of the fortifications recommended by the commission 
of 1879. Military activity was stimulated throughout the 
empire, and the Colonial Defence Committee was created to 
supply a much-felt need for organized direction and advice to 
colonial administrations acting necessarily in independence of 
each other. The question of colonial defence was among the 
most important of the subjects discussed at the colonial conference 
held in London in 1887, and it was at this conference that the 
Australasian colonies first agreed to contribute to the expense 
of their own naval defence. From this date the principle of local 
responsibility for self-defence has been fully accepted. India 
has its own native army, and pays for the maintenance within its 
frontiers of an imperial garrison. Early in the summer of 1899, 
when hostilities in South Africa appeared to be imminent, the 
governments of the principal colonies took occasion to express 
their approval of the South African policy pursued by the im- 
perial government, and offers Vere made by the governments 
of India, the Australasian colonies, Canada, Hong-Kong, the 
Federal Malay states, some of the West African and other 
colonies, to send contingents for active service in the event of 
war. On the outbreak of hostilities these offers, on the part of 
the self-governing colonies, were accepted, and colonial contin- 
gents upwards of 30,000 strong were among the most efficient 
sections of the British fighting force. The manner in which 
these colonial contingents were raised, their admirable fighting 
qualities, and the service rendered by them in the field, disclosed 
altogether new possibilities of military organization within the 
empire, and in subsequent years the subject continued to engage 
the attention of the statesmen of the empire. Progress in this 
field lay chiefly in the increased support given in the colonial 
states to the separate local movements for self-defence; but 
in 1909 a scheme was arranged by Mr Haldane, by which the 
British War Office should co-operate with the colonial govern- 
ments in providing for the training of officers and an interchange 
of views on a common military policy. 

The important questions of justice, religion and instruction 
will be found dealt with in detail under the headings of separate 
sections of the empire. Systems of justice throughout 
the empire have a close resemblance to each other, Ac _ ' 
and the judicial committee of the privy council, on 
which the self-governing colonies and India are represented, con- 
stitutes a supreme court of appeal (q.v.) for the entire empire. 
In the matter of religion, while no imperial organization in the 
strict sense is possible, the progress made by the Lambeth 
Conferences and otherwise (see Anglican Communion) has done 
much to bring the work of the Church of England in different 
parts of the world into a co-operative system. Religion, of which 
the forms are infinitely varied, is however everywhere free, 



BRITISH HONDURAS 



615 



except in cases where the exercise of religious rites leads to 
practices foreign to accepted laws of humanity. It is perhaps 
interesting to state that the number of persons in the empire 
nominally professing the Christian religion is 58,000,000, of 
Mahommedans 94,000,000, of Buddhists 12,000,000, of Hindus 
208,000,000, of pagans and others 25,000,000. Systems of 
instruction, of which the aim is generally similar in the white 
portions of the empire and is directed towards giving to every 
individual the basis of a liberal education, are governed wholly 
by local requirements. Native schools are established in all 
settled communities under British rule. 

Literature. — In recent years the subject of British imperialism 
has inspired a growing literature, and it is only possible here to name 
a selected number of the more important works which may usefully 
be consulted on different topics: Sir C. P. Lucas, Historical Geography 
of the British Colonies (1888, et seq.) ; H. E. Egerton, Short History 
of British Colonial Policy (1897); H. J. Mackinder, Britain and the 
British Seas (1902); Sir J. R. Seeley, Expansion of England (1883); 
Growth of British Policy (1895); Sir Charles Dilke, Greater Britain 
(1869), Problems of Greater Britain (1890), The British Empire (1899) ; 
G. R. Parkin, Imperial Federation (1892) ; Sir John Colomb, Imperial 
Federation, Naval and Military (1886); Sir G. S. Clarke, Imperial 
Defence (1897); Sidney Goldmann and others, The Empire and the 
Century (1905); J. L. Garvin, Imperial Reciprocity (1903); J. W. 
Welsford, The Strength of a Nation (1907); Compatriots Club Essays 
(1906); Sir H. Jenkyns, British Rule and Jurisdiction beyond the 
Seas (1902); Bernard Holland, Imperium et libertas (1901); (for 
an anti-imperialist view) J. A. Hobson, Imperialism (1902). See 
also the Reports of the various colonial conferences, especially that 
of the Imperial Conference of 1907; and for trade statistics, J. Holt 
Schooling s British Trade Book. For the tariff reform movement in 
England see the articles Free Trade and Protection. (F. L. L.) 

BRITISH HONDURAS, formerly called Balize, or Belize, 
a British crown colony in Central America; bounded on the N. 
and N.W. by the Mexican province of Yucatan, N.E. and E. 
by the Bay of Honduras, an inlet of the Caribbean Sea, and 
S. and W. by Guatemala. (For map, see Central America.) 
Pop. (1905) 40,372; area, 7562 sq. m. The frontier of British 
Honduras, as defined by the conventions of 1859 an d J 893 
between Great Britain and Guatemala, begins at the mouth of 
the river Sarstoon or Sarstun, in the Bay of Honduras; ascends 
that river as far as the rapids of Gracias a Dios; and thence, 
turning to the right, runs in a straight line to Garbutt's Rapids, 
on the Belize river. From this point it proceeds due north to 
the Mexican frontier, where it follows the river Hondo to its 
' mouth in Chetumal Bay. 

British Honduras differs little from the rest of the Yucatan 
peninsula. The approach to the coast is through the islets 
known as cays, and through coral reefs. It is both difficult and 
dangerous. For some miles inland the ground is low and swampy, 
thickly covered with mangroves and tropical jungle. Next 
succeeds a narrow belt of rich alluvial land, not exceeding a mile 
in width, beyond which, and parallel to the rivers, are vast tracts 
of sandy, arid land, called " pine ridges," from the red pines with 
which they are covered. Farther inland these give place, first, 
to the less elevated " broken ridges," and then to what are called 
" cahoon ridges," with a deep rich soil covered with myriads of 
palm trees. Next come broad savannas, studded with clumps 
of, trees, through which the streams descending from the 
mountains wind in every direction. The mountains themselves 
rise in a succession of ridges parallel to the coast. The first are 
the Manatee Hills, from 800 to 1000 ft. high; and beyond these 
are the Cockscomb Mountains, which are about 4000 ft. high. 
No less than sixteen streams, large enough to be called rivers, 
descend from these mountains to the sea, between the Hondo 
and Sarstoon. The uninhabited country between Garbutt's 
Rapids and the coast south of Deep river was first explored in 
1879, by Henry Fowler, the colonial secretary of British 
Honduras; it was then found to consist of open and undulating 
grasslands, affording fine pasturage in the west and of forests 
full of valuable timber in the east. Its elevation varies from 
1200 to 3300 ft. Auriferous quartz and traces of other minerals 
have been discovered, but not in sufficient quantity to repay the 
cost of mining. The geology, fauna and flora of British Honduras 
do not materially differ from those of the neighbouring regions 
(see Central America). 



Although the colony is in the tropics, its climate is subtropical. 
The highest shade temperature recorded is 98° F., the lowest 50 . 
Easterly sea- winds prevail during the greater part of the year. 
The dry season lasts from the middle of February to the middle 
of May; rain occurs at intervals during the other months, and 
almost continuously in October, November and December. 
The annual rainfall averages about 815 in., but rises in some 
districts to 150 in. or more. Cholera, yellow fever and other 
tropical diseases occur sporadically, but, on the whole, the 
country is not unhealthy by comparison with the West Indies 
or Central American states. 

Inhabitants. — British Honduras is a little larger than Wales, 
and has a population smaller than that of Chester (England). 
In 1904 the inhabitants of European descent numbered 1500, 
the Europeans 253, and the white Americans 118. The majority 
belong to the hybrid race descended from negro slaves, aboriginal 
Indians and white settlers. At least six distinct racial groups 
can be traced. These consist of (1) native Indians, to be found 
chiefly in forest villages in the west and north of the colony away 
from the sea coast; (2) descendants of the English buccaneers, 
mixed with Scottish and German traders; (3) the woodcutting 
class known as " Belize Creoles," of more or less pure descent 
from African negroes imported, as slaves or as labourers, from 
the West Indies; (4) the Caribs of the southern districts, descend- 
ants of the population deported in 1796 from St Vincent, who 
were of mixed African and Carib origin; (5) a mixed population 
in the south, of Spanish-Indian origin, from Guatemala and 
Honduras; and (6) in the north another Spanish-Indian group 
which came from Yucatan in 1848. The population tends 
slowly to increase; about 45 % of the births are illegitimate, and 
males are more numerous than females. Many tracts of fallow 
land and forest were once thickly populated, for British Honduras 
has its ruined cities, and other traces of a lost Indian civilization, 
in common with the rest of Central America. 

Natural Products. — -For more than two centuries British Honduras 
has been supported by its trade in timber, especially in mahogany, 
logwood, cedar and other dye-woods and cabinet-woods, such as 
lignum-vitae, fustic, bullet-wood, santa-maria, ironwood, rosewood, 
&c. The coloured inhabitants are unsurpassed as woodmen, and 
averse from agriculture; so that there are only about 90 sq. m. of 
tilled land. Sugar-cane, bananas, cocoanut-palms, plantains, and 
various other fruits are cultivated ; vanilla, sarsaparilla, sapodilla or 
chewing-gum, rubber, and the cahoon or coyol palm, valuable for 
its oil, grow wild in large quantities. In September 1903 all the pine 
trees on crown lands were sold to Mr B. Chipley, a citizen of the 
United States, at one cent ($-d.) per tree; the object of the sale being 
to secure the opening up of undeveloped territory. Unsuccessful 
attempts have been made to establish sponge fisheries on a large 
scale. 

Chief Towns and Communications. — Belize (pop. in 1904, 9969), 
the capital and principal seaport, is described in a separate article. 
Other towns are Stann Creek (2459), Corosal (1696), Orange Walk 
(1244), Punta Gorda (706), the Cayo (421), Monkey River (384) 
and Mullins River (243). All these are administered by local 
boards, whose aggregate revenue amounts to some £7000. Tele- 
graph and telephone lines connect the capital with Corosal in the 
north, and Punta Gorda in the south; but there are no railways, 
and few good roads beyond municipal limits. Thus the principal 
means of communication are the steamers which ply along the coast. 
Mail steamers from New Orleans, Liverpool, Colon and Puerto 
Cortes in Honduras, regularly visit Belize. 

Commerce and Finance. — Between 1901 and 1905 the tonnage 
of vessels accommodated at the ports of British Honduras rose 
from 300,000 to 496,465; the imports rose from £252,500 to 
£386,123; the exports from £285,500 to £377,623. The exports 
consist of the timber, fruit and other vegetable products already 
mentioned, besides rum, deerskins, tortoiseshell, turtles and sponges, 
while the principal imports are cotton goods, hardware, beer, wine, 
spirits, groceries and specie. The sea-borne trade is mainly shared 
by Great Britain and the United States. On the 14th of October 
1 894, the American gold dollar was adopted as the standard coin, in 
place of the Guatemalan dollar; and the silver of North, South and 
Central America ceased to be legal tender. Government notes are 
issued to the value of I, 2, 5, 10, 50 and 100 dollars, and there is a 
local currency of one cent bronze pieces, and of 5, 10, 25 and 50 cent 
silver pieces. The British sovereign and half sovereign are legal 
tender. In 1846 the government savings bank was founded in 
Belize; branches were afterwards opened in the principal towns; 
and in 1903 the British Bank of Honduras was established at Belize. 
The revenue, chiefly derived from customs, rose from £60,150 in 1901 
to £68,335 in 1905. The expenditure, in which the cost of police 



6i6 



BRITOMAIR^OISi >\ 



and education are important items, rose, during the same period, 
from £51,210 to £(5i,8po. Jhe public debt, amounting in 1905 to 
£34,736, represents the balance due oh three loans which were raised 
in 1885, 1887, and 1891, for public works in Belize. The loans are 
repayable between 1916 and 1923. 

. Constitution and Administration. — From 1638 to 1786 the colonists 
were completely independent, a,nd elected their own magistrates, 
who performed all judicial and executive functions. The customs 
and precedents thus established were codified and published under 
the name of " Burnaby's Laws," after the visit of Admiral Sir W. 
Burnaby, in 1756, and were recognized as valid by the crown. In 
1786 a superintendent was appointed by the home government, 
and although this office was vacant from 1790 to 1797, it was revived 
until 1862. An executive council was established in 1839, and A 
legislative assembly, of three nominated and eighteen elected 
members, in 1853. British Honduras was declared a colony in 1862; 
with a lieutenant governor, subject to the governor of Jamaica, as 
its chief magistrate. In 1870 the legislative assembly was abolished, 
and a' legislative council substituted— the constitution of this body 
beingfixed, in 1892, at three official and five unofficial members; 
In 1884 the lieutenant governor was created governor and com- 
mander-in-chief, and rendered independent of Jamaica. He is 
assisted by an executive council of three official and three unofficial 
members. For administrative purposes the colony is divided into 
six districts— Belize, Corosal, Orange Walk, the Cayo, Stann Creek 
and Toledo. The capital of the last named is Punta Gorda ; the 
other districts take the names of their chief towns. English common 
law is valid throughout British Honduras, subject to modification by 
local enactments, and to the operation of the Consolidated Laips of 
British Honduras, This collection of ordinances, customs, &c.; was 
officially revised and published between 1884 and 1888. Appeals may 
be carried before the privy council or the supreme court of Jamaica, 

Religion and Education. — The churches represented are Roman 
Catholic, Anglican, Wesleyan, Baptist and Presbyterian; But rione 
of them receives assistance from public funds. The bishopric of 
British Honduras is part of the West Indian province of the Church 
of -England. Almost all the schools, secondary as well as primary, 
are denominational. School fees are charged, and grants-in-aid are 
made to elementary schools. Most of these, since r8g4, have been 
under the control of a : board, on which the religious bodies managing 
the schools are represented. 

Defence. — The Belize volunteer light infantry corps, raised, in 
1897, consists of, about 200 officers and men; a mounted section, 
rriirribering' about 40, was created in 1904. For the whole colony, 
the police' dumber about 120. There is also a volunteer fire brigade 
Of 335 officers and men. 

; History. — " His Majesty's Settlement in the Bay of Honduras, 
as, the territory was formerly styled in official documents, owes 
its origin, in 1638, to log-wood cutters who had formerly been 
buccaneers. These were afterwards joined by agents of the 
Chartered Company which exploited the pearl fisheries of the 
Mosquito coast. Although thus industriously; occupied, the 
settlers so far retained their old habits as to make frequent 
descents on the logwood establishments of the Spaniards, 'whose 
attempts to expel them were generally successfully resisted, 
The most formidable of these was made by the Spaniards in 
April 1734, when, in consequence of the difficulty of approaching 
the position from the sea, an expedition, consisting of 1500 men, 
Was organized inland at the town of Peten. As it neared tie 
coast, it was met by 250 British, and-completely routed. The 
log-wood cutters were not again disturbed for a number of years, 
and their position had become so well established that, in the 
treaty of 1763 with Spain, Great Britain, while agreeing to de- 
molish "all fortifications which English subjects had erected 
in the Bay of Honduras," insisted oh a clause in favour of the 
fritters of logwood, that " they or their Workmen were not 'to 
be disturbed or molested, under any pretext whatever, in theii 
said places of cutting and loading logwood," Strengthened by 
the recognition of the crown, the British settlers made fresh 
encroachments on Spanish territory. The Spaniards, asserting 
thit they were engaged, in smuggling and other illicit practices, 
organized a large force, and on the 15th of September, 17 79^ 
suddenly attacked and destroyed the establishment at Belize^ 
taking the inhabitants prisoners to Merida in Yucatan, arid 
afterwards to Havana, where most of them died, The survivors 
were liberated in 1782, and allowed to go to Jamaica. la 1783; 
they returned with many new adventurers, and were soon engaged 
in cutting woods. On the 3rd of September in that year a new 
treaty was signed between Great Britain and Spain, in which ji 
wasexpressly agreed that his Britannic Majesty's subjects should 
have " the right of cutting, loading, and carrying away logwood 



in tHe district lying between the river Wallis or Belize and Rio 
Hondo, taking the course of these two rivers for unalterable 
boundaries." These concessions " were not to be considered as 
derogating from the rights of sovereignty of the king of Spain " 
over the district in question, where all the English dispersed 
in the Spanish territories were to concentrate themselves within 
eighteen months. This did not prove a satisfactory arrangement; 
for in 1786 a 'new treaty was concluded, in which the king of 
Spain made an additional grant of territory, embracing the 
area between the rivers Sibun or Jabon and Belize. But these 
extended limits were coupled with still more rigid restrictions. 
It is not to be supposed that a population composed of so lawless 
a set of men was remarkably exact in its observance of the treaty. 
They seem to have greatly annoyed their Spanish neighbours, 
who eagerly availed themselves of the breaking out of war between 
the two countries in 1 796 to concert a formidable attack on Belize. 
They concentrated a force of 2000 men at Campeachy, winch, 
under the command of General O'Neill, set sail in thirteen vessels 
for Belize, and ar-rived on the 10th of July, 1798. The settlers, 
aided by the British sloop of war " Merlin," had strongly fortified 
a small island in the harbour, called St George's Cay. They 
maintained a determined resistance against the Spanish forces, 
Which were obliged to retire to Campeachy. This was the last 
attempt to dislodge the British. 

The defeat of the Spanish attempt <jf 1 70S has been adduced 
as an act of conquest, thereby permanently establishing British 
sovereignty. But those who take this view overlook the im- 
portant fact that, in 1814, by a new treaty with Spain, the 
provisions' of the earlier treaty Were revived. They forget 'also 
that' for many years the British government never laid claim 'to 
any rights acquired in virtue of the' successful defence; for so 
late aS 1817-1819' the acts of parliament relating to Belize always 
refer to it as " a settlement, for certain purposes, under the pro- 
tection of His Majesty." After Central America had attained its 
independence (i8i9- 1 i822) Great Britain secured its position by 
incorporating the 'provisions of the treaty of 1786 in a new treaty 
With Mexico (1826), and in the drafts of treaties with New 
Granada (1825) andthe United States of Central America (1831). 
The' territories between the Belize and; Sarstoori ' rivers were 
claimed by the British in 1836, The subsequent peaceful progress 
of the country under British rule; the exception of Belize from, 
that provision of the Clayton-Bulwer Treaty (q.ii.) of 1850 WEjch 
forbade Great Britain arid the United States to fortify of colonize 
any point on the Central American mainland; and the settler 
meht of the boundar^ disputes with Guatemala in 1859, finally 
confirmed the legal sovereignty of Great Britain over the who}e 
colbny, including the : territories claimed in 1836. The Bay 
Islands were recognized as' part of the republic of Hondurksih 
1859. Between 1849, when the Indians beyond the Hondo rose 
against their Mexican rulers, and 1901, when they were finally 
subjugated, rebel bands occasionally attacked the northern and 
north- Western marches of the colony. The last serious raid was 
foiled in 1872. 

Bibliography— For a ll statistical matter relating to the colony, 
see the annual reports to the British Colonial Office (London). ' For 
the 'progress of exploration; see A Narrative of a Journey across the 
unexplored Portion of British Honduras, by H. Fowler (Belize, 1879); 
and . An Expedition to {he Cockscomb Mountains,"by f, Bellamy, 
in Proceedings of the Rffyal, Geographical Society, vol. xf. (London, 
1889). A good general 'description is given in the Handbook of 
British Honduras, by L : W. Bristowe and P. B; Wright (Edinburgh, 
i89?);:and the local; history is recounted in the History -of British 
Honduras, by A-. R- Gibbs (London, 1883) ; (n Notes on Central 
America, by E. J. Squier* (New York, 1855) ; and in Belize or British 
Honduras, a paper read before the Society of Arts by Chief Justice 
Temple (London, 1847). (K. G. J.) 

• BRITOMARTIS ("sweet maiden"), an old Cretan goddess, 
later identified with Artemis. According to Callimachus 
: (Hymn to Diana, t^o), She was a nymph, the daughter of Zeus 
and Garmej ' and" a r favourite companion of Artemis. Being 
ptirstted by Miftosy king-' of Crete, who Was enariwJured' of her, she 
sprang from a rock into 'the sea, but was saved from drowning 
by foiling into' stone fishermen's nets. She was afterWards made 
a goddess by Artemis under the name of Bictyrina'CCkTiw," a 



BRITON-FERRY— BRITTANY 



617 



net "). She was the patroness of hunters, fishermen and sailors, 
and also a goddess of birth and health. The centre of her worship 
was Cydonia, whence it extended to Sparta and Aegina (where she 
was known as Aphaea) and the islands of the Mediterranean. By 
some she is considered to have been a moon-goddess, her flight 
from Minos and her leap into the sea signifying the revolution and 
disappearance of the moon (Pausanias ii. 30, iii. 14; Antoninus 
Liberalis 40). 

BRITON-FERRY, a seaport in the mid-parliamentary division 
of Glamorganshire, Wales, on the eastern bank of the estuary of 
the Neath river in Swansea Bay, with stations on the Great 
Western and the Rhondda & Swansea Bay railways, being 174 m. 
by rail from London. Pop. of urban district (1901) 6973. A 
tram-line connects it with Neath, 2 m. distant, and the Vale of 
Neath Canal (made in 1797) has its terminus here. The district 
was formerly celebrated for its scenery, but this has been con- 
siderably marred by industrial development which received its 
chief impetus from the construction in 1861 of a dock of 13 acres, 
the property of the Great Western Railway Company, and the 
opening up about the same time of the mining districts of 
Glyncorrwg and Maesteg by means of the South Wales mineral 
railway, which connects them with the dock and supplies it with 
its chief export, coal. Steel and tinplates are manufactured here 
on a large scale. There are also iron- works and a foundry. 

The name La Brittone was given by the Norman settlers of 
the 12th century to its ferry across the estuary of the Neath 
(where Archbishop Baldwin and Giraldus crossed in 1188, and 
which is still used), but the Welsh name of the town from at least 
the 16th century has been Llansawel. 

BRITTANY, or Britanny (Fr. Bretagne), known as Armorica 
(q.v.) until the influx of Celts from Britain, an ancient province 
and duchy of France, consisting of the north-west peninsula, and 
nearly corresponding to the departments of Finistere, C6tes-du- 
Nord, Morbihan, Ille-et-Vilaine and Lower Loire. It is popularly 
divided into Upper or Western, and Lower or Eastern Brittany. 
Its greatest length between the English Channel and the Atlantic 
Ocean is 250 kilometres (about 155 English miles), and its super- 
ficial extent is 30,000 sq. kilometres (about 18,630 English sq. m.). 
It comprises two distinct zones, a maritime zone and an inland 
zone. In the centre there are two plateaus, partly covered with 
landes, unproductive moorland : the southern plateau is continued 
by the Montagnes Noires, and the northern is dominated by the 
Monts d'Arree. These ranges nowhere exceed 1 1 50 ft. in height, 
but from their wild nature they recall the aspect of high 
mountains. The waterways of Brittany are for the most part of 
little value owing to their torrent-like character. The only river 
basin of any importance is that of the Vilaine, which flows 
through Rennes. The coast is very much indented, especially 
along the English Channel, and is rocky and lined with reefs and 
islets. The mouths of the rivers form deep estuaries. Thus 
nature itself condemned Brittany to remain for a long time shut 
out from civilization. But in the 19th century the development 
of railways and other means of communication drew Brittany 
from its isolation. In the 1 9th century also agriculture developed 
in a remarkable manner. Many of the landes were cleared and 
converted into excellent pasturage, and on the coast market- 
gardening made great progress. In the fertile districts cereals 
too are cultivated. Industrial pursuits, except in a few seaport 
towns, which are rather French than Breton, have hitherto 
received but little attention. 

The Bretons are by nature conservative. They cling with 
almost equal attachment to their local customs and their religious 
superstitions. It was not till the 17 th century that paganism 
was even nominally abolished in some parts, and there is probably 
no district in Europe where the popular Christianity has assimi- 
lated more from earlier creeds. Witchcraft and the influence of 
fairies are still often believed in. The costume of both sexes is 
very peculiar both in cut and colour, but varies considerably 
in different districts. Bright red, violet and blue are much used, 
not only by the women, but in the coats and waistcoats of the 
men. The reader will find full illustrations of the different styles 
in Bouet's Breiz-izel, ou vie des Brewns de V Armorique (1844)! 



The Celtic language is still spoken in lower Brittany. Four dia- 
lects are pretty clearly marked (see the article Celt: Language, 
"Breton" p. 328). Nowhere has the taste for marvellous 
legends been kept so green as in Brittany; and an entire folk- 
literature still flourishes there, as is manifested by the large 
number of folk-tales and folk-songs which have been collected 
of late years. 

The whole duchy was formerly divided into nine bishoprics :— - 
Rennes, Dol, Nantes, St Malo and St Brieuc, in Upper Brittany 
and Treguier, Vannes, Quimper and St Pol de Leon in Lower. 

History. — Of Brittany before the coming of the Romans we 
have no exact knowledge. The only traces left by the primitive 
populations are the megalithic monuments (dolmens, menhirs 
and cromlechs) , which remain to this day in great numbers (see 
Stone Monuments). In 56 b.c. the Romans destroyed the 
fleet of the Veneti, and in 52 the inhabitants of Armorica took 
part in the great insurrection of the Gauls against Caesar, but 
were subdued finally by him in 51. Roman civilization was then 
established for several centuries in Brittany. 

In the 5th century numbers of the Celtic inhabitants of Britain, 
flying from the Angles and Saxons, emigrated to Armorica, ana 
populated a great part of the peninsula. Converted to Chris- 
tianity, the new-comers founded' monasteries which helped to 
clear the land, the greater part of which was barren and wild. 
The Celtic immigrants formed the counties of Vannes, Cornou- 
aille, Leon and Domnonee. A powerful aristocracy was con- 
stituted, which owned estates and had them cultivated by serfs 
or villeins. The Celts sustained a long struggle against the 
Frankish kings, who only nominally occupied Brittany. Louis 
the Pious placed a native chief Nomenoe at the head of Brittany. 
There was then a fairly long period of peace; but Nomenoe" 
rebelled against Charles the Bald, defeated him, and forced him, 
in 846, to recognize the independence of Brittany. The end of 
the 9th century and the beginning of the 10th were remarkable 
for the invasions of the Northmen. On several occasions they 
were driven back — by Salomon (d. 874) and afterwards by Alain, 
count of Vannes (d. 907)— but it was Alain Barbetorte (d. 952) 
who gained the decisive victory over them. 

In the second half of the 10th century and in the nth century 
the counts of Rennes were predominant in Brittany. Geoffrey, 
son of Conan, took the title of duke of Brittany in 992. Conan II., 
Geoffrey's grandson, threatened by the revolts of the nobles, was 
attacked also by the duke of Normandy (afterwards William I. 
of England). Alain Fergent, one of his successors, defeated 
William in 1085, and forced him to make peace. But in the 
following century the Plantagenets succeeded in establishing 
themselves in Brittany. Conan IV., defeated by the revolted 
Breton nobles, appealed to Henry II; of England, who, in reward 
for his help, forced Conan to give his daughter in marriage to 
his Son Geoffrey. Thus Henry II. became master of Brittany, 
and Geoffrey was recognized as duke of Brittany. But this 
new dynasty was not destined to last long. Geoffrey's pos- 
thumous son, Arthur, was assassinated by John of England in 
1203, and Arthur's sister Alix, who succeeded to his rights, was 
married in 1 2 1 2 to Pierre de Dreux, who became duke. This was 
the beginning of a ducal dynasty of French origin, which lasted 
till the end of the 15 th century. 

From that moment the ducal power gained strength in 
Brittany and succeeded in curbing the feudal nobles. Under 
French influence civilization made notable progress. For more 
than a centtiry peace reigned undisturbed in Brittany. But in 
1341 the death of John III., without direct heir, provoked a war 
of succession between the houses of Blois and Montfort, which 
lasted till 1364. This war of succession was, in reality, an 
incident of the Hundred Years' War, the partisans of Blois and 
Montfort supporting respectively the kings of France and 
England. In 1364 John of Montfort (d. 1399) was recognized 
as duke of Brittany under the style of John IV., 1 but his reign 

1 Certain authorities count the father of this duke, another John of 
Montfort (d. 1345), among the dukes of Brittaay, and according to 
this enumeration the younger John becomes John V., not John IV.. 
and his successor John VI. and not John V. 



6i8 



BRITTON, JOHN— BRIVE 



was constantly troubled, notably by his struggle with Olivier de 
Clisson (1336-1407). John V. (d. 1442), on the other hand, 
distinguished himself by his able and pacific policy. During his 
reign and the reigns of his successors, Francis I., Peter II. and 
Arthur III., the ducal authority developed in a remarkable 
manner. The dukes formed a standing army, and succeeded 
in levying hearth taxes (fouages) throughout Brittany. Francis 
II. (1435-1488) fought against Louis XI., notably during the 
War of the Public Weal, and afterwards engaged in the struggle 
against Charles VIII., known as " The Mad War " (La Guerre 
Felle). After the death of Francis II. the king of France invaded 
Brittany, and forced Francis's daughter, Anne of Brittany, to 
marry him in 1491. Thus the reunion of Brittany and France 
was prepared. After the death of Charles VIII. Anne married 
Louis XII. Francis I., who married Claude, the daughter of 
Louis XII. and Anne, settled the definitive annexation of the 
duchy by the contract of 1532, by which the maintenance of the 
privileges and liberties of Brittany was guaranteed. Until the 
Revolution Brittany retained its own estates. The royal power, 
however, was exerted to reduce the privileges of the province 
as much as possible. It often met with vigorous resistance, 
notably in the 18th century. The struggle was particularly keen 
between 1760 and 1769, when E. A. de V. du Plessis Richelieu, 
due d'Aiguillon, had to fight simultaneously the estates and the 
parliament, and had a formidable adversary in L. R. de C. de la 
Chalotais. But under the monarchy the only civil war in 
Brittany in which blood was shed was the revolt of the due de 
Mercceur (d. 1602) against the crown at the time of the troubles 
of the League, a revolt which lasted from 1 589 to 1 598. Mention, 
however, must also be made of a serious popular revolt which 
broke out in 1675 — " the revolt of the stamped paper." 

See Bertrand d'Argentre, Histoire de Bretagne (Paris, 1586); 
Dom Lobineau, Histoire de Bretagne (Paris, 1702); Dom Morice, 
Histoire de Bretagne (1 742-1 756); T. A. Trollope, A Summer in 
Brittany (1840) ; A. du Chatellier, V 'Agriculture et Us classes agricoles 
de la Bretagne (1862) ; F. M. Luzel, Legendes chretiennes de la Basse- 
Bretagne (Paris, 1881), and Veillees bretonnes (Paris, 1879) ; A. Dupuy, 
La Reunion de la Bretagne a la France (Paris, 1880), and Etudes sur 
V administration municipale en Bretagne au XVIII' siecle d89i); 
J. Loth, L 'Emigration bretonne en Armorique du V" au VII" siecle 
(Rennes, 1883); H. du Cleuziou, Bretagne artistique et pittoresque 
(Paris, 1886); Arthur de la Borderie, Histoire de Bretagne (Rennes, 
1896 seq.); J. Lemoine, La Revolte du papier timbre ou des bonnets 
rouges en Bretagne en 167$ (1898) ; M. Marion, La Bretagne et le due 
dAiguillon (Paris, 1898); B. Pocquet, Le Due d'Aiguillon et la 
Chalotais (Paris, 1900-1902) ; Anatole le Braz, Vieilles Histoires du 
pays breton (1897), and La Legende de la mort (Paris, 1902) ; Ernest 
Lavisse, Histoire de France, vol. i. (Paris, 1903) ; Henri See, Etude 
sur les classes rurales en Bretagne au moyen Age (1896), and Les 
Classes rurales en Bretagne du XVI" siecle a la Revolution (1906). 

BRITTON, JOHN (1771-1857), English antiquary, was born 
on the 7 th of July 1771 at Kington-St-Michael, near Chippenham. 
His parents were in humble circumstances, and he was left an 
orphan at an early age. At sixteen he went to London and was 
apprenticed to a wine merchant. Prevented by ill-health from 
serving his full term, he found himself adrift in the world, without 
money or friends. In his fight with poverty he was put to strange 
shifts, becoming cellarman at a tavern and clerk to a lawyer, 
reciting and singing at a small theatre, and compiling a collection 
of common songs. After some slight successes as a writer, a 
Salisbury publisher commissioned him to compile an account 
of Wiltshire and, in conjunction with his friend Edward Wedlake 
Brayley, Britton produced The Beauties of Wiltshire (1801 ; 
2 vols., a third added in 1825), the first of the series The Beauties 
of England and Wales, nine volumes of which Britton and his 
friend wrote. Britton was the originator of a new class of 
literary works. " Before his time," says Digby Wyatt, " popular 
topography was unknown." In 1805 Britton published the 
first part of his Architectural Antiquities of Great Britain (9 vols., 
1805-18 14); and this was followed by Cathedral Antiquities 
of England (14 vols., 1814-1835). In 1845 a Britton Club was 
formed, and a sum of £1000 was subscribed and given to Britton, 
who was subsequently granted a civil list pension by Disraeli, 
then chancellor of the exchequer. Britton was an earnest 
advocate of the preservation of national monuments, proposing 



in 1837 the formation of a society such as the modern Society 
for the Preservation of Ancient Monuments. Britton himself 
supervised the reparation of Waltham Cross and Stratford-on- 
Avon church. He died in London on the 1st of January 1857. 

Among other works with which Britton was associated either as 
author or editor are Historical Account of Redcliffe Church, Bristol 
(1813); Illustrations of Fonthill Abbey (1823); Architectural An- 
tiquities of Normandy, with illustrations by Pugin (1825-1827); 
Picturesque Antiquities of English Cities (1830); and History of the 
Palace and Houses of Parliament at Westminster ( 1 834-1 836), the 
joint work of Britton and Brayley. He contributed much to the 
Gentleman 's Magazine and other periodicals. 

His Autobiography was published in 1850. A Descriptive Account 
of his Literary Works was published by his assistant T. E. Jones. 

BRITTON, the title of the earliest summary of the law of 
England in the French tongue, which purports to have been 
written by command of King Edward I. The origin and author- 
ship of the work have been much disputed. It has been attri- 
buted to John le Breton, bishop of Hereford, on the authority of a 
passage found in some MSS. of the history of Matthew of West- 
minster; there are difficulties, however, involved in this theory, 
inasmuch as the bishop of Hereford died in 1275, whereas 
allusions are made in Britton to several statutes passed after that 
time, and more particularly to the well-known statute Quia 
emptores lerrarum, which was passed in 1 290. It was the opinion 
of Selden that the book derived its title from Henry de Bracton, 
the last of the chief justiciaries, whose name is sometimes 
spelled in the fine Rolls " Bratton " and " Bretton," and that it 
v/as a royal abridgment of Bracton's great work on the customs 
and laws of England, with the addition of certain subsequent 
statutes. The arrangement, however, of the two works is 
different, and but a small proportion of Bracton's work is in- 
corporated in Britton. The work is entitled in an early MS. of 
the 14th century, which was once in the possession of Selden, and 
is now in the Cambridge university library, Summa de legibus 
Anglie que vocatur Bretone; and it is described as "a book 
called Bretoun " in the will of Andrew Horn, the learned chamber- 
lain of the city of London, who bequeathed it to the chamber * 
of the Guildhall in 1329, together with another book called 
Mirroir des Justices. 

Britton was first printed in London by Robert Redman, without 
a date, probably about the year 1530. Another edition of it was 
printed in 1640, corrected by E. Wingate. A third edition of it, 
with an English translation, was published at the University Press, 
Oxford, 1865, by F. M. Nichol. An English translation of the work 
without the Latin text had been previously published by R. Kelham 
in 1762. 

BRITZSKA, or Britska (from the Polish bryczka; a diminu- 
tive of hryka, a goods- wagon) , a form of carriage, copied in 
England from Austria early in the 19th century; as used in 
Poland and Russia it had four wheels, with a long wicker-work 
body constructed for reclining and a calash (hooded) top. 

BRIVE, or Brives-la-Gaillarde, a town of south-central 
France, capital of an arrondissement in the department of 
Correze, 62 m. S.S.E. of Limoges on the main line of the Orleans 
railway from Paris to Montauban. Pop. (1906) town 14,954; 
commune 20,636. It lies on the left bank of the Correze in an 
ample and fertile plain, which is the meeting-place of important 
roads and railways. The enceinte which formerly surrounded 
the town has been replaced by shady boulevards, and a few 
wide thoroughfares have been made, but many narrow winding 
streets and ancient houses still remain. Outside the boulevards 
lie the modern quarters, also the fine promenade planted with 
plane trees which stretches to the Correze and contains the chief 
restaurants and the theatre. Here also is the statue of Marshal 
Guillaume Marie Anne Brune, who was a native of Brive. A 
fine bridge leads over the river to suburbs on its right bank. 
The public buildings are of little interest apart from the church 
of St Martin, which stands in the heart of the old town. It is 
a building of the 12 th century in the Romanesque style of 
Limousin, with three narrow naves of almost equal height. 
The ecclesiastical seminary occupies a graceful mansion of the 
16th century, with a fafade, a staircase and fireplaces of fine 
Renaissance workmanship. Brive is the seat of a sub-prefeel 



BRIXEN— BRIZO 



619 



and has a tribunal of first instance, a tribunal of commerce, a 
communal college and a school of industry. Its position makes 
it a market of importance, and it has a very large trade in the 
early vegetables and fruit of the valley of the Correze, and in 
grain, live-stock and truffles. Table-delicacies, paper, wooden 
shoes, hats, wax and earthenware are manufactured, and there 
are slate and millstone workings and dye-works. 

In the vicinity are numerous rock caves, many of them having 
been used as dwellings in prehistoric times. The best known 
are those of Lamouroux, excavated in stages in a vertical wall 
of rock, and four grotto-chapels resorted to by pilgrims in 
memory of St Anthony of Padua, who founded a Franciscan 
monastery at Brive in 1226. Under the Romans Brive was 
known as Briva Curretiae (bridge of the Correze). In the 
middle ages it was the capital of lower Limousin. 

BRIXEN (Ital. Bressanone) , a small city in the Austrian 
province of Tirol, and the chief town of the administrative 
district of Brixen. Pop. (1000) 5767. It is situated in the valley 
of the Eisack, at the confluence of that stream with the Rienz, 
and is a station on the Brenner railway, being 34 m. south-east 
of that pass, and 24 m. north-east of Botzen. The aspect of the 
city is very ecclesiastical; it is still the see of a bishop, and 
contains an 18th-century cathedral church, an episcopal palace 
and seminary, twelve churches and five monasteries. The see 
was founded at the end of the 8th century (possibly of the 6th 
century) at Saben on the rocky heights above the towni of 
Klausen (some way to the south of Brixen), but in 992 was 
transferred to Brixen, which, perhaps a Roman station, became 
later a royal estate, under the name of Prichsna, and in 901 
was given by Louis the Child to the bishop. In 1027 the bishop 
received from the emperor Conrad II. very extensive temporal 
powers, which he only lost to Austria in 1803. The town was 
surrounded in 1030 by walls. In 1525 it was the scene of the 
first outbreak of the great peasants' revolt. About s§ m. north 
of Brixen is the great fortress of Franzensfeste, built 1833-1838, 
to guard the route over the Brenner and the way to the east up 
the Pusterthal. (W. A. B. C.) 

BRIXHAM, a seaport and market town in the Torquay 
parliamentary division of Devonshire, England, 33 m. S. of 
Exeter, on a branch of the Great Western railway. Pop. of 
urban district (1901) 8092. The town is irregularly built on 
the cliffs to the south of Torbay, and its harbour is sheltered 
by a breakwater. Early in the 19th century it was an important 
military post, with fortified barracks on Berry Head. It is 
the headquarters of the Devonshire sea-fisheries, having also 
a large coasting trade. Shipbuilding and the manufacture of 
ropes, paint and sails are industries. There is excellent bathing, 
and Brixham is in favour as a seaside resort. St Mary's, the 
ancieat parish church, has an elaborate 14th-century font and 
somennonuments of interest. At the British Seamen's Orphans' 
home boys are fed, clothed and trained as apprentices for the 
merchant service. A statue commemorates the landing, in 
1 681, of William of Orange. 

Brixham Cave, called also Windmill Hill Cavern, is a well- 
known ossiferous cave situated near Brixham, on the brow of a 
hill composed of Devonian limestone. It was discovered by 
chance in 1858, having been until then hermetically sealed by a 
mass of limestone breccia. Dr Hugh Falconer with the assistance 
of a committee of geologists excavated it. The succession of 
beds in descending order is as follows: — (1) Shingle consisting of 
pebbles of limestone, slate and other local rocks, with fragments of 
stalagmite and containing a few bones and worked flints. The 
thickness varies from five to sixteen feet. (2) Red cave earth 
with angular fragments of limestone, bones and worked flints, 
and having a thickness of 3 to 4 ft. (3) Remnants {in situ) of 
an old stalagmitic floor about nine inches thick. (4) Black 
peaty soil varying in thickness, the maximum being about a foot. 
(5) Angular debris fallen from above varying in thickness from 
one to ten feet. (6) Stalagmite with a few bones and antlers of 
reindeer, the thickness varying from one to fifteen inches. Of 
particular interest is the presence of patches or ledges of an old 
stalagmitic floor, three to four feet above the present floor. 



On the under-side, there are found attached fragments of lime- 
stone and quartz, showing that the shingle bed once extended 
up to it, and that it then formed the original floor. The shingle 
therefore stood some feet higher than it does now, and it is 
supposed that a shock or jar, such as that of an earthquake, 
broke up the stalagmite, and the pebbles and sand composing 
the shingle sunk deeper into the fissures in the limestone. This 
addition to the size of the cave was partially filled up by the cave 
earth. At a later period the fall of angular fragments at the 
entrance finally closed the cave, and it ceased to be accessible 
except to a few burrowing animals, whose remains are found 
above the second and newer stalagmite floor. 

The fauna of Brixham cavern closely resembles that of Kent's 
Hole. The bones of the bear, horse, rhinoceros, lion, elephant, 
hyena and of many birds and small rodents were unearthed. 
Altogether 1621 bones, nearly all broken and gnawed, were found; 
of these 691 belonged to birds and small rodents of more recent 
times. The implements are of a roughly-chipped type resembling 
those of the Mousterian period. From these structural and 
palaeontological evidences, geologists suppose that the formation 
of the cave was carried on simultaneously with the excavation of 
the valley; that the small streams, flowing down the upper 
ramifications of the valley, entered the western opening of the 
cave, and traversing the fissures in the limestone, escaped by the 
lower openings in the chief valley; and that the rounded pebbles 
found in the shingle bed were carried in by these streams. It 
would be only at times of drought that the cave was frequented by 
animals, a theory which explains the small quantity of animal 
remains in the shingle. The implements of man are relatively 
more common, seventeen chipped flints' having been found. As 
the excavation of the valley proceeded, the level of the stream was 
lowered and its course diverted; the cave consequently became 
drier and was far more frequently inhabited by predatory 
animals. It was now essentially an animal den, the occasional 
visits of man being indicated by the rare occurrence of flint- 
implements. Finally, the cave became a resort of bears; the 
remains of 354 specimens, in all stages of growth, including even 
sucking cubs, being discovered. 

See Sir Joseph Prestwich, Geology (1888) ; Sir John Evans, 
Ancient Stone Implements of Great Britain, p. 512; Report on the 
Cave, Phil. Trans. (Royal Society, 1873). 

BRIXTON, a district in the south of London, England, 
included in the metropolitan borough of Lambeth (q.v.). 

BRIZEUX, JULIEN AUGUSTE PELAGE (1803-1858), French 
poet, was born at Lorient (Morbihan) on the 12th of September 
1803. He belonged to a family of Irish origin, long settled in 
Brittany, and was educated for the law, but in 1827 he pro- 
duced at the Theatre Francais a one-act verse comedy, Racine, 
in collaboration with Philippe Busoni. A journey to Italy in 
company with Auguste Barbier made a great impression on him, 
and a second visit (1834) resulted in 1841 in the publication of a 
complete translation of the Divina Commedia in terza ritna. 
With Primel el Nola (1852) he included poems written under 
Italian influence, entitled Les Ternaires (1841), but in the 
rustic idyl of Marie (1836) turned to Breton country life; in 
Les Bretons (1845) he found his inspiration in the folklore and 
legends of his native province, and in Telen-Aroor (1844) he used 
the Breton dialect. His Histoires poitiques (1855) was crowned 
by the French Academy. His work is small in bulk, but is charac- 
terized by simplicity and sincerity. Brizeux was an ardent 
student of the philology and archaeology of Brittany, and had 
collected materials for a dictionary of Breton place-names 
He died at Montpellier on the 3rd of May 1858. 

His GEuvres completes (2 vols., i860) were edited with a notice of 
the author by Saint-Rene Taillandier. Another edition appeared in 
1880-1884 (4 vols.). A long list of articles on his work may be con- 
sulted in an exhaustive monograph, Brizeux; sa vie et ses auvres 
(1898), by the abbe C. Lecigne. 

BRIZO, an ancient goddess worshipped in Delos. She delivered 
oracles in dreams to those who consulted her about fishery and 
seafaring. The women of Delos offered her presents consisting of 
little boats filled with all kinds of eatables (with the exception of 



620 



BROACH— BROCADE 



fish) in order to obtain her protection for those engaged on the 
sea (Athenaeus viii. p. 335). 

BROACH, or Bharuch, an ancient city and modern district 
of British India, in the northern division of Bombay. The 
city is on the right bank of the Nerbudda, about 30 m. from the 
sea, and 203 m. N. of Bombay. The area, including suburbs^ 
occupies 25 sq. m. Pop. (1901) 42,806. The sea-borne trade is 
confined to a few coasting vessels. Handloom-weaving is almost 
extinct, but several cotton mills have been opened. There" are 
also large flour-mills. Broach is the Barakacheva of the Chinese 
traveller Hsiian Tsang and the Barygaza of Ptolemy and Arrian. 
Upon the conquest of Gujarat by the Mahommedans, and the 
formation of the state of that name, Broach formed part of the new 
kingdom. On its overthrow by Akbar in 1572, it was annexed 
to the Mogul empire and governed by a Nawab. The Mahrattas 
became its masters in 1685, from which period it was held in 
subordination to the peshwa until 1772, when it was captured 
by a force under General Wedderburn (brother to Lord Loughs 
borough), who was killed in the assault. In 1783 it was ceded 
by the British to Sindhia in acknowledgment of certain services. 
It was stormed in 1803 by a detachment commanded by Colonel 
Woodington, and was finally ceded to the East India Company 
by Sindhia under the treaty of Sarji Anjangaom. 

The District or Broach contains an area of 1467 sq. m. 
Consisting chiefly of the alluvial plain at the mouth of the river 
Nerbudda, the land is rich and highly cultivated, and though it 
is without forests it is not wanting in trees. The district is well 
supplied with rivers, having in addition to the Nerbudda the 
Mahi in the north and the Kim in the south. The population 
comprises several distinct races or castes, who, while speaking a 
common dialect, Gujarati, inhabit separate villages. Thus there 
are Koli, Kunbi or Voro (Bora) villages, and others whose lands 
are almost entirely held and cultivated by high castes, such as 
Rajputs, Brahmans or Parsees. In 1901 the population was 
291,763, showing a decrease of 15%, compared with an increase 
of s % in the preceding decade. The principal crops are cotton, 
millet, wheat and pulse. Dealing in cotton is the chief industry, 
the dealers being organized in a gild. Besides the cotton mills in 
Broach city there are several factories for ginning and pressing 
cotton, some of them on a very large scale. The district is 
traversed throughout its length by the Bombay & Baroda railway, 
which crosses the Nerbudda opposite Broach city on an iron- 
girder bridge of 67 spans. The district suffered severely from the 
famine of 1899-1900. 

BROACH (Fr. broche, a pointed instrument, Med. Lat. brocca, 
cf. the Latin adjective brochus or broecus, projecting, used of 
teeth), a word, of which the doublet " brooch " (q.v.) has a 
special meaning, for many forms of pointed instruments, such 
as a bodkin, a wooden needle used in tapestry-making, a spit for 
roasting meat, and a tool, also called a " rimer," used with a 
wrench for enlarging or smoothing holes (see Tool) . From the 
use of a similar instrument to tap casks, comes " to broach " or 
" tap " a cask. A particular use in architecture is that of 
" broach-spire," a term employed to designate a particular form 
of spire, found only in England, which takes its name from the 
stone roof of the lower portion. The stone spire being octagonal 
and the tower square on plan, there remained four angles to be 
covered over. This was done with a stone roof of slight pitch, 
compared with that of the spire, and it is the intersection of this 
roof with the octagonal Places of the spire which forms the 
broach. 

BROADSIDE, sometimes termed .Broadsheet, a single sheet 
of paper containing printed matter on one side only. The broad- 
side seems to have been employed from the very beginning of 
printing for royal proclamations, papal indulgences and similar 
documents. England appears to have been its chief home, 
where it was used chiefly for ballads, particularly in the 16th 
century, but also as a means of political agitation and for personal 
statements of all kinds, especially for the dissemination of the 
dying speeches and confessions of criminals. It is prominent in 
the history of literature because, particularly during the later 
part of the 17th century, several important poems, by Dryden, 



Butler and others, originally appeared printed on the "broad 
side " of a sheet. The term is also used of the simultaneous 
discharge of the guns on one side of a ship of war. 

BROADSTAIRS, a watering-place, in the Isle of Thanet 
parliamentary division of Kent, England, 3 m. S.E. of Margate, 
on the South-Eastern & Chatham railway. Pop. of urban 
district, Broadstairs and St Peter's (1901) 6466. From 1837 to 
1851 Broadstairs was a favourite summer resort of Charles 
Dickens, who, in a sketch called " Our English Watering-Place," 
described it as a place " left high and dry by the tide of years." 
This seaside village, with its " semicircular sweep of houses," 
grew into a considerable town owing to the influx of summer 
visitors, for whose entertainment there are, besides the " Albion " 
mentioned by Dickens, numerous hotels and boarding-houses, 
libraries, a bathing establishment and a fine promenade. 
Dickens' residence was called Fort House, but it became known 
as Bleak House, through association with his novel of that name, 
though this was written after his last visit to Broadstairs in 
1851. Broadstairs has a small pier for fishing-boats, first built 
in the reign of Henry VIII. An archway leading down to the 
shore bears an inscription showing that it was erected by George 
Culmer in 1540, and not far off is the site of a chapel of the 
Virgin, to which ships were accustomed to lower their top-sails 
as they passed. St Peter's parish, lying on the landward side of 
Broadstairs, and included in the urban district, has a church 
dating from the 12th to the end of the 16th century. Kingsgate, 
on the North Foreland, north of Broadstairs on the coast, 
changed its name from St Bartholomew's Gate in honour of 
Charles II. 's landing here with the duke of York in 1683 on his 
way from London to Dover. Stonehouse, close by, now a 
preparatory school for boys, was the residence of Archbishop 
Tait, whose wife established the orphanage here. 

BROCA, PAUL (1824-1880), French surgeon and anthro- 
pologist, was born at Sainte-Foy la Grande, Gironde, on the 
28th of June 1824. He early developed a taste for higher 
mathematics, but circumstances decided him in adopting 
medicine as his profession. Beginning his studies at Paris in 
1841, he made rapid progress, becoming house-surgeon in 1844, 
assistant anatomical lecturer in 1846, and three years later 
professor of surgical anatomy. He had already gained a reputa- 
tion by his pathological researches. In 1853 he was named 
fellow of the Faculty of Medicine, and in 1867 became member 
of the Academy of Medicine and professor of surgical pathology 
to the Faculty. During the years occupied in winning his way 
to the head of his profession he had published treatises of much 
value on cancer, aneurism and other subjects. It was in 1861 
that he announced his discovery of the seat of articulate speech 
in the left side of the frontal region of the brain, since known as 
the convolution of Broca. But famous as he was as a suigeon, 
his name is associated most closely with the modern school 
of anthropology. Establishing the Anthropological Society of 
Paris in 1859, of which he was secretary till his death, he was 
practically the inventor of the modern science of craniofegy. 
He rendered distinguished service in the Franco- German War, 
and during the Commune by his organization and administration 
of the public hospitals. He founded La Revue a" Anthropologic 
in 1872, and it was in its pages that the larger portion of his 
writings appeared. In his last years Broca turned from his 
labours in the region of craniology to the exclusive study of the 
brain, in which his greatest triumphs were achieved (see 
Aphasia). He was decorated with the Legion of Honour 
in 1868, and was honorary fellow of the leading ana- 
tomical, biological and anthropological societies of the world. 
He died on the 9th of July 1880. A statue of him by Choppin 
was erected in 1887 in front of the Faculty of Medicine in Paris. 
BROCADE, the name usually given to a class of richly decora- 
tive shuttle-woven fabrics, often made in coloured silks and 
with or without gold and silver threads. Ornamental features 
in brocade are emphasized and wrought as additions to the 
main fabric, sometimes stiffening it, though more frequently 
producing on its face the effect of low relief. These additions 
present a distinctive appearance on the back of the stuff, where 



BROCADE 



62 1 



the weft or floating threads of the brocaded or broached parts 
hang in loose groups or are clipped away. 
The Latin word broccus is related equally to the Italian 




Fig. 1. — Brocade woven in red and olive green silks and gold 
thread on a cream-coloured ground. Along the top is the Kufic 
inscription " Arrahman " (The Merciful) several times repeated in 
olive green on a gold-thread ground. Pairs of seated animals, 
addorsed regardant, and geese vis-a-vis are worked within the lozenge- 
shaped compartments of the trellis framework which regulates the 
pattern. Both animals and birds are separated by conventional 
trees, and the latter are enclosed in inscriptions of Kufic characters. 
Siculo-Saracenic; nth or 12th century. 55 in. sq. 

brocato, the Spanish brocar and the French brocarts and brocher, 
and implies a form of stitching or broaching, so that textile 
fabrics woven with an appearance of stitching or broaching have 
consequently come to be termed " brocades." A Spanish docu- 





Fig. 2. — Part of-a Siculo-Saracenic brocade woven in the 12th 
century. 16 j in. wide. 

ment dated 1375 distinguishes, bet ween &vdnj^vdV ed'argento 

de seda and brocats d'or e d'argent, a difference which is readily 

perceived, upon comparing for instance cloths of gold, Indian 



kincobs, with Lyons silks that are brocket with threads of 
gold, silk or other material. Notwithstanding this, many Indian 
kincobs'and dainty gold and coloured silk-weavings of Persian 
workmanship, both without floating threads, are often called 
brocades, although in neither .„..„, 

is the ornamentation really IV^. TI. 2?^ ar S^f^t flfc. JSS^ 
brochS or brocaded. Con- 
temporary in use with the 
Spanish brocats is the word 
brocado. In addition to bro- 
carts the French now use the 
word brocher in connexion 
with certain silk stuffs which 
however are not brocades in 
the same sense as the bro- 
carts. A wardrobe account 
of King Edward IV. (1480) 
has an entry of " satyn 
broched with gold "—a de- 
scription that fairly applies 
to such an enriched satin as 
that for instance shown in £ 
fig. 4. But some three cen- jj» 
turies earlier than the date of 
that specimen, decorative 
stuffs were partly broches 
with gold threads by oriental 
weavers, especially those of 
Persia, Syria and parts of FlG . 3 ._ Piece of stuff woven 
southern Europe and northern or brocaded with red silk and 
Africa under the domination gold thread, with an -ogival fram- 
of the Saracens, to whom the in S enclosing alternately, pairs of 
earlier germs, so to speak, of £E&^^Tl2^ 
brocading may be traced. i ea f -shaped fruit device. Probably 
Of such is the nth or of Rhenish-Byzantine manufacture 
12th century Siculo-Saracenic inthe12thor13thcentury.9in.long. 
specimen in fig. 1, in which the heads only of the pairs 
of animals and birds are broched. with gold thread. Another 
sort of brocaded material is indicated in fig. 2, taken from a 
part of a sumptuous Siculo-Saracenic weaving ' produced in 
coloured silks and gold threads at the famous Hotel des Tiraz 
in Palermo for an official robe of Henry IV. 
(1165-1197) as emperor of the Holy Roman Empire, 
and still preserved in the cathedral of Regensburg. 
Fig. 3 is a further variety of textile that would be 
classed as brocat. This is of the 12th or 13th century 
manufacture, possibly by German or Rhenish-Byzan- 
tine weavers, or even by Spanish weavers, i many of 
whom at Almeria, Malaga, Grenada and Seville 
rivalled those at Palermo. In the 14th century the 
making of satins heavily brocaded with gold threads 
was associated conspicuously with such Italian towns 
as Lucca, Genoa, Venice and Florence. Fig. 4 is from 
a piece of 14th-century dark-blue, satin broached 
in relief with gold thread in a design the like of 
which appears in the background of Orcagna's 
"Coronation of the Virgin," now in the ; National 
Gallery, London. During the 17 th century Genoa, 
Florence and Lyons vied with each other in 
making brocades in which the enrichments were 
as frequently of coloured silks as of gold inter- 
mixed with silken threads. Fig. 5 is from a piece of 
crimson silk damask flatly brocaded with flowers, 
scroll forms, fruit and birds in gold. This is 
probably of Florentine workmanship. Rather more 
closely allied to modern brocades is the Lyons 
specimen given in fig. 6, in which the brocading is 
done not only with silver but also with coloured 
silks. Early in the 18th century Spitalfields was 
busy as a competitor with Lyons in manufacturing many 
sorts of brocades, specified in a collection of designs pre- 
served in the national art library of the Victoria and 



622 



BROCCHI 



Albert Museum, under such trade titles as " brocade lut- 
string, brocade tabby, brocade tissue, brocade damask, brocade 




Fig. 4. — Piece of blue satin brocaded with gold threads. The unit 
of the pattern is a symmetrical arrangement of fantastic birds, vine 
leaves and curving stems. The bird shapes are remotely related to, 
if not derived from, the Chinese mystical " fonghoang." North 
Italian weaving of the 14th century; about n in. square. 

Siitin, Venetian brocade, and India figured brocade." Brocading 
in China seems to be of considerable antiquity, and Dr Bushell 
in his valuable handbook on Chinese art cites a notice of five 




Fig. 5. — Piece of crimson silk damask brocaded in gold thread 
with symmetrically arranged flowers, scrolls, birds, &c. Italian 
(? Florentine). Late 17th century; about 2 ft. 6 in. long. 

rolls of brocade with dragons woven upon a crimson ground, 
presented by the emperor Ming Ti of the Wei dynasty, in the 



year a.d. 238, to the reigning empress of Japan; and varieties 
of brocade patterns are recorded as being in use during the Sung 
dynasty (960-1279). The first edition of an illustrated work 
upon tillage and weaving was published in China in 12 10, and 
contains an engraving of a loom constructed to weave flowered- 
silk brocades such as are woven at the present time at Suchow 
and Hangchow and elsewhere. On the other hand, although 
they are described usually as brocades, certain specimens of 
imperial Chinese robes sumptuous in ornament, sheen of coloured 
silks and the glisten of golden threads, are woven in the tapestry- 
weaving manner and without any floating threads. It seems 
reasonable to infer that Persians and Syrians derived the art of 




Fig. 6. — Piece of pink silk brocaded in silver and white and 
coloured silks. French middle 18th century; about 15 in. square. 

weaving brocades from the Chinese, and as has been indicated, 
passed it on to Saracens as well as Europeans. (A. S. C.) 

BROCCHI, GIOVANNI BATTISTA (1772-1826), Italian miner- 
alogist and geologist, was born at Bassano on the 18th of February 
1772. He studied at the university of Pisa, where his attention 
was turned to mineralogy and botany. In 1802 he was appointed 
professor of botany in the new lyceum of Brescia; but he more 
especially devoted himself to geological researches in the adjacent 
districts. The fruits of these labours appeared in different 
publications, particularly in his Trattato mineralogico e chemico 
sidle miniere di ferro del dipartimento del Mella (1808) — treatise 
on the iron mines of Mella. These researches procured him the 
office of inspector of mines in the recently established kingdom 
of Italy, and enabled him to extend his investigations over great 
part of the country. In 181 1 he produced a valuable essay 
entitled Memoria mineralogica sulla Voile di Fassa in Tirolo; but 
his most important work is the Conchiologia fossile subapennina 
con osservazioni geologiche sugli Apennini, e sul suolo adiacente 
(2 vols., 4to, Milan, 1814), containing accurate details of the 
structure of the Apennine range, and an account of the fossils 
of the Italian Tertiary strata compared with existing species. 
These subjects were further illustrated by his geognostic map, 
and his Catalogo ragionato di una raccolta di rocce, disposto con 
ordine geografico, per servire alia geognosia dell' Italia (Milan, 
1817). His work Dello stato fisico del suolo di Roma (1820), 
with its accompanying map, is likewise noteworthy. In it he 
corrected the erroneous views of Breislak, who conceived that 
Rome occupies the site of a volcano, to which he ascribed the 
volcanic materials that cover the seven hills. Brocchi pointed 
out that these materials were derived either from Mont Albano, 



BROCHANT DE VILLIERS— BROCKEN 



623 



an extinct volcano, 12 m. from the city, or from Mont Cimini, 
still farther to the north. Several papers by him, on minera- 
logical subjects, appeared in the Biblioteca Italiana from 1816 to 
1823. In the latter year Brocchi sailed for Egypt, in order to 
explore the geology of that country and report on its mineral 
resources. Every facility was granted by Mehemet Ali, who in 
1823 appointed him one of a commission to examine the district 
of Sennaar; but Brocchi, unfortunately for science, fell a victim 
to the climate, and died at Khartum on the 25th of September 
1826. 

BROCHANT DE VILLIERS, ANDRE JEAN FRANCOIS MARIE 
(1772-1840), French mineralogist and geologist, was born at 
Villiers, near Nantes, on the 6th of August 1772. After studying 
at the Ecole Polvtechnique, he was in 1794 the first pupil 
admitted to the Ecole des Mines. In 1804 he was appointed 
professor of geology and mineralogy in the Ecole des Mines, which 
had been temporarily transferred to Pezay in Savoy, and he 
returned with the school to Paris in 1815. Later on he became 
inspector general of mines and a member of the Academy of 
Sciences. He investigated the transition strata of the Tarantaise, 
wrote on the position of the granite rocks of Mont Blanc, and 
on the lead minerals of Derbyshire and Cumberland. He was 
charged with the superintendence of the construction of the 
geological map of France, undertaken by his pupils Dufrenoy 
and Elie de Beaumont. He died in Paris on the 16th of May 
1840. His publications include Traite elementaire de minSralogie 
(2 vols., 1801-1802; 2nd ed., 1808), and Traite abrtge' de cristal- 
lographie (Paris, 1818). 

BROCHANTITE, a mineral species consisting of a basic -copper 
sulphate Cu 4 (OH) 6 S0 4 , crystallizing in the orthorhombic system. 
The crystals are usually small and are prismatic or acicular in 
habit; they have a perfect cleavage parallel to the face lettered 
a in the adjoining figure. They are trans- 
parent to translucent, with a vitreous 
lustre, and are of an emerald-green to 
blackish - green colour. Specific gravity 
3-907; hardness 35-4. The mineral was 
first found associated with malachite and 
native copper in the copper mines of the 
Urals, and was named by A. Levy in 1824 
after A. J. M. Brochant de Villiers. Several 
varieties, differing somewhat in crystalline 
form, have been distinguished, some of 
them having originally been described as 
distinct species, but afterwards proved 
to be essentially identical with brochan- 
tite; these are konigine from the Urals, brongniartine from 
Mexico, krisuvigite from Iceland, and warringtonite from 
Cornwall. Of other localities, mention may be made of Rough- 
ten Gill, Caldbeck Fells, Cumberland, where small brilliant 
crystals are associated with malachite and chrysocolla in a 
quartzose rock; Rezbanya in the Bihar Mountains, Hungary; 
Atacama in Chile, with atacamite, which closely resembles 
brochantite in general appearance; the Tintic district in Utah. 
A microscopical examination of the green copper ores of second- 
ary origin in the Clifton and Morenci district of Arizona 
proves brochantite to be of extremely common occurrence 
mostly intergrown with malachite which effectually masks its 
presence: it is not unlikely that the malachite of other 
localities will on examination be found to be intergrown with 
brochantite. 

Mention may be here made of another orthorhombic basic 
copper sulphate not unlike brochantite in general characters, 
but differing from it in containing water of crystallization and 
in its fine blue colour; this is the Cornish mineral langite, 
whichhasthecompositionCuS0 4 -3Cu(OH) 2 4-H 2 0. (L. J. S.) 

BROCK, SIR ISAAC (1769-1812), British soldier and ad- 
ministrator, was born at St Peter Port, Guernsey, on the 6th 
of October 1769. Joining the army at the age of fifteen as an 
ensign of the 8th regiment, he became a lieutenant-colonel in 
1797, after less than thirteen years' service. He commanded 
the 49th regiment in the expedition to North Holland in 1799, 



was wounded at the battle of Egmont-op-Zee, and subsequently 
served on board the British fleet at the battle of Copenhagen. 
From 1802 to 1805 he was with his regiment in Canada, returning 
thither in 1806 in view of the imminence of war between Great 
Britain and the United States. From September 1806 till 
August 18 10 he was in charge of the garrison at Quebec; in the 
latter year he assumed the command of the troops in Upper 
Canada, and soon afterwards took over the civil administration 
of that province as provisional lieutenant-governor. On the 
outbreak of the war of 181 2 Brock had to defend Upper Canada 
against invasion by the United States. In the face of many 
difficulties and not a little disaffection, he organized the militia 
of the province, drove back the invaders, and on the 16th of 
August 181 2, with about 730 men and 600 Indians commanded 
by their chief Tecumseh, compelled the American force of 
2500 men under General William Hull (1753-1825) to surrender 
at Detroit, an achievement which gained him a knighthood of 
the Bath and the popular title of " the hero of Upper Canada." 
From Detroit he hurried to the Niagara frontier, but on the 13th 
of October in the same year was killed at the battle of Queenston 
Heights. The House of Commons voted a public monument to 
his memory, which was erected in Saint Paul's cathedral, 
London. On the 13th of October 1824, the twelfth anniversary 
of his death, his remains were removed from the bastions of 
Fort George, where they had been originally interred, and placed 
beneath a monument on Queenston Heights, erected by the 
provincial legislature. This was blown up by a fanatic in 1840, 
but as the result of a mass-meeting of over 8000 citizens 
held on the spot, a new and more stately monument was 
erected. 

His Life and Correspondence by his nephew, Ferdinand Brock 
Tupper (2nd edition, London, 1847), still remains the best; later 
lives are by D. R.Read (Toronto, 1894), and by Lady Edgar (Toronto 
and London, 1905). (W. L. G.) 

BROCK, THOMAS (1847- ), English sculptor, was the 
chief pupil of Foley, and later became influenced by the new 
romantic movement. His group " The Moment of Peril " was 
followed by " The Genius of Poetry," " Eve," and other ideal 
works that mark his development. His busts, such as those 
of Lord Leighton and Queen Victoria; his statues, such as 
" Sir Richard Owen " and "Dr Philpott, bishop of Worcester "; 
his sepulchral monuments, such as that to Lord Leighton in 
St Paul's cathedral, a work of singular significance, refinement 
and beauty; and his memorial statues of Queen Victoria, at 
Hove and elsewhere, are examples of his power as a portraitist, 
sympathetic in feeling, sound and restrained in execution, and 
dignified and decorative in arrangement. The colossal equestrian 
statue of " Edward the Black Prince " was set up in the City 
Square in Leeds in 1901, the year in which the sculptor was 
awarded the commission to execute the vast Imperial Memorial 
to Queen Victoria in front of Buckingham Palace. Brock was 
elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1883 and full 
member in 1891. 

BROCKEN, a mountain of Germany, in Prussian Saxony, the 
highest point (3733 ft.) of the Harz. It is a huge, bare, granite- 
strewn, dome-shaped mass and, owing to its being the greatest 
elevation in north Germany, commands magnificent views in all 
directions. From it Magdeburg and the Elbe, the towers of 
Leipzig and the Thuringian forest are distinctly visible in clear 
weather. Access to the summit is attained by a mountain 
railway (12 m.) from Dreiannen-Hohne, a station on the normal 
gauge line Wernigerode-Nordhausen, and by two carriage roads 
from the Bodetal and Usenburg respectively. In the folk- 
lore of north Germany the Brocken holds an important place, 
and to it cling many legends. Long after Christianity had 
penetrated to these regions, the Brocken remained a place of 
heathen worship. Annually, on Walpurgis night (1st of May), 
curious rites were here enacted, which, condemned by the 
priests of the Christian church, led to the belief that the devil 
and witches here held their orgies. Even to this day, this super- 
stition possesses the ininds of many country people around, who 
believe the mountain to be haunted on this night. In literature 



624 



BROCKEN, SPECTRE OF THE— BROCKTON 



it is represented by the famous " Brocken scene " in Goethe's 
Faust. 

See Jacobs, Der Brocken in Geschichte und Sage (Halle, 1878); 
and Prohle, Brockensagen (Magdeburg, 1888). 

BROCKEN, SPECTRE OF THE (so named from having been 
first observed in 1780 on the Brocken), an enormously magnified 
shadow of an observer cast upon a bank of cloud when the sun 
is low in high mountain regions, reproducing every motion of 
the observer in the form of a gigantic but misty image of himself. 

BROCKES, BARTHOLD HEINRICH (1680-1747), German 
poet, was born at Hamburg on the 22nd of September 1680. 
He studied jurisprudence at Halle, and after extensive travels 
in Italy, France and Holland, settled in his native town in 1704. 
In 1720 he was appointed a member of the Hamburg senate, 
and entrusted with several important offices. Six years (from 
1735 to 1741) he spent as Amtmann (magistrate) at Ritzebiittel. 
He died in Hamburg on the 16th of January 1747. Brockes' 
poetic works were published in a series of nine volumes under 
the fantastic title Irdisches Vergniigen in Gott (1721-1748); 
he also translated Marini's La Strage degli innocenti (1715), 
Pope's Essay on Man (1740) and Thomson's Seasons (1745). 
His poetry has small intrinsic value, but it is symptomatic of 
the change which came over German literature at the beginning 
of the 18th century. He was one of the first German poets to 
substitute for the bombastic imitations of Marini, to which he 
himself had begun by contributing, a clear and simple diction. 
He was also a pioneer in directing the attention of his countrymen 
to the new poetry of nature which originated in England. His 
verses, artificial and crude as they often are, express a reverential 
attitude towards nature and a religious interpretation of natural 
phenomena which was new to German poetry and prepared 
the way for Klopstock. 

Brockes' autobiography was published by J. M. Lappenberg in the 
Zeitschrift des Vereins fur Hamburger Geschichte, ii. pp. 167 ff. (1847). 
See also A. Brandl, B. H. Brockes (1878), and D. F. Strauss, Brockes 
und H. S. Reimarus (Gesammelte Schriften, ii.). A short selection 
of his poetry will be found in vol. 39 (1883) of Kurschner's Deutsche 
Nationalliteratur. 

BROCKHAUS, FRIEDRICH ARNOLD (1772-1823), German 
publisher, was bom at Dortmund, on the 4th of May 1772. He 
was educated at the gymnasium of his native place, and from 
1788 to 1793 served an apprenticeship in a mercantile house 
at Diisseldorf. He then devoted two years at Leipzig to the 
study of modern languages and literature, after which he set 
up at Dortmund an emporium for English goods. In 1801 he 
transferred this business to Arnheim, and in the following year 
to Amsterdam. In 1805, having given up his first line of trade, 
he began business as a publisher. Two journals projected by 
him were not allowed by the government to survive for any 
length of time, and in 1810 the complications in the affairs of 
Holland induced him to return homewards. In 181 1 he settled 
at Altenburg. About three years previously he had purchased 
the copyright of the Konversations-Lexikon, started in 1796, and 
in 1810-1811 he completed the first edition of this celebrated 
work (14th ed. 1901-4). A second edition under his own editor- 
ship was begun in 181 2, and was received with universal favour. 
His business extended rapidly, and in 181 8 Brockhaus removed 
to Leipzig, where he established a large printing-house. Among 
the more extensive of his many literary undertakings were the 
critical periodicals — Hermes, the Literarisches Konversationsblatt 
(afterwards the Blatter filr liter arische Unterhaltung), and the 
Zeitgenossen, and some large historical and bibliographical 
works, such as Raumer's Geschichte der Hohenstaitfen, and 
EbeTt's Allgemeines bibliographisches Lexikon. F. A. Brockhaus 
died at Leipzig on the 20th of August 1823. The business was 
carried on by his sons, Friedrich Brockhaus (1800-1865) who 
retired in 1850, and Heinrich Brockhaus (1804-1874), under 
whom it was considerably extended. The latter especially 
rendered great services to literature and science, which the 
university of Jena recognized by making him, in 1858, honorary 
doctor of philosophy. In the years 1842-1848, Heinrich 
Brockhaus was member of the Saxon second chamber, as repre- 



sentative for Leipzig, was made honorary citizen of that city 
in 1872, and died there on the 15th of November 1874. 

See H. E. Brockhaus, Friedrich A. Brockhaus, sein Leben und 
Wirken nach Brief en und andern Aufzeichnungen (3 vols., Leipzig, 
1872-1881); also by the, same author, Die Firma F. A. Brockhaus 
von der Begriindung bis zum hundertjdhrigen Jubildum (1805-1905, 
Leipzig, 1905). 

Another of Friedrich's sons, Hermann Brockhaus (1806- 
1877), German Orientalist, was born at Amsterdam on the 28th 
of January 1806. While his two brothers carried on the business 
he devoted himself to an academic career. He was appointed 
extraordinary professor in Jena in 1838, and in 1841 received 
a call in a similar capacity to Leipzig, where in 1848 he was 
made ordinary professor of ancient Semitic. He died at Leipzig 
on the 5th of January 1877. Brockhaus was an Oriental scholar 
in the old sense of the word, devoting his attention, not to one 
language only, but to acquiring a familiarity with the principal 
languages and literature of the East. He studied Hebrew, 
Arabic and Persian, and was able to lecture on Sanskrit, after- 
wards his specialty, Pali, Zend and even on Chinese. His most 
important work was the editio princeps of the Katha-sarit-sdgara, 
" The Ocean of the Streams of Story," the large collection of 
Sanskrit stories made by Soma Deva in the 12th century. By 
this publication he gave the first impetus to a really scientific 
study of the origin and spreading of popular tales, and enabled 
Prof. Benfey and others to trace the great bulk of Eastern and 
Western stories to an Indian, ■and more especially to a Budd- 
histic source. Among Prof. Brockhaus's other publications 
were his edition of the curious philosophical play Prabodha- 
chandrodaya, " The Rise of the Moon of Intelligence," his 
critical edition of the " Songs of Hafiz," and his publication in 
Latin letters of the text of the "Zend-Avesta." 

BROCKLESBY, RICHARD (1722-1797), English physician, 
was born at Minehead, Somersetshire, on the nth of August 
1722. He was educated at Ballitore, in Ireland, where Edmund 
Burke was one of his schoolfellows, Studied medicine at Edin- 
burgh, and finally graduated at Leiden in 1745- Appointed 
physician to the army in 1758, he served in Germany during 
part of the Seven Years' War, and on his return settled down to 
practise in London. In 1764 he published Economical and 
Medical Observations, which contained suggestions for improving 
the hygiene of army hospitals. In his latter years he withdrew 
altogether into private life. The circle of his friends included 
some of the most distinguished literary men of the age. He was 
warmly attached to Dr Johnson, to whom about 1784 he offered 
an annuity of £100 for life, and whom he attended on his death- 
bed, while in 1788 he presented Burke, of whom he was an 
intimate friend, with £1000, and offered to repeat the gift 
" every year until your merit is rewarded as it ought to be at 
court." He died on the nth of December 1797, leaving his 
house and part of his fortune to his grand-nephew, Dr Thomas 
Young. 

BROCKTON, a city of Plymouth county, Massachusetts, 
U.S.A., about 20 m. S. of Boston, and containing an area of 
21 sq. m. of rolling surface. Pop. (1870) 8007; (1880)13,608; 
(1890) 27,294; (1900) 40,063, of whom 9484 were foreign-born, . 
including 2667 Irish, 2199 English Canadians and 1973 Swedes; 
(1910, census) 56,878. It is served by the New York, New 
Haven & Hartford railway. Brockton has a public library, with 
54,000 volumes, in 1908. By popular vote, beginning in 1886 
(except in 1898), the liquor traffic was prohibited annually. 
The death-rate, 13-18 in 1907, is very low for a manufacturing 
city of its size. Brockton is the industrial centre of a large 
population surrounding it (East and West Bridgewater, North 
Easton, Avon, Randolph, Holbrook and Whitman), and is an 
important manufacturing place. Both in 1900 and in 1905 it 
ranked first among the cities of the United States in the manu- 
facture of boots and shoes. The city's total factory product in 
1900 was valued at $24,855,362, and in 1905 at $37,790,982, an 
increase during the five years of 52 %. The boot and shoe pro- 
duct in 1905 was valued at $30,073,014 (9-4 % of the value of 
the total boot and shoe product of the United States), the boot 



BROCKVILLE— BRODIE 



625 



and shoe cut stock at $1,344,977, and the boot and shoe findings 
at $2,435,137 — the three combined representing 89.6% of the 
city's total manufactured product. In 1908 there were 35 
shoe factories, including the W. L. Douglas, the Ralston, the 
Walkover, the Eaton, the Keith and the Packard establishments, 
and, in 1905, 14,000,000 (in 1907 about 17,000,000) pairs of shoes 
were produced in the city. Among the other products are lasts, 
blacking, paper and wooden packing boxes, nails and spikes, 
and shoe fittings and tools. The assessed valuation of the city 
rose from $6,876,427 in 1881 to $37,408,332 in 1907. Brockton 
was a part of firidgewater until 1821, when it was incorporated 
as the township of North Bridgewater. Its present name was 
adopted in 1874, and it was chartered as a city in 1881. Brockton 
was the first city in Massachusetts to abolish all grade crossings 
(1896) within its limits. 

BROCKVILLE, a town and port of entry of Ontario, Canada, 
and capital of Leeds county, named after General Sir Isaac 
Brock, situtated 119 m. S. W. of Montreal, on the left bank of 
the St Lawrence, and on the Grand Trunk, and Brockville & 
Westport railways. A branch line connects it with the Canadian 
Pacific. It has steamer communication with the St Lawrence 
and Lake Ontario ports, and is a summer resort. The principal 
manufactures are hardware, furnaces, agricultural implements, 
carriages and chemicals. It is the centre of one of the chief 
dairy districts of Canada, and ships large quantities of cheese 
and butter. Pop. (1881) 7609; (1901) 8940. 

BROD, a town of Croatia-Slavonia, in the county of Pozega, 
on the left bank of the river Save, 124 m. by rail S. E. by E. of 
Agram. Pop. (1900) 7310. The principal Bosnian railway here 
crosses the river, to meet the Hungarian system. Brod has thus 
a considerable transit trade, especially in cereals, wine, spirits, 
prunes and wood. It is sometimes called Slavonisch-Brod, to 
distinguish it from Bosna-Brod, or Bosnisch-Brod, across the 
river. The town owes its name to a ford (Servian brod) of the 
Save, and dates at least from the 15th century. Brod was fre- 
quently captured and recaptured in the wars between Turkey 
and Austria; and it was here that the Austrian army mustered, 
in 1879, for the occupation of Bosnia. 

BRODERIP, WILLIAM JOHN (1789-1859), English naturalist, 
was born in Bristol on the 21st of November 1789. After 
graduating at Oxford he was called to the bar in 181 7, and for 
some years was engaged in law-reporting. In 1822 he was 
appointed a metropolitan police magistrate, and filled that office 
until 1856, first at the Thames police court and then at West- 
minster. His leisure was devoted to natural history, and his 
writings did much to further the study of zoology in England. 
The zoological articles in the Penny Cyclopaedia were written 
by him, and a series of articles contributed to Fraser's Magazine 
were reprinted in 1848 as Zoological Recreations, and were 
followed in 1852 by Leaves from the Note-book of a Naturalist. 
He was one of the founders of the Zoological Society of London, 
and a large collection of shells which he formed was ultimately 
bought by the British Museum. He died in London on the 
27th of February 1859. 

BRODHEAD, JOHN ROMEYN (1814-1873), American his- 
torical scholar, was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, on the 
2nd of January 1814, the son of Jacob Brodhead (1782-1855), 
a prominent clergyman of the Dutch Reformed Church. He 
graduated at Rutgers College in 1831, and in 1835 was admitted 
to the bar in New York City. After 1837, however, he devoted 
himself principally to the study of American colonial history, 
and in order to have access to the records of the early Dutch 
settlements in America he obtained in 1839 an appointment as 
attache of the American legation at the Hague. His investiga- 
tions here soon proved that the Dutch archives were rich in 
material on the early history of New York, and led the state 
legislature to appropriate funds for the systematic gathering 
from various European archives of transcripts of documents 
relating to New York. Brodhead was appointed (1841) by 
Governor William H. Seward to undertake the work, and 
within several years gathered from England, France and Holland 
some eighty manuscript volumes of transcriptions, largely of 



documents which had not hitherto been used by historians. 
These transcriptions were subsequently edited by Edward 
O'Callaghan (vols, i.-xi., incl.) and by Berthold Fernow (vols, 
xii.-xv., incl.), and published by the state under the title Docu- 
ments relating to the Colonial History of New York (15 vols., 
1853-1883). From 1846 to 1849, while George Bancroft was 
minister to Great Britain, Brodhead held under him the post of 
secretary of legation. In 1853-1857 he was, naval officer of the 
port of New York. He published several addresses and a 
scholarly History of the State of New York (2 vols., 1853-187 1), 
generally considered the best for the brief period covered (1600- 
1690). He died in New York City on the 6th of May 1873. 

BRODIE, SIR BENJAMIN COLLINS, 1st Bart. (1 783-1862), 
English physiologist and surgeon, was born in 1783 at Winter- 
slow, Wiltshire. He received his early education from his 
father; then choosing medicine as his profession he went to 
London in 1801, and attended the lectures of John Abernethy. 
Two years later he became a pupil of Sir Everard Home at St 
George's hospital, and in 1808 was appointed assistant surgeon 
at that institution, on the staff of which he served for over thirty 
years. In 1810 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, to 
which in the next four or five years he contributed several 
papers describing original investigations in physiology. At this 
period also he rapidly obtained a large and lucrative practice, 
and from time to time he wrote on surgical questions, contribut- 
ing numerous papers to the Medical and Chirufgical Society, 
and to the medical journals. Probably his most important work 
is that entitled Pathological and Surgical Observations on the 
Diseases of the Joints, in which he attempts to trace the beginnings 
of disease in the different tissues that form a joint, and to give 
an exact value to the symptom of pain as evidence of organic 
disease. This volume led to the adoption by surgeons of measures 
of a conservative nature in the treatment of diseases of the 
joints, with consequent reduction in the number of amputations 
and the saving of many limbs and lives. He also wrote on 
diseases of the urinary organs, and on local nervous affections 
of a surgical character. In 1854 he published anonymously 
a volume of Psychological Inquiries; to a second volume which 
appeared in 1862 his name was attached. He received many 
honours during his career. He attended George IV., was sergeant- 
surgeon to William IV. and Queen Victoria, and was made a 
baronet in 1834. He became a corresponding member of the 
French Institute in 1844, D.C.L. of Oxford in 1855, and president 
of the Royal Society in 1858, and he was the first president of 
the general medical council. He died at Broome Park, Surrey, 
on the 21st of October 1862. His collected works, with auto- 
biography, were published in 1865 under the editorship of 
Charles Hawkins. 

His eldest son, Sir Benjamin Collins Brodie, 2nd Bart. (1817- 
1880), was appointed professor of chemistry at Oxford in 1865, 
and is chiefly known for his investigations on the allotropic 
states of carbon and for his discovery of graphitic acid. 

BRODIE, PETER BELLINGER (1815-1897), English geologist, 
son of P. B. Brodie, barrister, and nephew of Sir Benjamin 
C. Brodie, was born in London in 1815. While still residing 
with his father at Lincoln's Inn Fields, he gained some knowledge 
of natural history and an interest in fossils from visits to the 
museum of the Royal College of Surgeons, at a time when W. 
Clif t was curator. Through the influence of Clif | he was elected 
a fellow of the Geological Society early in 1834. Proceeding 
afterwards to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, he came under 
the spell of Sedgwick, and henceforth devoted all his leisure 
time to geology. Entering the church in 1838, he was curate 
at Wylye in Wiltshire, and for a short time at Steeple Claydon 
in Buckinghamshire, becoming later rector of Down Hatherley 
in Gloucestershire, and finally (1855) vicar of Rowington in 
Warwickshire, and rural dean. Records of geological observa- 
tions in all these districts were published by him. At Cambridge 
he obtained fossil shells from the Pleistocene deposit at Barnwell; 
in the Vale of Wardour he discovered in Purbeck Beds the 
isopod named by Milne-Edwards Archaeoniscus Brodiei; in 
Buckinghamshire he described the outliers of Purbeck and 



626 



BRODY— BROGLIE 



Portland Beds; and in the Vale of Gloucester the Lias and 
Oolites claimed his attention. Fossil insects, however, formed 
the subject of his special studies (History of the Fossil Insects 
of the Secondary Rocks of England, 1845), and many of his pub- 
lished papers relate to them. He was an active member of the 
Cotteswold Naturalists' Club and of the Warwickshire Natural 
History and Archaeological Society, and in 1854 he was chief 
founder of the Warwickshire Naturalists' and Archaeologists' 
Field Club. In 1887 the Murchison medal was awarded to him 
by the Geological Society of London. He died at Rowington, 
on the 1st of November 1897. 

See Memoir by H. B. Woodward in Geological Magazine, 1897, 
p. 481 (with portrait). 

BRODY, a town of Austria, in Galicia, 62 m. E. of Lemberg 
b v rail. Pop. (1900) 17,360, of which about two-thirds are Jews. 
It is situated near the Russian frontier, and has been one of the 
most important commercial centres in Galicia, especially for 
the trade with Russia. But since 1879, when its charter as a 
free commercial city was withdrawn, its trade has also greatly 
diminished. Brody was created a town in 1684, and was raised 
to the rank of a free commercial city in 1779. 

BROEKHUIZEN, JAN VAN [Janxjs Beoukhusius], (1649- 
1707), Dutch classical scholar and poet, was born on the 20th 
of November 1649, at Amsterdam. Having lost his father when 
very young, he was placed with an apothecary, with whom he 
lived several years. Not liking this employment, he entered the 
army, and in 1674 was sent with his regiment to America, in the 
fleet under Admiral de Ruyter, but returned to Holland the 
same year. In 1678 he was sent to the garrison at Utrecht, 
where he contracted a friendship with the celebrated Graevius; 
here he had the misfortune to be so deeply implicated in a duel 
that, according to the laws of Holland, his life was forfeited. 
Graevius, however, wrote immediately to Nicholas Heinsius, 
who obtained his pardon. Not long afterwards he became a 
captain of one of the companies then at Amsterdam. After the 
peace of Ryswick, 1697, his company was disbanded, and he 
retired on a pension to a country house near Amsterdam and 
pursued his classical and literary studies at leisure. His Dutch 
poems, in which he followed the model of Pieter Hooft, were 
first published in 1677; a later edition, with a biography by 
D. van Hoogstraten, appeared in 1712, the last edition, 1883, 
was edited by R. A. Kollewijn. His classical reputation rests 
on his editions of Propertius (1702) and Tibullus (1707). His 
Latin poems (Carmina) appeared in 1684; a later edition( Poemata) 
by D. van Hoogstraten appeared in 1711. The Select Letters 
(Jani Browkhusii Epistolae Selectae, 1889 and 1893) were edited 
by J. A. Worp, who also wrote his biography, 1891. Broekhuizen 
died on the 15th of December 1707. 

BROGGER, WALDEMAR CHRISTOFER (1851- ), Nor- 
wegian geologist, was born in Christiania on the 10th of November 
1851, and educated in that city. In 1876 he was appointed 
curator of the geological museum in his native city, and 
assistant on the Geological Survey. He was professor of 
mineralogy and geology from 188 1 to 1890 in the university of 
Stockholm, and from 1890 in the university of Christiania. He 
also became rector and president of the senate of the royal uni- 
versity of Christiania. His observations on the igneous rocks of 
south Tirol compared with those of Christiania afford much 
information oa the relations of the granitic and basic rocks. 
The subject of the differentiation of rock-types in the process 
of solidification as plutonic or volcanic rocks from a particular 
magma received much attention from him. He dealt also with 
the Palaeozoic rocks of Norway, and with the late glacial and 
post-glacial changes of level in the Christiania region. The 
honorary degree of Ph.D. was conferred upon him by the uni- 
versity of Heidelberg and that of LL.D. by the university of 
Glasgow. The Murchison medal of the Geological Society of 
London was awarded to him in 1891. 

BROGLIE, DE, the name of a noble French family which, 
originally Piedmontese, emigrated to France in the year 1643. 
The head of the family, Francois Marie (1611-1656), then took 
the title of comte de Broglie. He had already distinguished 



himself as a soldier, and died, as a lieutenant-general, at the siege 
of Valenza on the 2nd of July 1656. His son, Victor Maurice, 
Comte de Broglie (1647-1727), served under Conde, Turenne 
and other great commanders of the age of Louis XIV., becoming 
marSchal de camp in 1676, lieutenant-general in 1688, and finally 
marshal of France in 1724. 

The eldest son of Victor Marie, Francois Marie, afterwards 
Due de Broglie (1671-1745), entered the army at an early age, 
and had a varied career of active service before he was made, 
at the age of twenty-three, lieutenant-colonel of the king's 
regiment of cavalry. He served continuously in the War of the 
Spanish Succession and was present at Malplaquet. He was made 
lieutenant-general in 17 10, and served with Villars in the last 
campaign of the war and at the battle of Denain. During the 
peace he continued in military employment, and in 17 19 he was 
made director-general of cavalry and dragoons. He was also 
employed in diplomatic missions, and was ambassador in 
England in 1724. The war in Italy called him into the field 
again in 1733, and in the following year he was made marshal 
of France. In the campaign of 1734 he was one of the chief 
commanders on the French side, and he fought the battles 
of Parma and Guastalla. A famous episode was his narrow 
personal escape when his quarters on the Secchia were raided by 
the enemy on the night of the 14th of September 1734. In 1735 
he directed a war of positions with credit, but he was soon 
replaced by Marshal de Noailles. He was governor-general of 
Alsace when Frederick the Great paid a secret visit to Strassburg 
(1740). In 1742 de Broglie was appointed to command the 
French army in Germany, but such powers as he had possessed 
were failing him, and he had always been the " man of small 
means," safe and cautious, but lacking in elasticity and daring. 
The only success obtained was in the action of Sahay (25th May 
1742), for which he was made a duke. He returned to France in 
1743, and died two years later. 

His son, Victor Francois, Due de Broglie (1718-1804), 
served with his father at Parma and Guastalla, and in 1734 
obtained a colonelcy. In the German War he took part in the 
storming of Prague in 1742, and was made a brigadier. In 1744 
and 1745 he saw further service on the Rhine, and in 1756 he 
was made marechal de camp. He subsequently served with 
Marshal Saxe in the low countries, and was present at Roucoux, 
Val and Maastricht. At the end of the war he was made a 
lieutenant-general. During the Seven Years' War he served 
successively under d'Estrees, Soubise and Contades, being 
present at all the battles from Hastenbeck onwards. His victory 
over Prince Ferdinand at Bergen (1759) won him the rank of 
marshal of France from his own sovereign and that of prince of 
the empire from the emperor Francis I. In 1760 he won an 
action at Corbach, but was defeated at Vellinghausen in 1761. 
After the war he fell into disgrace and was not recalled to active 
employment until 1778, when he was given command of the 
troops designed to operate against England. He played a 
prominent part in the Revolution, which he opposed with deter- 
mination. After his emigration, de Broglie commanded the 
" army of the princes " for a short time (1792). He died at 
Minister in 1804. 

Another son of the first duke, Charles Francois, Comte de 
Broglie (1719-1781), served for some years in the army, and 
afterwards became one of the foremost diplomatists in the 
service of Louis XV. He is chiefly remembered in connexion 
with the Secret du Roi, the private, as distinct from the official, 
diplomatic service of Louis, of which he was the ablest and most 
important member. 

The son of Victor Francois, Victor Claude, Prince de 
Brogue (1757-1794), served in the army, attaining the rank of 
marechal de camp. He adopted revolutionary opinions, served 
with Lafayette and Rochambeau in America, was a member of 
the Jacobin Club, and satin the Constituent Assembly, constantly 
voting on the Liberal side. He served as chief of the staff to the 
Republican army on the Rhine; but in the Terror he was 
denounced, arrested and executed at Paris on the 27th of June 
1794. His dying admonition to his little son was to remain 



BROGLIE 



627 



faithful to the principles of the Revolution, however unjust and 
ungrateful. 

Achille Charles Leonce Victor, duc de Broglie (1785- 
1870), statesman and diplomatist, son of the last-named, was 
born at Paris on the 28th of November 1785. His mother had 
shared her husband's imprisonment, but managed to escape 
to Switzerland, where she remained till the fall of Robespierre. 
She now returned to Paris with her children and lived there 
quietly until 1 796, when she married a M. d'Argenson, grandson 
of Louis XV. 's minister of war. Under the care of his step-father 
young de Broglie received a careful and liberal education and 
made his entree into the aristocratic and literary society of Paris 
under the Empire. In 1809, he was appointed a member of the 
council of state, over which Napoleon presided in person; and 
was sent by the emperor on diplomatic missions, as attache, 
to various countries. Though he had never been in sympathy 
with the principles of the Empire, de Broglie was not one of those 
who rejoiced at its downfall. In common with all men of ex- 
perience and sense he realized the danger to France of the rise 
to power of the forces of violent reaction. With Decazes and 
Richelieu he saw that the only hope for a calm future lay in " the 
reconciliation of the Restoration with the Revolution." By 
the influence of his uncle, Prince Amedee de Broglie, his right to 
a peerage had been recognized; and to his own great surprise 
he received, in June 1814, a summons from Louis XVIII. to the 
Chamber of Peers. "There, after the Hundred Days, he distin- 
guished himself by his courageous defence of Marshal Ney, for 
whose acquittal he, alone of all the peers, both spoke and voted. 
After this defiant act of opposition it was perhaps fortunate 
that his impending marriage gave him an excuse for leaving the 
country. On the 15th of February 1816, he was married at 
Leghorn to the daughter of Madame de Stael. He returned to 
Paris at the end of the year, but took no part in politics until the 
elections of September 1817 broke the power of the " ultra- 
royalists " and substituted for the Chambre inlrouvable a 
moderate assembly. De Broglie's political attitude during 
the years that followed is best summed up in his own words: 
" From 1812 to 1822 all the efforts of men of sense and character 
were directed to reconciling the Restoration and the Revolution, 
the old regime and the new France. From 1822 to 1827 all 
their efforts were directed to resisting the growing power of the 
counter-revolution. From 1827 to 1830 all their efforts aimed at 
moderating and regulating the reaction in a contrary sense." 
During the last critical years of Charles X.'s reign, de Broglie 
identified himself with the doctrinaires, among whom Royer- 
Collard and Guizot were the most prominent. The July revolu- 
tion placed him in a difficult position; he knew nothing of 
the intrigues which placed Louis Philippe on the throne; but, 
the revolution once accomplished, he was ready to uphold the 
fait accompli with characteristic loyalty, and on the 9th of 
August took office in the new government as minister of public 
worship and education. As he had foreseen, the ministry 
was short-lived, and on the 2nd of November he was once more 
out of office. During the critical time that followed he con- 
sistently supported the principles which triumphed with the fall 
of Laffitte and the accession to power of Casimir Perier in March 
1832. After the death of the latter and the insurrection of June 
1832, de Broglie took office once more as minister for foreign 
affairs (October nth). His tenure of the foreign office was 
coincident with a very critical period in international relations. 
But for the sympathy of Great Britain under Palmerston, the 
July monarchy would have been completely isolated in Europe; 
and this sympathy the aggressive policy of France in Belgium 
and on the Mediterranean coast of Africa had been in danger 
of alienating. The Belgian crisis had been settled, so far as the 
two powers were concerned, before de Broglie took office; but 
the concerted military and naval action for the coercion of the 
Dutch, which led to the French occupation of Antwerp, was 
carried out under his auspices. The good understanding of which 
this was the symbol characterized also the relations of de Broglie 
and Palmerston during the crisis of the first war of Mehemet Ali 
(if .v.) with the Porte, and in the affairs of the Spanish peninsula 



their common sympathy with constitutional liberty led to an 
agreement for common action, which took shape in the treaty of 
alliance between Great Britain, France, Spain and Portugal, 
signed at London on the 22nd of April 1834. De Broglie had 
retired from office in the March preceding, and did not return 
to power till March of the following year, when he became head 
of the cabinet. In 1836, the government having been defeated 
on a proposal to reduce the five per cents, he once more resigned, 
and never returned to official life. He had remained in power 
long enough to prove what honesty of purpose, experience of 
affairs, and common sense can accomplish when allied with 
authority. The debt that France and Europe owed him may 
be measured by comparing the results of his policy with that 
of his successors under not dissimilar circumstances. He had 
found France isolated and Europe full of the rumours of war; 
he left her strong in the English alliance and the respect 
of Liberal Europe, and Europe freed from the restless apprehen- 
sions which were to be stirred into life again by the attitude of 
Thiers in the Eastern Question and of Guizot in the affair of the 
" Spanish marriages." From 1836 to 1848 de Broglie held 
almost completely aloof from politics, to which his scholarly 
temperament little inclined him, a disinclination strengthened 
by the death of his wife on the 22nd of September 1838. His 
friendship for Guizot, however, induced him to accept a tem- 
porary mission in 1845, and in 1847 to go as French ambassador 
to London. The revolution of 1848 was a great blow to him, for 
he realized that it meant the final ruin of the Liberal monarchy — 
in his view the political system best suited to France. He took 
his seat, however, in the republican National Assembly and in 
the Convention of 1848, and, as a member of the section known 
as the " Burgraves," did his best to stem the tide of socialism 
and to avert the reaction in favour of autocracy which he foresaw. 
He shared with his colleagues the indignity of the coup d'etat 
of the 2nd of December 1851, and remained for the remainder 
of his life one of the bitterest enemies of the imperial regime, 
though he was heard to remark, with that caustic wit for which 
he was famous, that the empire was " the government which 
the poorer classes in France desired and the rich deserved." 
The last twenty years of his life were devoted chiefly to philo- 
sophical and literary pursuits. Having been brought up by his 
step-father in the sceptical opinions of the time, he gradually 
arrived at a sincere belief in the Christian religion. " I shall die," 
said he, "a penitent Christian and an impenitent Liberal." 
His literary works, though few of them have been published, 
were rewarded in 1856 by a seat in the French Academy, and 
he was also a member of another branch of the French Institute, 
the Academy of Moral and Political Science. In the labours of 
those learned bodies he took an active and assiduous part. 
He died on the 25th of January 1870. 

Besides his Souvenirs, in 4 vols. (Paris, 1885-1888), the duc de 
Broglie left numerous works, of which only some have been published. 
Of these may be mentioned Ecrits el discpurs (3 vols., Paris, 1863); 
Le Libre Echange et Vimpol (Paris, 1879) ; Vues sur le gouvernement de 
la France (Paris, 1861). This last was confiscated before publication 
by the imperial government. See Guizot, Le Duc de Broglie (Paris, 
1870), and Memoires (Paris, 1858-1867) ; and the histories of 
Thureau-Dangin and Duvergier de Hauranne. 

Jacques Victor Albert, duc de Broglie (1821-1901), his 
eldest son, was born at Paris on the 13th of June 1821. After 
a brief diplomatic career at Madrid and Rome, the revolution 
of 1848 caused him to withdraw from public life and devote 
himself to literature. He had already published a translation 
of the religious system of Leibnitz (1846). He now at once made 
his mark by his contributions to the Revue des deux Mondcs 
and the Orleanist and clerical organ Le Correspondant, which 
were afterwards collected under the titles of Etudes morales 
et lilteraires (1853) and Questions de religion et d'histoire (i860). 
These were supplemented in 1869 by a volume of Nouvelles eludes 
de litterature et de morale. His L'Eglise et Vempire romain au 
IV' siecle (1856-1866) brought him the succession to Lacordaire's 
seat in the Academy in 1862. In 1870 he succeeded his father 
in the dukedom, having previously been known as the prince 
de Broglie. In the following year he was elected to the National 



6 f 2>8 



BROGUE-^BROKE 



Assembly for the department of the Eure, and a few days later 
(on the 19th of February) was appointed ambassador in London; 
but in March 1872, in consequence of criticisms upon his negotia- 
tions concerning the commercial treaties between England and 
France, he resigned his post and took his seat in the National 
Assembly, where he became the leading spirit of the monarchical 
campaign against Thiers. On the replacement of the latter by 
Marshal MacMahon, the due de Broglie became president of 
the council and minister for foreign affairs (May 1873), but in 
the reconstruction of the ministry on the 26th of November, after 
the passing of the septennate, transferred himself to the ministry 
of the interior. His tenure of office was marked by an extreme 
conservatism, which roused the bitter hatred of the Republicans, 
while he alienated the Legitimist party by his friendly relations 
with the Bonapartists, and the Bonapartists by an attempt 
to effect a compromise between the rival claimants to the 
monarchy. The result was the fall of the cabinet on the 16th of 
May 1874. Three years later (on the 16th of May 1877) he was 
entrusted with the formation of a new cabinet, with the object 
of appealing to the country and securing a new chamber more 
favourable to the reactionaries than its predecessor had been. 
The result, however, was a decisive Republican majority. The 
due de Broglie was defeated in his own district, and resigned 
office on the 20th of November. Not being re-elected in 1885, 
he abandoned politics and reverted to his historical work, 
publishing a series of historical studies and biographies written 
in a most pleasing style, and especially valuable for their 
extensive documentation. He died in Paris on the 19th of 

January 1901. 

Besides editing the Souvenirs of his father (1886, &c), the Memoires 
of Talleyrand (1891, &c.), and the Letters of the Duchess Albertine 
de Broglie (1896), he published Le Secret du rot, Correspondance 
secrete de Louis XV avec ses agents diplomatiques , 1752-1774 (1878) ; 
Frederic II et Marie ThSrhe (1883); Frederic II et Louis XV 
(1885); Marie Therese Imperatrice (1888); Le Pere Lacordaire 
(1889); Maurice de Saxe et le marquis d'Argenspn (1891); La Paix 
d'Aix-la-Chapelle (1892); L' Alliance autrichienne (1895); La 
Mission de M. de Gontaut-Biron & Berlin (1896) ; Voltaire avant et 
pendant.la Guerre de Sept Ans (1898) ; Saint Ambroise, translated by 
Margaret Maitland in the series of " The Saints " (1899). 

BROGUE. (1) A rough shoe of raw leather (from the Gael. 
brog, a shoe) worn in the wilder parts of Ireland and the Scottish 
Highlands. (2) A dialectical accent or pronunciation (of 
uncertain origin), especially used of the Irish accent in speaking 
English. 

BROHAN, AUGUSTINE SUSANNE (1807-1887), French 
actress, was born in Paris on the 22nd of January 1807. She 
entered the Conservatoire at the age of eleven, and took the 
second prize for comedy in 1820, and the first in 1821. She 
served her apprenticeship in the provinces, making her first 
Paris appearance at the Odeon in 1832 as Dorine in Tartuffe. 
Her success there and elsewhere brought her a summons to the 
ComSdie Francaise, where she made her debut on the 15th of 
February 1834, as Madelon in Les Pricieuses ridicules, and 
Suzanne in Le Manage de Figaro. She retired in 1842, and died 
on the 16th of August 1887. 

Her elder daughter, Josephine Felictte Augustine Brohan 
(1824-1893), was admitted to the Conservatoire when very 
young, twice taking the second prize for comedy. The soubrette 
part, entrusted for more than 1 50 years at the Comedie Francaise 
to a succession of artists of the first rank, was at the moment 
without a representative, and Mdlle Augustine Brohan made 
tier debut there on the 19th of May 1841, as Dorine in Tartuffe, 
and Lise in Rivaux d 'eux-m&mes. She was immediately admitted 
pensionnaire, and at the end of eighteen months unanimously 
elected soeiitaire. She soon became a great favourite, not only 
in the plays Of Moliere and de Regnard, but also in those of 
Marivaux. On her retirement from the stage in 1866, she made 
an unhappy marriage with Edmond David de Gheest (d. 1885), 
secretary to the Belgian legation in Paris. 

Susanne Brohan's second daughter, Emilie Madeleine 
Brohan (1833-1900), also took first prize for comedy at the 
Conservatoire (1850). She was engaged at once by the Comedie 
Francaise, but instead of making her dibul in some play of the 



repertoire of the theatre, the management put on for her benefit 
a new comedy by Scribe and Legouve, Les Contes de la reine de 
Navarre, in which she created the part of Marguerite on the 1st 
of September 1850. Her talents and beauty made her a success 
from the first, and in less than two years from her debut she was 
elected societaire. In 1853 she married Mario Uchard, from 
whom she was soon separated, and in 1858 she returned to the 
Comedie Francaise in leading parts, until her retirement in 1886. 
Her name is associated with a great number of plays, besides 
those in the classical repertoire, notably Le Monde oil Von s'ennuie, 
Par droit de conquete, Les Deux Veuves, and Le Lion amour eux, in 
which, as the " marquise de Maupas," she had one of her greatest 
successes. 

BROKE, or Brooke, ARTHUR (d. 1563), English author, 
wrote the first English version of the story of Romeo and Juliet. 
The Tragicall Historye of Romeus and Julieit (1562) is a rhymed 
account of the story, taken, not directly from Bandello's collec- 
tion of novels (1554), but from the French translation (Histoires 
tragiques) of Pierre Boaistuau or Boisteau, surnamed Launay, 
and Francois de Belleforest. Broke adds some detail to the 
story as told by Boisteau. As the poem contains many scenes 
which are not known to exist elsewhere, but which were adopted 
by Shakespeare in Romeo and Juliet, there is no reasonable 
doubt that it may be regarded as the main source of the play. 
Broke perished by shipwreck in 1 563, on his way from Newhaven 
to join the English troops fighting on the Huguenot side in 
France. 

The genesis of the Juliet story, and a close comparison of. Shake- 
speare's play with Broke's version, are to be found in a reprint of the 
poem and of William Paynter's prose translation from the Palace of 
Pleasure, edited by Mr P. A. Daniel for the New Shakespere Society 
(1875)- 

BROKE, SIR PHILIP BOWES VERE, Bart. (1776-1841), 
British rear-admiral, was born at Broke Hall, near Ipswich, oh 
the 9th of September 1776, a member of an old Suffolk family. 
Entering the navy in June 1792, he saw active service in the 
Mediterranean from 1793 to 1795, and was with the British 
fleet at the battle of Cape St Vincent, 1797. In 1798 he was 
present at the defeat and capture of the French squadron off 
the north coast of Ireland. From 1799 to 1801 he served with 
the North Sea fleet, and in the latter year was made captain. 
Unemployed for the next four years, he commanded in 1805 
a frigate in the English and Irish Channels. In 1806 he was 
appointed to the command of the " Shannon," 38-gun frigate, 
remaining afloat, principally in the Bay of Biscay, till 1811. 
The " Shannon " was then ordered to Halifax, Nova Scotia. 
For a year after the declaration of war between Great Britain 
and the United States in 18 12, the frigate saw no important 
service, though she captured several prizes. Broke utilized 
this period of comparative inactivity to train his men thoroughly. 
He paid particular attention to gunnery, and the" Shannon " 
ere long gained a unique reputation for excellence of shooting. 
Broke's opportunity came in 1813. In May of that year the 
" Shannon " was cruising off Boston, watching the" Chesapeake," 
an American frigate of the same nominal force but heavier 
armament. On the 1st of June Broke, finding his water supply 
getting low, wrote to Lawrence, the commander of the " Chesa'- 
peake," asking for a meeting between the two ships, stating the 
" Shannon's " force, and guaranteeing that no other British 
ship should take part in the engagement. Before this letter 
could be delivered, however, the " Chesapeake," under full sail, 
ran out of Boston harbour, crowds of pleasure-boats accom- 
panying her to witness the engagement. Broke briefly addressed 
his men. " Don't cheer," he concluded, " go quietly to your 
quarters. I feel sure you will all do your duty." As the " Chesa- 
peake " rounded to on the " Shannon's " weather quarter, 
at a distance of about fifty yards, the British frigate received 
her with a broadside. A hundred of the " Chesapeake's " crew 
were struck down at once, Lawrence himself being mortally 
wounded. A second broadside, equally well-aimed, increased 
the confusion, and, her tiller-ropes being shot away, the American 
frigate drifted foul of the " Shannon." Broke sprang on board 
with some sixty of his men following him. After a brief struggle 



BROKEN HILlP-iBROKER 



62c* 



the fight was over. Within fifteen minutes of the firing of the 
first shot, the " Chesapeake " struck her flag, but Broke himself 
was seriously wounded. For his services he was rewarded with 
a baronetcy, and subsequently was made a K.C.B. His exploit 
captivated the public fancy, and his popular title of " Brave 
Broke " gives the standard by which his action was judged. 
Its true significance, however, lies deeper. Broke's victory was 
due not so much to courage as to forethought. " The ' Shannon,'" 
said Admiral Jurien de La Graviere, " captured the ' Chesa- 
peake ' on the 1st of June 1813; but on the 14th of September 
1806, when he took command of his frigate, Captain Broke had 
begun to prepare the glorious termination to this bloody affair." 
Broke's wound incapacitated him from further service, and for 
the rest of his life caused him serious suffering. He died in 
London on the 2nd of January 1841. 

BROKEN HILL, a silver-mining town of Yancowinna county, 
New South Wales, Australia, 925 m. directly W. by N. of Sydney, 
and connected with Adelaide by rail. Pop. (1901) 27,518. 
One of the neighbouring mines, the Proprietary, is the richest 
in the world; gold is associated with the silver; large quantities 
of lead, good copper lodes, zinc and tin are also found. The 
problem of the profitable treatment of the sulphide ores has been 
practically solved here. In addition Broken Hill is the centre 
of one of the largest pastoral districts in Australia. The town 
is the seat of the Roman Catholic bishop of Wilcannia. 

BROKER (according to the New English Dictionary, from Lat. 
brocca, spit, spike, broccare, to "■ broach " — another Eng. form 
of the same word; hence O. Fr. vendre d broche, to retail, e.g. 
wine, from the tap, and thus the general sense of dealing; see 
also for a discussion of the etymology and early history of the 
use of the word, J. R. Dos Passos, Law of Stockbrokers, chap, i., 
New York, 1905). In the primary sense of the word, a broker 
is a mercantile agent, of the class known as general agents, 
whose office is to bring together intending buyers and sellers 
and make a contract between them, for a remuneration called 
brokerage or commission; e.g. cotton brokers, wool brokers 
or produce brokers. Originally the only contracts negotiated 
by brokers were for the sale or purchase of commodities; but 
the word in its present use includes other classes of mercantile 
agents, such as stockbrokers, insurance-brokers, ship-brokers or 
bill-brokers. Pawnbrokers are not brokers in any proper sense 
of the word; they deal as principals and do not act as agents. 
In discussing the chief questions of modern legal interest in 
connexion with brokers, we shall deal with them, firstly, in the 
original sense of agents for the purchase and sale of goods. 

Relations between Broker and Principal. — A broker has not, 
like a factor, possession of his principal's goods, and, unless 
expressly authorized, cannot buy or sell in his own name; his 
business is to bring into privity of contract his principal and the 
third party. When the contract is made, ordinarily he drops 
out altogether. Brokers very frequently act as factors also, 
but, when they do so, their rights and duties as factors must be 
distinguished from their rights and duties as brokers. It is a 
broker's duty to carry out his principal's instructions with 
diligence, skill and perfect good faith. He must see that the 
terms of the bargain accord with his principal's orders from a 
commercial point of view, e.g. as to quality, quantity and price; 
he must ensure that the contract of sale effected by him be legally 
enforceable by his principal against the third party; and he 
must not accept any commission from the third party, or put 
himself in any position in which his own interest may become 
opposed to his principal's. As soon as he has made the contract 
which he was employed to make, in most respects his duty to, 
and his authority from, his principal alike cease; and conse- 
quently the law of brokers relates principally to the formation 
of contracts by them. 

The most important formality in English law, in making 
contracts for the sale of goods, with which a broker must comply, 
in order to make the contract legally enforceable by his principal 
against the third party, is contained in section 4 of the Sale of 
Goods Act 1893, which (in substance re-enacting section 17 of the 
Statute of Frauds) provides as follows: — " A contract for the 



sale of any goods of the value of ten pounds or upwards shall 
not be enforceable by action unless the buyer shall accept part 
of the goods as sold, and actually receive the same, or give 
something in earnest to bind the contract, or in part payment, or 
unless some note or memorandum in writing of the contract be made 
and signed by the party to be charged or his agent in that behalf." 

From the reign of James I. till 1884 brokers in London were 
admitted and licensed by the corporation, and regulated by 
statute; and it was common to employ one broker only, who 
acted as intermediary between, and was the agent of both buyer 
and seller. When the Statute of Frauds was passed in the reign 
of Charles II., it became the practice for the broker, acting for 
both parties, to insert in a formal book, kept for the purpose, a 
memorandum of each contract effected by him, and to sign such 
memorandum on behalf of both parties, in order that there 
might be a written memorandum of the contract of sale, signed 
by the agent of the parties as required by the statute. He would 
then send to the buyer a copy of this memorandum, called the 
" bought note," and to the seller a " sold note," which would run 
as follows: — 

" I have this day bought for you from A B [or " my principal "] 
" [signed] " M, Broker." 



" I have this day sold for you to A B [or " my principal ':] 

[signed] " M, Broker." 

There was in the earlier part of the 19th century considerable 
discussion in the courts as to whether the entry in a broker's 
book, or the bought and sold notes (singly or together), constituted 
the statutory memorandum; and judicial opinion was not 
unanimous on the point. But at the present day brokers are no 
longer regulated by statute, either in London or elsewhere, and 
keep no formal book; and as an entry made in a private book 
kept by the broker for another purpose, even if signed, would 
probably not be regarded as a memorandum signed by the agent 
of the parties in that behalf, the old discussion is now of little 
practical interest. 

Under modern conditions of business the written memorandum 
of the contract of sale effected by the broker is usually to be 
found in a " contract note "; but the question whether, in the 
particular circumstances of each case, the contract note affords a 
sufficient memorandum in writing, depends upon a variety of con- 
siderations — e.g. whether the transaction is effected through one 
or through two brokers; whether the contract notes are rendered 
by one broker only, or by both; and, if the latter, whether ex- 
changed between the brokers, or rendered by each broker to his 
own client; for under present practice any one of these methods 
may obtain, according to the trade in which the transaction is 
effected, and the nature of the particular transaction 

Where one and the same broker is employed by both seller and 
buyer, bought and sold notes rendered in the old form provide the 
necessary memorandum of the contract. Where two brokers are 
employed, one by the seller and one by the buyer, sometimes one 
drops out as soon as the terms are negotiated, and the other makes 
out, signs and sends to the parties the bought and sold notes. 
The latter then becomes the agent of both parties for the purpose 
of signing the statutory memorandum, and the position is the 
same as if one broker only had been employed. Oil the other 
hand, if one broker does not drop out of the transaction, each 
broker remains to the end the agent of his own principal only, 
and neither becomes the agent of the other party for the purpose 
of signing the memorandum. In such a case it is the usual 
practice for the buyer's broker to send to the seller's broker a 
note of the contract, — " I, acting on account of A. B. [or, " of 
my principal,"], have this day bought/row you, acting on account 
of C. D. [or, " of your principal "]," — and to receive acorrespond- 
ing note from the seller's broker. Thus each of the parties receives 
through his own agent a memorandum signed by the other party's 
agent. These contract notes are usually known as, and serve the 
purpose of, " bought " and " sold " notes. In all the above three 
cases the broker's duty of compliance with all formalities neces- 
sary to make the contract of sale legally enforceable is performed, 



630 



BROKER 



and both parties obtain a written memorandum of the contract 
upon which they can sue. 

The broker, on performing his duty in accordance with the 
terms upon which he is employed, is entitled to be paid his 
" brokerage." This usually takes the form of a percentage, 
varying according to the nature and conditions of the business, 
upon the total price of the goods bought or sold through him. 
When he guarantees the solvency of the other party, he is said 
to be employed upon del credere terms, and is entitled to a higher 
rate of remuneration.' In some trades it is the custom for the 
selling broker to receive payment from the buyer or his broker; 
and in such case it is his duty to account to his principal for the 
purchase money. A broker who properly expends money or 
incurs liability on his principal's behalf in the course of his 
employment, is entitled to be reimbursed the money, and in- 
demnified against the liability. Not having, like a factor,' 
possession of the goods, a broker has no lien by which to enforce 
his rights against his principal. If he fails to perform his duty, 
he loses his right to remuneration, reimbursement and indemnity, 
and further becomes liable to an action for damages for breach 
of his contract of employment, at the suit of his principal. 

Relations between Broker and Third Party. — A broker who 
signs a contract note as broker on behalf of a principal, whether 
named or not, is not personally liable on the contract to the 
third party. But if he makes the contract in such a way as to 
make himself a party to it, the third party may sue either the 
broker or his principal, subject to the limitation that the third 
party, by his election to treat one as the party to the contract, 
may preclude himself from suing the other. In this respect the 
ordinary rules of the law of agency apply to a broker. Generally, 
a broker has not authority to receive payment, but in trades in 
which it is customary for him to do so, if the buyer pays the 
seller's broker, and is then sued by the seller for the price by 
reason of the broker having become insolvent or absconded, he 
may set up the payment to the broker as a defence to the action 
by the broker's principal. Brokers may render themselves liable 
for damages in tort for the conversion of the goods at the suit 
of the true owner if they negotiate a sale of the goods for a 
selling principal who has no title to the goods. 

The Influence of Exchanges. — The relations between brokers 
and their principals, and also between brokers and third parties 
as above defined, have been to some extent modified in practice 
by the institution since the middle of the 19th century in im- 
portant commercial centres of " Exchanges," where persons 
interested in a particular trade, whether as merchants or as 
brokers, meet for the transaction of business. By the contract 
of membership of the association in whose hands is vested the 
control of the exchange, every person on becoming a member 
agrees to be bound by the rules of the association, and to make 
his contracts on the market in accordance with them. A 
governing body or committee elected by the members enforces 
observance of the rules, and members who fail to meet their 
engagements on the market, or to conform to the rules, are 
liable to suspension or expulsion by the committee. All disputes 
between members on their contracts are submitted to an arbitra- 
tion tribunal composed of members; and the arbitrators in 
deciding the questions submitted to them are guided by the rules. 
A printed book of rules is available for reference; and various 
printed forms of contract suited to the various requirements 
of the business are specified by the rules and supplied by the 
association for the use of members. In order to simplify the 
settlement of accounts between members, particularly in respect 
of " futures," i.e. contracts for future delivery, a weekly or other 
periodical settlement is effected by means of a clearing-house; 
each member paying or receiving in respect of all his contracts 
which are still open, the balance of his weekly " differences," i.e. 
the difference between the contract price and the market price 
fixed for the settlement, or between the last and the present 
settlement prices. 

As all contracts on the market are made subject to the rules, 
it follows that so far as the rules alter the rights and liabilities 
attached by law, the ordinary law is modified. The most 



important modification in the position of brokers effected by 
membership of such an exchange is due to the rule that as, 
between themselves, all members are principals, on the market 
no agents are recognized; a broker employed by a non-member 
to buy for him on the market is treated by the rules as buying 
for himself, and is, therefore, personally liable on the contract. 
If it be a contract in futures, he is required to conform to the 
weekly settlement rules. If his principal fails to take delivery, 
the engagement is his and he is required to make good to the 
member who sold to him any difference between the contract 
and market price at the date of delivery. But whilst this 
practice alters directly the relations of the broker to the third 
party, it also affects or tends to affect indirectly the relations of 
the broker to his own principal. The terms of the contract of 
employment being a matter of negotiation and agreement 
between them, it is open to a broker, if he chooses, to stipulate 
for particular terms; and it is the usual practice of exchanges 
to supply printed contract forms for the use of members in their 
dealings with non-members who employ them as brokers, 
containing a stipulation that the contract is made subject to 
the rules of the exchange; and frequently also a clause that 
the contract is made with the broker as principal. In addition 
to these express terms, there is in the contract of employment 
the term, implied by law in all trade contracts, that the parties 
consent to be bound by such trade usages as are consistent with 
the express terms of the contract, and reasonable. On executing 
an order the broker sends to his client a contract-note either in 

the form of the old bought and sold notes " I have this day bou S ht 

for you," or, when the principal clause is inserted, " I have this 

day bought frdm you '" These are not bou S nt and sold - notes 
proper, for the broker is not the agent of the third party for the 
purpose of signing them as statutory memoranda of the sale. 
But they purport to record the terms of the contract of employ- 
ment, and the principal may treat himself as bound by their 
provisions. Sometimes Lhey are accompanied by a detachable 
form, known as the " client's return contract note," to be filled 
in, signed and returned by the client; but even the " client's 
return contract note " is retained by the client's own broker, 
and is only a memorandum of the terms of employment. The 
following is a form of contract note rendered by a broker to his 
client for American cotton, bought on the Liverpool Cotton 
Exchange for future delivery. The client's contract note is 
attached to it, and is in precisely corresponding form. 

American Cotton, 
Delivery Contract Note. 



M. 



Liverpool, 



Dear Sirs, 



We have this day , to you 

; ft American Cotton, net weight, to be contained 

in American Bales, more or less, to be delivered in 

Liverpool, during on the basis of per lb 

for on the terms of the rules, bye-laws, and Clearing 

House regulations of the Liverpool Cotton Association, Limited, 
whether endorsed hereon or not. 

The contract, of which this is a note, is made between ourselves 
and yourselves, and not by or with any person, whether disclosed 
or not, on whose instructions or for whose benefit the same may 
have been entered into. Yours faithfully, 



The contract, of which the above is a note, was made on the 
date specified, within the business hours fixed by the Liverpool 
Cotton Association, Limited. 
per cent to us. 

Please confirm by signing and returning the contract attached. 

The above form of contract note illustrates the tendency of 
exchanges to alter the relations between the broker and his 
principal. The object of inserting in the printed form the pro- 
vision that the contract is made subject to the rules of the 



BROMBERG— BROME 



631 



Liverpool Cotton Association is to make those rules binding 
upon the principal, and if he employs his broker upon the basis 
of the printed form, he does bind himself to any modification 
of the relations between himself and his broker which those rules 
may effect. The object of the principal clause in the above and 
similar printed forms is apparently to entitle the broker to sell 
to or buy from his principal on his own account and not as 
agent at all, thus disregarding the duty incumbent upon him 
as broker of making for his principal a contract with a third 
party. 

It is not possible, except very generally, to state how far 
.exchanges have succeeded in imposing their own rules and usages 
•>n non-members, but it is probably correct to say that in most 
cases if the question came before the courts, the outside client 
would be held to have accepted the rules of the exchange so far 
as they did not alter the fundamental duties to him of his broker. 
On the other hand, provisions purporting to entitle the broker in 
disregard of his duties as broker himself to act as principal, 
would be rejected by the courts as radically inconsistent with 
the primary object of the contract of brokerage and, therefore, 
meaningless. But it is undoubtedly too often the practice of 
brokers who are members of exchanges to consider themselves 
entitled to act as principals and sell on their own account to 
their own clients, particularly in futures. The causes of this 
opinion, erroneously, though quite honestly held, are probably 
to be looked for partly in the habit of acting as principal on the 
market in accordance with the rules, partly in the forms of 
contract notes containing " principal clauses " which they send 
to their clients, and perhaps, also, in the occasional difficulty of 
effecting actual contracts on the market at the time when they 
are instructed so to do. 

A stockbroker is a broker who contracts for the sale of stocks 
and shares. Stockbrokers differ from brokers proper chiefly in 
that stocks and shares are not " goods," and the requirement of a 
memorandum in writing, enacted by the Sale of Goods Act 1893, 
does not apply. Hence actions may be brought by the principals 
to a contract for the sale of stocks and shares although no memo- 
randum in writing exists. For instance, the jobber, on failing to 
recover from the buyer's broker the price of shares sold, by reason 
of the broker having failed and been declared a defaulter, may sue 
the buyer whose " name was passed " by the broker. The employ- 
ment of a stockbroker is subject to the rules and customs of the 
Stock Exchange, in accordance with the principles discussed above, 
which apply to the employment of brokers proper. A custom 
which is illegal, such as the Stock Exchange practice of disregarding 
Leeman'sAct (1867), which enacts that contracts for the sale of joint- 
stock bank shares shall be void unless the registered numbers of 
the shares are stated therein, is not binding on the client to the 
extent of making the contract of sale valid. But if a client choose 
to instruct his broker to buy bank shares in accordance with that 
practice, the broker is entitled to be indemnified by his client for 
money which he pays on his behalf, even though the contract of 
sale so made is unenforceable. For further information the reader 
is referred to the article Stock Exchange and to the treatises on 
stock exchange law. 

An insurance broker is an agent whose business is to effect policies of 
marine insurance. He is employed by the person who has an interest 
to insure, pays the premiums to the underwriter, takes up the policy, 
and receives from the underwriter payment in the event of a loss 
under the policy. By the custom of the trade the underwriter looks 
solely to the broker for payment of premiums, and has no right of 
action against the assured ; and, on the other hand, the broker is 
paid his commission by the underwriter, although he is employed by 
the assured. Usually the broker keeps a current account with the 
underwriter, and premiums and losses are dealt with in account. 
It is only in the event of the underwriter refusing to pay on a loss, 
that the broker drops out and the assured sues the underwriter 
direct. Agents who effect life, fire or other policies, are not known 
as insurance brokers. 

Ship-brokers are, firstly, " commission agents," and, secondly, 
very often also ships' managers. Their office is to act as agents for 
owners of ships to procure purchasers for ships, or ships for intending 
purchasers, in precisely the same manner as house-agents act in 
respect of houses. They also act as agents for ship-owners in 
finding charterers for their ships, or for charterers in finding ships 
available for charter, and in either case they effect the charter-party 
(see Affreightment). 

Chartering brokers are customarily paid by the ship-owner, when 
the charter-party is effected, whether originally employed by him 
or by the charterer. Charter-parties effected through brokers often 
contain a provision — " 2\ % on estimated amount of freight to be 
paid to A B, broker, on the signing of this charter-party, and the ship 



to be consigned to hint for ship's business at the port of X [inserting the 
name ofthe port where A B carries on business]." The brokercannot 
sue on the charter-party contract because he is not a party to it, but 
the insertion of the clause practically prevents his right from being 
disputed by the ship-owner. When the broker does the ship's 
business in port, it is his duty to clear her at the customs and 
generally to act as " ship's husband.". 

A bill-broker was originally an agent who, for a commission, 
procured for country bankers the discounting of their bills in London. 
But the practice arose of the broker guaranteeing the London banker 
or financier; and finally the brokers ceased to deposit with the 
London bankers the bills they received, and at the present day a 
bill-broker, as a rule, buys bills on his own account at a discount, 
borrows money on his own account and upon his own security at 
interest, and makes his profit out of the difference between the dis- 
count and the interest. When acting thus the bill-broker is not a 
broker at all, as he deals as principal and does not act as agent. 

Authorities. — Story, Commentaries on the Law of Agency (Boston, 
1882); Brodhurst, Law and Practice of the Stock Exchange (London, 
1897); Gow, Handbook of Marine Insurance (London, 1900); 
Arnould, On Marine Insurance, edited by Messrs Hart & Simey 
(1901) ; J. R. Dos Passos, Law of Stock-Brokers and Stock Exchanges 
(New York, 1905). » (L, F. S.) 

BROMBERG, a town of Germany, in the Prussian province of 
Posen, 32 m. by rail W.N.W. from the fortress of Thorn, 7 m. 
W. from the bank of the Vistula, and at the centre of an im- 
portant network of railways, connecting it with the strategical 
points on the Prusso-Russian frontier. Pop. (1900) 52,082; 
(1905) 54,229. Its public buildings comprise two Roman 
Catholic and three Protestant churches, a Jewish synagogue, a 
seminary, high grade schools and a theatre. The town also 
possesses a bronze statue of the emperor William I., a monument 
of the war of 1870-71 , and a statue of Benkenhoff , the constructor 
of the.Bromberg Canal. This engineering work, constructed in 
i773 -1 774, by command of Frederick II., connects the Brahe 
with the Netze, and thus establishes communication between the 
Vistula, the Oder and the Elbe. The principal industrial works 
are iron foundries and machine shops, paper factories and flour 
mills; the town has, moreover, an active trade in agricultural 
and other products. In view of its strategical position, a large 
garrison is concentrated in and about the town. Bromberg is 
mentioned as early as 1252. It fell soon afterwards into the 
hands of the Poles, from whom it was taken in 1327 by the 
Teutonic Order, which held it till 1343, when the Poles re- 
captured it. Destroyed in the course of these struggles, it was 
restored by Casimir of Poland in 1346, and down to the close of 
the 16th century it continued to be a flourishing commercial city. 
It afterwards suffered so much from war and pestilence that about 
1772, when the Prussians took possession, it contained only from 
five to six hundred inhabitants. By the treaty of Tilsit it was 
transferred to the duchy of Warsaw; in 18 13 it was occupied 
by the Russians, and in 181 5 was restored to Prussia. 

BROME, ALEXANDER (1620-1666), English poet, was by 
profession an attorney, and was the author of many drinking 
songs and of satirical verses in favour of the Royalists and against 
the Rump. He published in 1661 Songs and other Poems, con- 
taining songs on various subjects, followed by a series of political 
songs; ballads, epistles, elegies and epitaphs; epigrams and 
translations. Izaak Walton wrote an introductory eclogue for 
this volume in praise of the wri'ter, and his gaiety and wit won 
for him the title of the " English Anacreon " in Edward Phillips's 
Theatrum Poetarum. Brome published in 1666 a translation of 
Horace by himself and others, and was the author of a comedy 
entitled The Cunning Lovers (1654). He also edited two volumes 
of Richard Brome's plays. 

BROME, RICHARD (d. 1652), English dramatist, was originally 
a servant of Ben Jonson, and owed much to his master. The 
development of his plots, the strongly marked characters and 
the amount of curious information to be found in his work, all 
show Jonson's influence. The relation of master and servant 
developed into friendship, and our knowledge of Brome's 
personal character is chiefly drawn from Ben Jonson's lines to 
him, prefixed to The Northern Lasse (1632), the play which made 
Brome's reputation. Brome's genius lay entirely in comedy. 
He has left fifteen pieces. Five New Playes (ed. by Alex. Brome, 
1652?) contained Madd Couple Well Matcht (acted 1639?); 



632 



BROMELIACEAE— BROMINE 



Novella (acted 1632); Court Begger (acted 1632); City Witt; 
The Damoiselle or the New Ordinary. Five New Playes (1659) 
included The English Moor, or The Mock Marriage; The Love- 
sick Court, or The Ambitious Politique; Covent Garden Weeded; 
The New Academy, or The New Exchange; and The Queen and 
Concubine. The Antipodes (acted 1638, pr. 1640); The Sparagus 
Garden (acted 1635, pr. 1640); A Joviall Crew, or the Merry 
Beggars (acted 1641, pr. 1652, revised in 1731 as an " opera "), 
and The Queenes Exchange (pr. 1657), were published separately. 
He collaborated with Thomas Hey wood in The late Lancashire 
Witches (pr. 1634). 

See A. W. Ward, History of English Dramatic Literature, vol. iii. 
pp. 125-131 (1899). The Dramatic Works of Richard Brome . . . 
were published in 1873. 

BROMELIACEAE, in botany, a natural order oi Monocoty- 
ledons, confined to tropical and sub-tropical America. It 
includes the pine-apple (fig. 1) and the so-called Spanish moss 
(fig. 2); a rootless* plant, which hangs in long grey lichen-like 
festoons from the branches of trees, a native of Mexico and the 
southern United States; the water required for food is absorbed 
from the moisture in the air by peculiar hairs which cover the 




Fig. 1. — Fruitofthe 
pine-apple (Ananas 
sativa), consisting of 
numerous flowers and 
bracts united together 
so as to form a collec- 
tive or anthocarpous 
fruit. The crown of 
the pine-apple, c, con- 
sists of a series of 
empty bracts pro- 
longed beyond the 
fruit. 



(From The Botanical Magazine, by permission of Lovell, 
Reeve & Co.) 

Fig. 2. — Tillandsia usneoides, Spanish 
moss, 'slightly reduced. 1, Small branch 
with flower; 2, flower cut vertically; 3, 
section of seed of Bromelia. 



surface of the shoots. The plants are generally herbs with a 
much shortened stem bearing a rosette of leaves and a spike or 
panicle of flowers. They are eminently dry-country plants 
(xerophytes) ; the narrow leaves are protected from loss of 
water by a thick cuticle, and have a well-developed sheath 
which embraces the stem and forms, with the sheaths of the other 
leaves of the rosette, a basin in which water collects, with frag- 
ments of rotting leaves and the like. Peculiar hairs are developed 
On the inner surface of the sheath by which the water and dis- 
solved substances are absorbed, thus helping to feed the plant. 
The leaf-margins are often spiny, and the leaf-spines of Puya 
chUensis are used by the natives as fish-hooks. Several species 
are grown as hot-house plants for the bright colour of their 
flowers or flower-bracts, e.g. species of Tillandsia, Billbergia, 
Aechmea and others. ' 



BROMINE (symbol Br, atomic weight 79-96), a chemical 
element of the halogen group, which takes its name from its 
pungent unpleasant smell (f}po>nos, a stench). It was first 
isolated by A. J. Balard in 1826 from the salts in the waters of 
the Mediterranean. He established its elementary character, 
and his researches were amplified by K. J. Lowig (1803-1890) 
in Das Brom und seine chemischen Verhaltnisse (1829). Bromine 
does not occur in nature in the uncombined condition, but in 
combination with various metals is very widely but sparingly 
distributed. Potassium, sodium and magnesium bromides are 
found in mineral waters, in river and sea-water, and occasionally 
in marine plants and animals. Its chief commercial sources are 
the salt deposits at Stassfurt in Prussian Saxony, in which 
magnesium bromide is found associated with various chlorides, 
and the brines of Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania and West 
Virginia, U.S.A.; small quantities are obtained from the mother 
liquors of Chile saltpetre and kelp. In combination with silver 
it is found as the mineral bromargyrite (bromite). 

Manufacture. — The chief centres of the bromine industry are 
Stassfurt and the central district of Michigan. It is manufac- 
tured from the magnesium bromide contained in " bittern " (the 
mother liquor of the salt industry), by two processes, the continuous 
and the periodic. The continuous process depends upon the de- 
composition of the bromide by chlorine, which is generated in special 
stills. A regular current of chlorine mixed with steam is led in at 
the bottom of a tall tower filled with broken bricks, and there meets 
a descending stream of hot bittern: bromine is liberated and is 
swept out of the tower together with some chlorine, by the current 
of steam, and then condensed in a worm. Any uncondensed bromine 
vapour is absorbed by moist iron borings, and the resulting iron 
bromide is used for the manufacture of potassium bromide. The 
periodic process depends on the interaction between manganese 
dioxide (pyrolusite) , sulphuric acid, and a bromide, and the operation 
is carried out in sandstone stills heated to 60° C, the product being 
condensed as in the continuous process. The substitution of potassium 
chlorate^ for pyrolusite is recommended when calcium chloride is 
present in the bittern. The crude bromine is purified by repeated 
shaking with potassium, sodium or ferrous bromide and subsequent 
redistillation. Commercial bromine is rarely pure, the chief im- 
purities present in it being chlorine, hydrobromic acid, and bromo- 
form (M. Hermann, Annalen, 1855, 95, p. 21 1). E. Gessner (Berichte, 
1876, 9, p. 1507) removes chlorine by repeated shaking with water, 
followed by distillation over sulphuric acid; hydrobromic acid is 
removed by distillation with pure manganese dioxide, or mercuric 
oxide, and the product dried over sulphuric acid. J. S. Stas, in his 
stoichiometric researches, prepared chemically pure bromine from 
potassium bromide, by converting it into the bromate which was 
purified by repeated crystallization. By heating the bromate it 
was partially converted into the bromide, and the resulting mixture 
was distilled with sulphuric acid. The distillate was further purified 
by digestion with milk of lime, precipitation with water, and further 
digestion with calcium bromide and barium oxide, and was finally 
redistilled. 

Characters. — Bromine at ordinary temperatures is a mobile liquid 
of fine red colour, which appears almost black in thick layers. It 
boils at 59 C. According to Sir W. Ramsay and S. Young, bromine, 
when dried over sulphuric acid, boils at 57-65° C, and when dried 
over phosphorus pentoxide, boils at 58-85° C. (under a pressure of 
755-8 mm.), forming a deep red vapour, which exerts an irritating 
and directly poisonous action on the respiratory organs. It solidifies 
at —21° C. (Quincke) to a dark brown solid. Its specific gravity is 
3-18828 (f°), latent heat of fusion 16-185 calories, latent heat of 
vaporization 45-6 calories, specific heat 0-1071. The specific heat 
of bromine vapour, at constant pressure, is 0-05504 and at constant 
volume is 0-04251 (K. Strecker). Bromine is soluble in water, to 
the extent of 3-226 grammes of bromine per 100 grammes of solution 
at 15° C, the solubility being slightly increased by the presence of 
potassium bromide. The solution is of an orange-red colour, and is 
quite permanent in the dark, but on exposure to light, gradually 
becomes colourless, owing to decomposition Mnto hydrobromic acid 
and oxygen. By cooling the aqueous solution, hyacinth-red octa- 
hedra of a crystalline hydrate of composition Br-4H 2 or Br 2 -8H 2 
are obtained (Bakhuis Roozeboom, Zeits. phys. Chem., 1888, 2. 
p. 449). Bromine is readily soluble in chloroform, alcohol and ether. 

Its chemical properties are in general intermediate between those 
of chlorine and iodine; thus it requires the presence of a catalytic 
agent, or a fairly high temperature, to bring about its union with 
hydrogen. It does not combine directly with oxygen, nitrogen or 
carbon. With the other elements it unites to form bromides, often 
with explosive violence; phosphorus detonates in liquid bromine 
and inflames in the vapour; iron is occasionally used to absorb 
bromine vapour, potassium reacts energetically, but sodium requires 
to be heated to 200° C; The chief use of bromine in analytical 
chemistry is based upon the oxidizing action of bromine water. 
Bromine and bromine water both bleach organic colouring matters. 



BROMLEY, SIR T^BRQMLEY 



633 



, : The use of bromine in the extraction of gold (q.v.) was proposed by 
'R.''Wagrier'(2)tngfcrY/0Mrradi,.2i8, p. 253) and others, butitscost 
has restricted its general application. Bromine is used extensively 
in organic chemistry as a substituting and oxidizing agent and also 
for the preparation of addition compounds. Reactions in which it 
is used in the liquid form, in. vapour, in solution, and in the presence 
of the so-called "bromine carriers," have been studied. Sunlight 
affects the action of bromine-vapour on organic compounds in various 
iways, sometimes retarding or accelerating the reaction, while in 
some cases the products are different (J. Schramm, Monatshefte fur 
Chemie, 1887, 8, p.. 101).. Some reactions, which are only possible 
by the aid of nascent bromine, are carried out by using solutions of 
sodium ! bromide and bromate, with the amount of sulphuric acid 
calculated according to the equation 5NaBr+NaBr03+6H 2 S04'= 
6NaHS0 4 +3H ? 0+6Br. (German Patent, 26642.) The diluents in 
which bromine is employed are usually ether, chloroform, acetic acid, 
hydrochloric acid, carbon bisulphide and water, and, less commonly, 
alcohol, potassium bromide and hydrobromic acid; the excessof 
bromine being removed by heating, by sulphurous acid or by shaking 
with mercury. The choice of solvent is important, for the velocity 
of the reaction and the nature of the product may vary according 
to the solvent used, thus A. Baeyer and F. Blom found that on 
brominating orthoacetamido-acetophenone in presence of water or 
acetic acid, the bromine goes into the benzene nucleus, whilst in 
chloroform or sulphuric acid or by use of bromine vapour it goes 
into the side chain as well. The action of bromine is sometimes 
accelerated by the use of compounds which behave catalytically, 
the more important of these substances being iodine, iron, ferric 
chloride, ferric bromide, aluminium bromide and phosphorus. For 
oxidizing purposes bromine is.generally employed in aqueous and in 
alkaline solutions, one of its most important applications being by 
Emil Fischer {Berichte, 1889, 22, p. 362) in his researches on the 
Sugars. The atomic Weight of bromine has been determined by J. S. 
Stas and C. Marignac from the analysis of potassium bromide, and 
of silver bromide. G. P. Baxter {Zeit. anorg. Chem. 1906, 50, p. 389) 
determined the ratios Ag: AgBr, and AgCl: Ag Br. 

Hydrobromic Acid. — This acid, HBr, the only compound of 
hydrogen and bromine, is in many respects similar to hydrochloric 
acid, but is rather less stable. It may be prepared by passing 
hydrogen gas and bromine vapour through a tube containing a 
heated platinum spiral. It cannot be prepared with any degree of 
purity by the action of concentrated sulphuric acid on bromides, 
since secondary reactions take place, leading to the liberation of 
free bromine and formation of sulphur dioxide. The usual method 
employed for the preparation of the gas consists in dropping bromine 
on to a mixture of amorphous phosphorus and water, when a violent 
reaction takes place and the gas is rapidly liberated. It can be 
obtained also, although in a somewhat impure condition, by the 
direct action of bromine on various saturated hydrocarbons {e.g. 
paraffin-wax), while an aqueous solution may be obtained by passing 
sulphuretted hydrogen through bromine water. Alexander Scott 
{Journal of Chem. Soc, 1900, 77, p. 648) prepares pure hydrobromic 
acid by covering bromine, which is contained in a large flask, with a 
layer of water, and passing sulphur dioxide into the water above 
the surface of the bromine, until the whole is of a pale yellow colour ; 
the resulting solution is then distilled in a slow current of air and 
finally purified by distillation over byium bromide. At ordinary 
temperatures hydrobromic acid is a colourless gas which fumes 
strongly in moist air, and has an acid taste and reaction. It can be 
condensed to a liquid, which boils at -64-9°C. (under a pressure of 
738-2 mm.), and, by still further cooling, gives colourless crystals 
which melt at -88-5° C. It is readily soluble in water, forming the 
aqueous acid, which when saturated at o" C. has a specific gravity of 
1 78. When boiled, the aqueous acid loses either acid or water until 
a solution of constant boiling point is obtained, containing 48 % of 
the, acid and boiling at 126 C. under atmospheric pressure ; should 
the pressure, however, vary, the strength of the solution boiling at a 
constant temperature varies also. Hydrobromic acid is one of the 
" strong "acids, being ionized to a very large extent even in con- 
centrated solution, as shown by the molecular conductivity increasing 
by only a small amount over a wide range of lilution. 

Bromides.— Hydrobromic acid reacts with metallic oxides, 
hydroxides and carbonates to form bromides, which can in many 
cases be obtained also by the direct union of the metals with bromine. 
As a class, the metallic bromides are solids at ordinary temperatures, 
which fuse readily and volatilize on heating. The majority are 
soluble in water, the chief exceptions being silver bromide, mercurous 
bromide, palladious bromide and lead bromide ; the last is, however, 
soluble in hot water. They are decomposed by chlorine, with 
liberation of , bromine and formation of metallic chlorides; con- 
centrated sulphuric acid also decomposes them, with formation of a 
metallic sulphate and liberation of bromine and sulphur dioxide. 
The non-metallic bromides are usually liquids, which are readily 
decomposed by water. Hydrobromic acid and its salts can be 
readily detected by the addition of chlorine water to their aqueous 
solutions, when bromine is liberated; or by warming with con- 
centrated sulphuric acid and manganese dioxide, the same result 
being obtained. Silver nitrate in the presence of nitric acid gives 
with bromides a pale yellow precipitate of silver bromide, AgBr, 
which is sparingly soluble in ammonia. For their quantitative 



determination ;they are precipitated in nitric acid solution by means 
of silver nitratei and the silver bromide well washed, dried and 
weighed. 

No oxides of bromine have as yet been isolated, but three oxy-acids 
are known, namely hypobromous acid, HBrO, bromousacid, HBrOj, 
and bromic acid, HBrOs. Hypobromous acid is obtained by shaking 
together bromine water and precipitated mercuric oxide, followed by 
distillation of the 'dilute solution in vacuo at low temperature (about 
40°C). It is a very Unstable compound, breaking up, on heating, into 
bromine and oxygen. The aqueous solution is light yellow in colour, 
and possesses strong bleaching properties. Bromous acid is formed 
by adding bromine to a saturated solution of silver nitrate (A. H. 
Richards, J. Soc. Chem. Ind., 1906, 25, p. 4). Bromic acid is obtained 
by the addition of the calculated amount of sulphuric acid (previously 
diluted with water) to the barium salt ; by the action of bromine on 
the silver salt, in. the presence of water, 5AgBr0 3 -f 3Br2+3H 2 = 
5AgBr+6HBr03, or bypassing chlorine through a solution of brornine 
in water. The acid is only known in the form of its aqueous solution ; 
this is, however, very unstable, decomposing on being heated to 
ioo° C. into water, oxygen and bromine. By reducing agents such, 
for example, as sulphuretted hydrogen and sulphur-dioxide,* it is 
rapidly converted into hydrobromic acid. Hydrobromic acid de- 
composes it according to the equation HBr03-)-5HBr = 3H20-f SBr^. 
Its salts are known as bromates, and are as a general rule difficultly 
soluble in water, and decomposed by heat, with evolution pf oxygen. 

Applications. — The salts of bromine, are widely used in photo- 
graphy, especially bromide of silver. For antiseptic purposes it has 
been prepared as " bromum solidificatum," which consists of 
kieselguhr or similar substance impregnated with about 75 % of its 
weight of bromine. In medicine it is largely employed in the form of 
bromides of potassium, sodium and ammonium, as well as in com- 
bination with alkaloids and other substances. 

Medicinal Use. — Bromide of potassium is the safest and most 
generally applicable sedative of the nervous system. Whilst very 
weak, its action is perfectly balanced throughout all nervous tissue, 
so much so that Sir Thomas Lauder Brunton has suggested its action 
to be due to its replacement of sodium chloride (common salt) in 
the fluids of the nervous system. Hence bromide of potassium — or 
bromide of sodium, which is possibly somewhat safer still though 
not quite so certain in its action — is used as a hypnotic, as the 
standard anaphrodisiac, as a sedative in mania and all forms of 
morhid mental excitement, and in hyperaesthesia of all kinds. Its 
most striking success is in epilepsy, for which it is the specific remedy. 
It may be given in doses of from ten to fifty grains or more, and 
may be continued without ill effect for long periods in grave cases 
of epilepsy {grand mal). Of the three bromides in common use the 
potassium salt is the most rapid and certain in its action, but may 
depress the heart in morbid states of that organ ; in such cases the 
sodium salt — of which the base is inert — may be employed. In 
whooping-cough, when a sedative is required but a stimulant is also 
indicated, ammonium bromide is often invaluable. The conditions 
in which bromides are most frequently used are insomnia, epilepsy, 
whooping-cough, delirium tremens, asthma, migraine, laryngismus 
stridulus, the symptoms often attendant upon the climacteric in 
women, hysteria, neuralgia, certain nervous disorders of the hearts 
strychnine poisoning, nymphomania and spermatorrhoea. Hydro- 
bromic acid is often used to relieve or prevent the headache and 
singing in the ears that may follow the administration of quinine 
and of salicylic acid or salicylates. 

BROMLEY, SIR THOMAS (1530-1587), English lord chan- 
cellor, was born in Staffordshire in 1 530. He was educated at 
Oxford University and called to the bar at the Middle Temple. 
Through family influence as well as the patronage of Sir Nicholas 
Bacon, the lord keeper, he quickly made progress in his profession. 
In 1566 he was appointed recorder of London, and in 1569 he 
became solicitor-general. He sat in parliament successively for 
Bridgnorth, Wigan and Guildford. On the death of Sir Nicholas 
Bacon in 1579 he was appointed lord chancellor. As an 'equity 
judge he showed- great and profound knowledge, and Ms judg- 
ment in Shelley's case (q."v.) is a landmark in the history of English 
real property law. He presided over the commission which tried 
Mary, queen of Scots, in 1 586, but the strain : of the trialy coupled 
with the responsibility which her execution' involved '.upon him, 
proved too much for his strength, and he died oh 1 the tithof 
April 1587. He was buried' in Westminster Abbey. ' 

See Foss, Lives of the Judges; Campbell, Lives of the Lord 
Chancellors. 

BROMLEY, a municipal borough in the Sevenoaks parlia- 
mentary division of Kent, England, io| m. S.E. by S. of London 
by the South Eastern & Chatham railway. Pop. (1901) 27,354. 
It lies on high ground north of the small river Ravensbourne, 
in a well- wooded district, and has become a favourite residential 
locality for those whose business lies in London. The former 
palace of the bishops of Rochester was erected in 1777 in room 



634 



BROMLITE— BRONCHITIS 




of an older structure. The manor belonged to this see as early 
as the reign of Ethelbert. In the gardens is a chalybeate spring 
known as St Blaize's Well, which was in high repute before the 
Reformation. The church of St Peter and St Paul, mainly 
Perpendicular, retains a Norman font and other remains of an 
earlier building. Here is the gravestone of, the wife of Dr 
Johnson. Bromley College, founded by Bishop Warner in 1666 
for " twenty poor widows of loyal and orthodox clergymen," 
has been much enlarged, and forty widows are in receipt of 
support. Sheppard College (1840) is an affiliated foundation 
for unmarried daughters of these widows. In the vicinity of 
Bromley, Bickley is a similar residential township, Hayes 
Common is a favourite place of excursion, and at Holwood Hill 
near Keston are remains of a large encampment known as Caesar's 
Camp. Bromley was incorporated in 1903, and is governed 
by a mayor, 6 aldermen and 18 councillors. Area, 4703 acres. 

BROMLITE, a member of the aragonite group of minerals. 
It consists of an isomorphous mixture of calcium and barium 
carbonates in various proportions, (Ca, Ba) C0 3 , and thus 
differs chemically from barytocalcite (q.v.) 
which is a double salt of these carbonates 
in equal molecular proportions. Being 
isomorphous with aragonite, it crystallizes 
in the orthorhombic system, but simple 
"crystals are not known. The crystals are 
invariably complex twins, and have the 
form of doubly terminated pseudo-hexagonal 
pyramids, like those of witherite but more 
acute; the faces are horizontally striated 
and are divided down their centre by a twin- 
suture, as represented in the adjoining figure. 
The examination in polarized light of a 
transverse section shows that each compound 
crystal is built up of six differently orientated 
individuals arranged in twelve segments. 
The crystals are translucent and white, sometimes with a shade 
of pink. Sp. gr. 3-706; hardness 4-45. The mineral has been 
found at only two localities, both of which are in the north of 
England. At the Fallowfield lead mine, near Hexham in 
Northumberland, it is associated with witherite; and at Bromley 
Hill, near Alston in Cumberland, it occurs in veins with galena. 
The species was named bromlite by T. Thomson in 1837, and 
alstonite by A. Breithaupt in 1841, both of which names, derived 
from the locality, have been in common use. (L. J. S.) 

BROMPTON, a western district of London, England, in the 
south-east of the metropolitan borough of Kensington. Bromp- 
ton Road, leading south-west from Knightsbridge, is continued 
as Old Brompton Road and Richmond Road, to join Lillie Road, 
at which point are the District and West London railway stations 
of West Brompton. The Oratory of St Philip Neri, commonly 
called Brompton Oratory, close by the Victoria and Albert 
Museum, the Brompton consumption hospital and the West 
London or Brompton cemetery are included in this district, 
which is mainly occupied by residences of the better class. 
(See Kensington.) 

BROMSGROVE, a market town in the Eastern parliamentary 
division of Worcestershire, England, 12 m. N.N.E. of Worcester, 
with a station 1 m. from the town on the Bristol-Birmingham 
line of the Midland railway. Pop. of urban district (1001) 
8418. It lies in a pleasant undulating district near the foot of 
the Lickey Hills, to surmount which the railway towards 
Birmingham here ascends for 2 m. one of the steepest gradients 
in England over such a distance. There remain several pictur- 
esque half-timbered houses, dating from 1572 and later. The 
church of St John is a fine building, Perpendicular and earlier 
in date, picturesquely placed on an elevation above the town, 
with a lofty tower and spire. There are a well-known grammar- 
school, founded by Edward VI., with university scholarships; 
a college school, a literary'jnstitute, and a school of art. Birming- 
ham Sanatorium stands in the parish. Cloth was formerly a 
staple of trade, but manufactures of nails and buttons are now 
pre-eminent, while the river Salwarpe works a number of mills 



in the neighbourhood, and near the town are carriage works 
belonging to the Midland railway. 

BRONCHIECTASIS (Gr. Pp6yxia, bronchial tubes, and 
eKTaais, extension), dilatation of the bronchi, a condition 
occurring in connexion with many diseases of the lungs. 
Bronchitis both acute and chronic, chronic pneumonia and 
phthisis, acute pneumonia and broncho-pneumonia, may all 
leave after them a bronchiectasis whose position is determined 
by the primary lesion. Other causes, acting mechanically, are 
tracheal and bronchial obstruction, as from the pressure of an 
aneurism, new growth, &c. It used to be considered a disease 
of middle age, but of late years Dr Walter Carr has shown that 
the condition is a fairly common one among debilitated children 
after measles, whooping cough, &c. The dilatation is commonly 
cylindrical, more rarely saccular, and it is the medium and 
smaller sized tubes that are generally affected, except where the 
cause is mechanical. The affection is usually of one lung only. 
Emphysema is a very common accompaniment. Though at 
first the symptoms somewhat resemble those of bronchitis, 
later they are quite distinctive. Cough is very markedly par- 
oxysmal in character, and though severe is intermittent, the 
patient being entirely free for many hours at the time. The 
effect of posture is very maiked. If the patient lie on the 
affected side, he may be free from cough the whole night, but 
if he turn to the sound side, or if he rises and bends forward, 
he brings up large quantities of bronchial secretion. The 
expectoration is characterized by its abundance and manner 
of expulsion. Where the dilatation is of the saccular variety, 
it may come up in such quantities and with so much suddenness 
as to gush from the mouth. It is very commonly foetid, as it is 
retained and decomposed in situ. Dyspnoea and haemoptysis 
occasionally occur, but are by no means the rule. If pyrexia 
is present, it is a serious symptom, as it is a sign of septic absorp- 
tion in the bronchi, and may be the forerunner of gangrene. 
If gangrene does set in, it will be accompanied by severe attacks 
of shivering and sweating. Where the disease has lasted long, 
clubbing of fingers and toes is very common. The diagnosis 
from putrid bronchitis is usually fairly easily made, but at 
times it may be a matter of extreme difficulty to distinguish 
between this condition and a tuberculous cavity in the lung. 
Nothing can be done directly to cure this disease, but the patient's 
condition can be greatly alleviated. Creosote vapour baths 
are eminently satisfactory. A mechanical treatment much 
recommended by some of the German physicians is that of 
forced expiration. 

BRONCHITIS, the name'|iven to inflammation of the mucous 
membrane of the bronchial tubes (see Respiratory System: 
Pathology). Two main varieties are described, specific and non- 
specific bronchitis. The bronchitis which occurs in infectious or 
specific disorders, as diphtheria, influenza, measles, pneumonia, 
&c, due to the micro-organisms observed in these diseases, is 
known as specific; whereas that which results from extension 
from above, or from chemical or mechanical irritation, is known 
as non-specific. It is convenient to describe it, however, under 
the chemical divisions of acute and chronic bronchitis. 

Acute bronchitis, like other inflammatory affections of the 
chest, generally arises as the result of exposure to cold, particularly 
if accompanied with damp, or of sudden change from a heated to 
a cool atmosphere. The symptoms vary according to the severity 
of the attack, and more especially according to the extent to which 
the inflammatory action spreads in the bronchial tubes. The 
disease usually manifests itself at first in the form of a catarrh, 
or common cold; but the accompanying feverishness and general 
constitutional disturbance proclaim the attack to be something 
more severe, and symptoms denoting the onset of bronchitis soon 
present themselves. A short, painful, dry jcough, accompanied 
with rapid and wheezing respiration, a feeling of rawness and pain 
in the throat and behind the breast bone, and of oppression or 
tightness throughout the chest, mark the early stages of the 
disease. In some cases, from the first, symptoms of the form 
of asthma (q.v.) known as the bronchitic are superadded, and 
greatly aggravate the Datient's suffering. 



BRONCHITIS 



635 



After a few days expectoration begins to come with the cough, 
at first scanty and viscid or frothy, but soon becoming copious 
and of purulent character. In general, after free expectoration 
has been established the more urgent and painful symptoms 
abate; and while the cough may persist for a length of time, 
often extending to three or four weeks, in the majority of instances 
convalescence advances, and the patient is ultimately restored 
to health, although there is not unfrequently left a tendency 
to a recurrence of the disease on exposure to its exciting 
causes. 

When the ear or the stethoscope is applied to the chest of a 
person suffering from such an attack as that now described, 
there are heard in the earlier stages snoring or cooing sounds, 
mixed up with others of wheezing or fine whistling quality, 
accompanying respiration. These are denominated dry sounds, 
and they are occasionally so abundant and distinct, as to convey 
their vibrations to the hand applied to the chest, as well as to be 
audible to a bystander at some distance. As the disease progresses 
these sounds become to a large extent replaced by others of 
crackling or bubbling character, which are termed moist sounds 
or rales. Both these kinds of abnormal sounds are readily 
explained by a reference to the pathological condition of the 
parts. One of the first effects of inflammation upon the bronchial 
mucous membrane is to cause some degree of swelling, which, 
together with the presence of a tough secretion closely adhering 
to it, tends to diminish the calibre of the tubes. The respired 
air as it passes over this surface gives rise to the dry or sonorous 
breath sounds, the coarser being generated in the large, and the 
finer or wheezing sounds in the small divisions of the bronchi. 
Before long, however, the discharge from the bronchial mucous 
membrane becomes more abundant and less glutinous, and 
accumulates in the tubes till dislodged by coughing. The re- 
spired air, as it passes through this fluid, causes the moist rales 
above described. In most instances both moist and dry sounds 
are heard abundantly in the same case, since different portions 
of the bronchial tubes are affected at different times in the course 
of the disease. 

Such are briefly the main characteristics presented by an 
ordinary attack of acute bronchitis running a favourable course. 
The case is, however, very different when the inflammation 
spreads into, or when it primarily affects, the minute ramifica- 
tions of the bronchial tubes which are in immediate relation 
to the air-cells of the lungs, giving rise to that form of the 
disease known as capillary bronchitis or broncho-pneumonia (see 
Respiratory System: Pathology; and Pneumonia). When 
this takes place all the symptoms already detailed become 
greatly intensified, and the patient's life is placed in imminent 
peril in consequence of the interruption to the entrance of air 
into the lungs, and thus to the due aeration of the blood. The 
feverishness and restlessness increase, the cough becomes in- 
cessant, the respiration extremely rapid and laboured, the nostrils 
dilating with each effort, and evidence of impending suffocation 
appears. The surface of the body is pale or dusky, the lips are 
livid, while breathing becomes increasingly difficult, and is 
attended with suffocative paroxysms which render the recumbent 
posture impossible. Unless speedy relief is obtained by successful 
efforts to clear the chest by coughing and expectoration, the 
patient's strength gives way, somnolence and delirium set in 
and death ensues. All this may be brought about in the space 
of a few days, and such cases, particularly among the very young, 
sometimes prove fatal within forty-eight hours. 

Acute bronchitis must at all times be looked upon as a severe 
and even serious ailment, but there are certain circumstances 
under which its occurrence is a matter of special anxiety to the 
physician. It is pre-eminently dangerous at the extremes of 
life, and mortality statistics show it to be one of the most fatal 
of the diseases of those periods. This is to be explained not only 
by the well-recognized fact that all acute diseases tell with great 
severity on the feeble frames alike of infants and aged people, but 
more particularly by the tendency which bronchitis undoubtedly 
has in attacking them to assume the capillary form, and 
when it does so to prove quickly fatal. The importance, therefore, 



of early attention to the slightest evidence of bronchitis among 
the very young or the aged can scarcely be overrated. 

Bronchitis is also apt to be very severe when it occurs in 
persons who are addicted to intemperance. Again, in those who 
suffer from any disease affecting directly or indirectly the re- 
spiratory functions, such as consumption or heart disease, the 
supervention of an attack of acute bronchitis is an alarming 
complication, increasing, as it necessarily does, the embarass- 
ment of breathing. The same remark is applicable to those 
numerous instances of its occurrence in children who are or have 
been suffering from such diseases as have always associated 
with them a certain degree of bronchial irritation, such as measles 
and whooping-cough. 

One other source of danger of a special character in bronchitis 
remains to be mentioned, viz. collapse of the lung. Occasionally 
a branch of a bronchial tube becomes plugged up with secretion, 
so that the area of the lung to which this branch conducts ceases 
to be inflated on inspiration. The small quanti ty of air imprisoned 
in the portion of lung gradually escapes, but no fresh air enters, 
and the part collapses and becomes of solid consistence. Increased 
difficulty of breathing is the result, and where a large portion of 
lung is affected by the plugging up of a large bronchus, a fatal 
result may rapidly follow, the danger being specially great in 
the case of children. Fortunately, the obstruction may some- 
times be removed by vigorous coughing, and relief is then 
obtained. 

With respect to the treatment of acute bronchitis, in those mild 
cases which are more of the nature of a simple catarrh, little 
else will be found necessary than confinement in a warm room, 
or in bed, for a few days, and the use of light diet, together with 
warm diluent drinks. Additional measures are however called 
for when the disease is more markedly developed. Medicines 
to allay fever and promote perspiration are highly serviceable 
in the earlier stages. Later, with the view of soothing the pain of 
the cough, and favouring expectoration, mixtures of tolu, with 
the addition of some opiate, stfth as the ordinary paregorics, 
may be advantageously employed. The use of opium, however., 
in any form should not be resorted to in the case of young 
children without medical advice, since its action on them is much 
more potent and less under control than it is in adults. Not a 
few of the so-called " soothing mixtures " have been found to 
contain opium in quantity sufficient to prove dangerous when 
administered to children, and caution is necessary in using them. 

From the outset of the attack the employment of fomentations, 
or especially a turpentine stupe, gives great relief, and occasion- 
ally in the non-specific form this treatment, combined with a 
good dose of calomel and salts, may render the attack abortive. 
Some relief is always obtained by inhalations, and theoretically, 
an acute specific bronchitis should be successfully treated by 
inhalation of antiseptic and soothing remedies. In practice, 
however, it is found that the strength cannot be sufficiently 
strong to destroy the bacteria in the bronchial tubes. However, 
much relief is obtained from the use of steam atomizers filled 
with an aqueous solution of compound tincture of benzoin, creo- 
sote or guaiacol. A still more practicable means of introducing 
volatile antiseptic oils is the globe nebulizer, which throws 
oleaginous solutions in the form of a fine fog, that can be deeply 
inhaled. Menthol, eucalyptol and white pine extract are some 
of the remedies that may be tried dissolved in benzoinol, to 
which cocaine or opium may be added if the cough is troublesome. 

When the bronchitis is of the capillary form, the great object 
is to maintain the patient's strength, and to endeavour to secure 
the expulsion of the morbid secretion from the fine bronchi. 
In additon to the remedies already alluded to, stimulants are 
called for from the first; and should the cough be ineffectual 
in relieving the bronchial tubes, the administration of an emetic 
dose of sulphate of zinc may produce a good effect. 

During the whole course of any attack of bronchitis attention 
must be paid to the due nourishment of the patient; and during 
the subsequent convalescence, which, particularly in elderly 
persons, is apt to be slow, tonics and stimulants may have to be 
prescribed. 



6 3 6 



BRONCHOTOMY^BRONGNIART, ADOLPHE 



Chronic bronchitis may arise as the' result of repeated attacks 
of the acute form, or it may exist altogether independently. 
It occurs more frequently among persons advanced in life than 
among the young, although no age is exempt from it. The usual 
history of this- form, of bronchitis is that of a cough recurring 
during the colder seasons of the year, and in its earlier stages, 
departing entirely in summer, so that it is frequently called 
" winter cough." In many persons subject to it, however, 
attacks are apt to be excited at any time by very slight causes, 
such as, changes in the weather; and in advanced cases of the 
disease the cough is seldom altogether absent. The symptoms 
and auscultatory signs of chronic bronchitis are on the whole 
similar to those pertaining to the acute form,, except that the 
febrile disturbance and pain are much Jess marked. The cough 
is usually more troublesome in the morning than during the day. 
There is usually free and copious expectoration, and occasionally 
this is so abundant as to constitute what is termed bronchorrhoea. 

Chronic bronchitis leads to alterations of structure in the 
affected bronchial tubes, their mucous membrane becoming 
thickened or even ulcerated, while occasionally permanent 
dilatation of the bronchi. takes place, often accompanied with 
profuse foetid expectoration. In long-standing cases of chronic 
bronchitis the nutrition of the lungs becomes impaired, and 
dilatation of the air-tubes (emphysema) and other complications 
result, giving rise to more or less constant breathlessness. 

Chronic bronchitis may arise secondarily to some other ailment. 
This is especially the case in Bright's disease of the kidneys 
and in heart disease, of both of which maladies it often proves 
a serious complication, also in gout and syphilis. The influence 
of occupation is seen in the frequency in which persons following 
certain employments suffer from chronic bronchitis. Hirt has 
shown that the inhalation of vegetable dust is very liable to 
produce bronchitis through the irritation produced by the dust 
particles and the growth of organisms carried in with the dust. 
Consequently, millers and grain-shovellers are especially liable 
to it, while next in order come- weavers and workers in cotton 
factories. 

. The treatment tobe adopted in chronicbronchitis depends upon 
the severity of the case, the age of the patient and the presence 
or absence of complications. Attention to the general health is 
a matter; of prime importance in all cases of the disease, more 
particularly among persons whose avocations entail exposure, 
and tonics with cod-liver oil will be found highly advantageous. 
The use of a respirator in very cold or damp weather is a valuable 
means of protection. In those aggravated forms of chronic 
bronchitis, where the slightest exposure to cold air brings on 
fresh attacks, it may become necessary, where circumstances 
permit, to enjoin confinement to a warm room or removal to a 
more genial climate during the winter months. 

BRONCHOTOMY (Gr. Ppbyx™, wind-pipe, and rkfiveiv, to 
cut), a medical term used to describe a surgical incision into 
the throat; now largely superseded by the terms laryngotomy, 
thyrotomy and tracheotomy, which indicate more accurately 
the place of incision. 

BRONCO, usually incorrectly spelt Broncho (a Spanish word 
meaning rough, rude), an unbroken or untamed horse, especially 
in the United States, a mustang; the word entered America 
by way of Mexico. 

BRONDSTED, PETER OLUF (1780-1842), Danish archaeo- 
logist and traveller, was born at Fruering in Jutland on the 17th 
of November 1780. After studying at the university of Copen- 
hagen he visited Paris in 1806 with his friend Georg Koes. After 
remaining there two years, they went together to Italy. Both 
were zealously attached to the study of antiquities; and con- 
geniality of tastes and pursuits induced them, in 18 10, to join 
an expedition to Greece, where they excavated the temples of 
Zeus in Aegina and of Apollo at Bassae in Arcadia. After 
three years of active researches in Greece, Brondsted returned 
to Copenhagen, where, as a reward for his labours, he was 
appointed professor of Greek in the university. He then began 
to arrange and prepare for publication the vast materials he 
had collected during his travels; but finding that Copenhagen 



did not afford him the desired facilities, he exchanged his pro- 
fessorship for the office of Danish envoy at the papal court in 
1818, and took up his abode at Rome. In 1820 and 1821 he 
visited Sicily and the Ionian Isles to collect additional materials 
for his great work. In 1826 he went to London, chiefly with a 
view of studying the Elgin marbles and other remains of antiquity 
in the British Museum, and became acquainted with the prin- 
cipal archaeologists of England. From 1828-1832 he resided in 
Paris, to superintend the publication of his Travels, and then 
returned to Copenhagen on being appointed director of the 
museum of antiquities and the collection of coins and medals. 
In. 1842 he became rector of the university; but a fall from 
his horse caused his death on the 26th of June. His principal 
work was the' Travels, and Archaeological Researches in Greece 
(in German and French, 1 8.26-1 830), of which only two volumes 
were published, dealing with the island of Ceos and the metopes 
of the Parthenon. 

BRONGNIART, ADOtPHE THEODORE (1801-1876), French 
botanist, son of the geologist Alexandre Brongniart, was born in 
Paris on the 14th of January 1801. He soon showed an inclina- 
tion towards the study of natural science, devoting himself at 
first more particularly to geology, and later to botany, thus 
equipping himself for what was to be the main occupation of his 
life— the investigation of fossil plants. In 1826 he graduated 
as doctor of medicine with a dissertation on the Rhamnaceae; 
but the career which he adopted was botanical, not medical. 
In 1 83 1 he became assistant to R. L. Desfontaines at tlje Musee 
d'Histoire "Naturelle, and two years later succeeded him as 
professor, a position which he continued to hold until his death 
in Paris on the 18th of February 1876. 

Brongniart was an indefatigable investigator and a prolific 
writer,; so that he left behind him, as the fruit of his labours, 
a large number of books and memoirs. As early as 1822 he 
published a paper on the classification and distribution of fossil 
plants (Mem. Mus. Hist. Nat. viii.). This was followed by 
several papers chiefly bearing upon the relation between extinct 
and existing forms — a line of research which culminated in the 
publication of the Histoire des vigStauxfossiles, which has earned 
for him the title of " father of paleobotany." This great work 
was heralded by a small but most important " Prodrome " 
(contributed to the Grand Dictionnaire d'Hist. Nat., 1828, t. lvii.) 
which brought order into chaos by a classification in which the 
fossil plants were arranged, with remarkably correct insight, 
along with their nearest living allies, and which forms the basis 
of all subsequent progress in this direction. It is of especial 
botanical interest, because, in accordance with Robert Brown's 
discoveries, the Cycadeae and Coniferae were placed in the new 
group Fhan&rogames gymnospermes. In this book attention was 
also directed to the succession of forms in the various geological 
periods, with the important result (stated in modern terms) 
that in the Palaeozoic period the Pteridophyta are found to 
predominate; in the Mesozoic, the Gymnosperms; in the 
Cainozoic, the Angiosperms, a result subsequently more fully 
stated in his "Tableau des genres de vegetaux fossiles" 
(D'Orbigny, Diet. Univ. d'Hist. Nat., 1849). But the great 
Histoire itself was not destined to be more than a colossal 
fragment; the publication of successive parts proceeded regularly 
from 1828 to 1837, when the first volume was completed, but 
after that only three parts of the second volume appeared. 
Brongniart, no doubt, was overwhelmed with the continually 
increasing magnitude of the task that he had undertaken. 
Apart from his more comprehensive works, his most important 
palaeontological contributions are perhaps his observations on 
the structure of Sigillaria (Arch. Mus. Hist. Nat. i., 1839) and 
his researches (almost the last he undertook) on fossil seeds, of 
which a full account was published posthumously in 1880. His 
activity was by no means confined to palaeobotany, but extended 
into all branches of botany, more particularly^anatomy and 
phanerogamic taxonomy. Among his achievements in these 
directions the most notable is the memoir " Sur la generation 
et le developpement de 1'embryon des Phanerogames " (Ann. 
Sci. Nat. xii., 1827); This is remarkable in that it contains the 



BRONGNIART, ALEXANDRE— BRONTE 



637 



first account of any value of the development of the pollen; 
as also a description of the structure of the pollen-grain, the 
confirmation of G. B. Amici's (1823) discovery of the pollen-tube, 
the confirmation of R. Brown's views as to the structure of the 
unimpregnated ovule (with the introduction of the term " sac 
embryonnaire "); and in that it shows how nearly Brongniart 
anticipated Amici's subsequent (1846) discovery of the entrance 
of the pollen-tube into the micropyle, fertilizing the female 
cell which then develops into the embryo. Of his anatomical 
works, those of the greatest value are probably the " Recherches 
sur la structure et les fonctions des feullles " (Ann, Sci, Nat. 
xxi., 1830), and the " Nouvelles Recherches sur l'Epiderme " 
{Ann. Sci. Nat. i., 1834), in which, among other important obser- 
vations, the discovery of the cuticle is recorded; and, further, 
the " Recherches sur l'organisation des tiges des Cycadees " 
{Ann. Sci. Nat. xvi., 1829), giving the results of the first 
investigation of the anatomy of those plants. His systematic 
work is represented by a large number of papers and monographs, 
many of which relate to the flora of New Caledonia; and by his 
Enumeration des genres de plantes cultivees au Musee d'Histaire 
Naturelle de Paris (1843), which is an interesting landmark in the 
history of classification in that it forms the starting-point of the 
system, modified successively by A. Braun, A. W. Eichler and 
A. Engler, which is now adopted in Germany. In addition to 
his scientific and professorial labours, Brongniart held various 
important official posts in connexion with the department of 
education, and interested himself greatly in agricultural and 
horticultural matters. With J. V. Audouin and J. B. A. Dumas, 
his future brothers-in-law, he established the Annates des 
Sciences Naturelles in 1824; he also founded the Societe 
Botanique de France in 1854, and was its first president. 

For accounts of his life and work see Bull, de la Soc. Geol. de France, 
1876, and La Nature, 1876; the Bulletin de la Soc. Bot. de France 
for 1876, vol. xxiii., contains a list of his works and the orations 
pronounced at his funeral. (S. H. V.*) 

BRONGNIART, ALEXANDRE (1770-1847), French miner- 
alogist and geologist, son of the eminent architect who designed 
the Bourse and other public buildings of Paris, was born in that 
city on the 5th of February 1770. At an early age he studied 
chemistry, under Lavoisier, and after passing through the 
Ecole des Mines he took honours at the Ecole de Medecine; 
subsequently he joined the army of the Pyrenees as pharmacien; 
but having committed some slight political offence, he was 
thrown into prison and detained there for some time. Soon 
after his release he was appointed professor of natural history 
in the College des Quatre Nations. In 1 800 he was made director 
of the Sevres porcelain factory, a post which he retained to his 
death, and in which he achieved his greatest work. In his hands 
Sevres became the leading porcelain factory in Europe, and the 
researches of an able band of assistants enabled him to lay 
the foundations of ceramic chemistry. In addition to his work 
at Sevres, quite enough to engross the entire energy of any 
ordinary man, he continued his more purely scientific work. 
He succeeded Hauy as professor of mineralogy in the Museum 
of Natural History; but he did not confine himself to mineralogy, 
for it is to him that we owe the division of Reptiles into the 
four orders of Saurians, Batrachians, Chelonians and Ophidians. 
Fossil as well as living animals engaged his attention, and in his 
studies of the strata around Paris he was instrumental in estab- 
lishing the Tertiary formations. In 1816 he was elected to the 
Academy; and in the following year he visited the Alps of 
Switzerland and Italy, and afterwards Sweden and Norway. 
The result of his observations was published from time to time 
in the Journal des Mines and other scientific journals. Wide 
as was the range of his interests his most famous work was 
accomplished at Sevres, and his most enduring monument is 
his classic. Traite des arts cer antiques (1844). He died in Paris 
on the 7 th of October 1847. 

His other principal works are:- — Traite elementaire de mineralogie, 
avec des applications aux arts (2 vols.,. Paris, 1807) ; Histoire naturelle 
des crustaces fossiles (Paris, 1822); Classification et caracteres 
mineralogiques des roch.es homogenes et heterogenes (Paris, 1827); 
the Tableau des terrains, qui composent I' ecorce du globe, ou Essai sur. 



la structure de la partie connue de la terre (Paris, 1829) ; and the 
TraitS des arts ceramiques ( 1 844) . Brongniart was also the coadj utor 
of Cuvier in the admirable Essai sur la geographic mineralogique 
des environs de Paris (Paris, 1811); originally published in Ann. 
Mus. Hist. Nat. (Paris, xi. 1808). 

BRONN, HEINRICH GEORG (1800-1862), German geologist, 
was born on the 3rd of March 1800 at Ziegelhausen near Heidel- 
berg. Studying at the university at Heidelberg he took his 
doctor's degree in the faculty of medicine in 1821, and in the 
following year was appointed professor of natural history. He 
now devoted himself to palaeontological studies, and to field- 
work in various parts of Germany, Italy and France. From 
its commencement in 1830 to 1862 he 1 assisted in' editing the 
Jahrbuch fiir Miner alogie, &c, continued as Neues Jahrbuch. 
His principal work, Lethaea Geognostica (2 vols., Stuttgart, 
1834-1838; 3rd ed. with F. Romer, 3 vols., 1851-1856), has 
been regarded as one of the foundations of German stratigraphical 
geology. His Handbuch einer Geschichteder Natur,oi which the 
first part was issued in 1841, gave a general account of the 
physical history of the earth, while the second part dealt with the 
life-history, species being regarded as direct acts of creation. 
The third part included his famous Index Palaeontologicus, and 
was issued in 3 vols., 1848-1849, with the assistance of H. von 
Meyer and H. R. Goppert. This record of fossils has proved 
of inestimable value to all palaeontologists. An important 
work on recent and fossil zoology, Die Klassen und Ordnungen 
des Thier-Reichs, was commenced by Bronn. He wrote the 
volumes dealing with Amorphozoa, Actinozoa, and Malacozoa, 
published 1859-1862; the work was continued by other natural- 
ists. In 1 86 1 Bronn was awarded the Wollaston medal by the 
Geological Society of London. He died at Heidelberg on the 
5th of July 1862. 

BRONSART VON SCHELLENDORF, PAUL (1832-1891), 
Prussian general, was born at Danzig in 1832. He entered the 
Prussian Guards in 1849, and was appointed to the general 
staff in 1861 as a captain; after three years of staff service he 
returned to regimental duty, but was soon reappointed to the 
staff, and lectured at the war academy, becoming major in 
1865 and lieut.-colonel in 1869. During the war of 1870 he was 
chief of a section on the Great General Staff, and conducted the 
preliminary negotiations for the surrender of the French at 
Sedan. After the war Bronsart was made a colonel and chief 
of staff of the Guard army corps, becoming major-general in 
1876 and lieut.-general (with a division command) in 1881. Two 
years later he became war minister, and during his tenure of the 
post (1883-1889) many important reforms were carried out in 
the Prussian army, in particular the introduction of the magazine 
rifle. He was appointed in 1889 to command the I. army Corps 
at Konigsberg. He died on the 23rd of June 1891 at his 
estate near Braunsberg. Bronsart's military writings include 
two works of great importance — Ein Ruckblick auf die taklischen 
Ruckblicke (2nd ed., Berlin, 1870), a pamphlet written in reply 
to Captain May's Tactical Retrospect of 1866; and Der Dienst 
des Generalstabes (1st ed., Berlin, 1876; 3rd ed. revised by 
General Meckel, 1893; new ed. by the author's son, Major 
Bronsart von Schellendorf, Berlin, 1904, a comprehensive 
treatise on the duties of the general staff. The third edition of 
this work was soon after its publication translated into English 
and issued officially to the British army as The Duties of the 
General Staff. Major Bronsart's new edition of 1904 was re- 
issued in English by the General Staff, under the same title, 
in 1905. ■••■:■,■ 

BRONTE, CHARLOTTE (1816-1855), EMILY (1818-1848), 
and ANNE (1820^1849), English novelists, were three of the six 
children of Patrick Bronte, a clergyman Of the Church of England, 
who for the last forty-one years of his' life was perpetual incum- 
bent of the parish of Ha worth in the West Riding of Yorkshire. 
Patrick Bronte was born at Emsdale, Co. Down, Ireland; on the 
17th of March 1777. His parents were ! of the peasant class, 
their original name of Brunty apparently having been changed 
by their son on his entry at St John's College, Cambridge, in 
1802. In the intervening years he had been successively a 
weaver and schoolmaster in his native Country. From Cambridge 



6 3 8 



BRONTE 



he became a curate, first at Wethersfield in Essex, in 1806, then 
for a few months at Wellington, Salop, in 1809. At the end of 
1809 he accepted a curacy at Dewsbury, Yorkshire, following 
up this by one at Hartshead-cum-Clifton in the same county. 
At Hartshead Patrick Bronte married in 181 2 Maria Branwell, 
a Cornishwoman, and there two children were born to him, 
Maria (1813-1825) and Elizabeth (1814-1825). Thence Patrick 
Bronte removed to Thornton, some 3 m. from Bradford, and 
-here his wife gave birth to four children, Charlotte, Patrick 
Branwell (181 7-1848), Emily Jane, and Anne, three of whom 
were to attain literary distinction. 

In April 1820, three months after the birth of Anne Bronte, 
her father accepted the living of Ha worth, a village near Keighley 
in Yorkshire, which will always be associated with the romantic 
story of the Brontes. In September of the following year his 
wife died. Maria Bronte lives for us in her daughter's biography 
only as the writer of certain letters to her " dear saucy Pat," 
as she calls her lover, and as the author of a recently published 
manuscript, an essay entitled The Advantages of Poverty in 
Religious Concerns, full of a sententiousness much affected at 
the time. 

Upon the death of Mrs Bronte her husband invited his sister- 
in-law, Elizabeth Branwell, to leave Penzance and to take up 
her residence with his family at Haworth. Miss Branwell 
accepted the trust and would seem to have watched over her 
nephew and five nieces with conscientious care. The two 
eldest of those nieces were not long in following their mother. 
Maria and Elizabeth, Charlotte and Emily, were all sent to the 
Clergy Daughters' school at Cowan Bridge in 1824, and Maria 
and Elizabeth returned home in the following year to die. How 
far the bad food and drastic discipline were responsible cannot 
be accurately demonstrated. Charlotte gibbeted the school 
long years afterwards in Jane Eyre, under the thin disguise of 
" Lowood," and the principal, the Rev. William Carus Wilson 
(1792-1859), has been universally accepted as the counterpart 
of Mr Naomi Brocklehurst in the same novel. But congenital 
disease more probably accounts for the tragedy from which 
happily Charlotte and Emily escaped, both returning in 1825 
to a prolonged home life at Haworth. Here the four surviving 
children amused themselves in intervals of study under their 
aunt's guidance with precocious literary aspirations. The many 
tiny booklets upon which they laboured in the succeeding years 
have been happily preserved. We find stories, verses and essays, 
all in the minutest handwriting, none giving any indication of 
the genius which in the case of two of the four children was to 
add to the indisputably permanent in literature. 

At sixteen years of age — in 1831 — Charlotte Bronte became 
a pupil at the school of Miss Margaret Wooler (1792-1885) at 
Roe Head, Dewsbury. She left in the following year to assist 
in the education of the younger sisters, bringing with her much 
additional proficiency in drawing, French and composition; 
she took with her also the devoted friendship of two out of her 
ten fellow-pupils — Mary Taylor (1817-1893) and Ellen Nussey 
(1817-1897). With Miss Taylor and Miss Nussey she corre- 
sponded for the remainder of her life, and her letters to the 
xatter make up no small part of what has been revealed to us of 
her life story. Her next three years at Haworth were varied 
by occasional visits to one or other of these friends. In 1835 
she returned to Miss Wooler's school at Roe Hea.d as a governess, 
her sister Emily accompanying her as a pupil, but remaining 
only three months, and Anne then taking her place. The year 
following the school was removed to Dewsbury. In 1838 
Charlotte went back to Haworth and soon afterwards received 
her first offer of marriage — from a clergyman, Henry Nussey, 
the brother of her friend Ellen. This was followed a little later 
by a second offer from a curate named Bryce. She refused both 
and took a situation as nursery governess, first with the Sidgwicks 
of Stonegappe, Yorkshire, and later with the Whites at Rawdon 
in the same county. A few months of this, however, filled her 
with an ambition to try and secure greater independence as the 
possessor of a school of her own, and she planned to acquire 
more proficiency in " languages " on the continent, as a pre- I 



liminary step. The aunt advanced some money, and accom- 
panied by her sister Emily she became in February 1842 a pupil 
at the Pensionnat Heger, Brussels. Here both girls worked hard, 
and won the goodwill and indeed admiration of the principal 
teacher, M. Heger, whose wife was at the head of the establish- 
ment. But the two girls were hastily called back to England 
before the year had expired by the announcement of the critical 
illness of their aunt. Miss Branwell died on the 29th of October 
1842. She bequeathed sufficient money to her pieces to enable 
them to reconsider their plan of life. Instead of a school at 
Bridlington which had been talked of, they could now remain 
with their father, utilize their aunt's room as a classroom, and 
take pupils. But Charlotte was not yet satisfied with what the 
few months on Belgian soil had done for her, and determined 
to accept M. Heger's offer that she should return to Brussels 
as a governess. Hence the year 1843 was passed by her at the 
Pensionnat Heger in that capacity, and in this period she 
undoubtedly widened her intellectual sphere by reading the 
many books in French literature that her friend M. Heger lent 
her. But life took on a very sombre shade in the lonely environ- 
ment in which she found herself. She became so depressed that 
on one occasion she took refuge in the confessional precisely as 
did her heroine Lucy Snowe in Villette. In 1844 she returned 
to her father's house at Haworth, and the three sisters began 
immediately to discuss the possibilities of converting the vicarage 
into a school. Prospectuses were issued, but no pupils were 
forthcoming. 

Matters were complicated by the fact that the only brother, 
Patrick Branwell, had about this time become a confirmed 
drunkard. Branwell had been the idol of his aunt and of his 
sisters. Educated under his father's care, he had early shown 
artistic leanings, and the slender resources of the family had been 
strained to provide him with the means of entering at the Royal 
Academy as a pupil. This was in 1835. Branwell, it would 
seem, indulged in a glorious month of extravagance in London 
and then returned home. His art studies were continued for a 
time at Leeds, but it may be assumed that no commissions 
came to him, and at last he became tutor to the son of a Mr 
Postlethwaite at Barrow-in-Furness. Ten months later he was 
a booking-clerk at Sowerby Bridge station on the Leeds & 
Manchester railway, and later at Luddenden Foot. Then he 
became tutor in the family of a clergyman named Robinson at 
Thorp Green, where his sister Anne was governess. Finally he 
returned to Haworth to loaf at the village inn, shock his sisters 
by his excesses, and to fritter his life away in painful sottishness. 
He died in September 1848, having achieved nothing reputable, 
and having disappointed all the hopes that had been centred in 
him. " My poor father naturally thought more of his only son 
than of his daughters," is one of Charlotte's dreary comments 
on the tragedy. In early years he had himself written both 
prose and verse; and a foolish story invented long afterwards 
attributed to him some share in his sisters' novels, particularly 
In Emily Bronte's Wuthering Heights. But Charlotte distinctly 
tells us that her brother never knew that his sisters had published 
a line. He was too much under the effects of drink, too besotted 
and muddled in that last year or two of life, to have any share 
in their intellectual enthusiasms. 

The literary life had, however, opened bravely for the three 
girls during those years. In 1846 a volume of verse appeared 
from the shop of Aylott & Jones of Paternoster Row; " Poems, 
by Currer, Ellis and Acton Bell," was on the title-page. These 
names disguised the identity of Charlotte, Emily and Anne 
Bronte. The venture cost the sisters about £50 in all, but 
only two copies were sold. There were nineteen poems by 
Charlotte, twenty-one by Emily, and the same number by Anne. 
A consensus of criticism has accepted the fact that Emily's 
verse alone revealed true poetic genius. This was unrecognized 
then except by her sister Charlotte. It is obvious now to all. 

The failure of the poems did not deter the authors from 
further effort. They had each a novel to dispose of. Charlotte 
Bronte's was called The Master, which before it was sent off to 
London was retitled The Professor. Emily's story was entitled 



BRONTE— BRONZE 



639 



Wuthering Heights, and Anne's Agnes Gray. All these stories 
travelled from publisher to publisher. At last The Professor 
reached the firm of Smith, Elder & Co., of Cornhill. The " reader" 
for that firm, R. Smith Williams (1800-1875), was impressed, as 
were also his employers. Charlotte Bronte received in August 
1847 a letter informing her that whatever the merits of The 
Professor — and it was hinted that it lacked " varied interest " 
— it was too short for the three-volume form then counted 
imperative. The author was further told that a longer novel 
would be gladly considered. She replied in the same month 
with this longer novel, and Jane Eyre appeared in October 1847, 
to be wildly acclaimed on every hand, although enthusiasm 
was to receive a counterblast when more than a year later, in 
December 1848, Miss Rigby, afterwards Lady Eastlake (1809- 
1893), reviewed it in the Quarterly. 

Meanwhile the novels of Emily and Anne had been accepted 
by T. C. Newby. They were published together in three volumes 
in December 1847, two months later than Jane Eyre, although 
the proof sheets had been passed by the authors before their 
sister's novel had been sent to the publishers. The dilatoriness 
of Mr Newby was followed up by considerable energy when he 
saw the possibility of the novels by Ellis and Acton Bell sailing 
on the wave of Currer Bell's popularity, and he would seem very 
quickly to have accepted another manuscript by Anne Bronte, 
for The Tenant of Wildfell Hall was published by Newby in three 
volumes in June 1 848. It was Newby 's clever efforts to persuade 
the public that the books he published were by the author of 
Jane Eyre that led Charlotte and Anne to visit London this 
summer and interview Charlotte's publishers in Cornhill with 
a view to establishing their separate identity. Soon after their 
return home Branwell died (the 24th of September 1848), and 
less than three months later Emily died also at Ha worth (the 19th 
December 1 848) . Then Anne became ill and on the 24th of May 
1849 Charlotte accompanied her to Scarborough in the hope 
that the sea air would revive her. Anne died there on the 
28th of May, and was buried in Scarborough churchyard. Thus 
in exactly eight months Charlotte Bronte lost all the three 
companions of her youth, and returned to sustain her father, fast 
becoming blind, in the now desolate home at Haworth. 

In the interval between the death of Branwell and of Emily, 
Charlotte had been engaged upon a new novel — Shirley. Two- 
thirds were written, but the story was then laid aside while its 
author was nursing her sister Anne. She completed the book 
after Anne's death, and it was published in October 1849. The 
following winter she visited London as the guest of her publisher, 
Mr George Smith, and was introduced to Thackeray, to whom 
she had dedicated Jane Eyre. The following year she repeated 
the visit, sat for her portrait to George Richmond, and was 
considerably lionized by a host of admirers. In August 1850 
she visited the English lakes as the guest of Sir James Kay- 
Shuttleworth, and met Mrs Gaskell, Miss Martineau, Matthew 
Arnold and other interesting men and women. During this 
period her publishers assiduously lent her books, and her criti- 
cisms of them contained in many letters to Mr George Smith 
and Mr Smith Williams make very interesting reading. In 18 51 
she received a third offer of marriage, this time from Mr James 
Taylor, who was in the employment of her publishers. A visit 
to Miss Martineau at Ambleside and also to London to the Great 
Exhibition made up the events of this year. On her way home 
she visited Manchester and spent two days with Mrs Gaskell. 
During the year 1852 she worked hard with a new novel, Villette, 
which was published in January of 1853. In September of that 
year she received a visit from Mrs Gaskell at Haworth; in May 
1854 she returned it, remaining three days at Manchester, and 
planning with her hostess the details of her marriage, for at this 
time she had promised to unite herself with her father's curate, 
Arthur Bell Nicholls (1817-1906), who had long been a per- 
tinacious suitor for her hand but had been discouraged by Mr 
Bronte. The marriage took place in Haworth church on the 
29th of June 1854, the ceremony being performed by the Rev. 
Sutcliffe Sowden, Miss Wooler and Miss Nussey acting as wit- 
nesses. The wedded pair spent their honeymoon in Ireland, 



returning to Haworth, where they made their home with Mr 
Bronte, Mr Nicholls having pledged himself to continue in his 
position as curate to his father-in-law. After less than a year 
of married life, however, Charlotte Nicholls died of an illness 
incidental to childbirth, on the 31st of March 1855. She was 
buried in Haworth church by the side of her mother, Branwell 
and Emily. The father followed in 1861, and then her husband 
returned to Ireland, where he remained some years afterwards, 
dying in 1906. 

The bare recital of the Bronte story can give no idea of its 
undying interest, its exceeding pathos. Their life as told by 
their biographer Mrs Gaskell is as interesting as any novel. 
Their achievement, however, will stand on its own merits. Anne 
Bronte's two novels, it is true, though constantly reprinted, 
survive principally through the exceeding vitality of the Bronte 
tradition. As a hymn writer she still has a place in most religious 
communities. Emily is great alike as a novelist and as a poet. 
Her " Old Stoic " and " Last Lines " are probably the finest 
achievement of poetry that any woman has given to English 
literature. Her novel Wuthering Heights stands alone as a 
monument of intensity owing nothing to tradition, nothing to 
the achievement of earlier writers. It was a thing apart, pas- 
sionate, unforgettable, haunting in its grimness, its grey 
melancholy. Among women writers Emily Bronte has a sure 
and certain place for all time. As a poet or maker of verse 
Charlotte Bronte is undistinguished, but there are passages of 
pure poetry of great magnificence in her four novels, and par- 
ticularly in Villette. The novels Jane Eyre and Villette will 
always command attention whatever the future of English 
fiction, by virtue of their intensity, their independence, their 
rough individuality. 

The Life of Charlotte Bronte, by Mrs Gaskell, was first published 
in 1857. Owing to the many controversial questions it aroused, as 
to the identity of Lowood in Jane Eyre with Cowan Bridge school, as 
to the relations of Branwell Bronte with his employer's wife, as to 
the supposed peculiarities of Mr Bronte, and certain other minor 
points, the third edition was considerably changed. The Life has 
been many times reprinted, but may be read in its most satisfactory 
form in the Haworth edition (1902), issued by the original publishers, 
Smith, Elder & Co. To this edition are attached a great number of 
letters written by Miss Bronte to her publisher, George Smith. The 
first new material supplied to supplement Mrs Gaskell's Life was 
contained in Charlotte Bronte: a Monograph, by T. Wemyss Reid 
(1877). This book inspired Mr A. C. Swinburne to issue separately 
a forcible essay on Charlotte and Emily Bronte, under the title of 
A Note on Charlotte Bronte (1877). A further collection of letters 
written by Miss Bronte was contained in Charlotte Bronte and her 
Circle, by Clement Shorter (1896), and interesting details can be 
gathered from the Life of Charlotte Bronte, by Augustine Birrell 
(1887), The Brontes in Ireland, by William Wright, D.D. (1893), 
Charlotte Bronte and her Sisters, by Clement Shorter (1906), and the 
Bronte Society publications, edited by Butler Wood (1895-1907). 
Miss A. Mary F. Robinson (Madame Duclaux) wrote a separate 
biography of Emily Bronte in 1883, and an essay in her Grands 
Ecrivains d'outre-Manche. The Brontes: Life and Letters, by Clement 
Shorter (1907), contains the whole of C. Bronte's letters in chrono- 
logical order. (C. K. S.) 

BRONTE, a town of the province of Catania, Sicily, on the 
western slopes of Mt. Etna, 24 m. N.N.W. of Catania direct, 
and 34 m. by rail. Pop. (1901) 20,366. It was founded by 
the emperor Charles V. The town, with an extensive estate 
which originally belonged to the monastery of Maniacium 
(Maniace), was granted, as a dukedom, to Nelson by Ferdinand 
IV. of Naples in 1799. 

BRONX, THE, formerly a district comprising several towns in 
Westchester county, New York, U.S.A., now (since 1898) the 
northernmost of the five boroughs of New York City (q.v.). 
Several settlements in the Bronx were made by the English 
and the Dutch between 1640 and 1650. 

BRONZE, an alloy formed wholly or chiefly of copper and 
tin in variable proportions. The word has been etymologically 
connected with the same root as appears in " brown," but 
according to M. P. E. Berthelot (La Chimie au moyen dge) it is 
a place-name derived from aes Brundusianum (cf. Pliny, Nat. 
Hist, xxxiii. ch. ix. § 45, " specula optima apud majores fuerunt 
Brundusiana, stanno et aere mixtis "). A Greek MS. of about 
the nth century in the library of St Mark's, Venice, contains 



640 



BRONZE AGE 



the form Ppovrycnov, and gives the composition of the alloy 
as 1 lb of copper with 2 oz. of tin. The product obtained by 
adding tin to copper is more fusible than copper and thus better 
suited for casting; it is also harder and less malleable. A soft 
bronze or gun-metal is formed with 16 parts of copper to 1 of tin, 
and a harder gun-metal,, such as was used for bronze ordnance, 
when the proportion of tin is about doubled. The steel bronze 
of Colonel Franz Uchatius (1811-1881) consisted of copper 
alloyed with 8% of tin, the tenacity and hardness being in- 
creased by cold-rolling. Bronze containing about 7 parts of 
copper to 1 Of tin is hard, brittle and sonorous, and can be 
tempered to take a fine edge. Bell-metal varies considerably in 
composition, from about 3 to 5 parts of copper to 1 of tin. In 
speculum metal there are 2 to 2§ parts of copper to 1 of tin. 
Statuary bronze may contain from 80 to 00 % of copper, the 
residue being tin, or tin with zinc and lead in various proportions. 
The bronze used for the British and French copper coinage 
consists of 95 % copper, 4 % tin and 1 % zinc. Many copper-tin 
alloys employed for machinery-bearings contain a small pro- 
portion of zinc, which gives increased hardness. " Anti-friction 
metals," also used in bearings, are copper-tin alloys in which 
the amount of copper is small and there is antimony in addition. 
Of this class an example is "Babbitt's metal," invented by 
Isaac Babbitt (1799-1862); it originally consisted of .24 parts of 
tin, 8 parts of antimony and 4 parts of copper, but in later 
compositions for the same purpose the proportion of tin is often 
considerably higher. Bronze is improved in quality and strength 
when fluxed with phosphorus. Alloys prepared in this way, and 
known as phosphor bronze, may contain only about 1 % of 
phosphorus in the ingot, reduced to a mere trace after casting, 
but their value is nevertheless enhanced for purposes in which 
a hard strong metal is required, as for pump plungers, valves, 
the bushes of bearings, &c. Bronze again is improved by the 
presence of manganese in small quantity, and various grades 
of manganese bronze, in some of which there is little or no tin 
but a considerable percentage of zinc, are extensively used 
in mechanical engineering. Alloys of copper with aluminium, 
though often nearly or completely destitute of tin, are known as 
aluminium bronze, and are valuable for their strength and the 
resistance they offer to corrosion. By the addition of a small 
quantity of silicon the tensile strength of copper is much in- 
creased; a sample of such silicon bronze, used for telegraph wires, 
on analysis was found to consist of 99*94 % of copper, 0-03 % 
of tin, and traces of iron and silicon. 

The bronze (Gr. x^*^ Lat. aes) of classical antiquity 
consisted chiefly of copper, alloyed with one or more of the 
metals, zinc, tin, lead and silver, in proportions that varied as 
times changed, or according to the purposes for which the alloy 
was required. Among bronze remains the copper is found to 
vary from 67 to 95 %. From the analysis of coins it appears 
that for their bronze coins the Greeks adhered to an alloy of 
copper and tin till 400 B.C., after which time they used also lead 
with increasing frequency. Silver is rare in their bronze coins. 
The Romans also used lead as an alloy in their bronze coins, 
but gradually reduced the quantity, and under Caligula, Nero, 
Vespasian and Domitian, coined pure copper coins; afterwards 
they reverted to the mixture of lead. So far the words x^kos 
and aes may be translated as bronze. Originally, no doubt, 
XaX/cos was the name for pure copper. It is so employed by 
Homer, who calls it epvdpos (red), aWd)*// (glittering), ^aevvos 
(shining), terms which apply only to copper. But instead of 
its following from this that the process of alloying copper with 
other metals was not practised in the time of the poet, or was 
unknown to him, the contrary would seem to be the case from 
the passage {Iliad xviii. 474) where he describes Hephaestus 
as throwing into his furnace copper, tin, silver and gold to make 
the shield of Achilles, so that it is not always possible to know 
whether when he uses the word x<*\k6s he means copper pure or 
alloyed. Still more difficult is it to make this distinction when 
we read of the mythical Dactyls of Ida in Crete or the Telchines 
or Cyclopes being acquainted with the smelting of xaA/cos. It is 
not, however, likely that later Greek writers, who knew bronze 



in its true sense, and called it x<*Xkos, would have employed 
this word without qualification for objects which they had seen 
unless they had meant it to be taken as bronze. When Pausanias 
(iii. 17. 6) speaks of a statue, one of the oldest figures he had seen 
of this material, made of separate pieces fastened together with 
nails, we understand him to mean literally bronze, the more 
I readily since there exist very early figures and utensils of bronze 
so made. 

For the use of bronze in art, see Metal- work. 

BRONZE AGE, the name given by archaeologists to that 
stage in human culture, intermediate between the Stone and 
Iron Ages, when weapons, utensils and implements were, as a 
general rule, made of bronze. The term has no absolute chrono- 
logical value, but marks a period of civilization through which 
it is believed that most races passed at one time or another. 
The " finds " of stone and bronze, of bronze and iron, and even 
of stone and iron implements together in tumuli and sepulchral 
mounds, suggest that in many countries the three stages, in 
man's progress overlapped. From the similarity of types of 
weapons and implements of the period found throughout Europe 
a relatively synchronous commencement has been inferred for 
the Bronze Age in Europe, fixed by most authorities at between 
2000 B.C. to 1800 B.C. But it must have been earlier in some 

' countries, and is certainly known to have been later in others; 
while the Mexicans and Peruvians were still in their bronze age 
in recent times. Not a few archaeologists have denied that 
there ever was a distinct Bronze Age. They have found their 
chief argument in the fact that weapons of these ages have been 
found side by side in prehistoric burial-places. But when it 
is admitted that the ages must have overlapped, it is fairly easy 
to undertand the mixed " finds." The beginning, the prevalence 
and duration of the Bronze Age in each country would have 
been ordered by the accessibility of the metals which form the 
alloy. Thus in some lands bronze may have continued to be a 
substance of extreme value until the Iron Age was reached, 
and in tumuli in which more than one body was interred, as was 
frequently the case, it would only be with the remains of the 
richer tenants of the tomb that the more valuable objects would 
be placed. There is, moreover, much reason to believe that 
sepulchral mounds were opened from age to age and fresh inter- 
ments made, and in such a practice would be found a simple 
explanation of the mixing of implements. Another curious fact 
has been seized on by those who argue against the existence of 
a Bronze Age. Among all the " finds " examined in Europe 
there is a most remarkable absence of copper implements. The 
sources of tin in Europe are practically restricted to Cornwall 
and Saxony. How then are we to explain on the one hand the 
apparent stride made by primitive man when from a Stone Age 
civilization he passed to a comparatively advanced metallurgical 
skill? On the other, how account for a comparatively syn- 
chronous commencement of bronze civilization when one at 
least of the metals needed for the alloy would have been naturally 
difficult of access, if not unknown to many races? The answer 
is that there can be but little doubt that the knowledge of 
bronze came to the races of Europe from outside. Either by the 
Phoenicians or by the Greeks metallurgy was taught to men who 
no sooner recognized the nature and malleable properties of 
copper than they learnt that by application of heat a substance 
could be manufactured with tin far better suited to their purposes. 1 
Copper would thus have been but seldom used unalloyed; and 
the relatively synchronous appearance of bronze in Europe, and 
the scanty " finds " of copper implements, are explained. We 
may conclude then that there was a Bronze Age in most countries; 
that it was the direct result of increasing intercommunication 
of races' and the spread of commerce; and that the discovery 
of metals was due to information brought to Stone-Age man 
in Europe by races which were already skilful metallurgists. 

The Bronze «Age in Europe is characterized by weapons, 
utensils and implements, distinct in design and size from those 
in use in the preceding or succeeding stage of man's civilization. 

: Moreover — and this has been employed as an argument in 
favour of the foreign origin of the knowledge of bronze — all the 



BRONZING-^BROOCH 



641 



objects in one part of Europe are identical in pattern and size 
with those found in another part. The implements of the 
Bronze Age include swords, awls, knives, gouges, hammers, 
daggers and arrow-heads. A remarkable confirmation of the 
theory that the Bronze Age culture came from the East is to be 
found in the patterns of the arms, which are distinctly oriental; 
while the handles of swords and daggers are so narrow and short 
as to make it unlikely that they would be made for use by the 
large-handed races of Europe. The Bronze Age is also char- 
acterized by the fact that cremation was the mode of disposal 
of the dead, whereas in the Stone Age burial was the rule. 
Barrows and sepulchral mounds strictly of the Bronze Age are 
smaller and less imposing than those of the Stone Age. Besides 
varied and beautiful weapons, frequently exhibiting high 
workmanship, amulets, coronets, diadems of solid gold, and 
vases of elegant form and ornamentation in gold and bronze 
are found in the barrows. These latter appear to have been 
used as tribal or family cemeteries. In Denmark as many as 
seventy deposits of burnt bones have been found in a single 
mound, indicating its use through a long succession of years. 
The ornamentation of the period is as a rule confined to spirals, 
bosses and concentric circles. What is remarkable is that the 
iwords not only show the design of the cross in the shape of the 
handle, but also in tracery what is believed to be an imitation 
of the Svastika, that ancient Aryan symbol which was probably 
the first to be made with a definite intention and a consecutive 
meaning. The pottery is all " hand-made," and the bulk of 
the objects excavated are cinerary urns, usually found full of 
burnt bones. These vary from 12 to 18 in. in height. Their 
decoration is confined to a band round the upper part of the pot, 
or often only a projecting flange lapped round the whole rim. 
A few have small handles, formed of pierced knobs of clay and 
sometimes projecting rolls of clay, looped, as it were, all round 
the urn. The ornamentation consists of dots, zigzags, chevrons 
or crosses. The lines were frequently made by pressing a twisted 
thong of skin against the moist clay; the patterns in all cases 
being stamped into the pot before it was hardened by fire. 

See Archaeology, &c. Also Lord Avebury, Prehistoric Times 
(1900); Sir J. Evans, Ancient Bronze Implements of Great Britain 
(1881) ; Chartre's Age du bronze en France. 

BRONZING, a process by which a bronze-like surface is 
imparted to objects of metal, plaster, wood, &c. On metals a 
green bronze colour is sometimes produced by the action of such 
substances as vinegar, dilute nitric acid and sal-ammoniac. 
An antique appearance may be given to new bronze articles by 
brushing over the clean bright metal with a solution of sal- 
ammoniac and salt of sorrel in vinegar, and rubbing the surface 
dry, the operation being repeated as often as necessary. Another 
solution for the same purpose is made with sal-ammoniac, cream 
of tartar, common salt and silver nitrate. With a solution of 
platinic chloride almost any colour can be produced on copper, 
iron, brass or new bronze, according to the dilution and the 
number of applications. Articles of plaster and wood may be 
brdnzed by coating them with size and then covering them with 
a bronze powder, such as Dutch metal, beaten into fine leaves 
and powdered. The bronzing of gun-barrels may be effected by 
the use of a strong solution of antimony trichloride. 

BRONZINO, IL, the name given to Angelo Alloei (1502- 
1572), the Florentine painter. He became the favourite pupil 
of J. da Pontormo. He painted the portraits of some of the 
most famous men of his day, such as Dante, Petrarch and 
Boccaccio. Most of his best works are in Florence, but examples 
are in the National Gallery, London, and elsewhere. 

BRONZITE, a member of the pyroxene group of minerals, 
belonging with enstatite and hypersthene to the orthorhombic 
series of the group. Rather than a distinct species, it is really 
a ferriferous variety of enstatite, which owing to partial altera- 
tion has acquired a bronze-like sub-metallic lustre on the cleavage 
surfaces. Enstatite is magnesium metasilicate, MgSiOs, with 
the magnesia partly replaced by small amounts (up to about 
5%) of ferrous oxide; in the bronzite variety, (Mg,Fe)Si03, the 
ferrous oxide ranges from about 5 to 14%, and with still more 

IV. 21 



iron there is a passage to hypersthene. The ferriferous varieties 
are liable to a particular kind of alteration, known as " schilleriza ; 
tion," which results in the separation of the iron as very fine 
films of oxide and hydroxides along the cleavage cracks of the 
mineral. The cleavage surfaces therefore exhibit a metallic 
sheen or " schiller," which is even more pronounced in hyper- 
sthene than in bronzite. The colour of bronzite is green or 
brown; its specific gravity is about 3^1-3-3, varying with the 
amount of iron present. Like enstatite, bronzite is a constituent 
of many basic igneous rocks, such as norites, gabbros, and 
especially peridotites, and of the serpentines which have been 
derived from them. It also occurs in some crystalline schists. 

Bronzite is sometimes cut and polished, usually in convex 
forms, for small ornamental objects, but its use for this purpose 
is less extensive than that of hypersthene. It often has a more 
or less distinct fibrous structure, and when this is pronounced 
the sheen has a certain resemblance to that of cat's-eye. Masses 
sufficiently large for cutting are found in the norite of the 
Kupferbergin the Fichtelgebirge, and in the serpentine of Kraubat 
near Leoben in Styria. In this connexion mention may be 
made of an altered form of enstatite or bronzite known as bastite 
or schiller-spar. Here, in addition to schillerization, the original 
enstatite has been altered by hydration and the product has 
approximately the composition of serpentine. In colour fetstite 
is brown or green with the same metallic sheen as bronzite. 
The typical locality is Baste in the Radauthal, Harz, where 
patches of pale greyish-green bastite are embedded in a darker- 
coloured serpentine. This rock when cut and polished makes 
an effective decorative stone, although little used for that 
purpose. (L. J. S.) 

BROOCH, or Broach (from the Fr. broche, originally an awl 
or bodkin; a spit is sometimes called a broach, and hence the 
phrase " to broach a barrel "; see Broker), a term now used 
to denote a clasp or fastener for the dress, provided with a pin, 
haying a hinge or spring at one end, and a catch or loop at the 
other. 

Brooches of the safety-pin type (fibulae) were extensively 
used in antiquity, but only within definite limits of time and 
place. They seem to have been unknown to the Egyptians, 
and to the oriental nations untouched by Greek influence. In 
lands adjacent to Greece, they do not occur in Crete or at His- 
sarlik. The place of origin cannot as yet be exactly determined, 
but it would seem to have been in central Europe, towards the 
close of the Bronze Age, somewhat before 1000 B.C. The earliest 
form is little more than a pin, bent round for security, with the 
point caught against the head. One such actual pin has been 
found. In its next simplest form, very similar to that of the 
modern safety-pin (in which the coiled spring forces the point 
against the catch), it occurs in the lower city of Mycenae, and in 
late deposits of the Mycenaean Age, such as at Enkomi in Cyprus. 
It occur 1 -, also (though rarely) in the " terramare " deposits of 
the Po valley, in the Swiss 
lake-dwellings of the later 
Bronze Age, in central Italy, 
in Hungary and in Bosnia 
(fig. i). 1 

; From the comparatively Fig. 1.— Early type from Peschiera. 
simple initial form, the fibula 

developed in different lines of descent, into different shapes, vary- 
ing according to the structural feature which was emphasized. 
On account of the number of local variations, the subject is 
extremely complex, but the main lines pf development were 
approximately as follows. 

Towards the end of the Bronze Age the safety-pin was arched 
into a bow, so as to include a greater amount of stuff in its 
compass. ' 

In the older Iron Age or " Hallstatt period " the bow and its 
accessories are thickened and modified in various directions, 
$o as to give greater rigidity, and prominences or surfaces for 
decoration. The chief types have been conveniently classed by 

1 The illustrations of this article are from Dr Robert Former's 
ReaUexikan, by permission of W. Spemann, Berlin and Stuttgart. 




642 



BROOCH 




Fig. 2. — Type I. with 
disk for catch-plate. 



Montelius in four main groups, according to the characteristic 
lorms: — 

I. The wire of the catch-plate is hammered into a flat disk, 
on which the pin rests (fig. 2). 

II. The bow is thickened towards the middle, so as to assume 
the " leech " shape, or it is hollowed 
out underneath, into the " boat " form. 
The catch-plate is only slightly turned 
up, but it becomes elongated, in order 
to mask the end of a long pin (fig. 3). 

III. The catch-plate is flattened out as 
in group I., but additional convolutions 
are added to the bow (fig. 4) . 

IV. The bow is convoluted (but the convolutions are some- 
times represented by knobs); the catch-plate develops as in 
group II. (fig. 5). For further examples of the four types, see 
Antiquities of Early Iron Age in British. Museum, p. 32. 

Among the special variations of the early form, mention 
should be made of the fibulae of the geometric age of Greece, 
with an exaggerated development 
of the vertical portion of the catch- 
plate (fig. 6). 

The example shown in fig. 7 is 
an ornate development of type II. 
above. 

In the later Iron Age (or early 
La Tene period) the prolongation 
of the catch-plate described in the 
second and fourth groups above has 
a terminal knob ornament, which is 
reflexed upwards, at first slightly 
(fig. 8), and then to a marked 
extent, turning back towards the 
bow. 

A far-reaching change in the 
design was at the same time 
brought about by a simple im- 
provement in principle, apparently 
c introduced within the area of the 

Fig. 3.-Type II. with La , T ^ culture. Instead of a 
turned-up and elongated unilateral spring— that is, of one 
catch-plate, a, " Leech " coiled on one side only of the bow 
fibula; b, " Boat " fibula; as commonly in the modern safety- 
pin — the brooch became bilateral. 
The spring was coiled on one side 
of the axis of the bow, and thence the wire was taken to the 
other side of the axis, and again coiled in a corresponding 
manner before starting in a straight line to form the pin. Once 
invented, the bilateral spring became almost universal, and its 
introduction serves to divide the whole mass of ancient fibulae 
into an older and a younger group. 

With the progress of the La Tene period (300-1 B.C.) the 
reflection of the catch-plate terminal became yet more marked, 
until it became practically merged in the bow (fig. 9). Mean- 
while, the bilateral spring described above was developing into 
two marked projections on each side of 
the axis. In order to give the double spring 
strength and protection it was given a 
metal core, and a containing tube. When 
the core had been provided the pin was no 
Fig. 4.— -Type III. j onger neC essarily a continuation of the 
with disk for catch- , ° , . . J , , _ . 

plate and convol- bow, and it became in tact a separate 
uted bow. member, as in a modern brooch of a non- 

safety-pin type, and was no longer actuated 
by its own spring. 

The T- s h a P e d or " cross-bow " fibula was thus developed. 
During the first centuries of the Empire it attained great size 
and importance (figs. 10-1 2) . The form is conveniently dated at 
its highest development by its occurrence on the ivory diptych 
of Stilicho at Monza (c. a.d. 400). 

In the tombs of the Frankish and kindred Teutonic tribes 
between the 3th and 9th centuries the crossbar of the T becomes 




c, variation 
fibula. 



of " Boat 




a yet more elaborately decorated semicircle, often surrounded by 
radial knobs and a chased surface. The base of the shaft is 
flattened out, and is no less ornate (fig. 13). At the beginning 
of this period the fibula of King Childeric (a.d. 481) has ;> 
singularly complicated pin-fastening. 

So far we have traced the history of the safety-pin form 0/ 





Fig. 5. — Type IV. with turned-up 
catch-plate and convoluted bow. 



Fig. 6. — Greek geometric 
fibula. 



brooch. Concurrently with it, other forms of brooch were 
developed in which the safety-pin principle is either absent or 
effectually disguised. One such form is that of the circular 
medallion brooch. It is found in Etruscan deposits of a fully 
developed style, and is commonly represented in Greek and 
Roman sculptures as a stud to fasten the cloak on the shoulder. 




Fig. 7. — Gold fibula from Naples. 

In the Roman provinces the circular brooches are very numerous, 
and are frequently decorated with inlaid stone, paste or enamel. 
Another kind of brooch, also known from early times, is in the 
form of an animal. In the early types the animal is a decorative 
appendage, but in later examples it forms the body of the brooch, 
to which a pin like the modern brooch-pin is attached under- 
neath. Both of these shapes, namely 
the medallion and the animal form, are 
found in Frankish cemeteries, together 
with the later variations of the J- 
shaped brooch described above. Such 

brooches were made in gold, silver or J ene . P e . riod - R^xed 

, , . , . . terminal ornament, 

bronze, adorned with precious stones, 

filigree work, or enamel; but whatever the richness of the 

material, the pin was nearly always of iron. 

The Scandinavian or northern group of T-shaped brooches 

are in their early forms indistinguishable from those of the 

Frankish tombs, but as time went on they became more massive, 

and richly decorated with intricate devices (perhaps brought 




Fig. 8.— Early La 




F1G.9, a-d . — Fibula of the La Tene period, showing the develop- 
ment of the reflexed terminal, and the bilateral spring. 

in by Irish missionary influence), into which animal forms were 
introduced. The period covered is from the 5th to the 8th 
centuries. 

The T-form, the medallion-form, and (occasionally) the 
animal forms occur in Anglo-Saxon graves in England. In Kent 
the medallion-form predominates. The Anglo-Saxon brooches 



BROOKE, F.— BROOKE, LORD 



*>43 



were exquisite works of art, ingeniously and tastefully con- 
structed. They are often of gold, with a central boss, exquisitely 
decorated, the fiat part of the brooch being a mosaic of tur- 
quoises, garnets on gold foil, mother of pearl, &c. arranged in 




Fig. 10. — Military Fibula. 
3rd century a.d. 



Fig. 11. — Fibula with niello 
work. 3rd century A.D. _ 




Fig. 12. — Gold Fibula. 4th century a.d. 



geometric patterns, and the gold work enriched with filigree or 
decorated with dragonesque engravings. 

The Scandinavian brooches of the Viking period (a.d. 800- 
1050) were oval and convex, somewhat in the form of a tortoise. 
In their earliest form they occur in the form of a frog-like animal, 
itself developed from the previous Teutonic T-shaped type. 
With the introduction of the intricate system of ornament 
described above, the frog-like animal is gradually superseded 
by purely decorative lines. The convex bowls are then worked 
a jour with a perforated upper shell of chased work over an under 
shell of impure bronze, gilt on the convex side. These outer 
cases are at last decorated with open crown-like ornament and 
massive projecting bosses. The geographical distribution of 

these peculiar brooches 
indicates the extent of 
the conquests of the 
Northmen. They occur 
in northern Scotland, 
England, Ireland, Ice- 
land, Normandy and 
Livonia. 

The Celtic group is 
characterized by the 
penannular form of the 
ring of the brooch and 
the greater length of the 
pin. The penannular ring, inserted through a hole at the head of 
the long pin, could be partially turned when the pin had been 
thrust through the material in such a way that the brooch became 
in effect a buckle. These brooches are usually of bronze or silver, 
chased or engraved with intricate designs of interlaced or 
dragonesque work in the style of the illuminated Celtic manu- 
scripts of the 7th, 8th and 9th centuries. The Hunterston 
brooch, which was found at Hawking Craig in Ayrshire, is a 
well-known example of this style. Silver brooches of immense 
size, some having pins 15 in. in length, and the penannular ring 
of the brooch terminating in large knobs resembling thistle heads, 
are occasionally found in Viking hoards of this period, consisting 
of bullion, brooches and Cufic and Anglo-Saxon coins buried 

on Scottish soil. In 
medieval times the 
form of the brooch 
was usually a simple, 
flat circular disk, with 
open centre, the pin 
being equal in length 
to the diameter of the 
brooch. They were 
often inscribed with 
religious and talis- 
manic formulae. The 
Highland brooches were commonly of this form, but the disk 
was broader, and the central opening smaller in proportion to 
the size of the brooch. They were ornamented in the style so 
common on Highland powder-horns, with engraved patterns 
of interlacing work and foliage, arranged in geometrical spaces, 
and sometimes mingled with figures of animals. (A. H. Sm.) 




Fig. 13. — Fibula of the Frankish period. 



BROOKE, FRANCES (1724-1789), English novelist and 
dramatist, whose maiden name was Moore, was born in 1724. 
Of her novels, some of which enjoyed considerable popularity 
in their day, the most important were The History of Lady Julia 
Mandeville (1763), Emily Montague (1769) and The Excursion 
(1777). Her dramatic pieces and translations from the French 
are now forgotten. She died in January 1789. 

BROOKE, FULKE GREVILLE, ist Baron (1554-1628), 
English poet, only son of Sir Fulke Greville, was born at Beau- 
champ Court, Warwickshire. He was sent in 1564, on the same 
day as his life-long friend, Philip Sidney, to Shrewsbury school. 
He matriculated at Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1568. Sir 
Henry Sidney, president of Wales, gave him in 1576 a post 
connected with the court of the Marches, but he resigned it in 
1577 to go to court with Philip Sidney. Young Greville became 
a great favourite with Queen Elizabeth, who treated him with 
less than her usual caprice, but he was more than once disgraced 
for leaving the country against her wishes. Philip Sidney, Sir 
Edward Dyer and Greville were members of the "Areopagus," 
the literary clique which, under the leadership of Gabriel 
Harvey, supported the introduction of classical metres into 
English verse. Sidney and Greville arranged to sail with Sir 
Francis Drake in 1585 in his expedition against the Spanish 
West Indies, but Elizabeth peremptorily forbade Drake to take 
them with him, and also refused Greville's request to be allowed 
to join Leicester's army in the Netherlands. Philip Sidney, 
who took part in the campaign, was killed on the 17th of October 
1586, and Greville shared with Dyer the legacy of his books, 
while in his Life of the Renowned Sir Philip Sidney he raised 
an enduring monument to his friend's memory. About 1591 
Greville served for a short time in Normandy under Henry of 
Navarre. This was his last experience of war. In 1583 he 
became secretary to the principality of Wales, and he represented 
Warwickshire in parliament in 1 592-1 593, 1597, 1601 and 1620. 
In 1598 he was made treasurer of the navy, and he retained the 
office through the early years of the reign of James I. In 1614 
he became chancellor and under-treasurer of the exchequer, and 
throughout the reign he was a valued supporter of the king's 
party, although in 161 5 he advocated the summoning of a 
parliament. In 1618 he became commissioner of the treasury, 
and in 1621 he was raised to the peerage with the title of Baron 
Brooke, a title which had belonged to the family of his paternal 
grandmother, Elizabeth Willoughby. He received from James I. 
the grant of Warwick Castle, in the restoration of which he is 
said to have spent £20,000. He died on the 30th of September 
1628 in consequence of a wound inflicted by a servant who was 
disappointed at not being named in his master's will. Brooke 
was buried in St Mary's church, Warwick, and on his tomb was 
inscribed the epitaph he had composed for himself: " Folk 
Grevill Servant to Queene Elizabeth Conceller to King James 
Frend to Sir Philip Sidney. Trophaeum Peccati." 

A rhyming elegy on Brooke, published in Huth's Inedited 
Poetical Miscellanies, brings charges of extreme penuriousness 
against him, but of his generous treatment of contemporary 
writers there is abundant testimony. His only works published 
during his lifetime were four poems, one of which is the elegy on 
Sidney which appeared in The Phoenix Nest (1593), and the 
Tragedy of Mustapha. A volume of his works appeared in 1633, 
another of Remains in 1670, and his biography of Sidney in 
1652. He wrote two tragedies on the Senecan model, Alaham 
and Mustapha. The scene of Alaham is laid in Ormuz. The 
development of the piece fully bears out the gloom of the 
prologue, in which the ghost of a former king of Ormuz reveals 
the magnitude of the curse about to descend on the doomed 
family. The theme of Mustapha is borrowed from Madeleine 
de Scudery's Ibrahim ou I'illustre Bassa, and turns on the am- 
bition of the sultana Rossa. The choruses of these plays are 
really philosophical dissertations, and the connexion with the 
rest of the drama is often very slight. In Mustapha, for instance^ 
the third chorus is a dialogue between Time and Eternity, 
while the fifth consists of an invective against the evils of super- 
stition, followed by a chorus of priests that does nothing to dispel 



644 



BROOKE, H -—BROOKE, SIR J. 



the impression of scepticism contained- in the first part. He 
tells us himself that the tragedies were not intended for the 
stage. Charles Lamb says they should rather be called political 
treatises. Of Brooke Lamb says, " He is nine parts Machiavel 
and Tacitus, for one of Sophocles and Seneca. . . . Whether 
we look into his plays or his most passionate love-poems, we 
shall find all frozen and made rigid with intellect." He goes on 
to speak of the obscurity of expression that runs through all 
Brooke's poetry, an obscurity which is, however, due more to 
the intensity and subtlety of the thought than to any lack of 
mere verbal lucidity. 

It is by his biography of Sidney that Fulke Greville is best 
known. The full title expresses the scope of the work. It runs: 
The Life of the Renowned Sr. Philip Sidney. With the true 
Interest of England as it then stood in relation to all Forrain 
Princes: And particularly for suppressing the power of Spain 
Stated by Him.' His principall Actions, Counsels, Designes, and 
Death. Together with a short account of the Maximes and Policies 
used by Queen Elizabeth in her Government. He includes some 
autobiographical matter in what amounts to a treatise on 
government. He had intended to write a history of England 
under the Tudors, but Robert Cecil refused him access to the 
necessary state papers. 

Brooke left no sons, and his barony passed to his cousin, 
Robert Greville (c. 1608-1643), who thus became 2nd Lord 
Brooke. This nobleman was imprisoned by Charles I. at York 
in 1639 for refusing to take the oath to fight for the king, and 
soon became an active member of the parliamentary party; 
taking part in the Civil War he defeated the Royalists in a 
skirmish at Kineton in August 1642. He was soon given a 
command in the midland counties, and having seized Lichfield 
he was killed there on the 2nd of March 1643. Brooke, who is 
eulogized as a friend of toleration by Milton, wrote on philo- 
sophical, theological and current political topics. In 1746 his 
descendant, Francis Greville, the 8th baron (1719-1773), was 
created earl of Warwick, a title still in his family. 

Dr A. B. Grosart edited the complete works of Fulke Greville for 
the Fuller Worthies Library in 1870, and made a small selection, 
published in the Elizabethan Library ( 1 894) . Besides the works above 
mentioned, the volumes include Poems of Monarchy, A Treatise of 
Religion, A Treatie of Humane Learning, An Inquisition upon Fame 
and Honour, A Treatie of Wanes, Caelica in CX Sonnets, a collection 
of lyrics in various forms, a letter to an " Honourable Lady," a letter 
to Grevill Varney in France, and a short speech delivered onbehalf 
of Francis Bacon, some minor poems, and an introduction includ- 
ing some of the author's letters. The life of Sidney was reprinted 
by Sir S. Egerton Brydges in 18 16; and with an introduction by 
N. Smith in the "Tudor and Stuart Library" in 1907; Caelica 
was reprinted in M.F. Crow's" Elizabethan Sonnet Cycles " in 1898. 
See also an essay in Mrs. C. C. Stopes's Shakespeare s Warwickshire 
Contemporaries (1907). 

BROOKE, HENRY (c. 1 703-1 783), Irish author, son of William 
Brooke, rector of Killmkere r Co. Cavan, was born at Rantavan 
in the same county, about 1703. His mother was a daughter 
of Simon Digby, bishop of Elphin. Dr Thomas Sheridan was 
one of his schoolmasters, and he was entered at Trinity College, 
Dublin, in 1720; in 1724 he was sent to London to study law. 
He married his cousin and ward, Catherine Meares, before she 
was fourteen. Returning to London he published a philosophical 
poem in six books entitled Universal Beauty (1735). He attached 
himself to the party of the prince of Wales, and took a small 
house at Twickenham near to Alexander Pope. In 1738 he 
translated the first and second books of Tasso's Gerusalemme 
tiberata, and in the next year he produced a tragedy, Gustavas 
Vasa, the Deliverer of his Country. This play had been rehearsed 
for five weeks at Drury Lane, but at the last moment the per- 
formance was forbidden. The reason of this prohibition was a 
supposed portrait of Sir Robert Walpole in the part of Trollio. 
In any case the spirit of fervent patriotism which pervaded the 
play was probably disliked by the government. The piece was 
printed and sold largely, being afterwards put on the Irish 
stage under the title of The Patriot. This affair provoked a 
satirical pamphlet from. Samuel Johnson, entitled " A Complete 
Vindication of the Licensers of the Stage from the malicious and 



scandalous Aspersions of Mr Brooke " (1739). His wife fearecf 
that his connexion with the opposition was imprudent, and 
induced him to return to Ireland. He interested himself in 
Irish history and literature, but a projected collection of Irish 
stories and a history of Ireland from the earliest times were 
abandoned in consequence of disputes about the ownership of 
the materials. During the Jacobite rebellion of 1745 Brooke 
issued his Farmer's Six Letters to the Protestants of Ireland 
(collected 1746) the form of which was suggested by Swift's 
Drapier's Letters. For this service he received from the govern- 
ment the post of barrack-master at Mullingar, which he held 
till his death. He wrote other pamphlets on the Protestant 
side, and was secretary to an association for promoting projects 
of national utility. About 1760 he entered into negotiations 
with leading Roman Catholics, and in 1761 he wrote a pamphlet 
advocating alleviation of the penal laws against them. He is 
said to have been the first editor of the Freeman's Journal, 
established at Dublin in 1763. Meanwhile he had been obliged 
to mortgage his property in Cavan, and had removed to Co. 
Kildare. Subsequently a bequest from Colonel Robert Brooke 
enabled him to purchase an estate near his old home, and he 
spent large sums in attempting to reclaim the waste-land. His 
best-known work is the novel entitled The Fool of Quality; or 
the History of Henry Earl of Moreland, the first part of which 
was published in 1765; and the fifth and last in 1770. The 
characters of this book, which relates the education of an ideal 
nobleman by an ideal merchant-prince, are gifted with a " pas- 
sionate and tearful sensibility," and reflect the real humour and 
tenderness of the writer. Brooke's religious and philanthropic 
temper recommended the book to John Wesley, who edited 
(1780) an abridged edition, and to Charles Kingsley, who pub- 
lished it with a eulogistic notice in 1859. Brooke had a large 
family, but only two children survived him. His wife's death 
seriously affected him, and he died at Dublin in a state of mental 
infirmity on the 10th of October 1783. 

His daughter, Charlotte Brooke, published The Poetical Works of 
Henry Brooke in 1792, but was able to supply very little biographical 
material. Other sources for Brooke's biography are C. H. Wilson, 
Brookiana (2 vols., 1804), and a biographical preface by E. A. Baker 
prefixed to a new edition (1906) of The Fool of Quality. Brooke's 
other works include several tragedies, only some of which were 
actually staged. He also wrote: Jack the Giant Queller (1748), an 
operatic satire, the repetition of which was forbidden on account of 
its political allusions; " Constantia, or the Man of Lawe's Tale " 
(1741), contributed to George Ogle's Canterbury Tales modernized; 
Juliet Grenville; or the History of the Human Heart (1773), a novel; 
and some fables contributed to Edward Moore's Fables for the 
Female Sex (1744). 

BROOKE, SIR JAMES (1803-1868), English soldier, traveller 
and raja of Sarawak, was born at Coombe Grove near Bath, 
on the 29th of April 1803. His father, a member of the civil 
service of the East India Company, had long lived in Bengal. 
His mother was a woman of superior mind, and to her care he 
owed his careful early training. He received the ordinary school 
education, entered the service of the East India Company, and 
was sent out to India about 1825. On the outbreak of the 
Burmese War he was despatched with his regiment to the valley 
of the Brahmaputra; and, being dangerously wounded in an 
engagement near Rungpore,was compelled to return home ( 1826). 
After his recovery he travelled on the continent before going 
to India, and circumstances led him soon after to leave the service 
of the company. In 1830 he made a voyage to China, and during 
his passage among the islands of the Indian Archipelago, so rich 
in natural beauty, magnificence and fertility, but occupied by 
a population of savage tribes, continually at war with each other, 
and carrying on a system of piracy on a vast scale and with 
relentless ferocity, he conceived the great design of rescuing them 
from barbarism and bringing them within the pale of civilization. 
His purpose was confirmed by observations made during a second 
visit to China, and on his return to England he applied him- 
self in earnest to making the necessary preparations. Having 
succeeded on the death of his father to a large property, he bought 
and equipped a yacht, the " Royalist," of 140 tons burden, and 
for three years tested its capacities and trained his crew of 



BROOKE, STOPFORD—3ROOK FARM 



M 



twenty men, chiefly in the Mediterranean. At length, on the 
27th of October 1838, he sailed from the Thames on his great 
adventure. On reaching Borneo, after various delays, he found 
the raja Muda Hassim, uncle of the reigning sultan, engaged in 
war in the province of Sarawak with several of the Dyak tribes, 
who had revolted against the sultan. He offered his aid to the 
raja; and with his crew, and some Javanese who had joined 
them, he took part in a battle with the insurgents, and they were 
defeated. For his services the title of raja of Sarawak was 
conferred on him by Muda Hassim , the former raja being deprived 
in his favour. It was, however, some time before the sultan 
could be induced to confirm his title (September 1841). During 
the next five years Raja Brooke was engaged in establishing his 
power, in making just reforms in administration, preparing 
a code of laws and introducing just and humane modes of 
dealing with the degraded subjects of his rule. But»this was not 
all. He looked forward to the development of commerce as the 
most effective means of putting an end to the worst evils that 
afflicted the archipelago; and in order to make this possible, 
the way must first be cleared by the suppression, or a considerable 
diminution, of the prevailing piracy, which was not only a curse 
to the savage tribes engaged in it, but a standing danger to 
European and American traders in those seas. Various expedi- 
tions were therefore organized and sent out against the marauders, 
Dyaks and Malays, and sometimes even Arabs. Captain (after- 
wards Admiral Sir Harry) Keppel, and other commanders of 
British ships of war, received permission to co-operate with 
Raja Brooke in these expeditions. The pirates were attacked 
in their strongholds, they fought desperately, and the slaughter 
was immense. Negotiations with the chiefs had been tried, and 
tried in vain. The capital of the sultan of Borneo was bom- 
barded and stormed, and the sultan with his army routed. 
He was, however, soon after restored to his dominion. So large 
was the number of natives, pirates and others, slain in these 
expeditions, that the " head-money " awarded by the British 
government to those who had taken part in them amounted to 
no less than £20,000. In October 1847 Raja Brooke returned 
to England, where he was well received by the government; 
and the corporation of London conferred on him the freedom 
of the city. The island of Labuan, with its dependencies, having 
been acquired by purchase from the sultan of Borneo, was erected 
into a British colony, and Raja Brooke was appointed governor 
and commander-in-chief. He was also named consul-general 
in Borneo. These appointments had been made before his 
arrival in England. The university of Oxford conferred on him 
the honorary degree of D.C.L., and in 1848 he was created K.C.B. 
He soon after returned to Sarawak, and was carried thither by 
a British man-of-war. In the summer of 1849 he led an expedi- 
tion against the Seribas and Sakuran Dyaks, who still persisted 
in their piratical practices and refused to submit to British 
authority. Their defeat and wholesale slaughter was a matter 
of course. At the time of this engagement Sir James Brooke 
was lying ill with dysentery. He visited twice the capital of the 
sultan of Sala, and concluded a treaty with him, which had for 
one of its objects the expulsion of the sea-gypsies and other 
tribes from his dominions. In 1851 grave charges with respect 
to the operations in Borneo were brought against Sir James 
Brooke in the House of Commons by Joseph Hume and other 
members, especially as to the " head-money " received. To 
meet these accusations, and to vindicate his proceedings, he 
came to England. The evidence adduced was so conflicting 
that the matter was at length referred to a royal commission, to 
sit at Singapore. As the result of its investigation the charges 
were declared to be " not proven." Sir James, however, was 
soon after deprived of the governorship of Labuan, and the 
head-money was abolished. In 1867 his house in Sarawak was 
attacked and burnt by Chinese pirates, and he had to fly from 
the capital, Kuching. With a small force he attacked the Chinese, 
recovered the town, made a great slaughter, of them, and drove 
away the rest. In the following year he came to England, and 
remained there for three years. During this time he was attacked 
by paralysis, a public subscription was raised, and an estate 



in Devonshire was bought and presented to him. He made two 
more visits to Sarawak, and on each occasion had a rebellion to 
suppress, He spent his last days on his estate at Burrator in 
Devonshire, and died there, on the nth of June 1868, being 
succeeded as raja of Sarawak by his nephew. Sir James Brooke 
was a man of the highest personal character, and he displayed 
rare courage both in his conflicts in the East and under the 
charges advanced against him in England. 

His Private Letters (1838 to 1853) were published in 1853. Portions 
of his Journal were edited by Captains Munday and Keppel. (See 
also Sarawak.) 

BROOKE, STOPFORD AUGUSTUS (1832- ), English 
divine and man of letters, born at Letterkenny, Donegal, Ireland, 
in 1832, was educated at Trinity College, Dublin. He was 
ordained in the Church of England in 1857, and held various 
charges in London. From 1863 to 1865 he was chaplain to the 
empress Frederick in Berlin, and in 1872 he became chaplain' 
in ordinary to Queen Victoria. But in 1880 he seceded from the 
Church, being no longer able to accept its leading dogmas, and 
officiated as a Unitarian minister for some years at Bedford 
chapel, Bloomsbury. Bedford chapel was pulled down about 
1894, and from that time he had no church of his own, but his 
eloquence and powerful religious personality continued to make 
themselves felt among a wide circle. A man of independent 
means, he was always keenly interested in literature and art, 
and a fine critic of both. He published in 1865 his Life and 
Letters of F. W. Robertson (of Brighton), and in 1876 wrote ah 
admirable primer of English Literature (new and revised ed., 1900), 
followed in 1892 by The History of Early English Literature 
(2 vols., 1892) down to the accession of Alfred, and English 
Literature from the Beginnings to the Norman Conquest (1898). 
His other works include various volumes of sermons; Poems 
(1888); Dove Cottage (1890); Theolegy in the English Poets — • 
Cowper, Coleridge, Wordsworth, Burns (1874); Tennyson, his 
Art and Relation to Modem Life (1894); The Poetry of Robert 
Browning (1902); On Ten Plays of Shakespeare (1905^; and 
The Life Superlative (1906). 

BROOK FARM, the name applied to a tract of land in West 
Roxbury, Massachusetts, on which in 1841-1847^ communistic 
experiment was unsuccessfully tried. The experiment was 
one of the practical manifestations of the spirit of " Trans* 
cendentalism," in New England, though many df the more 
prominent transcendentalists took no direct part in it. The 
project was originated by George Ripley, who also virtually 
directed it throughout. In his words it was intended "to 
insure a more natural union between intellectual and manual 
labour than now exists ; to combine the thinker and the worker* 
as far as possible, in the same individual; to guarantee the 
highest mental freedom by providing all with labour adapted to 
their tastes and talents, and securing to them the fruits of their 
industry; to do away with the necessity of menial services by 
opening the benefits of education and the profits of labour to 
all; and thus to prepare a society of liberal, intelligent and 
cultivated persons whose relations with each other would permit 
a more simple and wholesome life than can be led amidst the 
pressure of our competitive institutions." In short, its aim was 
to bring about the best conditions for an ideal civilization, 
reducing to a minimum the labour necessary for mere existence, 
and by this and by the simplicity of its social machinery saving 
the 'maximum of time for mental and spiritual education and 
development. At a time when Ralph Waldo Emerson could 
write to Thomas Carlyle, " We are all a little wild here with 
numberless projects of social reform; not a reading man but 
has a draft of a new community in his waistcoat pocket," — 
the Brook Farm project certainly did not appear as impossible 
a scheme as many others that were in the air. At all events it 
enlisted the co-operation of men whose subsequent careers show 
them to have been something more than visionaries. The 
association bought a tract of land about 10 m. from Boston, and' 
in the summer of 1841 began its enterprise with about twenty 
members. In September the " Brook Farm Institute of Agri- 
culture and Education " was formally organized, the members 



6 4 6 



BROOKITE— BROOKLINE 



signing the Articles of Association and forming an unincorporated 
joint-stock company. The farm was assiduously, if not very 
skilfully, cultivated, and other industries were established — 
most of the members paying by labour for their board — but 
nearly all of the income, and sometimes all of it, was derived 
from the school, which deservedly took high rank and attracted 
many pupils. Among these were included George William Curtis 
and his brother James Burrill Curtis, Father Isaac Thomas 
Hecker (1810-1888), General Francis C. Barlow (1834-1806), 
who as attorney-general of New York in 1871-1873 took a 
leading part in the prosecution of the " Tweed Ring." For three 
years the undertaking went on quietly and simply, subject to 
few outward troubles other than financial, the number of 
associates increasing to seventy or eighty. It was during this 
period that Nathaniel Hawthorne had his short experience of 
Brook Farm, of which so many suggestions appear in the Blithe- 
dale Romance, though his preface to later editions effectually 
disposed of the idea — which gave him great pain — that he had 
either drawn his characters from persons there, or had meant to 
give any actual description of the colony. Emerson refused, in 
a kind and characteristic letter, to join the undertaking, and 
though he afterwards wrote of Brook Farm with not uncharitable 
humour as " a perpetual picnic, a French Revolution in small, 
an age of reason in a patty-pan," among its founders were many 
of his near friends. In 1844 the growing need of a more 
scientific organization, and the influence which F. M. C. Fourier's 
doctrines, as modified by Albert Brisbane (1800-1800), had 
gained in the minds of Ripley and many of his associates, com- 
bined to change the whole plan of the community. It was 
transformed, with the strong approval of all its chief members 
and the consent of the rest, into a Fourierist "phalanx " in 1845. 
There was an accession of new members, a momentary increase 
of prosperity, a brilliant new undertaking in the publication of 
a Weekly journal, the Harbinger, in which Ripley, Charles A. 
Dana, Francis G. Shaw and John S. Dwight were the chief 
writers, and to which James Russell Lowell, J. G. Whittier, 
George William Curtis, Parke Godwin, T. W. Higginson, Horace 
Greeley and many more now and then contributed. But the 
individuality of the old Brook Farm was gone. The association 
was not rescued even from financial troubles by the change. 
With increasing difficulty it kept on till the spring of 1846, when 
a fire which destroyed its nearly completed " phalanstery " 
brought losses which caused, or certainly gave the final ostensible 
reason for, its dissolution. The experiment was abandoned in 
the autumn of 1847. Besides Ripley and Hawthorne, the 
principal members of the community were Charles A. Dana, 
John S. Dwight, Minot Pratt (c. 1805-1878), the head farmer, 
who, like George Partridge Bradford (1808-1890), left in 1845, an d 
Warren Burton (1810-1866) a preacher and, later, a writer on 
educational subjects. Indirectly connected with the experiment, 
also, as visitors for longer or shorter periods but never as regular 
members, were Emerson, Amos Bronson Alcott, Orestes A. 
Brownson, Theodore Parker and William Henry Channing, 
Margaret Fuller and Elizabeth Palmer Peabody. The estate 
itself, after passing through various hands, came in 1870 into the 
possession of the " Association of the Evangelical Lutheran 
Church for Works of Mercy," which established here an orphan- 
age, known as the " Martin Luther Orphan Home." 

The best account of Brook Farm is Lindsay Swift's Brook Farm, 
Its Members, Scholars and Visitors (New York, 1900). Brook Farm: 
Historic and Personal Memoirs (Boston, 1894), is by Dr J. T. Codman, 
one of the pupils in the school. See also Morris Hillquit's History of 
Socialism in the United States (New York, 1903). (E. L. B.) 

BROOKITE, one of the three modifications in which titanium 
dioxide (Ti0 2 ) occurs in nature; the other minerals with the 
same chemical composition, but with different physical and 
crystallographic characters, being rutile (q.v.) and anatase (q.v.). 
The two latter are tetragonal in crystallization, whilst brookite is 
orthorhombic. The name was given by A. Levy in 1825 in honour 
of the English mineralogist H. J. Brooke (1 771-1857). Two types 
of brookite crystals may be distinguished. The commoner 
type of crystals are thin and tabular, and often terminated by 
numerous small .and brilliant faces (fig. 1) ; the faces of the 



orthopinacoid (a) and of the prisms (m, I) are vertically striated. 
These crystals are of a rich reddish-brown colour and are often 
translucent. Crystals of the second type have the appearance 
of six-sided bipyramids (fig. 2) owing to the equal development 
of the prism m {110} and the pyramid e {122} ; these crystals are 
black and opaque, and constitute the variety known as arkansite. 
The lustre of brookite is metallic-adamantine. There is no 
distinct cleavage (rutile and anatase have cleavages); hardness 
; sp. gr. 4-0. The optical characters are interesting: the 





Fig. 1. 



Fig. 2. 



optic axes for red and for blue light lie in planes at right angles 
to each other, whilst for yellow-green light the crystals are 
uniaxial. The acute bisectrix of the optic axes is perpendicular 
to the orthopinacoid (a) for all colours, so that this phenomenon 
of the crossing of the optic axial planes may be readily observed 
in the thin tabular crystals of the first-mentioned type. 

Brookite occurs only as crystals, never in compact masses, 
and is usually associated with either anatase or rutile. The 
crystals are found attached to the walls of cavities in decom- 
posed igneous rocks and crystalline schists; it is also found as 
minute isolated crystals in many sedimentary rocks. The best- 
known locality is Fronolen near Tremadoc in North Wales, 
where crystals of the thin tabular habit occur with crystallized 
quartz, albite and anatase on the walls of crevices in diabase. 
Similar crystals of relatively large size are found attached to 
gneiss at several places in the Swiss and Tirolese Alps. Thicker 
crystals of prismatic, rather than tabular, habit and of a rich 
red colour combined with considerable transparency and brill- 
iancy are found in the gold-washings of the Sanarka river in the 
southern Urals. The arkansite variety occurs with rutile in 
the elaeolite-syenite of Magnet Cove in Hot Spring county, 
Arkansas. Minute crystals of brookite have been detected with 
anatase and rutile in the iron-ore of Cleveland in Yorkshire. 

Crystals of brookite, as well as of anatase and rutile, have 
been prepared artificially by the interaction of steam and 
titanium fluoride, the particular modification of titanium 
dioxide which results depending on the temperature at which the 
reaction takes place. Brookite is liable to become altered to rutile : 
aggregates of rutile needles with the form of brookite (arkansite) 
are not uncommon at Magnet Cove, Arkansas. (L. J. S.) 

BROOKLIME, known botanically as Veronica Beccabunga 
(natural order Scrophulariaceae), a succulent herb growing on 
margins of brooks and ditches in the British Isles, and a native 
of Europe, north Africa and north and western Asia. It has 
smooth spreading branches, blunt oblong leaves and small 
bright blue or pink flowers. 

BROOKLINE, a township of Norfolk county, Massachusetts, 
U.S.A., about 3 m. S.W. of Boston, lying immediately S. of the 
Back Bay district. Pop. (1890) 12,103; (1900) JQ^S, of whom 
6536 were foreign-born; (1910, census) 27,792. The area 
of the township in 1906 was 6-75 sq. m. It is served by the 
Boston & Albany railway, and is connected with Boston by an 
electric line. Brookline is the wealthiest of the residential 
suburbs of Boston; and contains a number of beautiful estates 
and homes. Within its limits are the villages of Cottage Farm, 
Longwood, and Reservoir Station,or Chestnut Hill — the Chestnut 
Hill reservoir is just beyond the township. Brookline has an 
excellent public library. At Clyde Park are the grounds and 
club-house of the Boston Country Club. Brookline has long 
been regarded as a model city suburb. It is connected with 



BROOKLYN 



647 



Boston Common by boulevards of the Metropolitan Park 
System. The first settlement was probably made about 1635, 
and it was called Muddy River until 1705, when it was created 
a township under the name of Brookline. Up to 1 793 it belonged 
to Suffolk county, of which Boston is a part, and since that 
time it has belonged to Norfolk county; but Boston has in its 
growth almost surrounded it, and because of its great wealth 
there has been a long struggle for and against its merger in 
Boston. Frederick Law Olmsted, the famous landscape gardener, 
had his home in Brookline, where there are various examples of 
his work. 

See H. F. Woods, Historical Sketches of Brookline (Boston, 1874) ; 
C. K. Bolton, Brookline, The History of a Favored Town (Brookline, 
1897) ; and J. W. Denehy, History of Brookline, 1630-1906 (Allston, 
Mass., 1907). 

BROOKLYN, formerly a city of New York state, U.S.A., 
but since 1898 a borough of New York City (?.».), situated at 
the S.W. extremity of Long Island. It is conterminous with 
Kings county, and is bounded N. by the borough of Queens, 
from which it is in part separated by Newtown Creek; E. by 
the borough of Queens and Jamaica Bay; S. by the Atlantic 
Ocean; W. by Gravesend Bay, the Narrows, Upper New York 
Bay and East river, which separate it from Staten Island, 
Jersey City and the borough of Manhattan. It has a water- 
front of 33 m. and extends over an area of 77-62 sq. m. Pop. 
(i860) 279,122; (1870) 419,921; (1880) 599,495; (189°, then 
Kings county) 838,547; (1900) 1,166,582; (1905, state census) 
1,358,686; (1910) 1,634,351. In 1900 only 310,501, or 
26-6%, were native-born of native white parents; 355, 697 
were foreign-born, 18,367 were negroes, and 1206 were Chinese. 
Out of 332,715 males of voting age (21 years and over), 15,415 
were illiterate (unable to write), and of these 14,159 were foreign- 
born. 

Brooklyn is connected with Manhattan by three bridges across 
the East river — the lowest, known as the Brooklyn, opened in 
1883; another, known as the Williamsburg or East River 
bridge, opened in 1903; and a third, the Manhattan, was 
opened in 1909. And a tunnel directly across from the south 
terminus of Manhattan was completed in 1907. Ferries ply at 
frequent intervals between numerous points on its west water- 
front and points in Manhattan; there is also ferry connexion 
with Jersey City. Brooklyn is served directly by the Long 
Island railway; by about fifty regular coast- wise and trans- 
Atlantic steamship lines; and by elevated or surface car lines 
on a large number of its streets. Subway lines, begun in 1904, 
connect Brooklyn with the subway system of Manhattan. 

Streets and Buildings. — The surface of Brooklyn in the west 
section, from the lower course of the East river to Gravesend 
Bay, varies in elevation from a few inches to nearly 200 ft. above 
sea-level, the highest points being in Prospect Park; but steep 
street grades even in this section are rare, and elsewhere the 
surface is either only slightly undulating or, as in the east and 
south, flat. Most of the streets are from 60 to 100 ft. wide. 
The principal business thoroughfare is Fulton Street, which begins 
at Fulton ferry nearly under the Brooklyn bridge, runs to City 
Hall Park, and thence across the north central section of the 
borough. In the City Hall Park are the old city hall (now the 
borough hall), the hall of records, and the county court-house. 
Two blocks to the north (on Washington Street) is the post- 
office, a fine granite Romanesque building. The manufacturing 
and shipping districts are mostly along the west water-front. 
Here, on Wallabout Bay at the bend of the East river to the 
westward, is the New York navy yard, the principal navy yard 
of the United States, established in 1801, and commonly but in- 
correctly called the Brooklyn navy yard. It occupies altogether 
about 144 acres, contains a trophy park, parade grounds, the 
United States Naval Lyceum (founded 1833), officers' quarters, 
barracks, and three large dry docks (respectively 564, 465 and 
307 ft. long), foundries and machine shops. A naval hospital 
(having accommodation for about 500 patients) to the east is 
separated from the navy yard by the largest and most interesting 
of Brooklyn's markets, the Wallabout (about 45 acres). The 



buildings of this market are Dutch in style and have a quaint 
clock tower. A little to the north of the navy yard are immense 
refineries of sugar. About 2 m. to the south, opposite Governor's 
Island, is the Atlantic Basin of 40 acres, with a wharfage of about 
3 m. and brick and granite warehouses used largely for the 
storage of grain. A little farther south, on Gowanus Bay, is 
another basin, the Erie, of 161 acres, protected by a breakwater 
1 m. in length, occupied by piers, warehouses, lumber depots and 
some of the largest dry docks in the United States; it also pro- 
vides protection during winter to hundreds of canal boats. In 
this vicinity, too, are several yards for building yachts, launches 
and other boats. At the lower end of the west water-front, facing 
the Narrows, are a United States reservation and the harbour 
defences of Fort Hamilton. 

For a considerable portion of its inhabitants Brooklyn is only 
a place of residence, their business interests being in the borough 
of Manhattan; hence Brooklyn has been called the " city of 
homes " and the " dormitory of New York." Residential 
districts with social lines more or less distinctly drawn are 
numerous. The oldest is that on Brooklyn (or Columbia) 
Heights, west of City Hall Park, rising abruptly from the river to 
a height of from 70 to 100 ft., and commanding a delightful 
view of the harbour. Here are hotels, large apartment-houses, 
many private residences and a number of clubs, including 
the Brooklyn, the Crescent, the Hamilton, the Jefferson and 
the Germania. On Park Slope, immediately west of Prospect 
Park, and St Mark's Avenue, in another part of the borough, 
are also attractive residential districts. The south shore of the 
borough has various summer pleasure resorts, of which Coney 
Island is the most popular. 

Parks and Cemeteries. — One of the most attractive features 
of Brooklyn is Prospect Park, occupying about 516 acres of 
high ground in the west central part of the borough, on a site 
made memorable by the battle of Long Island. Its large variety 
of trees and shrubs, including oak, hickory, elm, maple, chestnut, 
birch, ash, cedar, pine, larch and sumach, its flower gardens, 
a palm house, ponds, a lake of 61 acres for boating, skating and 
curling, a parade ground of 40 acres for other athletic sports, 
a menagerie, and numerous pieces of statuary, are among its 
objects of interest or beauty. From the southern entrance to 
this park, Ocean Parkway, a fine boulevard, 210 ft. wide and 
planted with six rows of trees, extends 55 m. south to Seaside 
Park (15 acres), on Brighton Beach, Coney Island. From the 
same entrance Fort Hamilton Parkway extends 4% m. south-east 
to Fort Hamilton, and to D}'ker Beach Park (144 acres) which 
face the lower end of the Narrows; and from Fort Hamilton, 
Shore Road and Bay Ridge Parkway extend north 4j m. to Bay 
Ridge Park overlooking Upper New York Bay. From the 
northern entrance to Prospect Park, Eastern Parkway, another 
fine boulevard, 200 ft. wide, extends east 25 m. to a point from 
which Rockaway Parkway runs 3 m. south-east to Canarsie 
Beach Park (40 acres), on Jamaica Bay; and extensions of 
Eastern Parkway run north-east through Highland Park (55 
acres), to Brooklyn Forest Park (535 acres, on the border of the 
borough of Queens), abounding in beautiful trees and delight- 
ful views. Half a mile east of the borough hall is Washington 
or Fort Greene Park (30 acres), laid out on the site of earth- 
works (known as Fort Greene) constructed during the War of 
Independence, and commanding good views. 

Greenwood cemetery, one of the most beautiful cemeteries 
in the United States, § m. east of Prospect Park, occupies about 
478 acres. Among the principal monuments are those erected 
to Roger Williams, S.F.B. Morse, Elias Howe, De Witt Clinton 
(colossal bronze statue by Henry Kirke Brown), Henry Ward 
Beecher, Peter Cooper, Horace Greeley, Henry Bergh, Henry 
George and James Gordon Bennett. At the main entrance is a 
beautiful gateway (of elaborately wrought brown stone), 142 ft. 
wide and having a central tower 100 ft. in height. Along the 
north-east border of the borough are Cypress Hills cemetery 
(400 acres), adjoining Brooklyn Forest Park, and the cemetery 
of the Evergreens (about 375 acres), adjoining Highland Park and 
partly in the borough of Queens. 



648 



BROOKLYN 



In the plaza at the northern entrance to Prospect Park is a 
soldiers' and sailors' memorial arch (80 ft. in width and 71 ft. 
in height), adorned with high-reliefs of Lincoln and Grant on 
horseback (by O'Donovan and Eakins) and with three large bronze 
groups (by Frederick MacMonnies). Immediately within the 
park there is a statue (also by MacMonnies) of J. S. T. Stranahan 
(1808-1898), who did more than any other man for the develop- 
ment of Brooklyn's system of parks and boulevards. On the 
slope of Lookout Hill (185 ft.) within the park is a shaft erected 
in 1895 to the memory of the Maryland soldiers who valiantly 
defended the rear of the American army at the battle of Long 
Island. A bronze statue of Abraham Lincoln overlooks the 
lake. In Fort Greene Park is a monument to the memory of 
the soldiers who died in the British prison ships during the War 
of Independence, many of them having been buried in a vault 
below. Facing the borough hall is a statue in bronze (by J. Q. A. 
Ward) of Henry Ward Beecher, mounted on a granite pedestal 
with a figure at one side to commemorate Beecher's sympathy for 
the slave. A fine bronze statue of Alexander Hamilton (by W. O. 
Partridge, b. 1861) stands at the entrance of the Hamilton Club in 
Clinton Street and one of U. S. Grant (also by Partridge) stands 
at the entrance of the Union League Club in Bedford Avenue. 

Education. — The Brooklyn Institute of Arts and Sciences 
embraces twenty-six departments, of which those of music, 
philology and the fine arts have each more than 1000 members; 
the total membership of all departments in 1906 was 5894. 
The museum building of this institution is in Institute Park, 
which is separated from Prospect Park on the north-.east by 
Flatbush Avenue. It contains, besides paintings and statuary, 
special collections for service in nearly all of the departments; 
among its purely art collections the most notable is that of 
J. J. J. Tissot's water-colour drawings, to illustrate the life of 
Christ. Since 1890 the Institute has received appropriations 
from the city, but it is maintained chiefly by private contribu- 
tions. It is the outgrowth of the Apprentices' Library Association, 
founded in 1824, of which General Lafayette laid the corner-stone 
on the 4th of July of that year. In 1888 Franklin W. Hooper 
(b. 185 1), who did much to increase the efficiency of the work 
Of the Institute, became director. Pratt Institute, founded in 
1887 by Charles Pratt (1830-1891), and the residuary legatee of 
his wife, who died in 1907, is one of the most successful manual 
and industrial training schools in the country, and its kinder- 
garten normal is one of the best known in the United States. 
The Polytechnic Institute, opened in 1855, is a high-grade school 
of science and liberal arts. Tt has two general departments, 
the college of arts and engineering and the preparatory school, 
Which are conducted independently of one another. In connexion 
with the college there is provision for graduate study and for 
night courses, and there are teachers' courses to which women 
are admitted. The Packer Collegiate Institute, opened as the 
successor of the Brooklyn Female Academy, in 1854, and en- 
dowed by Mrs Harriet L. Packer, an institution for women, 
has primary, preparatory, academic and collegiate departments. 
Adelphi College, opened in 1896, is for both sexes and gives 
special attention to normal training; it is the outgrowth of 
Adelphi Academy, founded in 1869, now the preparatory depart- 
ment. St Francis' College, opened in 1858, and St John's 
College, opened in 1870, are institutions maintained by Roman 
Catholics. Here, too, are the law school of St Lawrence 
•University, the Long Island Hospital Medical College, with a 
training school for nurses, the Brooklyn College of Pharmacy 
and several schools of music. Brooklyn's public schools rank 
especially high; among them there is a commercial high school 
and a manual training high school. Among the larger libraries 
of the borough are the Brooklyn public library, those of the 
Long Island Historical Society, on Brooklyn Heights, of Pratt 
■Institute, and of the King's County Medical Society, and a 
good law library. The Brooklyn Daily Eagle, which occupies an 
attractive building near the borough hall, has been a newspaper 
of strong influence in the community. It was established in 
1841 as a Democratic organ, and Walt Whitman was its editor 
for about a year during its early history. 



Brooklyn is well provided with charitable institutions, and 
has long been known as the " city of churches," probably from 
the famous clergymen who have lived there. Among them 
were Henry Ward Beecher, pastor of Plymouth church (Con- 
gregational) from 1847 to 1887; Lyman Abbott, pastor of the 
same .church from 1887 to 1898; Thomas De Witt Talmage, 
pastor of the Brooklyn Tabernacle (Presbyterian) from 1869 
to 1894; Richard Salter Storrs (1821-1900), pastor of the church 
of the Pilgrims (Congregational) from 1846 to 1899; and Theodore 
L. Cuyler (182 2-1 909), pastor of the Lafayette Avenue Presby- 
terian church from i860 to 1890. 

Manufactures and Commerce. — The borough of Brooklyn 
is one of the most important manufacturing centres in the 
United States, most of the factories being located along or near 
the East river north of the Brooklyn bridge. The total value of 
the manufactured products in 1890 was $270,823,754 and in 
1900, $342,127,124, an increase during the decade of 26-3%. 
In 1905 the total value of the borough's manufactured product 
(under the factory system) was $373,462,930, or 15% of the 
total manufactured product of the state of New York. Brooklyn's 
largest manufacturing industry is the refining of sugar, about 
one-half of the sugar consumed in the United States being 
refined here; in 1900 the product of the sugar and molasses 
refining establishments was valued at $77,942,997. Brooklyn is 
also an important place for the milling of coffee and spices (the 
1905 product was valued at $15,274,092), the building of small 
boats, and the manufacture of foundry and machine shop 
products, malt liquors, barrels, shoes, chemicals, paints, cordage, 
twine, and hosiery and other knitted goods. Of its large com- 
merce, grain is the chief commodity; it is estimated that about 
four-fifths of that exported from the port of New York is 
shipped from here, and the borough's grain elevators have an 
estimated storage capacity of about 20,000,000 bushels. 

The water-supply system is owned and operated by the 
borough; the water is derived from streams flowing southward 
in the sparsely settled area east of the borough, and also from 
driven wells in the same region; it is pumped by ten engines at 
Ridgewood to a reservoir having a capacity of about 300,000,000 
gallons, while a part of it is re-pumped to a high service reservoir 
near the north entrance to Prospect Park for the service of the 
most elevated part of the borough. Besides this system some 
towns in the south section recently annexed have their own 
water-supply. 

History. — The first settlement within the present limits of 
Brooklyn was made in 1636, when some Dutch farmers took up 
their residence along the shore of Gowanus Bay. About the same 
time other Dutch farmers founded Flatlands (at first called 
Amersfoort), on Jamaica Bay, and a few Walloons founded 
Wallabout, where the navy yard now is. In 1642 a ferry was 
established across East river from the present foot of Fulton 
Street, and a settlement grew up here which was known as 
The Ferry. The next year Lady Deborah Moody with some 
followers from New England founded Gravesend near the 
southern extremity of the borough. Finally, in the year 1645, 
a settlement was established near the site of the present borough 
hall, and was called Breuckelen (also spelled Breucklyn, Breuck- 
land, Brucklyn, Broucklyn, Brookland and Brookline) until 
about the close of the 18th century, when its orthography became 
fixed as Brooklyn. The name, Breuckelen, meaning marsh land, 
seems to have been suggested by the resemblance of the situation 
of the settlement to that of Breuckelen, Holland. Of the other 
towns which were later united to form the borough, New Utrecht 
was settled about 1650, Flatbush (at first called. Medwoud, 
Midwout or Midwood) about 1651, Bushwick and Williamsburg 
in 1660. All of the settlements were for a long time chiefly 
agricultural communities. Flatbush was for a few years immedi- 
ately preceding 1675 the largest; but Brooklyn was the first 
(1646) to have a township organization, and within a few years 
Wallabout, Gowanus, The Ferry, and Bedford — a new settlement 
to the south-east of Wallabout, established in 1662 — were in- 
cluded within its jurisdiction. In 1654 the municipal privileges 
of Brooklyn as well as of two of the other towns were enlarged. 



BROOKS— BROOM 



649 



but with Dutch rule there was general discontent, and when, 
in 1664, Colonel Richard Nicolls came to overthrow it and 
establish English rule these towns offered no resistance. Nicolls 
erected the region composed of Long Island, Staten Island and 
Westchester into a county under the name of Yorkshire, and 
divided it into three ridings, of which Staten Island, the present 
county of Kings, and the town of Newtown in Queens, formed one. 
In 1683 the present county of Kings was organized by the first : 
jcolonial legislature. During the War of Independence the chief 
event was the battle of Long Island, fought on the 27th of 
August 1776. In 1 816, when the population of the town of 
Brooklyn was about 4500, its most populous section was in- 
corporated as a village; and in 1834, when its population had 
increased to 23,310, the whole town was incorporated as a 
city. By 1850 its population had increased to 138,882. In 1855 
Williamsburg, which had been incorporated as a city in 1851, 
and the town of Bushwick were annexed. Other annexations 
followed until the city of Brooklyn was conterminous with Kings 
county; and finally, on the 1st of January 1898, the city of 
Brooklyn became a borough of New York City. 

See S. M. Ostrander, A History of Brooklyn and Kings County 
(Brooklyn, 1894); H. W. B. Howard (ed.), History of the City of 
Brooklyn (Brooklyn, 1893) ; and H. Putnam, Brooklyn, in L. P. 
Powell's Historic Towns of the Middle States (New York, 1899). 

BROOKS, CHARLES WILLIAM SHIRLEY (1816-1874), 
English novelist, playwright and journalist, was born on the 
29th of April 1816. He was the son of a London architect, and 
was articled in 1832 to a solicitor for five years. He became 
parliamentary reporter for the Morning Chronicle, and in 1853 
was sent by that paper as special commissioner to investigate 
the subject of labour and the poor in southern Russia, Egypt 
and Syria; the result of his inquiries appearing first in the form 
of letters to the editor, and afterwards in a separate volume, ; 
under the title of The Russians of the South (1856). He wrote, 
sometimes alone, sometimes in conjunction with others, slight 
dramatic pieces of the burlesque kind, among which- may be 
mentioned Anything for a Change (1848), The Daughter of the 
Stars (1850). Brooks was for many years on the staff of the 
Illustrated London News, contributing the weekly article on the 
politics of the day, and the two series entitled " Nothing in the ! 
Papers " and " By the Way." In 185 1 he joined the staff of 
Punch, and noteworthy among his numerous contributions were 
the weekly satirical summaries of the parliamentary debates, 
entitled " The Essence of Parliament." His long service as ! 
newspaper reporter gave him special aptitude for this playful 
parody. In 1870, on the death of Mark Lemon, " dear old 
Shirley," as his friends used to call him, was chosen to succeed 
to the editorial chair. His first novel, Aspen Court, was published 
in 1 8 5 s . It was followed by The Gordian Knot ( 1 860) , The Silver 
Cord (1861) and Sooner or Later (1868). Brooks was a great 
letter-writer, deliberately cultivating the practice as an art, and 
imitating the style in vogue before newspapers and telegraphs 
suppressed private letters. He had an astonishing memory, 
was brilliant as an epigrammatist, was a great reader and a 
most genial companion. He was in his element with a group 
of children, reading to them, sharing their fun and always 
remembering the birthdays. He died in London, on the 23rd 
of February 1874, and was buried near his friends Leech and 
Thackeray, in Kensal Green cemetery. 

See G. S. Layard, A Great " Punch " Editor: Being the Life, 
Letters and Diaries of Shirley Brooks (1907.) 

BROOKS, PHILLIPS (1835-1893), American clergyman and 
author, was born in Boston, Mass., on the 13th of December 
1835. Through his father, William Gray Brooks, he was de- 
scended from the Rev. John Cotton; through his mother, 
Mary Ann Phillips, a woman of rare force of character and 
religious faith, he was a great-grandson of the founder of Phillips 
Academy, Andover, Mass. Of the six sons, four — Phillips, 
Frederic, Arthur and John Cotton — entered the ministry of the 
Protestant Episcopal Church. Phillips Brooks prepared for 
college at the Boston Latin school and graduated at Harvard 
in 1S55. After a short and unsuccessful experience as a teacher 



in the Boston Latin school, he began in 1856 to study for the 
ministry of the Protestant Episcopal Church in the theological 
seminary at Alexandria, Virginia. In 1859 he graduated, was 
ordained deacon by Bishop William Meade of Virginia, and 
became rector of the church of the Advent, Philadelphia. In 
i860 he was ordained priest, and in 1862 became rector of the 
church of the Holy Trinity, Philadelphia, where he remained 
seven years, gaining an increasing name as preacher and 
patriot. Endowed by inheritance with a rich religious character, 
evangelical traditions, ethical temper and strong intellect, he 
developed, by wide reading in ancient and modern literature, a 
personality and attitude of mind which appealed to the character- 
istic thought and life of the period. With Tennyson, Coleridge, 
Frederic D. Maurice and F. W. Robertson he was in strong 
sympathy. During the Civil War he upheld with power the 
cause of the North and the negro, and his sermon on the death 
of President Lincoln was an eloquent expression of the character 
of both men. In 1869 he became rector of Trinity church, 
Boston. In 1877 the present church was finished, the architect 
being his friend H. H. Richardson. Here Phillips Brooks 
preached Sunday after Sunday to great congregations, until he 
was consecrated bishop of Massachusetts in 1891. In 1886 he 
declined an election as assistant bishop of Pennsylvania. He 
was for many years an overseer and preacher of Harvard 
University, his influence upon the religious life of the university 
being deep and wide. In 1881 he declined an invitation to be 
the sole preacher to the university and professor of Christian 
ethics. On the 30th of April 1891 he was elected sixth bishop 
of Massachusetts, and on the 14th of October was consecrated 
to that office in Trinity church, Boston. After a brief but great 
episcopate of fifteen months, he died, unmarried, on the 23rd of 
January 1893. Phillips Brooks was a tall, well-proportioned 
man of fine physique, his height being six feet four inches. In 
character he was pure, simple, endowed with excellent judgment 
and a keen sense Of humour, and quick to respond to any call 
for sympathy. When kindled by his subject it seemed to take 
possession of him and pour itself out with overwhelming speed 
.of utterance, with heat and power. Plis sympathy with men of 
other ways and thought, and with the truth in other ecclesiastical 
systems gained for him the confidence and affection of men of 
varied habits of mind and religious traditions, and was thus a 
great factor in gaining increasing support for the Episcopal 
Church. As years^went by his influence as a religious leader 
became unique. The degree of S.T.D. had been conferred upon 
him by the universities of Harvard (1877), and of Columbia 
(1887), and the degree of D.D. by the university of Oxford, 
England (1885). In 1877 he published a course of lectures upon 
preaching, which he had delivered at the theological school of 
Yale University, and which are an expression of his own ex- 
perience. In 1879 appeared the Bohlen Lectures on " The 
Influence of Jesus." In 1878 he published his first volume of 
sermons, and from time to time issued other volumes, including 
Sermons Preached in English Churches (1883). 

In 1001, at New York, was published, in two volumes, Phillips 
Brooks, Life and Letters, by the Rev. A. V. G. Allen, D. D., pro- 
fessor of ecclesiastical history, Episcopal Theological school, Cam- 
bridge, Mass., who in 1907 published at New York, in a single 
volume, Phillips Brooks, an abbreviation and revision of the earlier 
biography. (W. L.) 

BROOKS'S, a London club in St James's Street. It was 
founded in 1764 by the dukes of Roxburghe and Portland^ 
The building had been previously opened as a gaming-house by 
William Macall (Almack), and afterwards by Brooks, a wine 
merchant and money-lender, whose name it retained. 

BROOM, known botanically as Cytisus, or Sarothamnus, 
scoparius, a member of the natural order Leguminosae, a shrub 
found on heaths and commons in the British Isles, and also in 
Europe (except the north) and temperate Asia. The leaves are 
small, and the function of carbon-assimilating is shared by the 
green stems. The bright yellow flowers scatter their pollen by an 
explosive mechanism; the weight of a bee alighting on the 
flower causes the keel to split and the pollen to be shot out on 
to the insect's body. When ripe the black pods explode with a 



650 



BROOME— BROSELEY 



sudden twisting of the valves and scatter the seeds. The twigs 
have a bitter and nauseous taste and have long had a popular 
reputation as a diuretic; the seeds have similar properties. 

" Butcher's broom," a very different plant, known botanically 
as Ruscus aculeatus, is a member of the natural order Liliaceae. 
It is a small evergreen shrub found in copses and woods, but rare 




Cytisus scoparius, Common Broom. 



4- 



Two-lipped calyx. 

Broadly ovate vexillum or 

standard. 
One of the alae or wings of the 

corolla. 
Carina or keel. 



5. MonadeLphous stamens. 

6. Hairy ovary with the long 

style, thickened upwards, 
and spirally curved. 

7. Legume or pod. 



in the southern half of England. The stout angular stems bear 
leaves reduced to small scales, which subtend flattened leaf-like 
branches (cladodes) with a sharp apex. The small whitish 
flowers are borne on the face of the cladodes, and are succeeded 
by a bright red berry. 

BROOME, WILLIAM (1680-1745), English scholar and poet, 
the son of a farmer, was born at Haslington, Cheshire, where 
he was baptized on the 3rd of May 1689. He was educated at 
Eton, where he became captain of the school, and at St John's 
College, Cambridge. He collaborated with John Ozell and 
William Oldisworth in a translation (17 12) of the Iliad from the 
French version of Madame Dacier, and he contributed in the 
same year some verses to Lintot's Miscellany. He was introduced 
to Pope, who was at that time engaged on his translation of the 
Iliad . Pope asked Broome to make a digest for him of the notes 
of Eustathius, the 1 2th-century annotator of Homer. This task 
Broome executed to Pope's entire satisfaction, refusing any 
payment. He was rector of Sturston, Norfolk, and his prosperity 
was further assured by his marriage in 17 16 with a rich widow, 
Mrs Elizabeth Clarke. When Pope undertook the translation 
of the Odyssey, he engaged Elijah Fenton and Broome to assist 
him. Broome's facility in verse had gained for him at college 
the nickname of " the poet," and he adapted his style very 
closely to Pope's, He translated the 2nd, 6th, 8th, nth, 12th, 



16th, 18th and 23rd books, and practically provided all the notes. 
He was a vain, talkative man, and did not fail to make known 
his real share in the translation, of which Pope had given a very 
misleading account in the " proposals " issued to subscribers. 
He casually mentioned Broome as his coadjutor, as though his 
assistance was of an entirely subsidiary character. His influence 
over Broome was so strong that the latter was induced to write 
a note at the end of the translation minimizing his own share and 
implicating Fenton, who, moreover, had not wished his name 
to appear, in the deception. " If my performance," he said, 
" has merit either in these [the notes] or in any part of the trans- 
lation, namely the 6th, nth and 18th books, it is but just to 
attribute it to the judgment and care of Mr Pope, by whose hand 
every sheet was corrected." For the Odyssey Pope received 
£4500, of which Broome, who had provided a third of the text 
and the notes, received £570. He had hoped to secure fame from 
his connexion with Pope, and when he found that Pope had no 
intention of praising him he complained bitterly of being under- 
paid. Pope thought that Broome's garrulity had caused the 
reports which were being circulated to his disadvantage, and un- 
generously made satirical allusions to him in the Dunciad 1 and 
the Bathos. After these insults Broome's patience gave way, and 
there is a gap in his correspondence with Pope, but in 1730 the 
intercourse was renewed on friendly terms. In 1728 the degree 
of LL.D. was conferred on him by the university of Cambridge, 
and he was presented to the rectory of Pulham, Norfolk, and sub- 
sequently by Charles, 1st Earl Cornwallis, who had been his friend 
at Cambridge, to two livings, Oakley Magna in Essex, and Eye 
in Suffolk. He died at Bath on the 16th of November 1745. 

Broome was also the author of some translations from Anacreon 
printed in the Gentleman' s Magazine, and of Poems on Several 
Occasions (1727). His poems are included in Johnson's and other 
collections of the British poets. His connexion with Pope is ex- 
haustively discussed in Elwin and Courthope's edition of Pope's 
Works (viii. pp. 30-186), where the correspondence between the two 
is reproduced. 

BROOM-RAPE, known botanically as Orobanche, a genus of 
brown leafless herbs growing attached to the roots of other 
plants from which they derive their nourishment. The usually 
stout stem bears brownish scales, and ends in a spike of yellow, 
reddish-brown or purplish flowers, with a gaping two-lipped 
corolla. Several species occur in the British Isles; the largest, 
Orobanche major, is parasitic on roots of shrubby leguminous 
plants, and has a stout stem 1 to 2 ft. high. 

BROSCH, MORITZ (1829-1907), German historian, was born 
at Prague on the 7th of April 1829, was educated at Prague and 
Vienna, and became a journalist. Later he devoted himself to 
historical study, and he died on the 14th of July 1907 at Venice, 
where he had resided for over thirty years. To the series 
Geschichte der europaischen Staaten Brosch contributed England 
1509-1850 (6 vols., Gotha, 1884-1899), a continuation of the 
work of J. M. Lappenberg and R. Pauli, and Der Kirchenstaat 
(Gotha, 1880-1882). He gave further proof of his interest in 
English history by writing Lord Bolingbroke und die Whigs und 
Tories seiner Zeit (Frankfort, 1883), and Oliver Cromwell und die 
puritanische Revolution (Frankfort, 1886). He also wrote Julius 
II. und die Griindung des Kirchenstaats (Gotha, 1878), while one 
of his last pieces of work was to contribute a chapter on " The 
height of the Ottoman power " to vol. iii. of the Cambridge 
Modern History. 

See A. W. Ward in the English Historical Review, vol. xxii. (1907). 

BROSELEY, a market town in the municipal borough of 
Wenlock (q.v.) and the Wellington (Mid) parliamentary division 
of Shropshire, England, on the right bank of the Severn. It 
has a station (Ironbridge and Broseley) on the Great Western 
railway, 158 m. N.W. from London. There is trade in coal, but 

1 i. 146, " worthy Settle Banks and Broome." A footnote (1743) 
explained away the allusion by making it apply to Richard Brome, 
the disciple of Ben Jonson. Also iii. 332, of which the original 
rendering was : — 

" Hibernian politics, O Swift, thy doom, 
And Pope's, translating ten whole years with Broome." 
In the Bathos he was classed with the parrots and the tortoises. 



BROSSES— BROTHERS OF COMMON LIFE 



651 



the town is most famous for the manufacture of tobacco-pipes, 
a long-established industry. Pottery and bricks are also pro- 
duced, and at Benthall, 1 m. W., are large encaustic tile works. 
The early name of the town was Burwardesley. 

BROSSES, CHARLES DE (1709-1777), French magistrate and 
scholar, was born at Dijon and studied law with a view to the 
magistracy. The bent of his mind, however, was towards litera- 
ture and science, and, after a visit to Italy in 1739 in company 
with his friend Jean Baptiste de Lacurne de Sainte-Palaye, he 
published his Leitres sur Vital acluel de la ville souterraine 
d'Herculee (Dijon, 1750), the first work upon the ruins of Her- 
culaneum. It was during this Italian tour that he wrote his 
famous letters on Italy, which remained in MS. till long after 
his death. In 1760 he published a dissertation, Du culte des 
dieux fetiches, which was afterwards inserted in the Encyclopidie 
methodique. At the solicitation of his friend Buffon, he under- 
took his Histoire des navigations aux terres australes, which was 
published in 1756, in two vols. 4to, with maps. It was in this 
work that de Brosses first laid down the geographical divisions 
of Australasia and Polynesia, which were afterwards adopted 
by John Pinkerton and succeeding geographers. He also contri- 
buted to the EncyclopSdie the articles " Langues," " Musique," 
" Etymologic." In 1765 appeared his work on the origin of 
language, Traite de la formation mecanique des langues, the 
merits of which are recognized by E. B. Tylor in Primitive 
Culture. De Brosses had been occupied, during a great part of 
his life, on a translation of Sallust, and in attempting to supply 
the lost chapters in that celebrated historian. At length in 
1777 he published L'Histoire du septieme siecle de la ripublique 
romaine, 3 vols. 4to, to which is prefixed a learned life of Sallust, 
reprinted at the commencement of the translation of that 
historian by Jean Baptiste Dureau de La Malle. These literary 
occupations did not prevent the author from discharging with 
ability his official duties as first president of the parliament of 
Burgundy, nor from carrying on a constant and extensive corre- 
spondence with the most distinguished literary characters of his 
time. In 1758 he succeeded the marquis de Caumont in the 
Academie des Belles-lettres; but when in 1770 he presented 
himself at the French Academy, his candidature was rejected 
owing to Voltaire's opposition on personal grounds. Besides 
the works already mentioned, he wrote several memoirs and 
dissertations in the collections of the Academy of Inscriptions, 
and in those of the Academy of Dijon, and he left behind him 
several MSS., which were unfortunately lost during the Revolu- 
tion. His letters on Italy were, however, found in MS. in the 
confiscated library by his son, the emigrS officer Rene de Brosses, 
and were first published in 1799, in the uncritical edition of 
Antoine Serieys, under the title of Letlres historiques et critiques. 
A fresh edition, freed from errors and interpolations, by R. 
Colomb, with the title L'ltalie il y a cent ans, was issued in 1836; 
and two subsequent reprints appeared, one edited by Poulet- 
Malassis, under the title Lettres familieres (1858); the other, a 
re-impression of Colomb's edition, under that of Le Prisidenl 
de Brosses en Ilalie (1858). 

See H. Mamet, Le President de Brosses, sa vie et ses ouvrages^ (Lille, 
1874) ; also Cunisset-Carnot, " La Querelle de Voltaire et du president 
de Brosses," in the Revue des Deux Mondes (February 15, i""" v 



BROTHER, a male person in his relation to the other children 
of the same father and mother. " Brother " represents in 
English the Teutonic branch of a word common to the Indo- 
European languages, cf. Ger. Bruder, Dutch broeder, Dan. and 
Swed. broder, &c. In Celtic languages, Gaelic and Irish have 
brathair, and Welsh brawd; in Greek the word is cbparrip, in 
Lat. frater, from which come the Romanic forms, Fr. frere, Ital. 
fratello; the Span, fray, Port, frei, like the Ital. frate, fra, are 
only used of " friars." The Span, hermamo and the Port, irmao, 
the regular words for brother, are from Lat. germanus, born of 
the same father and mother. The Sanskrit word is bhrdtir, 
and the ultimate Indo-European root is generally taken to be 
bhar, to bear (cf. M. H. Ger. barn, Scot, bairn, child, and such 
words as "birth," "burden"). "Brother" has often been 
loosely used of kinsmen generally, or for members of the same 



tribe; also for quite fictitious relationships, e.g. " blood- 
brothers," through a sacramental rite of mutual blood-tasting, 
" foster-brothers," because suckled by the same nurse. Chris- 
tianity, through the idea of the universal fatherhood of God, 
conceives all men as brothers; but in a narrower sense " the 
brethren " are the members of the Church, or, in a narrower still, 
of a confraternity or " brotherhood " within the Church. This 
latter idea is reproduced in those fraternal societies, e.g. the 
Freemasons, the members of which become " brothers "by initia- 
tion. " Brother " is also used symbolically, as implying equality, 
by sovereigns in addressing one another, and also by bishops. 

BROTHERS, RICHARD (1757-1824), British religious fanatic, 
was born in Newfoundland on Christmas day, 1757, and educated 
at Woolwich. He entered the navy and served under Keppel 
and Rodney. In 1783 he became lieutenant, and was discharged 
on half-pay. He travelled on the continent, made an unhappy 
marriage in 1786, and again went to sea. But he felt that the 
military calling and Christianity were incompatible and aban- 
doned the former (1 789) . Further scruples as to the oath required 
on the receipt of his half-pay reduced him to serious pecuniary 
straits (1791), and he divided his time between the open air 
and the workhouse, where he developed the idea that he had a 
special divine commission, and wrote to the king and the parlia- 
ment to that effect. In 1793 he declared himself the apostle of a 
new religion, " the nephew of the Almighty, and prince of the 
Hebrews, appointed to lead them to the land of Canaan." At 
the end of 1794 he began to print his interpretations of prophecy, 
his first book being A Revealed Knowledge of the Prophecies and 
Times. In consequence of prophesying the death of the king 
and the end of the monarchy, he was arrested for treason in 
1795, and confined as a criminal lunatic. His case was, however, 
brought before parliament by his ardent disciple, Nathaniel 
Halhed, the orientalist, a member of the House of Commons, 
and he was removed to a private asylum in Islington. Here he 
wrote a variety of prophetic pamphlets, which gained him many 
believers, amongst them William Sharp, the engraver, who 
afterwards deserted him for Joanna Southcott. Brothers, how- 
ever, had announced that on the 19th of November 1795 he was 
to be" revealed " as prince of the Hebrews and ruler of the world; 
and when this date passed without any such manifestation, 
what enthusiasm he had aroused rapidly dwindled, despite the 
fact that some of his earlier political predictions (e.g. the violent 
death of Louis XVI.) had been fulfilled. He died in London on 
the 25th of January 1824, in the house of John Finlayson, who 
had secured his release, and who afterwards pestered the govern- 
ment with an enormous claim for Brothers's maintenance. The 
supporters of the Anglo-Israelite theory claim him as the first 
writer on their side. 

BROTHERS OF COMMON LIFE, a religious community 
formerly existing in the Catholic Church. Towards the end 
of his career Gerhard Groot (q.v.) retired to his native town of 
Deventer, in the province of Overyssel and the diocese of 
Utrecht, and gathered around him a number of those who had 
been " converted " by his preaching or wished to place them- 
selves under his spiritual guidance. With the assistance of 
Florentius Radewyn, who resigned for the purpose a canonry at 
Utrecht, he was able to carry out a long-cherished idea of estab- 
lishing a house wherein devout men might live in community 
without the monastic vows. The first such community was 
established at Deventer in the house of Florentius himself 
(c. 1380); and Thomas a. Kempis, who lived in it from 1392 
to 1399, has left a description of the manner of life pursued: — 

" They humbly imitated the manner of the Apostolic life, 
and having one heart and mind in God, brought every man what 
was his own into the common stock, and receiving simple food 
and clothing avoided taking thought for the morrow. Of their 
own will they devoted themselves to God, and all busied them- 
selves in obeying their rector or his vicar. . . . They laboured care- 
fully in copying books, being instant continually in sacred study 
and devout meditation. In the morning having said Matins, they 
went to the church (for Mass). . . . Some who were priests and 
were learned in the divine law preached earnestly in the church." 



652 



BROUGH— BROUGHAM, LORD 



Other houses of the Brothers of Common Life, otherwise called 
the " Modern Devotion," were in rapid succession established in 
the chief cities of the Low Countries and north and central 
Germany, so that there were in all upwards of forty houses of 
men; while those of women doubled that figure, the first having 
been founded by Groot himself at Deventer. 

The ground-idea was to reproduce the life of the first Christians 
as described in Acts iv. The members took no vows and were 
free to leave when they chose; but so long as they remained 
they were bound to observe chastity, to practise personal 
poverty, putting all their money and earnings into the common 
fund, to obey the rules of the house and the commands of the 
rector, and to exercise themselves in self-denial, humility and 
piety. The rector was chosen by the community and was not 
necessarily a priest, though in each house there were a few 
priests and clerics. The majority, however, were laymen, 
of all kinds and degrees — nobles, artisans, scholars, students, 
labouring men. The clerics preached and instructed the people, 
working chiefly among the poor; they also devoted themselves 
to the copying of manuscripts, in order thereby to earn something 
for the common fund; and some of them taught in the schools. 
Of the laymen, the educated copied manuscripts, the others 
worked at various handicrafts or at agriculture. After the 
religious services of the morning the Brothers scattered for the 
day's work, the artisans going to the workshops in the city, — 
for the idea was to live and work in the world, and not separated 
from it, like the monks. Their rule was that they had to earn 
their livelihood, and must not beg. This feature seemed a re- 
flection on the mendicant orders, and the idea of a community 
life without vows and not in isolation from everyday life, was 
looked upon as something new and strange, and even as bearing 
affinities to the Beghards and other sects, at that time causing 
trouble to both Church and state. And so opposition arose to 
the Modern Devotion, and the controversy was carried to the 
legal faculty at Cologne University, which gave a judgment 
strongly in their favour. The question, for all that, was not 
finally settled until the council of Constance (1414), when their 
cause was triumphantly defended by Pierre d'Ailly and Gerson. 
For a century after this the Modern Devotion flourished exceed- 
ingly, and its influence on the revival of religion in the Nether- 
lands and north Germany in the 15 th century was wide and 
deep. It has been the fashion to treat Groot and the Brothers 
of Common Life as " Reformers before the Reformation "; but 
Schujze, in the Protestant Realencyklopadie, is surely right in 
pronouncing this view quite unhistorical — except on the theory 
that all interior spiritual religion is Protestant: he shows that 
at the Reformation hardly any of the Brothers embraced 
Lutheranism, only a single community going over as a body 
to the new religion. During the second half of the 16th century 
the institute gradually declined, and by the middle of the 
17 th all its houses had ceased to exist. 

; Authorities. — The chief authorities are Thomas k Kempis, 
Lives of Groot and his Disciples and Chronicle of Mount St Agnes 
(both works translated by J. P. Arthur, the former under the title 
Founders of the New Devotion, 1905) ; Busch, Chronicle of Windes- 
heim (ed. Grube, 1887). Much has been written on the subject in 
Dutch and German; in English, S. Kettlewell, Thomas & Kempis 
and the Brothers'of Common Life (1882) (but see Arthur in the Prefaces 
to above-named books) ; for a shorter sketch, F. R. Cruise, Thomas 
a Kempis (1887). An excellent article in Herzog-Hauck, Real- 
encyklopddie (3rd ed.), " Briider des gemeinsamen Lebens," supplies 
copious information with references to all the literature; see also 
Max Heimbucher, Orden und Kongregationen (1897), ii. § 123. The 
part played by the Brothers of Common Life in the religious and 
educational movements of the time may be studied in Ludwig 
Pastor's History of the Popes from the close of the Middle Ages, or 
J. Janssen's History of the German People. (E. C. B.) 

BROUGH, ROBERT (1872-1905), British painter, was born 
at Invergordon, Ross-shire. He was educated at Aberdeen, and, 
whilst apprenticed for over six years as lithographer to Messrs 
Gibb & Co., attended the night classes at the local art school. 
He then entered the Royal Scottish Academy, and in the first 
year took the Stuart prize for figure painting, the Chalmers 
painting bursary, and the Maclaine-Walters medal for com- 



position^ After two years in Paris under J. P. Laurens and 
Benjamin-Constant at Julian's atelier, he settled in Aberdeen 
in 1894 as a portrait painter and political cartoonist. A portrait 
of Mr W. D. Ross first drew attention to his talent in 1896, and 
in the following year he scored a marked success at the Royal 
Academy with his " Fantaisie en Folie," now at the National 
Gallery of British Art (Tate Gallery). Two of his paintings, 
" 'Twixt Sun and Moon " and " Childhood of St Anne of 
Brittany," are at the Venice municipal gallery. Brough's art 
is influenced by Raeburn and by modern French training, but 
it strikes a very personal note. Robert Brough met his death 
from injuries received in a railway disaster in 1905, his early 
death being a notable loss to British art. 

BROUGHAM, JOHN (1814-1880), British actor, was born at 
Dublin on the 9th of May 1814, and was educated for a surgeon. 
Owing to family misfortunes he was thrown upon his own re- 
sources and made his first appearance on the London stage in 1830, 
at the Tottenham Street theatre in Tom and Jerry, in which he 
played six characters. In 183 1 he was a member of Madame 
Vestris's company, and wrote his. first play, a burlesque. He 
remained with Madame Vestris as long as she and Charles 
Mathews retained Covent Garden, and he collaborated with 
Dion Boucicault in writing London Assurance, Dazzle being one 
of his best parts. In 1840 he managed the Lyceum theatre, for 
which he wrote several light burlesques, but in 1842 he moved 
tp the United States, where he became a member of W. E. 
Burton's company, for which he wrote several comedies. Later 
he was the manager of Niblo's Garden, and in 1850 opened 
Brougham's Lyceum, which, like his next speculation, the lease 
of the Bowery theatre, was not financially a success. He was 
later connected with Wallack's and Daly's theatres, and wrote 
plays for both. In i860 he returned to London, where he 
adapted or wrote several plays, including The Duke's Motto 
for Fechter. After the Civil War he returned to New York. 
Brougham's theatre was opened in 1869 with his comedy Better 
Late than Never, but this managerial experience was also un- 
fortunate, and he took to playing with various stock companies. 
His last appearance was in 1879 as O'Reilly, the detective, in 
Boucicault's Rescued, and he died in New York on the 7th of 
June 1880. Brougham was the author of nearly 100 plays, most, 
of them now forgotten. He was the founder of the Lotus Club 
in New York, and for a time its president. He also edited there 
in 18.52 a comic paper called The Lantern, and published two 
collections of miscellaneous writings, A Basket of Chips and 
The Bunsby Papers. Brougham is said to, have been the original 
of Harry Lorrequer in Charles Lever's novel. He was twice 
married, in 1838 to Emma Williams (d. 1865), and in 1844 to 
Mrs Annette Hawley (d. 1870), both actresses. 

BROUGHAM, a four-wheeled closed carriage, seating two or 
more persons, and drawn by a single horse or pair, or propelled 
by motor. The modern " brougham " has developed and taken 
its name from the " odd little kind of garden-chair " described 
by Thomas Moore, which the first Lord Brougham had made 
by a coachmaker to his own design. 

BROUGHAM and VAUX, HENRY PETER BROUGHAM, 
ist Baron (1778-1868), lord chancellor of England, was born 
at Edinburgh on the 1 9th of September 1778. He was the eldest 
son of Henry Brougham and Eleanora, daughter of the Rev. 
James Syme. In his later years he was wont to trace his paternal 
descent to Uduardus de Broham, in the reign of Henry II., 
but no real connexion has been established between the ancient 
lords of Brougham castle, whose inheritance passed by marriage 
from the Viponts into the family of the De Cliffords, and the 
Broughams of Scales Hall, from whom the chancellor was really 
descended. Entering the high school of Edinburgh when 
barely seven, he left, having risen to be head of the school, 
in 1791. He entered the university of Edinburgh in 1792, and 
devoted himself chiefly to the study of natural science and 
mathematics, contributing in 1795 a paper to the Royal Society 
on some new phenomenon of light and colours, which was printed 
in the Transactions of that body. A paper on porisms was 
published in the same manner in 1798, and in 1803 his scientific 



BROUGHAM, LORD 



E>53 



reputation was so far established that he was elected F.R.S. 
But in spite of his taste for mathematical reasoning, Brougham's 
mind was not an accurate or exact one; and his pursuit of 
physical science was rather a favourite recreation than a solid 
advantage to him. 

For two years of his university career he had attended lectures- 
in civil law, and having adopted law as a profession he was 
admitted to the faculty of advocates in 1800. It does not appear 
that he ever held a brief in the court of session, but he went a 
circuit or two, where he defended or prosecuted a few prisoners, 
and played a series of tricks on the presiding judge, Lord Esk- 
grove, which almost drove that learned person to distraction. 
The Scottish bar, however, as he soon perceived, offered no field 
sufficiently ample for his talents and his ambition. He resolved 
to go to London, where he had already appeared as junior 
counsel in a Scottish appeal to the House of Lords. In 1803 
he entered at Lincoln's Inn, and in 1808 he was called to the 
English bar. In the meantime he had turned to literature 
as a means of subsistence. When in 1802 the Edinburgh Review 
was founded by the young and aspiring lights of the northern 
metropolis, Brougham was the most ready, the most versatile 
and the most satirical of all its contributors. To the first twenty 
numbers he contributed eighty articles, wandering through every 
imaginable subject, — science, politics, colonial policy, literature, 
poetry, surgery, mathematics and the fine arts. The prodigious 
success of the Review, and the power he was known to wield in it, 
made him a man of mark from his first arrival in London. He 
obtained the friendship of Lord Grey and the leading Whig 
politicians. His wit and gaiety made him an ornament of 
society, and he sought to extend his literary and political reputa- 
tion by the publication of an elaborate work on the colonial 
policy of the empire. In 1806, Fox being then in office, he was 
appointed secretary to a mission of Lord Rosslyn and Lord 
St Vincent to the court of Lisbon, with a view to counteract the 
anticipated French invasion of Portugal. The mission lasted 
two or three months; Brougham came home out of humour 
and out of pocket; and meantime the death of Fox put an end 
to the hopes of the Whigs. 

Brougham was disappointed by the abrupt fall of the ministry, 
and piqued that his Whig friends had not provided him with 
a seat in parliament. Nevertheless, he exerted his pen with 
prodigious activity during the election of 1809; and Lord 
Holland declared that he had filled the booksellers' shops with 
articles and pamphlets. The result was small. No seat was 
placed at his disposal, and he was too poor to contest a borough. 
He was fortunate at this time to ally himself with the movement 
for the abolition of the slave-trade, and he remained through 
life not only faithful, but passionately attached to the cause. 
Indeed, one of the first measures he carried in the House of 
Commons was a bill to make the slave-trade felony, and he had 
the happiness, as chancellor of England, to take a part in the 
final measure of negro emancipation throughout the colonies. 

Previous to his entering on practice at the English bar, 
Brougham had acquired some knowledge of international law, 
and some experience of the prize courts. This circumstance 
probably led to his being retained as counsel for the Liverpool 
merchants who had petitioned both Houses of Parliament against 
the Orders in Council. Brougham conducted the lengthened 
inquiry which took place at the bar of the House, and he displayed 
on this occasion a mastery over the principles of political economy 
and international law which at that time was rare. Nevertheless, 
he was unsuccessful, and it was not until 181 2, when he was 
himself in parliament, that he resumed his attack on the Orders 
in Council, and ultimately conquered. It was considered in- 
expedient and impossible that a man so gifted, and so popular 
as Brougham had now become, should remain out of parliament, 
and by the influence of Lord Holland the duke of Bedford was 
induced to return him to the House of Commons for the borough 
of Camelford. He took his seat early in 1810, having made a 
vow that he would not open his mouth for a month. The vow 
was kept, but ktpt for that month only. He spoke in March 
in condemnation of the conduct of Lord Chatham at Walcheren, 



and he went on speaking for the rest of his life. In four months> 
such was the position he had acquired in the House that he was 
regarded as a candidate for the leadership of the Liberal party, 
then in the feeble hands of George Ponsonby. However, the 
Tories continued in power. Parliament was dissolved. Camel- 
ford passed into other hands. Brougham was induced to stand 
for Liverpool, with Thomas Creevey against Canning and 
General Gascoyne. The Liberals were defeated by a large 
majority, and what made the sting of defeat more keen was 
that Creevey retained his old seat for Thetford, while Brougham 
was left out in the cold. 

He remained out of parliament during the four eventful years 
from 1812 to 1816, which witnessed the termination of the war, 
and he did not conceal his resentment against the Whigs. But 
in the years he spent out of parliament occurrences took place 
which gave ample employment to his bustling activity, and led 
the way to one of the most important passages of his life. He 
had been introduced in 1809 to the princess of Wales (afterwards 
Queen Caroline). But it was not till 18 12 that the princess 
consulted him on her private affairs, after the rupture between 
the prince regent and the Whigs had become more decided. 
From that time, Brougham, in conjunction with Samuel Whit- 
bread, became one of the princess's chief advisers; he was 
attached to her service, not so much from any great liking or 
respect for herself, as from an indignant sense of the wrongs and 
insults inflicted upon her by her husband. Brougham strongly 
opposed her departure from England in 1814, as well as her 
return in 1820 on the accession of George IV. 

In 181 6 he had again been returned to parliament for Winchel- 
sea, a borough of the earl of Darlington, and he instantly resumed 
a commanding position in the House of Commons. He succeeded 
in defeating the continuance of the income-tax ; he distinguished 
himself as an advocate for the education of the people; and on the 
death of Romilly he took up with ardour the great work of the 
reform of the law. Nothing exasperated the Tory party more 
than the select committee which sat, with Brougham in the 
chair, in 18 16 and the three following years, to investigate the 
state of education of the poor in the metropolis. But he was as 
far as ever from obtaining the leadership of the party to which 
he aspired. Indeed, as was pointed out by Lord Lansdowne in 
1 8 1 7 , the opposi tion had no recogn ized efficient leaders ; their war- 
fare was carried on in separate courses, indulging their own tastes 
and tempers, without combined action. Nor was Brougham 
much more successful at the bar. The death of George III. 
suddenly changed this state of things. Queen Caroline at once, 
in April 1820, appointed Brougham her attorney -general, and 
Denman her solicitor-general; and they immediately took their 
rank in court accordingly; this was indeed the sole act of royal 
authority on the part of the unhappy queen. In July Queen 
Caroline came from St Omer to England; ministers sent down 
to both Houses of Parliament the secret evidence which they had 
long been collecting against her; and a bill was brought into the 
House of Lords for the deposition of the queen, and the dissolu- 
tion of the king's marriage. The defence of the queen was 
conducted by Brougham, assisted by Denman, Lushington and 
Wilde, with equal courage and ability. His conduct of the 
defence was most able, and he wound up the proceedings with a 
speech of extraordinary power and effect. The peroration was 
said to have been written and rewritten by him seventeen times. 
At moments of great excitement such declamation may be of 
value, and in 1820 it was both heard and read with enthusiasm. 
But to the calmer judgment of later generations this celebrated 
oration seems turgid and overstrained. Such immense popular 
sympathy prevailed on the queen's behalf, that the ministry did 
not proceed with the bill in the Commons, and the result was a 
virtual triumph for the queen. 

This victory over the court and the ministry raised Henry 
Brougham at once to the pinnacle of fame. He shared the 
triumph of the queen. His portrait was in every shop window. 
A piece of plate was presented to him, paid for by a penny 
subscription of peasants and mechanics. He refused to acxept 
a sum of £4000 which the queen herself placed at his disposal; 



65+ 



BROUGHAM, LORD 



he took no more than the usual fees of counsel, while his salary 
as Her Majesty's attorney-general remained unpaid, until it 
was discharged by the treasury after her death. But from that 
moment his fortune was made at the bar. His practice on the 
northern circuit quintupled. One of his finest speeches was a 
defence of a Durham newspaper which had attacked the clergy 
for refusing to allow the bells of churches to be tolled on the 
queen's death; and by the admission of Lord Campbell, a rival 
advocate and an unfriendly critic, he rose suddenly to a position 
unexampled in the profession. The meanness of George IV. and 
of Lord Eldon refused him the silk gown to which his position 
at the bar entitled him, and for some years he led the circuit 
as an outer barrister, to the great loss of the senior members of 
the circuit, who could only be employed against him. His 
practice rose to about £7000 a year, but it was again falling off 
before he became chancellor. 

It may here be mentioned that in 1825 the first steps were 
taken, under the auspices of Brougham, for the establishment 
of a university in London, absolutely free from all religious or 
sectarian distinctions. In 1827 he contributed to found the 
" Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge " — an associa- 
tion which gave an immense impulse to sound popular literature. 
Its first publication was an essay on the " Pleasures and Advant- 
ages of Science " written by himself. In the following year 
(1828) he delivered his great speech on law reform, which lasted 
six hours, in a thin and exhausted House, — a marvellous effort, 
embracing every part of the existing system of judicature. 

The death of Canning, the failure of Lord Goderich, and the 
accession of the duke of Wellington to power, again changed the 
aspect of affairs. The progress of the movement for parlia- 
mentary reform had numbered the days of the Tory government. 
At the general election of 1830 the county of York spontaneously 
returned Brougham to the new House of Commons as their 
representative. The parliament met in November. Brougham's 
first act was , to move for leave to bring in a bill to amend the 
representation of the people; but before the debate came on the 
government was defeated on another question; the duke re- 
signed, and Earl Grey was commanded by William IV. to form 
an administration. 

Amongst the difficulties of the new premier and the Whig party 
were the position and attitude of Brougham. He was not the 
leader of any party, and'had no personal following in the House of 
Commons. Moreover, he himself had repeatedly declared that 
nothing would induce him to exchange his position as an inde- 
pendent member of parliament for any office, however great. 
On the day following the resignation of the Tory government, 
he reluctantly consented to postpone for one week his motion on 
parliamentary reform. The attorney-generalship was offered to 
him and indignantly refused. He himself affirms that he desired 
to be master of the rolls, which would have left him free to sit in 
the House of Commons. But this was positively interdicted by 
the king, and objected to by Lord Althorp, who declared that he 
could not undertake to lead the House with so insubordinate a 
follower behind him. But as it was impossible to leave Brougham 
out of the ministry, it was determined to offer Km the chancellor- 
ship. Brougham himself hesitated, or affected'.' to hesitate, but 
finally yielded to the representations of Lord Grey and Lord 
Althorp. On the 22nd of November the great seal was delivered 
to him by the king, and he was raised to the peerage as Baron 
Brougham and Vaux. His chancellorship lasted exactly four years. 

Lord Brougham took a most active and prominent part in all 
the great measures promoted by Grey's government, and the 
passing of the Reform Bill was due in a great measure to the 
vigour with which he defended it. But success developed traits 
which had hitherto been kept in the background. His manner 
became dictatorial and he exhibited a restless eccentricity, and a 
passion for interfering with every department of state, which 
alarmed the king. By his insatiable activity he had contrived 
to monopolize the authority and popularity of the government, 
and notwithstanding the immense majority by which it was 
supported in the reformed parliament, a crisis was not long in 
arriving. Lord Grey resigned, but very much by Brougham's 



exertions the cabinet was reconstructed under Lord Melbourne, 
and he appeared to think that his own influence in it would be 
increased. But the irritability of his temper and the egotism of 
his character made it impossible for his colleagues to work with 
him, and the extreme mental excitement under which he laboured 
at this time culminated during a journey to Scotland in a behaviour 
so extravagant, that it gave the final stroke to the confidence of 
the king. At Lancaster he joined the bar-mess, and spent the 
night in an orgy. In a country house he lost the great seal, and 
found it again in a game of blindman's-buff. At Edinburgh, 
in spite of the coldness which had sprung up between himself and 
the Grey family, he was present at a banquet given to the late 
premier, and delivered a harangue on his own services and his 
public virtue. All this time he continued to correspond with the 
king in a strain which created the utmost irritation and amaze- 
ment at Windsor. 

Shortly after the meeting of parliament in November the king 
dismissed his ministers. The chancellor, who had dined at 
Holland House, called on Lord Melbourne on his way home, and 
learned the intelligence. Melbourne made him promise that he 
would keep it a secret until the morrow, but the moment he 
quitted the ex-premier he sent a paragraph to The Times relating 
the occurrence, and adding that " the queen had done it all." 
That statement, which was totally unfounded, was the last act 
of his official life. The Peel ministry, prematurely and rashly 
summoned to power, was of no long duration, and Brougham 
naturally took an active part in overthrowing it. Lord Melbourne 
was called upon in April 1835 to reconstruct the Whig government 
with his former colleagues. But, formidable as he might be as an 
opponent, the Whigs had learned by experience that Brougham 
was even more dangerous to them as an ally, and with one accord 
they resolved that he should not hold the great seal or any other 
office. The great seal was put in commission, to divert for a time 
his resentment, and leave him, if he chose, to entertain hopes of 
recovering it. These hopes, however, were soon dissipated; 
and although the late chancellor assumed an independent position 
in the House of Lords, and even affected to protect the govern- 
ment, his resentment against his " noble friends " soon broke 
out with uncontrolled vehemence. Throughout the session of 
1835 his activity was undiminished. . Bills for every imaginable 
purpose were thrown by him on the table of the House, and it 
stands recorded in Hansard that he made no less than 221 re- 
ported speeches in parliament in that year. But in the course of 
the vacation a heavier blow was struck: Lord Cottenham was 
made lord chancellor. Brougham's daring and arrogant spirit 
sank for a time under the shock, and during the year 1836 he 
never spoke in parliament. Among the numerous expedients 
resorted to in order to keep his name before the public, was a 
false report of his death by a carriage accident, sent up from 
Westmorland in 1839. He was accused, with great probability, 
of being himself the author of the report. Such credence did it 
obtain that all the newspapers of October 22, excepting The 
Times, had obituary notices. However,for more than thirty years 
after his fall he continued to take an active part in the judicial 
business of the House of Lords, and in its debates; but it would 
have been better for his reputation if he had died earlier. His 
reappearance in parliament on the accession of Queen Victoria 
was marked by sneers at the court, and violent attacks on the 
Whigs for their loyal and enthusiastic attachment to their young 
sovereign; and upon the outbreak of the insurrection in Canada, 
and the miscarriage of Lord Durham's mission, he overwhelmed 
his former colleagues, and especially Lord Glenelg, with a torrent 
of invective and sarcasm, equal in point of oratory to the greatest 
of his earlier speeches. Indeed, without avowedly relinquishing 
his political principles, Brougham estranged himself from the 
whole party by which those principles were defended; and his 
conduct in general during the years following his loss of office 
revealed his character in a very unfavourable light. He con- 
tinued, however, to render judicial services in the privy council, 
and the House of Lords. The privy council, especially when 
hearing appeals from the colonies, India, and the courts maritime 
and ecclesiastical was his favourite tribunal; its vast range of 



BROUGHTON, H.— BROUGHTON, LORD 



(>5S 



jurisdiction, varied by questions of foreign and international law, 
suited his discursive genius. He had remodelled the judicial 
committee in 1833, and it still remains one of the most useful of 
his creations. 

In the year i860 a second patent was conferred upon him by 
Queen Victoria, with a reversion of his peerage to his youngest 
brother, William Brougham (d. 1886). The preamble of this 
patent stated that this unusual mark of honour was conferred 
upon him by the crown as an acknowledgment of the great 
services he had rendered, more especially in promoting the 
abolition of slavery, and the emancipation of the negro race. 
The peerage was thus perpetuated in a junior branch of the family, 
Lord Brougham himself being without an heir. He had married 
in 1821 Mrs Spalding (d. 1865), daughter of Thomas Eden, and 
had two daughters, the survivor of whom died in 1839. 
Brougham's last days were passed at Cannes, in the south of 
France. An accident having attracted his attention to the spot 
about the year 1838, when it was little more than a fishing village 
on a picturesque coast, he bought there a tract of land and built 
on it. His choice and his example made it the sanatorium of 
Europe. He died there on the 7th of May 1868, in the ninetieth 
year of his age. 

The verdict of the time has proved that there was nothing of 
permanence, and little of originality in the prodigious efforts of 
Brougham's genius. He filled the office of chancellor during 
times burning with excitement, and he himself embodied and 
expressed the fervour of the times. He affected at first to treat 
the business of the court of chancery as a light affair, though in 
truth he had to work hard to master the principles of equity, of 
which he had no experience. His manner in court was desultory 
and dictatorial. Sometimes he would crouch in his chair, muffled 
in his wig and robes, like a man asleep; at other times he would 
burst into restless activity, writing letters, working problems, 
interrupting counsel. But upon the whole Brougham was a just 
and able judge, though few of his decisions are cited as landmarks 
of the law. 

As a parliamentary figure Brougham's personality excited 
for many years an immense amount of public interest, now 
somewhat hard to comprehend. His boundless command of 
language, his animal spirits and social powers, his audacity and 
well-stored memory enabled him to dominate the situation. 
His striking and almost grotesque personal appearance, added 
to the effect of his voice and manner — a tall disjointed frame, 
with strong bony limbs and hands, that seemed to interpret the 
power of his address; strange angular motions of the arms; 
the incessant jerk of his harsh but expressive features; the 
modulations of his voice, now thundering in the loudest tones of 
indignation, now subdued to a whisper — all contributed to give 
him the magical influence such as is excited by a great actor. 
But his eccentricity rose at times to the verge of insanity; and 
with all his powers he lacked the moral elevation which inspires 
confidence and wins respect.. 

The activity of Lord Brougham's pen was only second to the 
volubility of his tongue. He carried on a vast and incessant 
correspondence of incredible extent. For thirty years he con- 
tributed largely to the Edinburgh Review, and he continued 
to write in that journal even after he held the great seal. The 
best of his writings, entitled " Sketches of the Statesmen of the 
time of George III.", first appeared in the Review. These were 
followed by the " Lives of Men of Letters and Science, " of the 
same period. Later in life he edited Paley's Natural Theology; 
and he published a work on political philosophy, besides in- 
numerable pamphlets and letters to public men on the events of 
the day. He published an incorrect translation of Demosthenes' 
Be Corona. A novel entitled Albert Lunel was attributed to him. 
A fragment of the History of England under the House of Lancaster 
employed his retirement. In 1838 was published an edition of 
his speeches in four volumes, elaborately corrected by himself. 
The last of his works was his posthumous Autobiography. Am- 
bitious as he was of literary fame, and jealous of the success 
of other authors, he has failed to obtain any lasting place in 
English literature. His style was slovenly, involved and in- 



correct; and his composition bore marks of haste and careless- 
ness, and nowhere shows any genuine originality of thought. 
The collected edition of his works and speeches carefully revised 
by himself (Edinburgh, 1857 and 1872) is the best. His Auto- 
biography is of some value from the original letters with which 
it is interspersed. But Lord Brougham's memory was so much 
impaired when he began to write his recollections that no 
reliance can be placed on hjs statements, and the work abounds 
in manifest errors. Nor was his regard for truth at any time 
unimpeachable, and the accounts which he gave of more than one 
transaction in which he played a prominent part were found on 
investigation to be unfounded. 

The best modern account of Brougham is J. B. Atlay's, in his 
Victorian Chancellors (1906) ; Lord Campbell's, in Lives of the 
Chancellors, is spiteful, and by an unfriendly though well-informed 
critic; the Rev. W. Hunt's judicious and careful biography in the 
V.N.B. is somewhat lacking in colour; Henry Reeve's article in the 
gth ed. of the Ency. Brit., which is frequently drawn upon above, 
now requires a good many corrections in points of fact and per- 
spective, but gives a brilliant picture by an appreciative critic, much 
" behind the scenes." See also references in the Greville Memoirs 
and Creevey Papers; S. Walpole, History of England (1890); J. A. 
Roebuck, History of the Whig Ministry (1852); Lord Holland, 
Memoirs of the Whig Party (1854) ; Brougham and his Early Friends; 
Letters to James Loch, 1798-1809 (3 vols., London, 1908, privately 
printed). 

BROUGHTON, HUGH (1549-1612), English scholar and divine, 
was born at Owlbury, Bishop's Castle, Shropshire, in 1549. 
He was educated by Bernard Gilpin at Houghton-le-Spring and 
at Cambridge, where he became fellow of St John's and then of 
Christ's, and took orders. Here he laid the foundation of the 
Hebrew scholarship for which he was afterwards so distinguished. 
From Cambridge he went to London, where his eloquence gained 
him many and powerful friends, In 1588 he published his first 
work, " a little book of great pains," entitled A Concent of 
Scripture. This work, dealing with biblical chronology and 
textual criticism, was attacked at both universities, and the 
author was obliged to defend it in a series of lectures. In 1589 
he went to Germany, where he frequently engaged in discussions 
both with Romanists and with the learned Jews whom he met at 
Frankfort and elsewhere. In 1591 he returned to England, but 
his Puritan leanings incurred the hostility of Whitgif t. Accord- 
ingly in 1592 he once more went abroad, and cultivated the 
acquaintance of the principal scholars of Europe, including 
Scaligeri and Rabbi Elias. Such was the esteem in which he was 
held, even by his opponents, that he might have had a cardinal's 
hat if he had been willing to change his faith. In 1599 he pub- 
lished his " Explication " of the article " He descended into 
hell," in which he maintained that Hades means simply the abode 
of departed spirits, not the place of torment. On the accession 
of James he returned to England; but not being engaged to 
co-operate in the new translation of the Bible (though he had for 
some years planned a similar work), he retired to Middleburg in 
Holland, where he preached to the English congregation. In 
1611 he returned to England, where he died on the 4th of August 
1612. 

Some of his works were collected and published in a large folio 
volume in 1662, with a sketch of his life by John Lightfoot, but 
many of his theological MSS. remain still unedited in the British 
Museum. 

BROUGHTON, JOHN CAM HOBHOUSE, Baron (1 786-1869), 
English writer and politician, was the eldest son of Sir Benjamin 
Hobhouse, Bart., by his wife Charlotte, daughter of Samuel Cam 
of Chantry House, Bradford, Wiltshire. Born at Bristol on 
the 27th of June 1786, he was educated at Westminster school 
and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated in 1808. 
He took the Hulsean prize in 1808 for his Essay on the Origin and 
Intention of Sacrifices. At Cambridge he founded the " Whig 
Club," and the " Amicable Society," and became very intimate 
with Byron, who accompanied him on a tour in Spain, Greece 
and Turkey in 1809. Hobhouse was present at the battle of 
Dresden in August 1813, and, following the allied army into 
France, saw Louis XVIII. enter Paris in May 1814. He was 
again in Paris after the return of Napoleon from Elba, and 
showed his dislike of the Bourbons and his sympathy with 



6 5 6 



BROUGHT Y FERRY— BROUWER 



Bonaparte by writing in 1816 a pamphlet entitled The substance 
of some lettet s written by an Englishman resident in Paris during 
the last reign of the emperor Napoleon. This caused some offence 
in England and more' in France, and the French translation was 
seized by the government and both translator and printer were 
imprisoned. A further period of travel with Byron followed, 
and at this time Hobhouse wrote some notes to the fourth canto 
x>f Childe Harold. This canto was afterwards dedicated to him, 
and a revised edition of a part of his notes entitled Historical 
illustrations of the fourth canto of " Childe Harold " containing 
dissertations on the ruins of Rome and an essay on Italian literature, 
was published in 1818. In February 1819 Hobhouse was the 
Radical candidate at a by-election for the representation of the 
city of Westminster, but he failed to secure election. He had 
already gained some popularity by writing in favour of reform, 
and in 1819 he issued A defence of the People in reply to Lord 
Erskine's " Two Defences of the Whigs," followed by A trifling 
mistake in Thomas, Lord Erskine's recent preface. The House of 
Commons declared this latter pamphlet a breach of privilege; 
its author was arrested on the 14th of December 1819, and in 
spite of an appeal to the court of king's bench he remained in 
custody until the end of the following February. But this 
proceeding only increased his' popularity, and at the general 
election of 1820 he was returned for Westminster. Hobhouse 
shared Byron's enthusiasm for the liberation of Greece; after 
the poet's death in 1824 he proved his will, and superintended 
the arrangements for his funeral. In parliament he proved a 
valuable recruit to the party of reform; and having succeeded 
his father as 2nd baronet in 1831, was appointed secretary at war 
in the ministry of Earl Grey in February 1832, and was made 
a privy councillor. He effected some reforms and economies 
during his tenure of this office, but, unable to carry out all 
his wishes, became chief secretary for Ireland in March 1833. 
He had only held this post for a few weeks when, in consequence 
of his refusal to vote with the government against the abolition 
of the house and window tax, he resigned both his office and his 
seat in parliament. At the subsequent election he was defeated, 
but joined the cabinet as first commissioner of woods and forests 
when Lord Melbourne took office in July 1834, and about the 
same time was returned at a by-election as one of the members 
for Nottingham. In Melbourne's government of 1835 ne was 
president of the board of control, in which position he strongly 
supported the Indian policy of Lord Auckland; he returned to the 
same office in July 1846 as a member of Lord John Russell's 
cabinet; and in February 1851 he went to the House of Lords 
as Baron Broughton of Broughton Gyfford. He left office when 
Russell resigned in February 1852, and took little part in political 
life, being mainly occupied in literary pursuits and in correspond- 
ence. He died in London on the 3rd of June 1869. 

He had married in July 1828 Lady Julia Tomlinson Hay, 
daughter of George, 7th marquess of Tweeddale, by whom he 
had three daughters, but being without heir male the barony 
lapsed on his death, the baronetcy passing to his nephew, 
Charles Parry Hobhouse. Lord Broughton was a partner in 
Whi thread's brewery, a fellow of the Royal Society, and one of 
the founders of the Royal Geographical Society. He was 
responsible for the passing of the Vestry Act of 1831, and is said 
to have first used the phrase " his majesty's opposition." He 
was a good classical scholar, and although not eloquent, an able 
debater. In addition to the works already enumerated he wrote 
4 journey through Albania and other provinces of Turkey in 
Europe and Asia to Constantinople during the years i8oq and 1810 
(London, 1813), revised edition (London, 1855); and Italy: 
Remarks made in Several Visits from the Year 1816 to 1854 
(London, 1859). A collection of his diaries, correspondence 
and memoranda is in the British Museum. 

See T. Moore, Life of Lord Byron (London, 1837-1840); Greville 
Memoirs (London, 1896); Dictionary of National Biography, vol. 
iticvii. (London, 1891); The Times, June 4, 1869; Spencer Walpole, 
History of England (London, 1890). Broughton also wrote Recollec- 
tions of a Long Life, printed privately in r865, and in 1909 published 
with additions in 2 vols, edited by his daughter, Lady, Dorchester, 
with a preface by the earl of Rosebery. 



BROUGHTY FERRY, a municipal and police burgh, seaport 
and watering-place of Forfarshire, Scotland, on the Firth of Tay, 
4 m. E. of Dundee by the North British railway. Pop. (1901) 
10,484. The name is a corruption of Brugh or Burgh Tay, in 
allusion to the fortress standing on the rock that juts into the 
Firth. It is believed that a stronghold has occupied this site 
since Pictish times. The later castle, built in 1498, fell into the 
hands of the English in 1547 and was held by them for three 
years. Gradually growing more or less ruinous it was acquired 
by government in 1855, repaired, strengthened and converted 
into a Tay defence, mounting several heavy guns. Owing to its 
healthy and convenient situation, Broughty Ferry has become 
a favourite residence of Dundee merchants. Fishery and shipping 
are carried on to a limited extent. Before the erection of the 
Tay Bridge the town was the scene of much traffic, as the railway 
ferry from Tayport was then the customary access to Dundee 
from the south. Monifieth (pop. 2134), 2j m. north-east of 
Broughty Ferry, with a station on the North British railway, is 
noted for its golf links. About 2 m. north rises the conical hill 
of Laws (400 ft. high) , on the top of which are the remains of a 
vitrified fort, 390 ft. long by 198 ft. in breadth. 

BROUSSAIS, FRANCOIS JOSEPH VICTOR (1772-1838), 
French physician, was borri at St Malo on the 1 7th of December 
1772. From his father, who was also a physician, he received 
his first instructions in medicine, and he studied for some years 
at the college of Dinan. At the age of seventeen he entered one 
of the newly-rformed republican regiments, but ill-health com- 
pelled him to withdraw after two years. He resumed his medical 
studies, and then obtained an appointment as surgeon in the navy. 
In 1799 he proceeded to Paris, wherein 1803 he graduated as M.D. 
In 1805 he again joined the army in a professional capacity, and 
served in Germany and Holland. Returning to Paris in 1808 
he published his Histoire des phlegmasies ou inflammations 
chroniques; then left again for active service in Spain. In 1814 
he returned to Paris, and was appointed assistant-professor to 
the military hospital of the Val-de-Grace, where he first pro- 
mulgated his peculiar doctrines on the relation between " life " 
and " stimulus," and on the physiological interdependence and 
sympathies of the various organs. His lectures were attended 
by great numbers of students, who received with the utmost 
enthusiasm the new theories which he propounded. In 1816 he 
published his Examen de la doctrine medicate gSniralement adoptee, 
which drew down upon its author the hatred of the whole medical 
faculty of Paris; but by degrees his doctrines triumphed, and 
in 183 1 he was appointed professor of general pathology in the 
academy of medicine. In 1828 he published a work De I'irrita- 
lion et de la folie, and towards the end of his life he attracted 
large audiences by his lectures on phrenology. He died at 
Vitry-sur-Seine on the 17th of November 1838. 

BROUSSONET, PIERRE MARIE AUGUSTE (1761-1807), 
French naturalist,was born at Montpellier on the 28th of February 
1 76 1, and was educated for the medical profession. Visiting 
England, he was admitted in 1872 an honorary member of the 
Royal Society, and in the same year published at London the 
first part of his work on fishes, Ichthyologiae Decas I, material 
for which was communicated to him by Sir Joseph Banks. On 
his return to Paris he was appointed perpetual secretary to the 
Society of Agriculture, and in 1789 became a member of the 
National Assembly. Under the convention he had to leave 
Paris, and after some dangers he made his way to Madrid. The 
enmity of the French emigrants, however, drove him from Spain, 
and afterwards from Lisbon, but at last he found a refuge in 
Morocco as physician to an embassy sent out by the United 
States. Later he obtained permission from the Directory to 
return to France, and in 1805 was appointed professor of botany 
at Montpellier, where he died on the 17th of January 1807. 

BROUWER, or Brauwer, ADRIAN (1608-1640), Dutch 
painter, was born at Haarlem, of very humble parents, who 
bound him apprentice to the painter Frans Hals. Brouwer had 
an admirable eye for colour, and much spirit in design; and 
these gifts his master appears to have turned to his own profit, 
while his pupil was half starved. As the result of this ungenerous 



BROWN, C. B.— BROWN, FORD MADOX 



6 S7 



treatment, Brouwer was frequently brought intD low company 
and dissipated scenes, which he delineated with great spirit and 
vivid colouring in his pictures. The unfortunate artist died in 
a hospital at Antwerp at the early age of thirty-two, consequently 
his works are few and rarely met with. The largest collection 
cf his masterpieces is in the Pinakothek at Munich. 

BROWN, CHARLES BROCKDEN (1771-1810), American 
novelist, was born of Quaker parents in Philadelphia, on the 
17th of January 1771. Of delicate constitution and retiring 
habits, he early devoted himself to study; his principal amuse- 
ment was the invention of ideal architectural designs, devised 
on the most extensive and elaborate scale. This characteristic 
talent for construction subsequently assumed the shape of 
Utopian projects for perfect commonwealths, and at a later 
period of a series of novels distinguished by the ingenuity and 
consistent evolution of the plot. The transition between these 
intellectual phases is marked by a juvenile romance entitled 
Carsol, not published until after the author's death, which 
professes to depict an imaginary community, and shows how 
thoroughly the young American was inspired by Godwin and 
Mary Wollstonecraft, whose principal writings had recently 
made their appearance. From the latter he derived the idea 
of his next work, The Dialogue of Alcuin (1797), an enthusiastic 
but inexperienced essay on the question of woman's rights and 
liberties. From Godwin he learned his terse style, condensed 
to a fault, but too laconic for eloquence or modulation, and the 
art of developing a plot from a single psychological problem or 
mysterious circumstance. The novels which he now rapidly 
produced offer the strongest affinity to Caleb Williams, and if 
inferior to that remarkable work in subtlety of mental analysis, 
greatly surpass it in affluence of invention and intensity of 
poetical feeling. All are wild and weird in conception, with 
incidents bordering on the preternatural, yet the limit of possi- 
bility is never transgressed. In Wieland; or the Transformation 
(1798), the first and most striking, a seemingly inexplicable 
mystery is resolved into a case of ventriloquism. Arthur Mervyn; 
or Memoirs of the Year 1793 (1798-1800), is remarkable for the 
description of the epidemic of yellow fever in Philadelphia. Edgar 
Huntly (Philadelphia, 1801), a romance rich in local colouring, 
is remarkable for the effective use made of somnambulism, and 
anticipates Cooper's introduction of the American Indian into 
fiction. Ormond (1799) is less powerful, but contains one 
character, Constantia Dudley, which excited the enthusiastic 
admiration of Shelley. Two subsequent novels, Clara Howard 
(1801) and Jane Talbot (1804) , dealing with ordinary life, proved 
failures, and Brown betook himself to compiling a general 
system of geography, editing a periodical, and an annual register, 
and writing political pamphlets. He died of consumption on 
the 22nd of February 1810. He is depicted by his biographer 
as the purest and most amiable of men, and in spite of a certain 
formality, due perhaps to his Quaker education, the statement 
is borne out by his correspondence. 

The life of Charles Brockden Brown was written by his friend 
William Dunlap (Philadelphia, 1815). See also William H. Prescott, 
Biographical and Critical Miscellanies (New York, 1845). His works 
in 6 vols, were published at Philadelphia in 1857 with a " life," 
and in a limited and more elaborate edition (1887). 

BROWN, FORD MADOX (1821-1893), English painter, was 
born at Calais on the 16th of April 182 1. His father was Ford 
Brown, a retired purser in the navy; his mother, Caroline 
Madox, of an old Kentish family. His paternal grandfather 
was Dr John Brown, who established the Brunonian Theory of 
Medicine. Ford Madox Brown was the only child of his parents, 
save for a daughter who died young. In childhood he was 
shifted about a good deal between France and England; and 
having shown from the age of six or seven a turn for drawing 
he was taken, when fourteen years old, and with meagre acquire- 
ments in the way of general tuition, to Bruges, and placed under 
the instruction of Gregorius, a pupil of David. His principal 
instructor, however, from about 1837, was Baron Wappers, of 
Antwerp, then regarded as a great light of the Belgian school. 
From him the youth learned the technique not only of oil painting 
but of various other branches of art. At a very early age Brown 



attained a remarkable degree of force in drawing and painting, 
as attested by an extant oil-portrait of his father, done at an age 
•not exceeding fifteen. His first composition, towards 1836, 
represented a blind beggar and his child; his first exhibited 
work, 1837, was "Job on the Ash-heap"; the first exhibited 
work in London (at the Royal Academy, 1840), " The Giaour's 
Confession," from Byron's poem. Both his parents died before 
1840, leaving to the young painter a moderate competence, 
which soon was materially reduced. In 1840 Brown completed 
a large picture, " The Execution of Mary, queen of Scots," 
strong in dramatic effect and in handling, with rather sombre 
colour; from this time forth he must be regarded as a proficient 
artist, independent in his point of view and strenuous in execu- 
tion. He contributed to the cartoon competitions, 1844 and 
1845, for the Houses of Parliament — " Adam and Eve after the 
Fall," "The Body of Harold brought to William the Conqueror," 
and " The Spirit of Justice." These highly remarkable cartoons 
passed not wholly unobserved, but not one of them obtained a 
prize. The years 1840 10-1845 were passed in Paris, London 
and Rome: towards the middle of 1846 Brown settled perman- 
ently in London. In 1841 he had married his cousin Elizabeth 
Bromley, who died of consumption in 1846, leaving a daughter, 
Lucy, who in 1874 became the wife of William M. Rossetti. Not 
long after being left a widower, Brown took a second wife, Emma 
Hill, who figures in many of his pictures. She had two children 
who grew up: Catherine, who married Dr Franz Hueffer, the 
musical scholar and critic, and Oliver, who died in 1874 in his 
twentieth year. All three children showed considerable ability 
in painting, and Oliver in romance as well. The second Mrs 
Brown died in 1890. 

The most marked distinction of Brown as an artist may be 
defined as vigorous invention of historic or dramatic scenes, 
carried out with a great regard to individuality in the personages, 
expressions and accessories of incident and detail, not excluding 
the familiar, the peculiar and the semi-grotesque, when these 
seem to subserve the general intent. Owing, however, to his 
association with artists of the so-called " pre-Raphaelite " 
movement, (which began late in 1848), and especially with 
Dante Gabriel Rossetti, who received some training in his 
studio in the spring of that year, he has been regarded sometimes 
as the precursor or initiator of this movement, and sometimes 
as a direct co-operator in it. His claim to be regarded as a 
precursor or initiator is not strong; though it is true that even 
before 1 841 he had pondered the theory (not then much in vogue) 
that a picture ought to present the veritable light and shade 
proper to some one moment in the day, and his " Manfred on the 
Jungfrau " (1841) exemplifies this principle to some extent; 
it reappears in his very large picture of " Chaucer at the Court 
of Edward III." (now in the public gallery of Sydney, Australia), 
which, although projected in 1845, was not brought to com- 
pletion until 1851. As to becoming a direct co-operator in the 
pre-Raphaelite movement, he did not join the " Brotherhood," 
though it would have been open to him to do so; but for some 
years bis works exhibited a marked influence derived from the 
movement, not on the whole to their clear advantage. The 
principal pictures of this class are: " The Pretty Baa-lambs "; 
"Work" (a street scene at Hampstead); and "The Last of 
England " (an emigration subject, one of his most excellent 
achievements): dating between 185 1 and 1863. "Christ 
Washing Peter's Feet " (now in the National Gallery of British 
Art) comes within the same range of dates, and is a masterly 
work; here the pre-Raphaelite influence is less manifest. 
Altogether it may be averred that the conception and introduc- 
tion of the pre-Raphaelite scheme, such as it appeared to the 
public eye in 1849 and 1850, belong to Millais, Holman Hunt 
and Rossetti, rather than to Brown. 

Other leading pictures by Brown are the following:— "Cor- 
delia at the Bedside of Lear "; " Shakespeare "; "Jacob and 
Joseph's Coat "; " Elijah and the Widow's Son "; "Cordelia's 
Portion"; "The Entombment"; "Romeo and Juliet" 
(the parting on the balcony); "Don Juan and Haidee "; 
"Cromwell on his Farm"; "Cromwell, Protector of the 



6 5 8 



BROWN, F.— BROWN, G. 



Vaudois ": — covering the period from 1849 to 1877. " Sardan- 
apalus and Myrrha." begun within the same period, was finished 
later. He produced, moreover, a great number of excellent 
cartoons for stained glass, being up to 1874 a member of the 
firm of decorative art, Morris, Marshall, Faulkner and Co. He 
also executed, in colours or in crayons, various portraits, including 
his own. From 1878 he was almost engrossed by work which he 
undertook for the town hall of Manchester, and which entailed 
his living for some few years in that city — twelve large wall 
paintings, some of them done in a modified form of the Gambier- 
Parry process, and others in oils on canvas applied to the wall 
surface. They present a compendium of the history of Manchester 
and its district, from the building of the Roman camp at Man- 
cunium to the experimental work of Dalton in elaborating the 
atomic theory. This is an extremely fine series, though with 
some diversity of individual merit in the paintings, and is 
certainly the chief representative, in the United Kingdom, of 
any such form of artistic effort — if we leave out of count the 
works (by various painters) in the Houses of Parliament. 

Madox Brown was never a popular or highly remunerated 
artist. Up' to near middle age he went through trying straits 
in money matters; afterwards his circumstances improved, 
but he was not really well off at any time. In youth he followed 
the usual course as an exhibiting painter, but after some 
mortifications and heart-burnings he did little in this way after 
1852. He held, however, in 1865, an exhibition of his own then 
numerous paintings and designs. He also delivered a few 
lectures on fine art from time to time. From 1868 he suffered 
from gout; and this led to an attack of apoplexy, from which 
he died in London on the 6th of October 1893. He was a man 
of upright, independent and honourable character, of warm 
affections, a steady and self-sacrificing friend; but he took 
offence rather readily, and viewed various persons and institu- 
tions with a degree of suspicion which may be pronounced 
excessive. He felt interest in many questions outside the range 
of his art, and, being a good and varied talker, had often some- 
thing apposite and suggestive to say about them. On more than 
one occasion he exerted himself very zealously for the benefit of 
the working classes. In politics he was a consistent Democrat, 
and on religious questions an Agnostic. 

The life of this artist has been well written by his grandson, 
Ford M. Hueffer, in a handsomely illustrated volume entitled Ford 
Madox Brown (London, 1896). This volume contains some extracts 
from Brown's diary, extending in the whole from 1847 to 1865; and 
other lengthier extracts appear in two books edited by William M. 
Rossetti — Ruskin, Rossetti, Pre-Raphaelitism (1899), and Pre- 
Raphaelite Diaries and Letters (1899). See also the Preferences in 
Art, &c, by Harry Quilter (1892), and a pamphlet, Ford Madox 
Brown (1901), by Helen Rossetti (Angeli), applicable to a collection 
of his works exhibited in the Whitechapel Art Gallery. (W. M. R.) 

BROWN, FRANCIS (1849- ), American Semitic scholar, 
was born in Hanover, New Hampshire, on the 26th of December 
1849, the son of Samuel Gilman Brown (1813-1885), president 
of Hamilton College from 1867 to 1881, and the grandson of 
Francis Brown (1784-1820), whose removal from the presidency 
of Dartmouth College and later restoration were incidental to 
the famous " Dartmouth College case." The younger Francis 
graduated from Dartmouth in 1870 and from the Union Theo- 
logical Seminary in 1877, and then studied in Berlin. In 1879 
he became instructor in biblical philology at the Union Theo- 
logical Seminary, in 1881 an associate professor of the same 
subject, and in 1890 professor of Hebrew and cognate languages. 1 
Dr Brown's published works have won him honorary degrees 
from the universities of Glasgow and Oxford, as well as from 
Dartmouth and Yale; they are, with the exception of The 
Christian Point of View (1902; with Profs. A. C. McGiffert and 
G. W. Knox), almost purely linguistic and lexical, and include 
Assyriology: its Use and Abuse in Old Testament Study (1885), 
and the important revision of Gesenius, undertaken with S. R. 
Driver and C. A. Briggs, A Hebrew and English Lexicon of the 
Old Testament (1891-1905). 

1 In 1908 he succeeded Charles Cuthbert Hall (1852-1908) as 
president of the seminary. 



BROWN, SIR GEORGE (1790-1865), British soldier, was born 
and educated in Elgin, Scotland. He obtained a commission 
in the 43rd (now 1st Bn. Oxfordshire) Light Infantry in 1806, was 
promoted lieutenant a few months later, and saw active service 
for the first time in the Mediterranean and at Copenhagen, 
1806 and 1807. The 43rd was one of the earliest arrivals in 
Spain when the Peninsular War broke out, and Brown was 
with his regiment at Vimeiro, and in the Corunna retreat. Later 
in 1809 the famous Light Division was formed, and with Crau- 
furd he was present at all the actions of 1810-1811, being severely 
wounded at Talavera; he was then promoted captain and 
attended the Staff College at Great Marlow until (late in 181 2) he 
returned to the Peninsula as a captain in the 85th. With this 
regiment he served under Major- General Lord Aylmer at the 
Nivelle and Nive, his conduct winning for him the rank of major. 
The 85th was next employed under General Robert Ross in 
America, and Brown, who received a severe wound at the action 
of Bladensburg, was promoted to a lieut.-colonelcy. At the age of 
twenty-five, with a brilliant warrecord, he received an appointment 
at the Horse Guards, and remained in London for over twenty- 
five years in various staff positions. He was made a colonel and 
K.H. in 1831, and by 1852 had arrived at the rank of lieut.- 
general and the dignity of K.C.B. At this time he was adjutant- 
general, but on the appointment of Lord Hardinge to the post 
of commander-in-chief, Brown left the Horse Guards. In 1854, 
on the despatch of a British force to the East, Sir George Brown 
was appointed to command the Light Division. This he led in 
action, and administered in camp, on Peninsular principles, 
and, whilst preserving the strictest discipline to a degree which 
came in for criticism, he made himself beloved by his men. 
At Alma he had a horse shot under him. At Inkerman he was 
wounded whilst leading the French Zouaves into action. In 
the following year, when an expedition against Kertch and the 
Russian communications was decided upon, Brown went in 
command of the British contingent. He was invalided home 
on the day of Lord Raglan's death. From March i860 to 
March 1865 he was commander-in-chief in Ireland. At the 
time of his death in 1865 he was general and G.C.B., colonel 
of the 32nd Regiment and colonel-in-chief of the Rifle Brigade. 

BROWN, GEORGE (1818-1880), Canadian journalist and 
statesman, was born in Edinburgh on the 29th of November 
1818, and was educated in his native city. With his father, 
Peter Brown (d. 1863), he emigrated to New York in 1838; and 
in 1843 they removed to Toronto, and began the publication 
of The Banner, a politico-religious paper in support of the newly 
formed Free Church of Scotland. In 1844 he began, independ- 
ently of his father, the issue of the Toronto Globe. This paper, 
at first weekly, became in 1853 a daily, and through the ability 
and energy of Brown, came to possess an almost tyrannical 
influence over the political opinion of Ontario. In 1851 he 
entered the Canadian parliament as member for Kent county. 
Though giving at first a modified support to the Reform govern- 
ment, he soon broke with it and became leader of the Radical 
or " Clear Grit " party. His attacks upon the Roman Catholic 
church and on the supposed domination in parliament of the 
French Canadian section made him very unpopular in Lower 
Canada, but in Upper Canada his power was great. Largely 
owing to his attacks, the Clergy Reserves were secularized in 1854. 
He championed the complete laicization of the schools in Ontario, 
but unsuccessfully, the Roman Catholic church maintaining 
its right to separate schools. He also fought for the repre- 
sentation by population of the two provinces in parliament, 
the Act of Union (1841) having granted an equal number of 
representatives to each. This principle of "Rep. by Pop." 
was conceded by the British North America Act (1867). In 
1858 Brown became premier of "The Short Administration," 
which was defeated and compelled to resign after an existence of 
two days. 

He was one of the earliest advocates of a federation of the 
British colonies in North America, and in 1864, to accomplish 
this end, entered into a coalition with his bitter personal and 
political opponent, Mr (afterwards Sir) John A. Macdonald. 



BROWN, H. K.— BROWN, J. 



6 59 



Largely owing to Brown's efforts, Federation was carried through 
the House, but on the 21st of December 1865 he resigned from 
the Coalition government, though continuing to support its 
Federation policy, and in 1867 he was defeated in South Ontario 
and never again sat in the House. In great measure owing to his 
energy, and in spite of much concealed opposition from the 
French-Canadians, the North- West Territories were purchased 
by the new Dominion. In December 1873 he was called to the 
Canadian senate, and in 1874 was appointed by the imperial 
government joint plenipotentiary with Sir Edward Thornton 
to negotiate a reciprocity treaty between Canada and the United 
States. The negotiations were successful, but the draft treaty 
failed to pass the United -States Senate. Soon afterwards 
Brown refused the lieutenant-governorship of Ontario, and on 
two subsequent occasions the offer of knighthood, devoting 
himself to the Globe and to a model farm at Bow Park near 
Brantford. On the 25th of March 1880 he was shot by a dis- 
charged employe, and died on the 9th of May. 

His candour, enthusiasm and open tolerance of the opinions 
of others made him many warm friends and many fierce enemies. 
He was at his best in his generous protests against all privileges, 
social, political and religious, and in the self-sacrificing patriot- 
ism which enabled him to fling aside his personal prejudices, 
and so to make Federation possible. 

See J. C. Dent, Canadian Portrait Gallery (Toronto, 1800). The 
official Life, by the Hon. Alexander Mackenzie, is decidedly partisan. 
A life by John Lewis is included in the Makers of Canada series 
(Toronto). (W. L. G.) 

BROWN, HENRY KIRKE (1814-1886), American sculptor, 
was born in Leyden, Massachusetts, on the 24th of February 
1814. He began to paint portraits while quite a boy, studied 
painting in Boston under Chester Harding, learned a little about 
modelling, and in 1836-1839 spent his summers working as a 
railroad engineer to earn enough to enable him to study further. 
He spent four years (1842-1846) in Italy; but returning to 
New York he remained distinctively American, and was never 
dominated, as were so many of the early American sculptors, 
by Italian influence. He died on the 10th of July 1886 at New- 
burgh, New York. His equestrian statues are excellent, notably 
that of General Winfield Scott (1874) in Washington, D.C., 
and one of George Washington (1856) in Union Square, New 
York City, which was the second equestrian statue made in 
the United States, following by three years that of Andrew 
Jackson in Washington by Clark Mills (1815-1883). Brown was 
one of the first in America to cast his own bronzes. Among his 
other works are: Abraham Lincoln (Union Square, New York 
City); Nathanael Greene, George Clinton, Philip Kearny, and 
Richard Stockton (all in the National Statuary Hall, Capitol, 
Washington, D.C.); De Witt Clinton and "The Angel of the 
Resurrection," both in Greenwood cemetery, New York City; 
and an " Aboriginal Hunter." 

His nephew and pupil, Henry Kirke Bush-Brown (b. 1857), 
also became prominent among American sculptors, his " Buffalo 
Hunt," equestrian statues of Generals Meade and Reynolds 
at Gettysburg, and " Justinian " in the New York appellate 
court-house, being his chief works. 

BROWN, JACOB (1775-1828), American soldier, was born of 
Quaker ancestry, in Bucks county, Pennsylvania, on the 9th 
of May 1775. From 1796 to 1798 he was engaged in surveying 
public lands in Ohio; in 1798 he settled in New York City, and 
during the period (1798-1800) when war with France seemed 
imminent he acted as military secretary to Alexander Hamilton, 
then inspector-general of the United States army. Subsequently 
he purchased a large tract of land in Jefferson county, New York, 
where he founded the town of Brownville. There he served as 
county judge, and attained the rank (1810) of brigadier-general 
in the state militia. On the outbreak of the second war with 
Great Britain (1812) he was placed in command of the New York 
state frontier from Oswego to Lake St Francis (near Cornwall, 
Ontario) and repelled the British attacks on Ogdensburg (October 
4, 181 2) and Sackett's Harbor (May 29, 1813). In July 1813 
he was commissioned brigadier-general in the regular army, and 



in January 1814 he was promoted major-general and succeeded 
General James Wilkinson in command of the forces at Niagara. 
Early in the summer of 18 14 he undertook offensive operations, 
and his forces occupied Fort Erie, and, on the 5th of July, at 
Chippawa, Ontario, defeated the British under General Phineas 
Riall (c. 1769-1851). On the 25th of July, with General Winfield 
Scott, he fought a hotly contested, but indecisive, battle with the 
British under General Gordon Drummond(i 771-1854) atLundy's 
Lane, where he was twice wounded. After the war he remained 
in the army, of which he was the commanding general from 
March 1821 until his death at Washington, D.C., on the 24th of 
February 1828. 

BROWN, JOHN (1715-1766), British divine and author, was 
born at Rothbury, Northumberland, on the 5th of November 
1715. His father, a descendant of the Browns of Coalston, near 
Haddington, became vicar of Wigton in that year. Young 
Brown was educated at St John's College, Cambridge; and 
after graduating at the head of the list of wranglers in 1735, 
he took holy orders, and was appointed minor canon and lecturer 
at Carlisle. In 1745 he distinguished himself in the defence of 
Carlisle as a volunteer, and in 1747 was appointed chaplain to 
Dr Osbaldiston, on his admission to the bishopric of Carlisle. 
His poem, entitled "Honour" (1743), was followed by the 
" Essay on Satire." This gained for him the friendship of 
William Warburton, who introduced him to Ralph Allen, of 
Prior Park, near Bath. In 1751 Brown dedicated to Allen his 
Essay on the Characteristics of Lord Shaftesbury, containing an 
able defence of the utilitarian philosophy, praised later by John 
Stuart Mill {Westminster Review, vol. xxix. p. 477). In 1756 he 
was promoted by the earl of Hardwicke to the living of Great 
Horkesley in Essex, and in the following year he took the degree 
of D.D. at Cambridge. He was the author of two plays, Bar- 
barossa (1754) and Athelstane (1756); Garrick played in both, 
and the first was a success. The most popular of his works was 
the Estimate of the Manners and Principles of the Times (2 vols., 
1757-1758), a bitter satire which pleased a public depressed by 
the ill-success in the conduct of the war, and ready to welcome 
an attack on luxury and kindred evils. Other works are the 
Additional Dialogue of the Dead between Pericles and Cosmo . . . 
(1760), in vindication of Chatham's policy; and the Dissertation 
on the Rise, Union and Power, &°c, of Poetry and Music (1763). 
He was consulted in connexion with a scheme of education which 
Catherine II. of Russia desired to introduce into her dominions. 
A memorandum on the subject by Dr Brown led to an offer on 
her part to entertain him at St Petersburg as her adviser on the 
subject. He had bought a postchaise and various other things 
for the journey, when he was persuaded to relinquish the design 
on account of his gout. He had been subject to fits of melan- 
choly, and, influenced perhaps by disappointment, he committed 
suicide on the 23rd of September 1 766. 

There is a detailed account of John Brown by Andrew Kippis in 
Biographia Britannica (1780), containing the text of the negotiations 
for his journey to Russia, and of a long letter in which he outlines 
the principles of the scheme he would have proposed. See also 
T. Da vies, Memoirs of . . . David Garrick (1780), chap. xix. 

BROWN, JOHN (1722-1787), Scottish divine, was bom at 
Carpow, in Perthshire. He was almost entirely self-educated, 
having acquired a knowledge of Latin, Greek and Hebrew 
while employed as a shepherd. His early career was varied, 
and he was in succession a packman, a soldier in the Edinburgh 
garrison in 1745, and a school-master. He was, from 1750 till 
his death, minister of the Burgher branch of the Secession church 
(see United Presbyterian Church) in Haddington. From 
1 786 he was professor of divinity for his denomination, and was 
mainly responsible for the training of its ministry. He gained 
a just reputation for learning and piety. The best of his many 
works are his Self-Interpreting Bible and Dictionary of the Bible, 
works that were long very popular. The former was translated 
into Welsh. He also wrote an Explication of the Westminster 
Confession, and a number of biographical and historical sketches. 

BROWN, JOHN (1735-1788), Scottish physician, was born 
in 1 73 5 at Lintlaws or at Preston, Berwickshire. After attending 
the parish school at Duns, he went to Edinburgh and entered 



66o 



BROWN, JOHN 



the divinity classes at the university, supporting himself by 
private tuition. In 1759 he seems to have discontinued his 
theological studies, and to have begun the study of medicine. 
He soon attracted the notice of William Cullen, who engaged him 
as private tutor to his family, and treated him in some respects 
as an assistant professor. In time, however, he quarrelled with 
Cullen, as with the professors of the university in general, and 
from about 1778 his public lectures contained vigorous attacks 
on all preceding systems of medicine and Cullen's in particular. 
In 1780 he published his Elementa Medicinae, expounding his 
own, or as it was then called the Brunonian, theory of medicine, 
which for a time had a great vogue. In 1786 he set out for 
London in the vain hope of bettering his fortunes, and died 
there of apoplexv on the 17th of October 1788. 

An edition of his works, with notice of his life by his son, William 
Cullen Brown, appeared in 1804. 

BROWN, JOHN (1784-1858), Scottish divine, grandson of the 
last-named, was born at Whitburn, Linlithgowshire, on the 
12th of July 1784. He studied at Glasgow university, and 
afterwards at the divinity hall of the " Burgher " branch of the 
" Secession " church at Selkirk, under the celebrated George 
Lawson. In 1806 he was ordained minister of the Burgher 
congregation at Biggar, Lanarkshire, where he laboured for 
sixteen years. While there he had an interesting controversy 
with Robert Owen the socialist. Transferred in 1822 to the 
charge of Rose Street church, Edinburgh, he at once took a high 
rank as a preacher. In 1829 he succeeded James Hall at 
Broughton Place church, Edinburgh. In 1835 he was appointed 
one of the professors in the theological hall of the Secession 
church, and, great as was his ability as a preacher and pastor, 
it was probably in this sphere that he rendered his most valuable 
service. He had been the first in Scotland to use in the pulpit 
the exegetical method of exposition of Scripture, and as a pro- 
fessor he illustrated the method and extended its use. To him 
chiefly is due the abandonment of the principle of interpretation 
according to the " analogy of faith," which practically sub- 
ordinated the Bible to the creed. Brown's exegesis was marked 
by rare critical sagacity, exact and extensive scholarship, 
unswerving honesty, and a clear, logical style; and his expository 
works have thus a permanent value. He had a considerable 
share in the Apocrypha controversy, and he was throughout life 
a vigorous and consistent upholder of anti-state-church or 
" voluntary " views. His two sermons on The Law of Christ 
respecting civil obedience, especially in the payment of tribute, 
called forth by a local grievance from which he had personally 
suffered, were afterwards published with extensive additions 
and notes, and are still regarded as an admirable statement and 
defence of the voluntary principle. The part he took in the 
discussion on the Atonement, which agitated all the Scottish 
churches, led to a formal charge of heresy against him by those 
who held the doctrine of a limited atonement. In 1845, after 
a protracted trial, he was acquitted by the synod, From that 
time he enjoyed the thorough confidence of his denomination 
(after 1847 merged in " the United Presbyterian church "), 
of which in his later years he was generally regarded as the 
leading representative. He died on the 13th of October 1858. 
His chief works were: Expository Discourses on First Peter 
(1848); Exposition of the Discourses and Sayings of our Lord 
(1850); Exposition of our Lord's Intercessory Prayer (185c); 
The Resurrection of Life (185 1); Expository Discourses on 
Galatians (1853); and Analytical Exposition of the Epistle to the 
Romans (1857). 

See Memoir of John Brown, D.D., by John Cairns (i860). 

BROWN, JOHN (1800-1859), American abolitionist, leader 
of the famous attack upon Harper's Ferry, in 1859, was born on 
the 9th of May 1800, at Torrington, Connecticut. He is said to 
have been descended from Peter Brown, who went to America in 
the Mayflower, and he was the grandson of Captain John Brown, 
who served iu the War of Independence. He was taken by his 
father, Owen Brown, to Hudson, Ohio, in 1805. At the age of 
eighteen he began to prepare himself for the Congregational 
ministry, but soon changed his mind and turned his attention 



to land surveying. He engaged successively in the tanning 
business, in sheep-raising, and in the wool trade, but met with 
little success and in 1842, at Akron, Ohio, became bankrupt. 
In 1849, after having lived in Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Massa- 
chusetts, he removed to North Elba, N.Y., where he engaged in 
farming on part of the land which was being given in small tracts, 
by its owner Gerrit Smith, to negro settlers. Long before this 
he had conceived a strong hatred for the institution of slavery, 
and had determined to do what he could to bring about its 
destruction. In 1854 five of his sons removed to Kansas, where 
the violent conflict was beginning between the "free-state" 
and the pro-slavery settlers, and in the following year Brown, 
leaving the rest of his family at North Elba, joined them, settling 
near Osawatomie and immediately becoming a conspicuous 
figure in the border warfare. His name became particularly 
well known in connexion with the so-called " Pottawatomie 
massacre," the killing in cold blood, on the 25th of May 1856, 
by men under his orders, of five pro-slavery settlers in retaliation 
for the murder a short time previously of five " free-state " 
settlers. He also on the 2nd: of June, at the head of about 
thirty men, captured Captain H. C. Pate and twenty-two pro- 
slavery men at Black Jack, and on the 30th of August 1856, 
with a small body of supporters, vigorously resisted an attack 
of a superior pro-slavery force upon Osawatomie. Brown then 
visited the Eastern states for the purpose of raising money to 
be used in the Kansas struggle and of arousing the people 
against slavery. After spending a short time in Kansas, in 
1858-1859 he proceeded to carry out a long-cherished scheme 
for facilitating the escape of fugitive slaves by establishing 
in the mountains of Virginia a stronghold in which such fugitives 
could take refuge and defend themselves against their pursuers. 
At Chatham, Canada; with eleven white and thirty-five negro 
associates, he adopted a " Provisional Constitution and Ordinance 
for the People of the United States." Brown was elected com- 
mander-in-chief, and from among this group a secretary of state, 
a secretary of war, a secretary of the treasury, and members of 
Congress were chosen. Later, with only twenty-two men supplied 
with arms furnished by the Massachusetts-Kansas committee, 
and with funds contributed (in ignorance of Brown's plans) by his 
intimate associates, Theodore Parker, George L. Stearns, T. W. 
Higginson, and F. B. Sanborn, all of Boston, and Gerrit Smith, of 
Peterboro, New York, he removed to a farm near Harper's Ferry, 
the site of a Federal arsenal, which he intended to capture as a 
preliminary to the carrying out of the main part of his plan. 
On the night of the 16th of October 1859, with only eighteen men, 
five of whom were negroes, he made the attack, easily capturing 
the arsenal and taking about sixty of the leading citizens prisoners 
to be used as hostages. On the following morning Brown and 
his followers were vigorously attacked, and on the 18th — a small 
force of United States marines under Colonel Robert E. Lee 
having arrived — were overpowered, Brown being seriously 
wounded after he had surrendered. Of the twenty-two men 
who had participated in the raid, ten were killed, seven were 
taken prisoners, and five escaped. On the other side five were 
killed and nine wounded. Brown was committed to the Charles- 
town, Virginia (now West Virginia), gaol on the 19th of October; 
on the 27th his trial began; on the 31st he was convicted of 
" treason, and conspiring and advising with slaves and other 
rebels, and murder in the first degree "; and on the 2nd of 
December he Was hanged at Charlestown. His fellow-prisoners 
were likewise hanged soon afterwards. Brown was buried at 
North Elba, New York. The attack upon Harper's Ferry 
created widespread excitement, particularly in the Southern 
states; and among the abolitionists in the North Brown was 
looked upon as a martyr to their cause. Shortly after his death 
a famous popular song became widely current in the North, 
beginning: — ■ 

John Brown's body lies a-mouldering in the grave, 

But his soul goes marching on. 

Intensely religious in his nature, Brown possessed something 
of the gloomy fanaticism of his Puritan ancestors. The secret 
of his whole career liesin his emphatic conviction, to use the 



BROWN, J.^-BROWN, S. M. 



66 1 



words of Wendell Phillips, that he had "letters of marque from 
God"; that he had a divine commission to destroy slavery by 
violent means. He scouted the "milk and water principles" 
of the milder abolitionists, advocated vigorous resistance to the 
slave power, and expressed his ideas by actions rather than by 
words. It now seems that this policy aided very little in making 
Kansas a free state, and that the attack on Harper's Ferry, 
while creating much feeling at the moment, had very little 
effect on the subsequent course of events. It is safe to assume 
that secession and civil war would have followed the election 
of Lincoln if there had been no such raid into Virginia. 

Brown was twice married and was the father of twenty 
children, eight of whom died in early childhood. His sons 
aided him in all his undertakings, two of them being killed at 
Harper's Ferry; and Owen Brown, who died in 1889, was long 
the only survivor of the attack. 

See the life (1910) by O. G. Villard, and F. B. Sanborn's Life 
and Letters of John Brown (Boston, 1885) ; R. J. Hinton's John Brown 
and His Men (New York, 1894) ; James Redpath's Public Life of 
Captain John Brown (Boston, i860) ; Von Hoist's essay, John 
Brown (Boston, 1889) ; and J. F. Rhodes, History of the United 
States from the Compromise of 1850 (New York, 1890-1906). 

BROWN, JOHN (1810-1882), Scottish physician and author, 
son of John Brown (1784-1858), was born at Biggar, Scotland, 
on the 22nd of September 1810. He graduated as«M.D. at the 
university of Edinburgh in 1833, and practised as a physician 
in that city. His reputation, however, is based on the two 
volumes of essays, Horae Subsecivae (i.e. "leisure hours") 
(1858, 1861), John Leech and other Papers (1882), Rab and His 
Friends (1859), and Marjorie Fleming: a Sketch (1863). The 
first volume of Horae Subsecivae deals chiefly with the equipment 
and duties of a, physician, the second with subjects outside his 
profession. He was emphatic in his belief that an author should 
publish nothing "unless he has something to say, and has done 
his best to say it aright." Acting on this principle, he published 
little himself, and only after subjecting it to the severest criticism. 
His work is invariably characterized by humour and tenderness. 
He suffered during the latter years of his life from pronounced 
attacks of melancholy, and died on the iith of May 1882. 

See also E. T. M'Laren, Dr John Brown and his Sister Isabella 
(4th ed., 1890); and Letters of Dr John Brown, edited by his son 
and D. W. Forrest, with biography by E. T. M'Laren (1907). 

BROWN, SIR JOHN (1816-1896), English armour plate 
manufacturer, was born at Sheffield on the 6th of December 
1816, the son of a slater. He was apprenticed when fourteen 
years old to a Sheffield firm who manufactured files and table 
cutlery. Impressed with Brown's ability, the senior partner 
offered him the control of the business (Earl Horton and Co.) 
and advanced some of the necessary capital. Brown invented 
in 1848 the conical steel spring buffer for railway wagons, and in 
i860, after seeing the French ship "La Gloire" armoured with 
hammered plate, he determined to attempt the production of 
armour for the British navy by a rolling process. The experiment 
was successful, and led to admiralty orders for armour plate 
sufficient to protect about three-quarters of the navy. In 1856 
Brown had started the Atlas Works in Sheffield, which soon 
produced, beside armour plates and railway buffers, ordnance 
forgings, steel rails, railway carriage axles and tires. The works 
covered thirty acres and employed eventually more than four 
thousand workmen. Resides, supplying iron to the Sheffield 
steel trade, Brown himself successfully developed the Bessemer 
process. In 1864, after his business had been converted into a 
limited company, he retired. He died at Bromley, Kent, on the 
27th of December 1896. Among the honours conferred upon 
him was a knighthood in 1867, the office of mayor of Sheffield 
in 1862 and 1863, and that of Master Cutler in 1865 and 1866. 

BROWN, JOHN GEORGE (1831- ), American painter, 
was born in Durham, England, on the nth of November 1831. 
He studied at Newcastle-on-Tyne, in the Edinburgh Academy, 
and after removing to New York City in 1853, at the schools of 
the National Academy of Design,, of which he afterwards became 
a member. In 1866 he became one- of the charter members of 
the Water-Colour Society, of which he. was president from 1887 



to 1904. He generally confined himself to representations of 
street child life, bootblacks, newsboys, &c. ; his- "Passing 
Show" (Paris, Salon, 1877) and "Street Boys at Play" (Paris 
Exhibition, 1900) are good examples of his popular talent. 

BROWN, ROBERT (1773-1858), British botanist, was born 
on the 21st of December 1773 at Montrose, and was educated 
at the grammar school of his native town, where he had as 
contemporaries Joseph Hume and James Mill. In 1787 he 
entered Marischal College, Aberdeen, but two years afterwards 
removed to Edinburgh University, where his taste for botany 
attracted the attention of John Walker (1731-1803), then pro- 
fessor of natural history in the university. In 1795 he obtained 
a commission in the Forfarshire regiment of Fencible Infantry 
as " ensign and assistant surgeon," and served in the north of 
Ireland. In 1798 he made the acquaintance of Sir Joseph 
Banks, by whom in 1801 he was offered the post of naturalist 
to the expedition fitted out under Captain Matthew Flinders 
for the survey of the then almost unknown coasts of Australia. 
Ferdinand Bauer, afterwards familiarly associated with Brown 
in his botanical discoveries, was draughtsman; William WeStall 
was landscape painter; and among the midshipmen was one 
; afterwards destined to rise into fame as Sir John Franklin. In 
1805 the expedition returned to England, having obtained, 
among other acquisitions, nearly 4000 species of plants, many 
of which were new. Brown was almost immediately appointed 
librarian of the Linnean Society. In this position, though one 
of no great emolument, he had abundant opportunities of 
pursuing his studies; but it was not until 18 10 that he pub- 
lished the first volume of his great work, in Latin, the Prodromus 
Florae Novae Hollandiae et Insulae Van Diemen, which did much 
to further the general adoption of A. L. de Jussieu'S: natural 
system of plant classification. Its merits were immediately 
recognized, and it gave its author an international reputation 
among botanists. It is rare in its original edition, the author 
having suppressed it, hurt at the Edinburgh Review having 
fallen foul of its Latinity. With the exception of a supplement 
published in 1830, no more of the work appeared. In 1810 
Brown became librarian to Sir Joseph Banks, who on his death 
in 1820 bequeathed to him the use and enjoyment of his library 
and collections for life. In 1827 an arrangement was made by 
which these were transferred to the British Museum, with 
Brown's consent and in accordance with Sir Joseph's will. 
Brown then became keeper of this new botanical department, 
an office which he held until his death. Soon after Banks's 
decease he resigned the librarianship of the Linnean Society, 
and from 1849 to 1853 he served as its president. He received 
many honours. Elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 181 1, he 
received its Copley medal in 1839, for his " discoveries on the 
subject of vegetable impregnation," and in 1833 he was' elected 
one of the five foreign associates of the Institute of France. 
Among his other distinctions was membership of the order 
"pour le Merite " of Prussia. In the Academia Caesarea Naturae 
Curiosorum he sat under the cognomen of Ray. He died on the 
10th of June 1858, in the house in Soho Square, London, be- 
queathed to him by Sir Joseph Banks. His works, which 
embrace not only systematic botany, but also plant anatomy 
and physiology, are distinguished by their thoroughness and 
conscientious accuracy, and display powers at once of minute 
detail and of broad generalization. The continual movements 
observed by the microscope among minute particles suspended 
in a liquid were noticed by him in 1827, and hence are known 
as "Brownian movements." 

In 1 825-1 834 his works up to that date were collected and pub- 
lished, in four divisions by Nees von Esenbeck, in German, under 
the title of Vermischte botanische Schriften (Leipzig and Nuremberg),. 
In 1866 the Ray Society reprinted, under the editorship of his friend 
and successor in the keepership oi the Botanical Department of the 
British Museum, J. J. Bennet, his complete writings, the Prodromus 
alone excepted. In these Miscellaneous Works (2 vols., with atlas 
of plates) the history of his discoveries can be best followed. 

BROWN, SAMUEL MORISON (1817-1856), Scottish chemist, 
poet and essayist, born at Haddington on the 2*rd of February. 
1817, was the fourth son of Samuel Brown, the founder of 



662 



BROWN, T.— BROWN, T. E. 



itinerating libraries, and grandson of John Brown, author of the 
Self-Interpreting Bible. In 1 83 2 he entered the university of Edin- 
burgh, where, after studying in Berlin and St Petersburg, he 
graduated as M.D. in 1839. About 1840 he was engaged in ex- 
periments by which he sought to prove that " carbon in certain 
states of combination is susceptible of conversion into silicon," 
and his failure to establish this proposition had much to do with 
his want of success as a candidate for the chair of chemistry 
at Edinburgh in 1843. He held the doctrine that the chemical 
elements are compounds of equal and similar atoms, and might 
therefore possibly be all derived from one generic atom. In 
1850 he published a tragedy, Galileo Galilei, and two volumes 
of his Lectures on the Atomic Theory and Essays Scientific and 
Literary appeared in 1858, with a preface by his kinsman Dr John 
Brown, the author of Horae Subsecivae. He died at Edinburgh 
on the 20th of September 1856. 

BROWN, THOMAS (1663-1704), English satirist, of " facetious 
memory " as Addison designates him, was the son of a farmer 
at Shifnal, in Shropshire, and was born in 1663. He was entered 
in 1678 atChrist Church, Oxford, where he is said to have escaped 
expulsion by the famous lines beginning, " I do not love thee, 
Dr Fell." He was for three years schoolmaster at Kingston-on- 
Thames, and afterwards settled in London. Under the pseu- 
donym of Dudly Tomkinson he wrote a satire on Dryden, The 
Reasons of Mr Bays changing his Religion: considered in a 
Dialogue between Crites, Eugenius and Mr Bays, with two 
other parts having separate titles (1688-1600, republished with 
additions in 1691). He was the author of a great variety of 
poems, letters, dialogues and lampoons, full of humour and 
erudition, but coarse and scurrilous. His writings have a certain 
value for the knowledge they display of low life in London. 
He died on the 16th of June 1704, and was buried in the cloister 
of Westminster Abbey. 

His collected works were published in 1707-1708. The second 
volume contains a collection of Letters from the Dead to the Living, 
some of which are translated from the French. His Comical Romance 
done into English (1772, theRoman Comique of Scarron) was reprinted 
in 1892. 

BROWK, THOMAS (1778-1820), Scottish philosopher, was 
born at Kirkmabreck, Kirkcudbright, where his father was 
parish clergyman. He was a boy of a refined nature, a wide 
reader and an eager student. Educated at several schools in 
London, he went to Edinburgh University in 1792, where he 
attended Dugald Stewart's moral philosophy class. His attend- 
ance was desultory, and he does not appear to have completed 
his arts course. After studying law for a time he took up 
medicine; his graduation thesis 'De Somno was well received. 
But his great strength lay in metaphysical analysis, as was shown 
in his answer to the objections raised against the appointment 
of Sir John Leslie to the mathematical professorship (1805). 
Leslie, a follower of Hume, was attacked by the clerical party 
as a sceptic and an infidel, and Brown took the opportunity to 
defend Hume's doctrine of causality as in no way inimical to 
religion. His defence, at first only a pamphlet, became in its 
third edition a lengthy treatise entitled Inquiry into the Relation 
of Cause and Effect, and is a fine specimen of Brown's analytical 
faculty. In 1806 he became a medical practitioner in partner- 
ship with James Gregory, but, though successful in his profession, 
preferred literature and philosophy. After twice failing in the 
attempt to gain a professorship in the university, he was invited, 
during an illness of Dugald Stewart in the session of 1808-1809, 
to act as his substitute, and during the following session he 
undertook a great part of Stewart's work. The students received 
him with enthusiasm, due partly to his splendid rhetoric and 
partly to the novelty and ingenuity of his views. In 1810 he 
was appointed as colleague to Stewart, a position which he held 
for the rest of his life. He wrote his lectures at high pressure, 
and devoted much time to the editing and publication of the 
numerous poems which he had written at various times during 
his life. He was also engaged in preparing an abstract of his 
lectures as a handbook for his class. His health, never strong, 
gave way under the strain of his work. He was advised to take 
a voyage to London, where he died on the 2nd of April 1820. 



His friend and biographer, David Welsh (1 793-1 845), super- 
intended the publication of his text-book, the Physiology of the 
Human Mind, and his Lectures on the Philosophy of the Human 
Mind was published by his successors, John Stewart and the 
Rev. E. Milroy. The latter was received with great enthusiasm 
both in England (where it reached its 19th edition) and in 
America; but recent criticism has lessened its popularity and it 
is now almost forgotten. 

Brown's philosophy occupies an intermediate place between 
the earlier Scottish school and the later analytical or associational 
psychology. To the latter Brown really belonged, but he had 
preserved certain doctrines of the older school which were out 
of harmony with his fundamental view. He still retained a 
small quantum of intuitive beliefs, and did not appear to see that 
the very existence of these could not be explained by his theory 
of mental action. This intermediate or wavering position 
accounts for the comparative neglect into which his works have 
now fallen. They did much to excite thinking, and advanced 
many problems by more than one step, but they did not furnish 
a coherent system, and the doctrines which were then new have 
since been worked out with greater consistency and clearness. 

Brown wrote a criticism of Darwin's Zoonomia (1798), and 
was one of the first contributors to the Edinburgh Review, in the 
second number of which he published a criticism of the Kantian 
philosophy, based entirely on Villers's French account of it. 
Among his poems, which are modelled on Pope and Akenside 
and rather commonplace, may be mentioned: Paradise of 
Coquettes (18 14); Wanderer in Norway (181 5); War fiend (18 16); 
Bower of Spring (1817); Agnes (1818); Emily (1819); a 
collected edition in 4 vols, appeared in 1820. 

For a severe criticism of Brown's philosophy, see Sir W. Hamilton's 
Discussions and Lectures on Metaphysics; and for a high estimate 
of his merits, see J. S. Mill's Examination of Hamilton. Sec also 
D. Welsh's Account of the Life and Writings, &c. (1825) ; M'Cosh's 
Scottish Philosophy, pp. 317-337. The only German writer who 
seems to have known anything of Brown is Beneke, who found in 
him anticipations of some of his own doctrines. See Die neue 
Psychologie, pp. 320-330. 

BROWN, THOMAS EDWARD (1830-1897), British poet, 
scholar and divine, was born on the 5th of May 1830, at Douglas, 
Isle of Man. His father, the Rev. Robert Brown, held the 
living of St Matthew's — a homely church in a poor district. 
His mother came of Scottish parentage, though born in the 
island. Thomas, the sixth of ten children, was but two years 
old when the family removed to Kirk Braddan vicarage, a short 
distance from Douglas, where his father (a scholar of no univer- 
sity, but so fastidious about composition that he would have 
some sentences of an English classic read to him before answering 
an invitation) took share with the parish schoolmaster in tutoring 
the clever boy until, at the age of fifteen, he was entered at 
King William's College. Here his abilities soon declared them- 
selves, and hence he proceeded to Christ Church, Oxford, where 
his position (as a servitor) cost him much humiliation, which 
he remembered to the end of his life. He won a double first, 
however, and was elected a fellow of Oriel in April 1854, Dean 
Gaisford having refused to promote him to a senior studentship 
of his own college, on the ground that no servitor had ever before 
attained to that honour. Although at that time an Oriel fellow- 
ship conferred a deserved distinction, Brown never took kindly 
to the life, but, after a few terms of private pupils, returned to 
the Isle of Man as vice-principal of his old school. He had been 
ordained deacon, but did not proceed to priest's orders for many 
years. In 1857 he married his cousin, Miss Stowell, daughter 
of Dr Stowell of Ramsey, and soon afterwards left the island 
once more to become headmaster of the Crypt school, Gloucester 
— a position which in no long time he found intolerable. From 
Gloucester he was summoned by the Rev. John Percival (after- 
wards bishop of Hereford), who had recently been appointed to 
the struggling young foundation of Clifton College, which he 
soon raised to be one of the great public schools. Percival 
wanted a master for the modern side, and made an appointment 
to meet Brown at Oxford; " and there," he writes, " as chance 
would have it, I met him standing at the corner of St Mary's 



BROWN, SIR W.--BROWNE, H. K. 



663 



Entry, in a somewhat Johnsonian attitude, four-square, his 
hands deep in his pockets to keep himself still, and looking 
decidedly volcanic. We very soon came to terms, and I left him 
there under promise to come to Clifton as my colleague at the 
beginning of the following term." At Clifton Brown remained 
from September 1863 to July 1892, when he retired — to the 
great regTet of boys and masters alike, who had long since come 
to regard " T.E.B.'s " genius, and even his eccentricities, with 
a peculiar pride — to spend the rest of his days upon the island 
he had worshipped from childhood and often celebrated in song. 
His poem " Betsy Lee " appeared in Macmillan's Magazine 
(April and May 1873), and was published separately in the same 
year. It was included in Fo'c's'le Yarns (1881), which reached 
a second edition in 1889. This volume included at least three 
other notable poems — " Tommy Big-eyes," " Christmas Rose," 
and " Captain Tom and Captain Hugh." It was followed by 
The Doctor and other Poems (1887), The Manx Witch and other 
Poems (1889), and Old John and other Poems — a volume mainly 
lyrical (1893). Since his death all these and a few additional 
lyrics and fragments have been published in one volume by 
Messrs Macmillan under the title of The Collected Poems of T. E. 
Brown (1900). His familiar letters (edited in two volumes by 
an old friend, Mr S. T. Irwin, in 1900) bear witness to the zest 
he carried back to his native country, although his thoughts 
often reverted to Clifton. In October 1897 he returned to the 
school on a visit. He was the guest of one of the house-masters, 
and on Friday evening, 29th October, he gave an address to the 
boys of the house. He had spoken for some minutes with his 
usual vivacity, when his voice grew thick and he was seen to 
stagger. He died in less than two hours. Brown's more im- 
portant poems are narrative, and written in the Manx dialect, 
with a free use of pauses, and sometimes with daring irregularity 
of rhythm. A rugged tenderness is their most characteristic 
note; but the emotion, while almost equally explosive in mirth 
and in tears, remains an educated emotion, disciplined by a 
scholar's sense of language. They breathe the fervour of an 
island patriotism (humorously aware of its limits) and of a simple 
natural piety. In his lyrics he is happiest when yoking one or 
the other of these emotions to serve a philosophy of life, often 
audacious, but always genial. (A. T. Q.-C.) 

BROWN, SIR WILLIAM, Bart. (1784-1864), British merchant 
and banker, founder of the banking-house of Brown, Shipley 
& Co., was born at Ballymena, Ireland, on the 30th of May 1 784, 
the son of an Irish linen-merchant. At the age of sixteen he 
accompanied his father and brothers to Baltimore, Maryland, 
U.S.A., whither it had been decided to transfer the family 
business, but in 1809 left America for Liverpool. Here he estab- 
lished a branch of the firm, which had now begun to deal largely 
in raw cotton as well as linen and soon afterwards developed into 
one of general merchants and finally bankers. Brown became 
one of the leaders in Liverpool commerce, and in 1832 took a 
principal share in the reform of the system of dock-management 
then in vogue at that port. The great financial crisis of 1837 
seriously threatened the ruin of the firm, but on Brown's urgent 
representations as to the multiplicity of interests involved the 
Bank of England agreed to advance him £2,000,000 to tide matters 
over. Actually Brown only found it necessary to apply for 
£1,000,000, which he repaid within six months. His business, 
both mercantile and banking, continued to increase, and in 1844 
he was in possession of a sixth of the trade between Great Britain 
and the United States. " There is hardly," declared Richard 
Cobden at this period, " a wind that blows, or a tide that flows 
in the Mersey, that does not bring a ship freighted with cotton or 
some other costly commodity for Mr Brown's house." In 1856 
the friction between the British and American governments due 
to the enlistment by British consuls of recruits for the Crimean 
War was largely allayed by the action of Brown, who in an 
interview with Lord Palmerston, then prime-minister, explained 
the objections taken in America. From 1846 to 1859 he was 
Liberal M.P. for South Lancashire. In i860 he presented Liver- 
pool with a public library and museum, and in 1863 was made a 
baronet. He died at Liverpool in 1864. 



BROWN, WILLIAM LAURENCE (1755-1830), Scottish divine, 
was born on the 7th of January 1 755 at Utrecht, where his father 
was minister of the English church. The father, having been 
appointed professor of ecclesiastical history at St Andrews, 
returned to Scotland in 1757, and his son went to the grammar 
school of that city, and then to the university." After passing 
through the divinity classes, he went in 1774 to the university of 
Utrecht, where he studied theology and civil law. In 1 7 7 7 he was 
appointed to the English church in Utrecht, and about 1 788 to the 
professorship of moral philosophy and ecclesiastical history in the 
university, to which was soon added the professorship of the 
law of nature. The war which followed the French Revolution 
finally drove Brown in January 1795 to London, where he was 
cordially welcomed. In 1795 the magistrates of Aberdeen ap- 
pointed him to the chair of divinity, and soon after he was made 
principal of Marischal College. In the year 1 800 he was appointed 
chaplain in ordinary to the king, and in 1804 dean of the chapel 
royal, and of the order of the Thistle. He died on the nth of 
May 1830. His most widely-known works were an Essay on 
the Natural Equality of Men (1793), which gained the Teyler 
Society's prize; a treatise On the Existence of the Supreme 
Creator (1816), to which was awarded the first Burnet prize of 
£1250; and A Comparative View of Christianity, and of the other 
Forms of Religion with regard to their Moral Tendency (2 vols., 
1826). 

BROWN BESS, a name given in the British army to the flint- 
lock musket with which the infantry were formerly armed. The 
term is applied generally to the weapon of the 18th and early 
19th centuries, and became obsolete on the introduction of the 
rifle. The first part of the name derives from the colour of the 
wooden stock, for the name is found much earlier than the intro- 
duction of " browning " the barrel of muskets; " Bess " may be 
either a humorous feminine equivalent of the " brown-bill," the 
old weapon, of the British infantry, or a corruption of the 
" buss," i.e. box, in " blunderbuss." 

BROWNE, EDWARD HAROLD (1811-1891), English bishop, 
was born at Aylesbury and educated at Eton and Cambridge. 
He was ordained in 1836, and two years later was elected senior 
tutor of Emmanuel College, Cambridge. From 1843 to 1849 he 
was vice-principal of St David's College, Lampeter, and in 1854 
was appointed Norrisian professor of divinity at Cambridge. His 
best- known book is the Exposition of the Thirty-nine Articles 
(vol. i., Cambridge, 1850; vol. ii., London, 1853), which remained 
for many years a standard work on the subject. In 1864 he was 
consecrated bishop of Ely, and proceeded to reorganize his 
diocese. He maintained that the deposition of Bishop Colenso 
endangered the independence of bishops. Nevertheless, he was 
opposed to Colenso's criticism of the Bible, and replied to it in 
The Pentateuch and the Elohistic Psalms (1863), written from a 
conservative standpoint. In 1869 he was one of the consecrating 
prelates when Temple became bishop of Exeter, and endeavoured 
to remove the prejudice against his appointment by showing that 
Temple was not responsible for the views of other writers in the 
famous Essays and Reviews (i860). He was bishop of Winchester 
from 1873 till 1890, when ill-health compelled him to resign. 

BROWNE, HABLOT KNIGHT (1815-1882), English artist, 
famous as " Phiz," the illustrator of the best-known bpoks 
by Charles Dickens, Charles Lever and Harrison Ainsworth in 
their original editions. His talents in other directions of art were 
of a very ordinary kind. As an interpreter and illustrator of 
Dickens's characters, " Phiz," as he always signed his drawings, 
was in some respects the equal of his rivals Cruikshank and 
Leech, while, in his own way, he excelled them both. Of Hugue- 
not extraction, he was born in Lambeth on the nth of June 1815. 
His father died early and left the family badly off. Browne 
was apprenticed to Finden, the eminent engraver on steel, 
in whose studio he obtained his only artistic education. TO 
engraving, however, he was entirely unsuited, and having in 1833 
secured an important prize from the Society of Arts for a drawing 
of " John Gilpin," he abandoned engraving in the following year 
and took to other artistic work, with the ultimate object of 
becoming a painter. In the spring of 1836 he met Charles 



66 4 



BROWNE, I, H .^BROWNE, COUNT VON 



Dickens. It was at the moment when the serial publication 
of Pickwick was in danger from the want of a capable inter- 
preter for the illustrations. Dickens knew Browne slightly as the 
illustrator of his little pamphlet Sunday under Three Heads, 
and probably this slight knowledge of his work stood the draughts- 
man in good stead. In the original edition of Pickwick, issued 
in shilling monthly parts from early in 1836 until the end of 1837, 
the first seven plates were drawn by Robert Seymour, a clever 
illustrator who committed suicide in April 1836. The next two 
plates were by R. W. Buss, an otherwise successful portrait- 
painter and lecturer, but they were so poor that a change was 
imperative. Browne and W. M. Thackeray called independently 
at the publishers' office with specimens of their powers for 
Dickens's inspection. The novelist preferred Browne. Browne's 
first two etched plates for Pickwick were signed " Nemo," but 
the third was signed " Phiz," a pseudonym which was retained 
in future. When asked to explain why he chose this name 
he answered that the change from " Nemo " to " Phiz " was 
made " to harmonize better with Dickens's Boz." Possibly 
Browne adopted it to conceal his identity, hoping one day to 
become famous as a painter. It is to be noted, however, that 
" Phiz " is usually attached to his hetter work and H. K. B. 
to his less successful drawings. " Phiz " undoubtedly created 
Sam Weller, so far as his well-known figure is concerned, as 
Seymour had created Pickwick. Dickens and " Phiz " were 
personally good friends in early days, and in 1838 travelled 
together to Yorkshire to see the schools of which Nicholas 
Nickleby became the hero; afterwards they made several 
journeys of this nature in company to facilitate the illustrator's 
work. The other Dickens characters which " Phiz " realized 
most successfully are perhaps Squeers, Micawber, Guppy, Major 
Bagstock, Mrs Gamp, Tom Pinch and, above all, David Copper- 
field. Of the books by Dickens which " Phiz " illustrated the 
best are David Copperfield, Pickwick, Dombey and Son, Martin 
Chuzzlewit and Bleak House. Browne made several drawings for 
Punch in early days and also towards the end of his life; his 
/;hief work in this direction being the clever design for the wrapper 
which was used for eighteen months from January 1842. He 
also contributed to Punch's Pocket Books. In addition to his 
work for Dickens, " Phiz " illustrated over twenty of Lever's 
novels (the most successful being Harry Lorrequer, Charles 
O'M alley, Jack Hinton and the Knight of Gwynne). He also 
illustrated Harrison Ainsworth's and Frank Smedley's novels. 
Mervyn Clitheroe by Ainsworth is one of the most admirable 
of the artist's Works. Browne was in continual employment 
by publishers until 1867, when he had a stroke of paralysis. 
Although he recovered slightly and made many illustrations on 
wood, they were by comparison inferior productions which the 
draughtsman's admirers would willingly ignore. In 1878 he was 
awarded an annuity by the Royal Academy. He gradually 
became worse in health, until he died on the 8th of July 1882. 

Most of B rowne's work was etched on steel plates because these 
yielded a far larger edition than copper. Browne was annoyed 
at some of his etchings being transferred to stone by the publishers 
and printed as lithographic reproductions. Partly with the view 
to prevent this treatment of his work he employed a machine 
to rule a series of lines over the plate in order to obtain what 
appeared to be a tint; when manipulated with acid this tint 
gave an effect somewhat resembling mezzotint, which at that 
time it was found practically impossible to transfer to stone. 
The illustrations executed by Browne are particularly noteworthy 
because they realized exactly what the reader most desired to 
see represented. So skilful was he in drawing and composition 
that no part of the story was avoided by reason of the elaborate- 
ness of the subject. Whatever was the best incident for illustra- 
tion was always the one selected. 

See D. Croal Thomson, Habldt Knight Browne, "Phiz'': Life 
and Letters (London, 1884); John Forster, Life of Charles Dickens 
(London, 1871-1874); F. 6. Kitton, " Phiz ": A Memoir (London, 
1882) ; Charles Dickens and his Illustrators (London, 1899) ; M. H. 
Spielmahn, The History of Punch (London, 1895). (D. C. T.) 

BROWNE, ISAAC HAWKINS (1705-1760), English poet, was 
born on the 21st of January 1705 at Burton-upon-Trent, of 



1 which place his father was vicar. He was educated at Lichfield, 
at Westminster school, and at Trinity College, Cambridge. 
After taking his M.A. degree he removed to Lincoln's Inn, and 
was called to the bar, but never practised. He was the author 
of " Design and Beauty," a poem addressed to his friend Joseph 
Highmore the painter; and of " The Pipe of Tobacco " which 
parodied Cibber, Ambrose Philips, Thomson, Young, Pope 
and Swift, who were then all living. He was elected to Parlia- 
ment through private interest in 1744 and again in 1747 for the 
borough of Wenlock in Shropshire. In 1754 he published his 
chief work, De Animi Immortalitate, a Latin poem much admired 
by the scholars of his time. The best of the many translations 
of these verses is by Soame Jenyns. Browne is said by Johnson 
to have been " one of the first wits of this country." He was a 
brilliant talker in private life, especially when his tongue was 
loosed by wine; but he made no mark in public life. He died 
in London on the 14th of February 1760. 

Two editions of his Poems on Various Subjects, Latin and English, 
were published in 1767 by his son Isaac Hawkins Browne (1745-1818), 
the author of two volumes of essays on religion and morals. One of 
these was printed for private circulation, and is said to have contained 
a memoir. A full account by Andrew Kippis in Biographia Brit- 
annica (1780) includes large extracts from his poems. 

BROWNE, JAMES (1793-1841), Scottish man of letters, was 
born at Whitefield, Perthshire, in 1793. He was educated at 
Edinburgh and at the university of St Andrews, where he 
studied for the church. He wrote a " Sketch of the History of 
Edinburgh," for Ewbank's Picturesque Views of that city, 
1823-1825. In 1826 he became a member of the Faculty of 
Advocates, and obtained the degree of LL.D. from King's 
College, Aberdeen. His works include a Critical Examination 
of Macculloch's Work on the Highlands and Islands of Scotland 
(1826), Apercu sur les Hiiroglyphes d'£gypte (Paris, 1827), a 
Vindication of the Scottish Bar from the Attacks of Mr Broughton, 
and History of the Highlands and Highland Clans (1834-1836). 
He was appointed editor of the Caledonian Mercury in 1827; 
and two years later he became sub-editor of the seventh edition 
of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, to which he contributed a large 
number of articles. He died in April 1841. 

BROWNE, SIR JAMES (1839-1896), Anglo-Indian engineer 
and administrator, was the son of Robert Browne of Falkirk 
in Scotland. He was educated at the military college, Addis- 
combe, and received a commission in the Bengal engineers in 
1857. He served in the expedition against the Mahsud Waziris 
in i860, being mentioned in despatches, and in 1863 in the 
Umbeyla campaign, when he was three times mentioned. In 
January 1875 he became superintendent of works for the building 
of the Indus bridge. In 1877 he was promoted lieutenant- 
colonel, and in 1878-1879 accompanied Sir Donald Stewart as 
political officer during the Afghan War. He took part in several 
engagements, was mentioned in despatches, and received the 
C.B. In 1881 he became colonel, and in 1882 commanded the 
Indian engineer contingent sent to Egypt, being present at the 
battle of Tell-el-Kebir. For his services in Egypt he received 
the 3rd class of the Osmanieh Order and the khedive's star. 
In 1884 he was appointed engineer in chief of the Sind-Pishin 
railway. In 1888 he was made a K. C.S.I, and in 1889 quarter- 
master-general for India. In 1892 he was appointed agent to 
the governor-general in Baluchistan, in succession to Sir Robert 
Sandeman, his intimate experience of the Baluchis, gained 
during his railway work, having specially fitted him for this post. 
He died suddenly on the 13th of June 1896. Sir James Browne 
was a man of splendid courage and physique, and many tales 
are told of the personal prowess which, together with his sym- 
pathetic knowledge of the natives, made him a popular hero 
among the frontier tribesmen. 

See General McLeod Innes, The Life and Times of Sir James 
Browne (1905). 

BROWNE, MAXIMILIAN ULYSSES, Count von, Baron de 
Camus and Mountany (1705-1757), Austrian field marshal, 
was born at Basel on the 23rd of October 1705. His father 
(Ulysses Freiherr v. Browne, d. 1731) was an Irish exile of 1690, 
who entered the imperial service and in 17 16 was made a count 



BROWNE, P;— BROWNE, R. 



66 5 



of the Empire {Reichsgraf) by the emperor Charles VI. His 
uncle Gebrg, Reichsgraf von Browne (1698-1792), was a distin- 
guished soldier, who rose to the rank of field marshal in the 
Russian army, and was made Reichsgraf by the emperor Joseph 
II. in 1779. The powerful influence which he commanded, 
through his father and his wife (nee Countess Marie Philippine 
v. Martinitz) , advanced the young officer through the subordinate 
grades so rapidly that at the age of twenty-nine he was colonel of 
an infantry regiment. But he justified his early promotion in the 
field, and in the Italian campaign of 1 734 he greatly distinguished 
himself. In the Tirolese fighting of 1 735, and in the unfortunate 
Turkish war, he won further distinction as a general officer. 
He was a lieutenant field marshal in command of the Silesian 
garrisons when in 1740 Frederick II. and the Prussian army 
overran the province. His careful employment of such resources 
as he possessed materially hindered the king in his conquest 
and gave time for Austria to collect a field army (see Austrian 
Succession, War of the). He was present at Mollwitz, where 
he received a severe wound. His vehement opposition to all 
half-hearted measures brought him frequently into conflict 
with his superiors, but contributed materially to the unusual 
energy displayed by the Austrian armies in 1742 and 1743. In 
the following campaigns Browne exhibited the same qualities 
of generalship and the same impatience of control. In 1745 
he served under Count Traun, and was promoted to the rank 
of Feldzeugmeister. In 1746 he was present in the Italian 
campaign and the battles of Piacenza and Rottofredo. Browne 
himself with the advanced guard forced his way across the 
Apennines and entered Genoa. He was thereafter placed in 
command of the army intended for the invasion of France, and 
early in 1 747 of all the imperial forces in Italy. At the end of the 
war Browne was engaged in the negotiations which led to the 
convention of NiceQanuary 21st, 1749)- He became commander- 
in-chief in Bohemia in 1751, and field marshal two years later. 
He was still in Bohemia when the Seven Years' War opened 
with Frederick's invasion of Saxony (1756). Browne's army, 
advancing to the relief of Pima (see Seven Years' War), was 
met, and, after a hard struggle, defeated by the king at Lobositz, 
but he drew off in excellent order, and soon made another 
attempt with a picked force to reach Pima, by wild mountain 
tracks. The field marshal never spared himself, bivouacking 
in the snow with his men, and Carlyle records that private 
soldiers made rough shelters over him as he slept. He actually 
reached the Elbe at Schandau, but as the Saxons were unable 
to break out Browne retired, having succeeded, however, in 
delaying the development of Frederick's operations for a whole 
campaign. In the campaign of 1757 he voluntarily served under 
Prince Charles of Lorraine (q.v.) who was made commander- 
in-chief, and on the 6th of May in that year, while leading a 
bayonet charge at the battle of Prague, Browne, like Schwerin 
on the same day, met his death. He was carried mortally 
wounded into Prague, and there died on the 26th of June, his 
last days embittered by the knowledge that he was unjustly 
held responsible for the failure of the campaign. His name has 
been borne, since 1888, by the 36th Austrian infantry. 

See Zuverlassige Lebensbeschreibung U.M. Reichsgrafen, v. B. . 
K.-K. Gen.-Feldmarschall (Frankfurt and Leipzig, 1757); Baron 
O'Cahill, Gesch. der grosslen Herrfiihrer (Rastadt, 1785, v. ii. pp. 
264-316). 

BROWNE, PETER (?i66s-i73s), Irish divine and bishop of 
Cork and Ross, was born in Co. Dublin, not long after the 
Restoration. He entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1682, and 
after ten years' residence obtained a fellowship. In 1699 he was 
made provost of the college, and in the same year published his 
Letter in answer to a Book entitled " Christianity not Mysterious," 
which was recognized as the ablest reply yet written to Toland. 
It expounds in germ the whole of his later theory of analogy. 
In 1 7 10 he was made bishop of Cork and Ross, which post he 
held till his death in 1733. In 17 13 he had become somewhat 
notorious from his vigorous pamphleteering attack on the 
fashion of drinking healths, especially " to the glorious and 
immortal memory." His two most important works are the 



Procedure, Extent, and Limits ojthe HumanUnderstanding (1728), 
an able though sometimes captious critique of Locke's essay, 
and Things Divine and Supernatural conceived by Analogy with 
Things Natural and Human, more briefly referred to as the 
Divine Analogy (1733). The doctrine of analogy was intended 
as a reply to the deistical conclusions that had been drawn from 
Locke's theory of knowledge. Browne holds that not only God's 
essence, but his attributes are inexpressible by our ideas, and 
can only be conceived analogically. This view was vigorously 
assailed as leading to atheism by Berkeley in his Alciphron 
(Dialogue iv.), and a great part of the Divine Analogy is occupied 
with a defence against that criticism. The bishop emphasizes 
the distinction between metaphor and analogy; though the 
conceived attributes are not thought as they are in themselves, 
yet there is a reality corresponding in some way to our ideas of 
them. His analogical arguments resemble those found in the 
Bampton Lectures of Dean Mansel. Browne was a man of 
abstemious habits, charitable disposition, and impressive 
eloquence. He died on the 27th of August 1735. 

BROWNE, ROBERT (1550-1633), a leader among the early 
Separatist Puritans (hence sometimes called Brownists), was 
born about 1550 at Tolethorpe, near Stamford. He was of an 
ancient family, several members of which had been distinguished 
as merchants, county magnates and local benefactors. He 
was educated at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, "com- 
mencing B;A;" in 1572. For some years he was a schoolmaster, 
but in what place is uncertain. In 1579, on a brother's applica- 
tion and without his own consent, he was licensed to preach, 
arid actually preached for some six months in Cambridge, where 
he gained considerable popularity; but impugning the episcopal 
order of the Established Church, he had his licence revoked 
early in the following year. He then went, on the invitation of 
Robert Harrison, " Maister in the Hospitall," to Norwich, where 
he soon gathered a numerous congregation, the members of 
which became associated in a religious " covenant," to the 
refusing of " all ungodlie communion with wicked persons." 
He seems also to have preached in various parts of Norfolk 
and Suffolk, especially at Bury St Edmunds, and vigorously 
denounced the form of government existing in the Church, 
which at this time he held incompatible with true ," preaching 
of the word." Dr Freake, bishop of Norwich, caused him to be 
imprisoned early in 1581, but he was ere long released through 
the influence of his remote kinsman, the Lord Treasurer Burghley. 
Before the end of 158 1, however, he incurred two more imprison- 
ments, and, apparently in January 1582, migrated with his 
whole company to Middelburg in Zealand. There they organized 
a church on what they conceived to be the New Testament 
model, but the community broke up within two years owing 
to internal dissensions. 

Meanwhile, Browne issued two most important works, A 
Treatise of Reformation without Tarying for Anie, in which he 
asserts the inalienable right of the church to effect necessary 
reforms without the authorization or permission of the civil 
magistrate; and A Booke which sheweth the life and manners oj 
all True Christians, in which he enunciates the theory of Con- 
gregational independency (see Congregationalism). These, 
with a third tract {A Treatise upon the 23. of Matthew; see C. 
Burrage, as below, pp. 21-25), making together a thin quarto, 
were published at Middelburg in 1582. The following year two 
men were hanged at Bury St Edmunds for circulating them. 
In January 1 584 l Browne and some of his company came to 
Edinburgh, after visiting Dundee and St Andrews. He remained 
some months in Scotland, endeavouring to commend his ec- 
clesiastical theories, but had no success. He then returned to 
Stamford, in which town or neighbourhood he seems to have 
resided chiefly for the next two years, his residence being broken 
by visits to London and probably to the continent (early in. 1.585),, 
and by at least one imprisonment (summer, 1585). His attitude 
to the lawfulness of occasional attendance at services ir> parish 
churches seems to have been changing about this time; on the 

*. Probably after writing A True and Short Declaration, the main 
source of our knowledge of his life hitherto. 



666 



BROWNE, SIR THOMAS 



7th of Octgber 1585 he was induced to make a qualified 
submission to the established order. The story that this result 
was brought about by excommunication, actual or threatened, 
is very doubtful, and rests on late and questionable authority. 
A further submission prepared the way for his appointment, in 
November 1586, to the mastership of St Olave's grammar school, 
Southwark, which he held for more than two years. During part 
of this time he was much engaged in controversy, on the one 
N hand with Stephen Bredwell, an uncompromising advocate 
of the established order, and on the other with some of those 
who more or less occupied his own earlier position, and now 
looked upon him as a renegade. In particular he several times 
replied to Barrowe and Greenwood; one of his replies, entitled 
A Reproofe of certaine schismatical persons and their doctrine 
touching the hearing and preaching of the word of God (1 587-1 588) , 
has recently been recovered, and sheds a flood of light upon the 
development of Browne's later views (see Burrage, pp. 45-° 2 > for 
this whole period). 

Before the 20th of June 1589 his mastership of St Olave's 
seems to have terminated, and after being rector of Little 
Casterton (in the gift of his eldest brother) for a month or two, 
he finally, in September 1591, accepted episcopal ordination 
and the rectory of Achurch-cum-Thorpe Waterville, in Northamp- 
tonshire. There he ministered for forty-two years, with one 
lengthy interval, 161 7-1626, which is only partly accounted for 
(see Burrage, pp. 68-71). There is reason to believe that he 
never entirely abandoned his early ideal, but latterly thought 
it possible to maintain a spiritual fellowship within the frame- 
Work of the Established Church. The closing years of his life 
seem to have been clouded, due partly to separation among his 
own flock, and partly to growing irritability in himself, a lonely 
and disappointed man. When over eighty years old he had a 
dispute with the parish constable about a rate, blows were struck, 
and before a magistrate he behaved so stubbornly that he was 
sent to Northampton gaol, where he died in October 1633. He 
was buried in St Giles's churchyard, Northampton. In spite of 
his later attitude of compromise with expediency, which he felt 
forced on him by external conditions too strong to defy or ignore, 
Robert Browne remains a pioneer in ecclesiastical theory in 
England, the first formulator of an ideal which subsequently 
became known as Congregationalism (q.v.). He rediscovered 
certain forgotten aspects of primitive church life, and did not 
shrink from suffering for the sake of what he held to be the 
truth. In addition to the works above-mentioned, Browne 
wrote several controversial and apologetic treatises, of which 
some remained in MS. until quite recently, and some are still 
missing. 

' See H. M. Dexter, The Congregationalism of the Last Three Hundred 
Years (1880); C. Burrage, The True Story of Robert Browne (Oxford, 
1906); Congregational Historical Society's Transactions, passim 
(1901-1906). 

BROWNE, SIR THOMAS (1605-1682), English author and 
physician, was born in London, on the 19th of October 1605. 
He was admitted as a scholar of Winchester school in 1616, and 
matriculated at Broadgates Hall (Pembroke College), Oxford, 
in 1623, where he graduated B.A. in January 1626. He took 
the further degree of M.A. in 1629, studied medicine, and 
practised for seme time in Oxfordshire. Between 1630 and 
1633 he left England, travelled in Ireland, France and Italy, 
and on his way home received the degree of M.D. at the university 
of Leiden. He returned to London in 1634, and, after a short 
residence at Shipden Hall, near Halifax, settled in practice at 
Norwich in 1637. He married in 1641 Dorothy Mileham. Their 
eldest son, Edward, became president of the Royal College of 
Physicians, and glimpses of their happy family life are obtainable 
in the fragmentary correspondence contained in Simon Wilkin's 
edition. In 1642 a copy of his Religio Medici, which he describes 
as " a private exercise directed to myself," was printed from one 
of his MSS. without his knowledge, and reviewed by Sir Kenelm 
Digby in Observations . . . (1643). The interest aroused by 
this edition compelled Browne to put forth a correct version 
(1643) of the work, in which letters between Digby and Browne 



were included. The book was probably written as early as 1635, 
for he describes himself as still under thirty. In 1646 he pub- 
lished Pseudodoxia Epidemica; Enquiries into very many 
commonly received Tenents and commonly presumed Truths (1646)^ 
and in 1658 Hydriotaphia, Urne-Buriall; or, a discourse of the 
sepulchrall urnes lately found in Norfolk. Together with the 
Garden of Cyrus, or the quincunciall, lozenge, or net-work planta- 
tions of the ancients, artificially, naturally, and mystically con- 
sidered. With Sundry observations (1658). These four works 
were all that he published, though several tracts, notably the 
Christian Morals 1 intended as a continuation of Religio Medici, 
were prepared for publication, and appeared posthumously. 
In 1671 he received the honour of knighthood from Charles II. 
on his visit to Norwich. He began a correspondence with John 
Evelyn in 1658. Very few of the letters are extant, but the 
diarist has left an account of a visit to Browne {Diary, 17th of 
October 167 1). He died in 1682 on his seventy-seventh birthday, 
and was buried at St Peter's, Mancroft, Norwich. His coffin 
was accidentally broken in 1840, and his skull is preserved in 
the museum of the Norwich hospital. 

Browne's writings are among the few specimens of purely 
literary work produced during a period of great political excite- 
ment and discord. He remained to all appearance placidly 
indifferent to the struggle going on around him. His first book, 
appeared in the year of the outbreak of the Civil War; Pseudo- 
doxia Epidemica in the critical year of 1646; and Hydriotaphia, 
the reflections on the shortness of human life inspired by the 
unearthing of some funeral urns, on the eve of the Restoration. 
A mind as aloof as his is a psychological curiosity, and its 
peculiarities are faithfully reflected in the form and matter of his 
works. His display of erudition, his copious citations from 
authorities, his constant use of metaphor and analogy, and his 
elaborate diction, are common qualities of the writers of the 17th 
century, but Browne stands apart from his contemporaries by 
reason of the peculiar cast of his mind. Imbued with the Platonic 
mysticism which taught him to look on this world as only the 
image, the shadow of an invisible system, he regarded the whole 
of experience as only food for contemplation. Nothing is too 
great or too small for him ; all finds a place in the universe of 
being, which he seems to regard almost from the position of an 
outsider. He did not speculate systematically on the problems 
of existence, but he meditates repeatedly on the outward and 
visible signs of mortality, and on what lies beyond death. Of 
Browne, as of the greatest writers, it is true that the style is 
the man. The form of his thought is as peculiar and remarkable 
as the matter; the two, indeed, react on one another. Much 
of the'quaintness of his style, no doubt, depends on the excessive 
employment of latinized words, many of which have failed to 
justify their existence; but the peculiarities of his vocabulary 
do not explain the unique character of his writing, which is 
appreciated to-day as much as ever. 

The Religio Medici was a puzzle to his contemporaries, and 
it is still hard to reconcile its contradictions. A Latin trans- 
lation appeared at Leiden in 1644, and it was widely read on 
the continent, being translated subsequently into Dutch, French 
and German. In Paris it was issued in the belief that Browne 
was really a Roman Catholic, but in Rome the authorities thought 
otherwise, and the book was placed on the Index Expurgatorius. 
It is the confession of a mind keen and sceptical in some aspects, 
and credulous in others. Browne professes to be absolutely 
free from heretical opinions, but asserts the right to be guided 
by his own reason in cases where no precise guidance is given 
either by Scripture or by Church teaching. " I love," he says, 
" to lose myself in a mystery, to pursue my reason to an 0, 
Altitudo!" The Pseudodoxia Epidemica, written in a more 
direct and simple style than is usual with Browne, is a wonder- 
ful storehouse of out-of-the-way facts and scraps of erudition, 

1 Ed. John Jeffery, archdeacon of Norwich, 1716. The dignified 
" Letter to a Friend, upon the occasion of the Death of his Intimate 
Friend " (written about 1672, pr. 1690) has been generally supposed 
to be a preliminary sketch for Christian Morals, but Dr \V. A. 
Greenhill thinks it was written later. 



BROWNE, W.— BROWNHILLS 



667 



exhibiting a singular mixture of credulity and shrewdness. Sir 
Thomas evidently takes delight in discussing the wildest fables. 
That he himself was by no means free from superstition is 
proved by the fact that the condemnation of two unfortunate 
women, Amy Duny and Rose Cullender, for witchcraft at 
Norwich in 1664 was aided by his professional evidence. The 
Garden of Cyrus is a continued illustration of one quaint conceit. 
The whole universe is ransacked for examples of the Quincunx, 
and he discovers, as Coleridge says, " quincunxes in heaven 
above, quincunxes in earth below, quincunxes in the mind of 
man, quincunxes in tones, in optic nerves, in roots of trees, 
in leaves, in everything!" But the whole strength of his genius 
and the wonderful charm of his style are to be sought in the 
Urnburial, the concluding chapter of which, for richness of 
imagery and majestic pomp of diction, can hardly be paralleled 
in the English language. For anything at all resembling it we 
must turn to the finest passages of Jeremy Taylor or of Milton's 
prose writings. 

In 1684 appeared a collection of Certain Miscellany Tracts (ed. 
Tenison), and in 1712 Posthumous Works of the learned Sir Thomas 
Browne. The first collected edition of Browne's works appeared in 
1686. It is said to have been edited by Dr, afterwards Archbishop 
Tenison. Sir Thomas Browne's Works, including his Life and Corre- 
spondence, were carefully edited by Simon Wilkin in 1835-1836. 
Among modern reprints may be mentioned Dr VV. A Greenhill's 
editions in the " Golden Treasury " series of the Religio Medici, 
Letter to a friend and Christian Morals (1881), with an admirable 
bibliographical note on the complicated subject of the numerous 
editions of the Religio Medici; of the Hydriotaphia and the Garden 
of Cyrus (1896), completed by Mr E. H. Marshall; a complete 
edition for the English Library, edited by Mr Charles Sayle (1904, 
&c). Browne's interest in bird-lore is noted by Evelyn, and some 
Notes and Letters on the Natural History of Norfolk were collected 
from his MSS. in the Sloane Collection, and edited by Thomas 
Southwell in 1902. 

BROWNE, WILLIAM (1501-1643), English pastoral poet, 
was born at Tavistock, Devonshire, in 1591, of a branch of the 
family of Browne of Betchworth Castle, Surrey. He received 
his early education at the grammar school of his native town, 
and is said to have proceeded to Oxford about 1603. After a 
short residence at Clifford's Inn he entered the Inner Temple in 
161 1. His elegy on the death of Henry, prince of Wales, and the 
first book of Britannia's Pastorals appeared in 1613; the Shep- 
herd's Pipe, which contained some eclogues by other poets, in 
1614. The second book of the pastorals (1616) is dedicated to 
William Herbert, earl of Pembroke, whose seat at Wilton was 
Browne's home for some time. In 1624 he returned to Oxford 
as tutor to Robert Dormer, afterwards earl of Carnarvon, 
matriculating at Exeter College in April and receiving his M.A. 
degree in November of the same year. Nearly all Browne's 
poetic work dates from his early manhood, before his marriage 
in 1628 with Timothy, daughter of Sir Thomas Eversham cf 
Horsham, Essex. In the fourth eclogue of George Wither's 
Shepherd's Hunting, written as early as 1613-1614, Philarete 
(Wither) asks Willy (Browne) why he is silent, and the reply 
is that some " my music do contemne." The times were un- 
favourable to his tranquil talent, and the second half of his life 
was spent in retirement. He died some time before 1645, when 
letters of administration were granted to his widow, and he may 
have been the William Browne whose burial is recorded in the 
Tavistock registers under the date of the 27 th of March 1643. 

Browne was the pupil and friend of Michael Drayton, who 
associates " my Browne " in the " Epistle to Henry Reynolds " 
with the two Beaumonts as " my dear companions whom 
I freely chose, My bosom friends." But directly indebted as 
Browne is for the form of his poems, for the slight story and the 
rather wearisome allegory, to Spenser, Sidney, Drayton and 
especially to Fletcher's Faithful Shepherdess, his poetry is no 
mere copy of any of these models. His Arcadia is localized in 
his native Devonshire. He was untiring in his praises of " Tavy's 
voiceful stream (to whom I owe more strains than from my 
pipe can ever flow)." He knew local history and traditions, 
and he celebrates the gallant sailors who " by their power made 
the Devonian shore Mock the proud Tagus." (Brit. Past. bk. ii., 
song 3). It is for his truthful, affectionate pictures of his country 



life and its surroundings that the stories of Marina and Celandine, 
Doridon and the rest are still read. A copy of Browne's pastorals 
with annotations in Milton's handwriting is preserved in the 
Huth library, and there are many points of likeness between 
Lycidas and the elegy on Philarete (Thomas Manwood) in the 
fourth eclogue of the Shepherd's Pipe. Keats was a student 
of Browne, and Herrick's fairy fantasies are thought to owe 
something to the third book of the pastorals. 

The first two books of Britannia's Pastorals were re-issued in 1625. 
The third, though it had no doubt circulated in the author's lifetime, 
remained unknown until Beriah Botfield discovered a copy of it in 
the library of Salisbury cathedral, bound up with the 1613 and 1616 
editions of the first and second books. This MS. was edited for the 
Percy Society by T. C. Croker in 1852. A collected edition of 
Browne's works was published in 1772 by John Da vies. It is nof 
known whether The Inner Temple Masque on the story of Ulysses 
and Circe, which was written for performance on the 13th of January 
1615, was ever actually represented. A series of sonnets to Caelist, 
some epistles, elegies and epitaphs, with some other miscellaneous 
poems, complete the list of Browne's works. These have been 
collected from various sources, the most important being Lansdowne 
MS. 777 (British Museum), and they were printed for the first time 
by Sir S. E. Brydges in 1815. Excellent modern complete editions 
of Browne and Mr W. C. Hazlitt's ( 1 868-1 869) for the Roxburghe 
library, and a more compact one (1894) by Mr Gordon Goodwin, 
with an introduction by Air A. H. B.ullen, for the " Muse's Library." 
For an elaborate analysis of Browne's obligations to earlier pastoral 
writers see F. W. Moorman, " William Browne " (Quellen und Fof- 
schungen zur Sprack- und Culturge.schichte der Germanischen Vblker 
Strassburg, 1897). A translation of Marin le Roy de Gomberville's 
Polexandre, by William Browne (1647), may be a posthumous work 
of the poet's. ■ ' 

BROWNE, WILLIAM GEORGE (1768-1813), English traveller, 
was born at Great Tower Hill, London, on the 25th of July 1768. 
At seventeen he was sent to Oriel College, Oxford. Having had 
a moderate competence left him by his father, on quitting the 
university he applied himself entirely to literary pursuits. But 
the fame of James Bruce's travels, and of the first discoveries 
made by the African Association, determined him to become 
an explorer of Central Africa. He went first to Egypt, arriving 
at Alexandria in January 1792. He spent some time in visiting 
the oasis of Siwa or Jupiter Ammon, and employed the remainder 
of the year in studying Arabic and in examining the ruins of 
ancient Egypt. In the spring of 1793 he visited Sinai, and in 
May set out for Darfur, joining the great caravan which every 
year went by the desert route from Egypt to that country. 
This was his most important journey, in which he acquired a 
great variety of original information. He was forcibly detained 
by the sultan of Darfur and endured much hardship, being unable 
to effect his purpose of returning by Abyssinia. He was, however, 
allowed to return to Egypt with the caravan in 1796; after 
this he spent a year in Syria, and did not arrive in London till 
September 1798. In 1799 he published his Travels in Africa, 
Egypt and Syria, from the year ijq2 to 1798. The work was full 
of valuable information; but, from the abruptness and dryness 
of the style, it never became popular. In 1800 Browne again 
left England, and spent three years in visiting Greece, some 
parts of Asia Minor and Sicily. In 181 2 he once more set out 
for the East, proposing to penetrate to Samarkand and survey 
the most interesting regions of central Asia. He spent the 
winter in Smyrna, and in the spring of 1813 travelled through 
Asia Minor and Armenia, made a short stay at Erzerum, and 
arrived on the 1st of June at Tabriz. About the end of the 
summer of 1813 he left Tabriz for Teheran, intending to proceed 
thence into Tartary, but was shortly afterwards murdered. 
Some bones, believed to be his, were afterwards found and 
interred near the grave of Jean de Thevenot, the French traveller. 

Robert Walpole published, in the second volume of his Memoirs 
relating to European and Asiatic Turkey (1820), from papers left 
by Browne, the account of his journey in 1802 through Asia Minor 
to Antioch and Cyprus; also Remarks written at Constantinople 
(1802). 

BROWNHILLS, an urban district in the Lichfield parlia- 
mentary division of Staffordshire, England, 6 m. W. of Lichfield, 
on branch lines of the London & North- Western and Midland 
railways, and near the Essington Canal. Pop. (1891) 11,820; 
(iqoi) 15,252. There are extensive coal-mines in the district, 



668 



BROWNING, E. B. 



forming part of the Cannock Chase deposit. The town lies on 
the Roman Watling Street, and remains of earthworks are seen 
at Knave's Castle, on the Street, and at Castle Old Fort, 2 m. 
S.E. Ogley Hay, the parish of which partly covers Brownhills, 
is a large adjoining village; there are also Great Wyrley and 
Norton-under-Cannock or Norton Canes to the N.W. and N., 
with collieries, and at Church Bridge are brick, tile, and edge-tool 
works. Wyrley Grove is a picturesque mansion of the 17th 
century. 

BROWNING, ELIZABETH BARRETT (1806-1861), English 
poet, wife of the poet Robert Browning, was born probably at 
Coxhoe Hall, Durham, for this was the home of her father and 
mother for some time after their marriage in 1805. Her bap- 
tismal register gives the date of her birth as the 6th of March 
1806, and that of her christening as the 10th of February 1808. 
The long misunderstanding as to her age, whereby she was 
supposed to have been born three years later, was shared by her 
contemporaries and even for a time by her husband. She was 
the daughter and eldest child of Edward Barrett Moulton, who 
added the surname of Barrett on the death of his maternal 
grandfather, whose estates in Jamaica he inherited. His wife 
was Mary Grahair-CIarke, daughter of J. Graham-Clarke of 
Fenham Hall, Newcastle-on-Tyne. She died when her illustrious 
daughter was twenty-two years old. Elizabeth's childhood 
was passed in the country, chiefly at Hope End, a house bought 
by her father in the beautiful country in sight of the Malvern 
Hills. " They seem to me," she wrote, " my native hills; for 
though I was born in the county of Durham, I was an infant 
when I went first into their neighbourhood, and lived there 
until I had passed twenty by several years." Her country 
poems, such as " The Lost Bower," " Hector in the Garden," 
and " The Deserted Garden," refer to the woods and gardens 
of Hope End. Elizabeth Barrett was much the companion of 
her father, who pleased himself with printing fifty copies of 
what she calls her " great epic of eleven or twelve years old, in 
four books "—The Battle of Marathon (sent to the printer in 
1810). She owns this to have been " a curious production for 
a child," but disclaims for it anything more than " an imitative 
faculty." The love of Pope's Homer, she adds, led her to the 
study of Greek, and of Latin as a help to Greek, " and the influence 
of all those tendencies is manifest so long afterwards as in my 
Essay on Mind [Essay on Mind and other Poems, 1826], a didactic 
poem written when I was seventeen or eighteen, and long 
repented of." She was a keen student, and it is told of her that 
when her health failed she had her Greek books bound so as to 
look like novels, for fear her doctor should forbid her continuous 
study. At this time began her friendship with the blind scholar 
Hugh Stuart Boyd, with whom she read Greek authors, and 
especially the Greek Christian Fathers and Poets. To him she 
addressed later three of her sonnets, and he was one of her 
chief friends untft-his death in 1848. In 1832 Mr Barrett sold 
his house of Hope End, and brought his family to Sidmouth, 
Devon, for some three years. There Elizabeth made a transla- 
tion of the Prometheus Bound of Aeschylus, published with 
some original poems (1833). After that time London became 
the home of the Barretts until the children married and the 
father died. The temporary dwelling was at 74 Gloucester 
Place, Portnian Square, and in 1838 the lease was taken of the 
final house, 50 Wimpole Street. 

It is in the middle of the year 1836 that Elizabeth Barrett's 
active literary life began. She then made the acquaintance of 
R. H. Home, afterwards famous for a tirhe as the author of 
Orion, . but perhaps best remembered as her correspondent 
{Letters to R. H. Home, 2 vols. 1877), and this acquaintance led 
to the appearance of rather frequent poems by Miss Barrett in 
the New Monthly Magazine, edited by Bulwer (Lord Lytton), 
and in other magazines or annuals. But the publication of 
The Seraphim and other Poems (1838) was a graver step. " My 
present attempt," she writes in this year, " is actually, and will 
be considered by others, more a trial of strength than either of 
my preceding ones;" There was at that date a lull in the pro- 
duction of conspicuous books of poetry. Wordsworth had 



ceased, Browning and Tennyson had hardly begun to write 
their best. Miss Barrett's volume was well reviewed, but not 
popular, and no second edition was required; of the poems 
afterwards famous it contained three, " Cowper's Grave," 
" My Doves," and " The Sea-Mew," the first impassioned and 
the other two very quiet, which a fine taste must rank high 
among all her works. The Quarterly Review (September 1840), 
in an article on " Modern English Poetesses," criticizes The 
Seraphim with Prometheus, and treats the former with respect, 
but does not lift the author out of the quite unequal company 
of Mrs Norton, " V," and other contemporary women. In the 
previous year Elizabeth had made the memorable acquaintance 
of Wordsworth. " No," she writes, " I was not at all disap- 
pointed in Wordsworth, although perhaps I should not have 
singled him from the multitude as a great man. There is a 
reserve even in his countenance; ... his eyes have more 
meekness than brilliancy; and in his slow, even articulation 
there is rather the solemnity and calmness of truth itself than 
the animation and energy of those who seek for it . . . He was 
very kind, and sate near me and talked to me as long as he was 
in the room, and recited a translation by Cary of a sonnet of 
Dante's — and altogether it was a dream." With Landor, at the 
same date, a meeting took place that had long results. At this 
time, too, 'began another of Elizabeth's valued friendships — that 
with Miss Mitford, author of Our Village and other works less 
well remembered. Mr John Kenyon also became at about this 
time a dear and intimate friend. He was a distant cousin of the 
Barretts, had published some verse, and was a warm and generous 
friend to men of letters. From the date of the birth of their 
child (1849) he gave the Brownings a hundred pounds a year, 
and when he died in 1856 he bequeathed to them eleven thousand 
pounds. To him a great number of Elizabeth's letters are 
addressed, and to him in later years was Aurora Leigh dedicated. 
Elizabeth Barrett began also in London an acquaintance with 
Harriet Martineau. 

Full of the interest of friendship and literature, the residence 
in London was unfavourable to Elizabeth's health. In early 
girlhood she had a spinal affection, and her lungs became delicate. 
She broke a blood-vessel in the beginning of the Barretts' life 
in town, and was thereafter an invalid — by no means entirely 
confined to her room, but often imprisoned there, and generally 
a recluse, until her marriage. Her state was so threatening that 
in 1838 it was found necessary to remove her to Torquay, where 
she spent three years, accompanied by her brother Edward, the 
dearest of her eight brothers, the only one, she said many years 
later, who ever comprehended her, and for a time by her father 
and sisters. During this time of physical suffering she underwent 
the greatest grief of her life by the drowning of her beloved 
brother, who with two friends went sailing in a small boat and 
was lost in Babbacombe Bay. Rumours of the foundering 
reached the unhappy sister, who was assured of the worst after 
three days, when the bodies were found. The accident of 
Edward Barrett's meeting with his death through her residence 
at Torquay, and the minor accident of her having parted from 
him on the day of his death, as she said, " with pettish words," 
increased her anguish of heart to horror. A few days before 
she had written, " There are so many mercies close around me 
that God's being seems proved to me, demonstrated to me, by His 
manifested love." When the blow came, its heavy weight and 
closeness to her heart convinced her, she wrote, through an 
awful experience of suffering, of divine action. But many years 
later the mention of her brother's death was intolerable to her. 
At the time she only did not die. She had to remain for nearly 
a year day and night within hearing of the sea, of which the 
sound seemed to her the moan of a dying man. 

There is here an interval of silence in the correspondence 
which busied her secluded life at all ages; but with an 
impulse of self-protection she went to work as soon as her 
strength sufficed. One of her tasks was a part taken in the 
Chaucer Modernized (1841), a work suggested by Wordsworth, 
to which he, Leigh Hunt, Home and others contributed. In 
1S41 she returned to Wimpole Street, and in that and the 



BROWNING, E. B. 



669 



following year she was at work on two series of articles on the 
Greek Christian poets and on the English poets, written for 
the Athenaeum under the editorship of Mr C. W. Dilke. In work 
she found some interest and even some delight: " Once I wished 
not to live, but the faculty of life seems to have sprung up in 
me again from under the crushing foot of heavy grief. Be it 
all as God wills." 

It is in 1842 that we notice the name of Robert Browning 
in her letters: " Mr Home the poet and Mr Browning the poet 
were not behind in approbation," she says in regard to her work 
on the poets. " Mr Browning is said to be learned in Greek, 
especially the dramatists." In this year also she declares her 
love for Tennyson. To Kenyon she writes, " I ought to be thank- 
ing you for your great kindness about this divine Tennyson." 
In 1842, moreover, she had the pleasure of a letter from Words- 
worth, who had twice asked Kenyon for permission to visit her. 
The visit was not permitted on account of Miss Barrett's ill- 
health. Now Haydon sent her his unfinished painting of the great 
poet musing upon Helvellyn; she wrote her sonnet on the portrait, 
and Haydon sent it to Rydal Mount. Wordsworth's com- 
mendation is rather cool. In August 1843 " The Cry of the 
Children " appeared in Blackwood's Magazine, and during the 
year she was associated with her friend Home in a critical work, 
The New Spirit of the Age, rather by advice than by direct 
contribution. Her two volumes of poems (1844) appeared, 
six years after her former book, under the title of Poems, by 
Elizabeth Barrett Barrett. The warmest praises that greeted the 
new poems were H. F. Chorley's in the Athenaeum, John 
Forster's in the Examiner, and those conveyed in Blackwood, 
the Dublin Review, the New Quarterly and the Atlas. Letters 
came from Carlyle and others. Both he and Miss Martineau 
selected as their favourite poem " Lady Geraldine's Court- 
ship," a violent piece of work. In the beginning of the following 
year came the letter from a stranger that was to be so 
momentous to both. " I had a letter from Browning the poet 
last night," she writes to her old friend Mrs Martin, " which 
threw me into ecstasies — Browning, the author of Paracelsus, 
the king of the mystics." She is flattered, though not to 
" ecstasies," at about the same time by a letter from E. A. Poe, 
and by the dedication to her, as " the noblest of her sex," of 
his own work. " What is to be said, I wonder, when a man 
calls you the ' noblest of your sex ' ? ' Sir, you are the most 
discerning of yours.' " America was at least as quick as England 
to appreciate her poetry; among other messages thence came 
in the spring letters from Lowell and from Mrs Sigoumey. " She 
says that the sound of my poetry is stirring the ' deep green 
forests of the New World '; which sounds pleasantly, does it 
not?" It is in the same year that the letters first speak of the 
hope of a journey to Italy. The winters in London, with the 
imprisonment which — according to the medical practice of that 
day — they entailed, were lowering Elizabeth's strength of 
resistance against disease. She longed for the change of light, 
scene, manners and language, and the longing became a hope, 
until her father's prohibition put an end to it, and doomed her, 
as she and others thought, to death, without any perceptible 
reason for the denial of so reasonable a desire. 

Meanwhile the friendship with Browning had become the 
chief thing in Elizabeth Barrett's life. The correspondence, 
once begun, had not flagged. In the early summer they 
met. The allusion to his poetry in " Lady Geraldine's Court- 
ship " had doubtless put an edge to his already keen wish to 
know her. He became her frequent visitor and kept her 
room fragrant with flowers. He never lagged, whether in 
friendship or in love. We have the strange privilege, since 
the publication of the letters between the two, of following 
the whole course of this noble love-story from beginning to end, 
and day by day. Browning was six years younger than the 
woman he so passionately admired, and he at first believed her 
to be confined by some hopeless physical injury to her sofa. 
But of his own wish and resolution he never doubted. Her 
hesitation, in her regard for his liberty and strength, to burden 
him with an ailing wife, she has recorded in the Sonnets after- 



wards published under a slight disguise as Sonnets front the 
Portuguese. She refused him once " with all her will, but much 
against her heart," and yielded at last for his sake rather than 
her own. Her father's will was that his children should not 
marry, and, kind and affectionate father though he was, the 
prohibition took a violent form and. struck terror into the hearts 
of the three dutiful and sensitive girls. Robert Browning's 
addresses were, therefore, kept secret, for fear of scenes of anger 
which the most fragile of the three could not face. Browning 
was reluctant to practise the deception; Elizabeth alone knew 
hbw impossible it was to avoid it. When she was persuaded 
to marry, it was she who insisted, in mental and physical terror*, 
upon a secret wedding. Throughout the summer of 1846 her 
health improved, and on the 12th of September the two poets 
were married in St Marylebone parish church. Browning visited 
it on his subsequent journeys to England to give thanks for what 
had taken place at its altar. Elizabeth's two sisters had been 
permitted to know of the engagement, but not of the wedding, 
so that their father's anger might not fall on them too heavily. 
For a week Mrs Browning remained in her father's house. On 
the 19th of September she left it, taking her maid and her little 
dog, joined her husband, and crossed to the Continent. She 
never entered that home again, nor did her father ever forgive 
her. Her letters, written with tears to entreat his pardon, were 
never answered. They were all subsequently returned to her 
unopened. Among them was one she had written, in the prospect 
of danger, before the birth of her child. With her sisters her 
relations were, as before, most affectionate. Her brothers, one 
at least of whom disapproved of her action, held for a time 
aloof. All others were taken entirely by surprise. Mrs Jameson, 
who had been one of the few intimate visitors to Miss Barrett's 
room, had offered to take her to Italy that year, but met her 
instead on her way thither with a newly-married husband. 
The poets' journey was full of delight. Where she could not walk, 
up long staircases or across the waters of the stream at Vaucluse, 
Browning carried her. In October they reached Pisa, and 
there they wintered; Mrs Jameson keeping them company for 
a time lest ignorance of practical things should bring them, in 
their poverty, to trouble. She soon found that they were both 
admirable economists; not that they gave time and thought to 
husbandry, but that they knew how to enjoy life without luxuries. 
So they remained to the end, frugal and content with little. 

For climate and cheapness they settled in Italy, choosing 
Florence in the spring of 1847, and remaining there, with the 
interruptions of a change to places in Italy such as Siena and 
Rome, and to Paris and England, until Mrs Browning's death. 
It was at Pisa that Robert Browning first saw the Sonnets from 
the Portuguese, poems which his wife had written in secret and 
had no thought of publishing. He, however, resolved to give 
them to the world. " I dared not," he said, " reserve to myself 
the finest sonnets written in any language since Shakespeare's." 
The judgment, which the existence of Wordsworth's sonnets 
renders obviously absurd, may be pardoned. The sonnets were 
sent to Miss Mitford and published at Reading, as Sonnets by 
E.B.B., in 1847. In 1850 they were included, under their final 
title, in a new issue of poems. During the Pisan autumn appeared 
in Blackwood's Magazine seven poems by Mrs Browning which she 
had sent some time before, and the publication of which at that 
moment disturbed her as likely to hurt her father by an apparent 
reference to her otto story. At Pisa also she wrote and sent to 
America a poem, " The Runaway Slave at Pilgrim Point," 
which was published in Boston, in The Liberty Bell, in 1848, 
and separately in England in 1849. In the summer of 1847 the 
Brownings left their temporary dwelling in Florence and took 
the apartment in Casa Guidi, near the Pitti Palace, which wa^ 
thenceforth their chief home. Early in their residence 'began 
that excited interest in Italian affairs which made so great 'a 
part of Mrs Browning's emotional life. The Florentines, under 
the government of the grand duke, were prosperous but disturbed 
by national aspirations. Mrs Browning, by degrees, ' wrote 
Casa Guidi Windows on their behalf and as an appeal -to the 
always impulsive sympathies of England. In 1849 was borii 



670 



BROWNING, O.— BROWNING, R. 



the Brownings' only child, their beloved son Robert Wiedemann 
Barrett. After this event Mrs Browning resumed her literary 
activities, preparing a new issue, with some additions, of her 
poems (1850). A poem on the death of a friend's child ap- 
peared in the Athenaeum (1849), and there the new volumes were 
warmly praised. Casa Guidi Windows followed in 185 1. Visiting 
England in that year, the Brownings saw much of the Procters, 
and something of Florence Nightingale, Kingsley, Ruskin, 
Rogers, Patmore and Tennyson, and also of Carlyle, with whom 
they went to Paris, where they saw George Sand, and where 
they passed the December days of the coup d'Slat. Mrs 
Browning happened to take a political fancy to Napoleon III., 
whom she would probably have denounced if a tithe of his 
tyrannies had occurred in Italy, and the fancy became more 
emotional in after years. 

A new edition of Mrs Browning's poems was called for in 1853, 
and at about this time, in Florence, she began to work on Aurora 
Leigh. She was still writing this poem when the Brownings were 
again in England, in 1855. Tennyson there read to them his 
newly-written Maud. After another interval in Paris they were 
in London again — Mrs Browning for the last time. She was 
with her dear cousin Kenyon during the last months of his life. 
In October 1856 the Brownings returned to their Florentine 
home, Mrs Browning leaving her completed Aurora Leigh for 
publication. The book had an immediate success; a second 
edition was required in a fortnight, a third a few months later. 
In the fourth edition (1859) several corrections were made. The 
review in Blackwood was written by W. E. Aytoun, that in the 
North British by Coventry Patmore. 

In 1857 Mrs Browning addressed a petition, in the form 
of a letter, to the emperor Napoleon begging him to remit the 
sentence of exile upon Victor Hugo. We do not hear of any 
reply. In 1857 Mrs Browning's father died, unreconciled. 
Henrietta Barrett had married, like her sister, and like her was 
unforgiven. In 1858 occurred another visit to Paris, and another 
to '. Rome, where Hawthorne and his iamily were among the 
Brownings' friends. In 1859 came the Italian war in which 
Mrs Browning's hasty sympathies were hotly engaged. Her 
admiration of Italy's champion, Napoleon III., knew no bounds, 
and did not give way when, by the peace of Villafranca, Venice 
and Rome were left unannexed to the kingdom of Italy, and the 
French frontiers were " rectified " by the withdrawal from that 
kingdom of Savoy and Nice. That peace, however, was a bitter 
disappointment, and her fragile health suffered. At Siena and 
Florence this year the Brownings were very kind to Landor, old, 
solitary, and ill. Mrs Browning's poem, " A Tale of Villafranca," 
was published in the Athenaeum in September, and afterwards 
included in Poems before Congress (i860). Then followed another 
long visit to Rome, and there Mrs Browning prepared for the press 
this, her last volume. The little book was judged with some 
impatience, A Curse for a Nation being mistaken for a denuncia- 
tion of England, whereas it was aimed at America and her slavery. 
The Athenaeum, amongst others, committed this error. The 
Saturday Review was hard on the volume, so was Blackwood; 
the A Has and Daily News favourable. In July 1 860 was published 
" A Musical Instrument " in the young Cornhill Magazine, edited 
by the author's friend W. M. Thackeray. The last blow she had 
to endure was the death of her sister Henrietta, in the same year. 

On the 30th of June 1861 Elizabeth Barrett Browning died. 
Her husband, who tended her alone on the night of her decease, 
wrote to Miss Blagden: " Then came what my heart will keep 
till I see her again and longer — the most perfect expression of her 
love to me within my whole knowledge of her. Always smilingly, 
happily, and with a face like a girl's, and in a few minutes she 
died in my arms, her head on my cheek. . . . There was no 
lingering, nor acute pain, nor consciousness of separation, but 
God took her to himself as you would lift a sleeping child from a 
dark uneasy bed into your arms and the light. Thank God." 
Her married life had been supremely happy. Something has been 
said of the difference between husband and wife in regard to 
" spiritualism," in which Mrs Browning had interest and faith, 
but no division ever interrupted their entirely perfect affection 



and happiness. Of her husband's love for her she wrote at the 
time of her marriage, " He preferred ... of free and deliberate 
choice, to be allowed to sit only an hour a day by my side, to the 
fulfilment of the brightest dream which should exclude me in 
any possible world." "I am still doubtful whether all the 
brightness can be meant for me. It is just as if the sun rose again 
at 7 o'clock p.m." " I take it for pure magic, this life of mine. 
Surely nobody was ever so happy before." " I must say to you 
[Mrs Jameson] who saw the beginning with us, that this end of 
fifteen months is just fifteen times better and brighter; the 
mystical ' moon ' growing larger and larger till scarcely room is 
left for any stars at all: the only differences which have touched 
me being the more and more happiness." Browning buried his 
wife in Florence, under a tomb designed by their friend Frederick 
Leighton. On the wall of Casa Guidi is placed the inscription: 
" Qui scrisse e mori Elisabetta Barrett Browning, che in cuore di 
donna concilia va scienza di dotto e spirito di poeta, e face del suo 
verso aureo annello fra Italia e Inghilterra. Pone questa lapide 
Firenze grata 1861." In 1866 Robert Browning published a 
volume of selections from his wife's works. 

The place of Elizabeth Barrett Browning in English literature 
is high, if not upon the summits. She had an original genius, a 
fervent heart, and an intellect that was, if not great, exceedingly 
active. She seldom has composure or repose, but it is not true 
that her poetry is purely emotional. It is full of abundant, 
and even over-abundant, thoughts It is intellectually restless. 
The impassioned peace of the greatest poetry, such as Words- 
worth's, is not hers. Nor did she apparently seek to attain those 
heights. Her Greek training taught her little of the economy 
that such a poetic education is held to impose; she " dashed," 
not by reason of feminine weakness, but as it were to prove her 
possession of masculine strength. Her gentler work, as in the 
Sonnets from the Portuguese, is beyond praise. There is in her 
poetic personality a glory of righteousness, of spirituality, and of 
ardour that makes her name a splendid one in the history of an 
incomparable literature. 

See the Letters of Elizabeth Barrett Browning addressed to R. H. 
Home, with Comments on Contemporaries, edited by S. R. Town- 
shend Mayer (2 vols., 1877) ;. The Poetical Works of Elizabeth Barrett 
Browning from 1826 to 1844, edited with memoir by J. H. Ingram 
(1887); Elizabeth Barrett Browning (Eminent Women series), by 
J. H. Ingram, 1888) ; Records of Tennyson, Ruskin and the Brownings, 
by Anne Ritchie (1892); The Letters of Elizabeth Barrett Browning, 
edited with biographical additions by Frederick G. Kenyon (2 vols., 
1897); The Letters of Robert Browning and Elizabeth Barrett Barrett 
(2 vols., 1899); La Vie et V ozuvre a" Elizabeth Browning, by Mdlle. 
Germaine- Marie Merlette (Paris, 1906). (A. Me.) 

BROWNING, OSCAR (1837- ), English writer, was born in 
London on the 17th of January 1837, the son of a merchant, 
William Shipton Browning. He was educated at Eton and at 
King's College, Cambridge, of which he became fellow and tutor, 
graduating fourth in the classical tripos of 1 860. He was for fifteen 
years a master at Eton College, resuming residence in 1876 at 
Cambridge, where he became university lecturer in history. He 
soon became a prominent figure in college and university life, 
encouraging especially the study of political science and modern 
political history, the extension of university teaching and the 
movement for the training of teachers. He is well known to 
Dante students by his Dante; Life and Works (1891), and to the 
study of Italian history he has contributed Guelphs and Ghibel- 
lines (1903). His works on modern history include England and 
Napoleon in 1803 (1887), History of England (4 vols. 1890), Wars 
of the Nineteenth Century (1899), History of Europe 18 14-1843 
(1901), Napoleon, the first Phase (1905). 

BROWNING, ROBERT (181 2-1889), English poet, was born 
at Camberwell, London, on the 7th of May 181 2. He was the 
son of Robert Browning (1781-1866), who for fifty years was 
employed in the Bank of England. Earlier Brownings had been 
settled in Wiltshire and Dorsetshire, and there is no ground for 
the statement that the family was partly of Jewish origin. 
The poet's mother was a daughter of William Wiedemann, a 
German who had settled in Dundee and married a Scottish wife. 
His parents had one other child, a daughter, Sarianna, born in 
1814. They lived quietly in Camberwell. The elder Browning 



BROWNING, ROBERT 



671 



had a sufficient income and was indifferent to money-making. 
He had strong literary and artistic tastes. He was an ardent 
book collector, and so good a draughtsman that paternal 
authority alone had prevented him from adopting an artistic 
career. He had, like his son, a singular faculty for versifying, 
and helped the boy's early lessons by twisting the Latin grammar 
into grotesque rhymes. He lived, as his father had done, to be 
84, with unbroken health. The younger Robert inherited, along 
with other characteristics, much of his father's vigour of con- 
stitution. From the mother, who had delicate health, he prob- 
ably derived his excessive nervous irritability ; and from her, 
too, came his passion for music. The family was united by the 
strongest mutual affection, and the parents erred, if anything, on 
the side of indulgence. Browning was sent to a school in the 
neighbourhood, but left it when fourteen, and had little other 
teaching. He had a French tutor for the next two years, and in 
his eighteenth year he attended some Greek lectures at the 
London University. At school he never won a prize, though 
it was more difficult to avoid than to win prizes. He was more 
conspicuous for the love of birds and beasts, which he always 
retained, than for any interest in his lessons. He rather despised 
his companions and made few friends. A precocious poetical 
capacity, however, showed itself in extra-scholastic ways. He 
made his schoolfellows act plays, partly written by himself. He 
had composed verses before he could write, and when twelve 
years old completed a volume of poems called Incondita. His 
parents tried unsuccessfully to find a publisher; but his verses 
were admired by Sarah Flower, afterwards Mrs Adams, a well- 
known hymn-writer of the day, and by W. J. Fox, both of whom 
became valuable friends. A copy made by Miss Flower was in 
existence in 187 1, but afterwards destroyed by the author. 
Browning had the run of his father's library, and acquired a very 
unusual amount of miscellaneous reading. Quarles' Emblems was 
an especial favourite; and besides the Elizabethan dramatists 
and standard English books, he had read all the works of Voltaire. 
Byron was his first master in poetry, but about the age of four- 
teen he fell in accidentally with Shelley and Keats. For Shelley 
in particular he conceived an enthusiatic admiration which 
lasted for many years, though it was qualified in his later life. 

The more aggressive side of Browning's character was as yet 
the most prominent; and a self-willed lad, conscious of a grow- 
ing ability, found himself cramped in Camberwell circles. He 
rejected the ordinary careers. He declined the offer of a clerkship 
in the Bank of England; and his father, who had found the 
occupation uncongenial, not only approved the refusal but 
cordially accepted the son's decision to take poetry for his pro- 
fession. For good or evil, Browning had been left very much to 
his own guidance, and if his intellectual training suffered in some 
directions, the liberty permitted the development of his marked 
originality. The parental yoke, however, was too light to pro- 
voke rebellion. Browning's mental growth led to no violent 
breach with the creeds of his childhood. His parents became 
Dissenters in middle life, but often attended Anglican services; 
and Browning, though he abandoned the dogmas, continued to 
sympathize with the spirit of their creed. He never took a keen 
interest in the politics of the day, but cordially accepted the 
general position of contemporary Liberalism. His worship of 
Shelley did not mean an acceptance of his master's hostile 
attitude towards Christianity, still less did he revolt against the 
moral discipline under which he had been educated. He fre- 
quented literary and artistic circles, and was passionately fond 
of the theatre; but he was entirely free from a coarse Bohemian- 
ism, and never went to bed, we are told, without kissing his 
mother. He lived with his parents until his marriage. His 
mother lived till 1849, and his father till 1866, and his affectionate 
relations to both remained unaltered. Browning's first published 
poem, Pauline, appeared anonymously in 1833. He always 
regarded it as crude, and destroyed all the copies of this edition 
that came within his reach. It was only to avoid unauthorized 
reprints that he consented with reluctance to republishing it in 
the collected works of 1868. The indication of genius was recog- 
nized by W. J. Fox, who hailed it in the Monthly Repository as 



marking the advent of a true poet. Pauline contains an en- 
thusiastic invocation of Shelley, whose influence, upon its style 
and conception is strongly marked. It is the only one of Brown- 
ing's works which can be regarded as imitative. In the winter 
of 1833 he went to St Petersburg on a visit to the Russian 
consul-general, Mr Benckhausen. There he wrote the earliest 
of his dramatic lyrics, " Porphyria's Lover " and " Johannes 
Agricola." In the spring of 1834 he visited Italy for the first 
time, going to Venice and Asolo. 

Browning's personality was fully revealed in his next consider- 
able poems, Paracelsus (1835) and Sordello( 1840). With Pauline, 
however, they form a group. In an essay (prefixed to the 
spurious Shelley letters of 1851), Browning describes Shelley's 
poetry " as a sublime fragmentary essay towards a presentment 
of the correspondency of the universe to Deity." The phrase 
describes his own view of the true functions of a poet, and 
Browning, having accepted the vocation, was meditating the 
qualifications which should fit him for his task. The hero of 
Pauline is in a morbid state of mind which endangers his fidelity 
to his duty. Paracelsus and Sordello are studies in the psychology 
of genius, illustrating its besetting temptations. Paracelsus fails 
from intellectual pride, not balanced by love of his kind, and from 
excessive ambition, which leads him to seek success by unworthy 
means. Sordello is a poet distracted between the demands of a 
dreamy imagination and the desire to utter the thoughts of man- 
kind. He finally gives up poetry for practical politics, and gets 
into perplexities only to be solved by his death. Pauline might 
in some indefinite degree reflect Browning's own feelings, but in 
the later poems he adopts his characteristic method of speaking in 
a quasi-dramatic mood. They are, as he gave notice, " poems, 
not dramas." The interest is not in the external events, but in 
the " development of a soul "; but they are observations of other 
men's souls, not direct revelations of his own. Paracelsus was 
based upon a study of the original narrative, and Sordello was 
a historical though a very indefinite person. The background 
of history is intentionally vague in both cases. There is one 
remarkable difference between them. The Paracelsus, though 
full of noble passages, is certainly diffuse. Browning heard that 
John Sterling had complained of its " verbosity," and tried to 
remedy this failing by the surgical expedient of cutting out the 
usual connecting words. Relative pronouns henceforth become 
scarce in his poetry, and the grammatical construction often a 
matter of conjecture. Words are forcibly jammed together 
instead of being articulately combined. To the ordinary reader 
many passages in his later work are both crabbed and obscure, 
but the " obscurity " never afterwards reached the pitch of 
Sordello. It is due to the vagueness with which the story is 
rather hinted than told, as well as to the subtlety and intricacy 
of the psychological expositions. The subtlety and vigour of 
the thought are indeed surprising, and may justify the frequent 
comparisons to Shakespeare; and it abounds in descriptive 
passages of genuine poetry. 

Still, Browning seems to have been misled by a fallacy. It 
was quite legitimate to subordinate the external incidents to 
the psychological development in which he was really interested, 
but to secure the subordination by making the incidents barely 
intelligible was not a logical consequence. We should not 
understand Hamlet's psychological peculiarities the better if 
we had to infer his family troubles from indirect hints. Brown- 
ing gave more time to Sordello than to any other work, and 
perhaps had become so familiar with the story which he professed 
to tell that he failed to make allowance for his readers' diffi- 
culties. In any case it was not surprising that the ordinary 
reader should be puzzled and repelled, and the general recognition 
of his genius long delayed, by his reputation for obscurity. It 
might, however, be expected that he would make a more success- 
ful appeal to the public by purely dramatic work, in which he 
would have to limit his psychological speculation and to place 
his characters in plain situations. Paracelsus and Sordello show 
so great a power of reading character and appreciating subtler 
springs of conduct that its author clearly had one, at least, of 
the essential qualifications of a dramatist. 



672 



BROWNING, ROBERT 



Before Sordello appeared Browning had tried his hand in this 
direction. He was encouraged by outward circumstances as 
well as by his natural bent. He was making friends and gaining 
some real appreciative admirers. John Forster had been greatly 
impressed by Paracelsus. Browning's love of the theatre had 
led to an introduction to Macready in the winter of 1835-1836; 
and Macready, who had been also impressed by Paracelsus, 
asked him for a play. Browning consented and wrote Strafford, 
which was produced at Covent Garden in May 1837, Macready 
taking the principal part. Later dramas were King Victor and 
King Charles, published in 1842; The Return of the Druses and 
A Blot onthe' Scutcheon (both in 1843), Colombe's Birthday (1844), 
Luria and A Soul's Tragedy (both in 1846), and the fragmentary 
In a Balcony (1853). Strafford succeeded fairly, though the 
defection of Vandenhoff, who took the part of Pym, stopped 
its run after the fifth performance. The Blot on the 'Scutcheon, 
produced by Macready as manager of Drury Lane on the 1 ith of 
February 1 843, led to an unfortunate quarrel. Browning thought 
that Macready had felt unworthy jealousy of another actor, 
and had gratified his spite by an inadequate presentation of 
the play! He remonstrated indignantly and the friendship was 
broken off for years. Browning was disgusted by his experience 
of the annoyances of practical play-writing, though he was not 
altogether discouraged. The play had apparently such a 
moderate success as was possible under the conditions, and a 
similar modest result was attained by Colombe's Birthday, pro- 
duced at Covent Garden on the 25th of April 1853. Browning, 
like other eminent writers of the day, failed to achieve the feat 
of attracting the British public by dramas of high literary aims, 
and soon gave up the attempt. It has been said by competent 
critics that some of the plays could be fitted for the stage by 
judicious adaptation. The Blot on the 'Scutcheon has a very 
clear and forcibly treated situation; and all the plays abound 
in passages of high poetic power. Like the poems, they deal 
with situations involving a moral probation of the characters, 
and often suggesting the ethical problems which always interested 
him. The speeches tend to become elaborate analyses of motive 
by the persons concerned, and try the patience of an average 
audience. For whatever reason, Browning, though he had given 
sufficient proofs of genius, had not found in these works the 
most appropriate mode of utterance. 

The dramas, after Strafford, formed the greatest part of a 
series of pamphlets called Bells and Pomegranates, eight of which 
were issued from 1841 to 1846. The name, he explained, was 
intended to indicate an " alternation of poetry and thought." 
The first number contained the fanciful and characteristic Pippa 
Passes. The seventh, significantly named Dramatic Romances 
and Lyrics, contained some of his most striking shorter poems. 
In 1844 he contributed six poems, among which were " The 
Flight of the Duchess " and " The Bishop orders his Tomb at 
St Praxed's Church," to Hood's Magazine, in order to help Hood, 
then in his last illness. These poems take the special form in 
which Browning is unrivalled. He wrote very few lyrical poems 
of the ordinary kind purporting to give a direct expression of 
his own personal emotions. But, in the lyric which gives the 
essential sentiment of some impressive dramatic situation, he 
has rarely been approached. There is scarcely one of the poems 
published at this time which can be read without fixing itself 
at once in the memory as a forcible and pungent presentation 
of a characteristic mood. Their vigour and originality failed 
to overcome at once the presumption against the author of 
Sordello. Yet Browning was already known to and appreciated 
by such literary celebrities of the day as Talfourd, Leigh Hunt, 
Procter, Monckton Milnes, Carlyle and Landor. His fame began 
to spread among sympathetic readers. The Bells and Pome- 
granates attracted the rising school of " pre-Raphaelites," 
especially D. G. Rossetti, who guessed the authorship of the 
anonymous Pauline and made a transcript from the copy in the 
British Museum. But his audience was still select. 

Another recognition of his genius was of incomparably more 
personal importance and vitally affected his history. In 1844 
Miss Barrett (see Browning, Elizabeth Barrett) published 



a volume of poems containing "Lady Geraldine's Courtship," 
with a striking phrase about Browning's ; poems. He ' was 
naturally gratified, and her special friend and cousin, John 
Kenyon, encouraged him to write to her. She admitted him to 
a personal interview after a little diffidence, and a hearty ap- 
preciation of literary genius on both sides was speedily ripened 
into genuine and most devoted love. Miss Barrett was six years 
older than Browning and a confirmed invalid with shaken nerves'. 
She was tenderly attached to an autocratic father who objected 
on principle to the marriage of his children. The correspondence 
of the lovers (published in 1899) shows not only their mutual 
devotion, but the chivalrous delicacy with Which Browning 
behaved in a most trying situation. Miss Barrett was gradu- 
ally encouraged to disobey the utterly unreasonable despotism. 
They made a clandestine marriage on the 1 2th of September 1846. 
The state of Miss Barrett's health suggested misgivings which 
made Browning's parents as well as his bride's disapprove of 
the match. She, however, appears to have become stronger 
for some time, though always fragile and incapable of much 
active exertion. She had already been recommended to pass a 
winter in Italy. Browning had made three previous tours there, 
and his impressions had been turned to account in Sordello 
and Pippa Passes, in The Englishman in Italy and Home 
Thoughts from Abroad. For the next fifteen years the Brown- 
ings lived mainly in Italy, making their headquarters at Florence 
in the Casa Guidi. A couple, of winters were passed in Rome. 
In the summer of 1849 they were at Siena, where Browning was 
helpful to Landor, then in his last domestic troubles. They also 
visited England and twice spent some months in Paris. Their 
only child, Robert Wiedemann Browning, was born at Florence 
in 1849. Browning's literary activity during his marriage seems 
to have been comparatively small; Christmas Eve and Easter 
Day appeared in 1850, While the two volumes called Men and 
Women (1855), containing some of his best work, showed that his 
power was still growing. His position involved some sacrifice 
and imposed limitations upon his energies. Mrs Browning's 
health required a secluded life; and Browning, it is said, never 
dined out during his marriage, though he enjoyed society and 
made many and very warm friendships. Among their Florence 
friends were Margaret Fuller Ossoli, Isa Blagden, Charles Lever 
and others. The only breach of complete sympathy with his 
wife was due to his contempt for " spiritualists " and " mediums," 
in whom she fully believed. His portrait of Daniel Dunglas 
Home as " Sludge the Medium " only appeared after her death. 
This domestic happiness, however, remained essentially unbroken 
until she died on 29th June 1861. The whole love-story had 
revealed the singular nobility of his character, and, though 
crushed for a time by the blow, he bore it manfully. Browning 
determined to return to England and superintend his boy's 
education at home. He took a house at 19 Warwick Crescent,' 
Paddington, and became gradually acclimatized in London. 
He resumed his work and published the Dramatis Personae in 
1864. The publication was well enough received to mark the 
growing recognition of his genius, which was confirmed by The 
Ring and the Book, published in four volumes in the winter of 
1868-1869. In 1867 the university of Oxford gave him the 
degree of M.A. " by diploma," and Balliol College elected him 
as an honorary fellow. In 1868 he declined a virtual offer of the 
rectorship of St Andrews. He repeated the refusal on a later 
occasion (1884) from a dislike to the delivery of a public address. 
The rising generation was now beginning to buy his books; 
and he shared the homage of thoughtful readers with Tennyson, 
though in general popularity he could not approach his friendly 
rival. The Ring and the Book has been generally accepted as 
Browning's masterpiece. It was based on a copy of the precis 
verbal of Guido Franceschini's case discovered by him at Florence. 
The audacity of the scheme is surprising. To tell the- story of 
a hideous murder twelve times over, to versify the arguments 
of counsel and the gossip of quidnuncs, and to insist upon every 
detail with the minuteness of a law report, could have occurred 
to no one else. The poem is so far at the opposite pole from Sor- 
dello. Vagueness of environment is replaced by a photographic 



BROWNING, ROBERT 



673 



distinctness, though the psychological interest is dominant in 
both. Particular phrases may be crabbed, but nothing can be 
more distinct and vivid in thought and conception. If some 
of those " dramatic monologues " of which the book is formed 
fail to be poetry at all, some of them— that of Pompilia the 
victim, her champion Caponsacchi, and the pope who gives 
judgment — are in Browning's highest mood, and are as im- 
pressive from the ethical as from the poetical point of view. 
Pompilia was no doubt in some respects an idealized portrait 
of Mrs Browning. Other pieces may be accepted as a background 
of commonplace to throw the heroic into the stronger ■ relief . 
The Ring and the Book is as powerful as its method is unique. 

Browning became gentler and more urbane as he grew older. 
His growing fame made him welcome in all cultivated circles, 
and he accepted the homage of his admirers with dignity and 
simplicity. He exerted himself to be agreeable in private 
society, though his nervousness made him invariably decline 
ever to make public speeches. He was an admirable talker, 
and took pains to talk his best. A strong memory supplied him 
with abundant anecdotes; and though occasionally pugnacious, 
he allowed a fair share of the conversation to his companions. 
Superficial observers sometimes fancied that the poet was too 
much sunk in the man of the world; but the appearance was 
due to his characteristic reluctance to lay bare his deeper feelings. 
When due occasion offered, the underlying tenderness of his 
affections was abundantly manifest. No one could show more 
delicate sympathy. He made many warm personal friendships 
in his later years, especially with women, to whom he could 
most easily confide his feelings. In the early years of this 
period he paid visits to country houses, but afterwards preferred 
to retire farther from the London atmosphere into secluded 
regions. He passed some holidays in remote French villages, 
Pornic, Le Croisic and St Aubyn, which have left traces in his 
poetry. Gold Hair is a legend of Pornic, and Herve Riel 
was written at Le Croisic. At St Aubyn he had the society of 
Joseph Milsand, who had shown his warm appreciation of Brown- 
ing 's poetry by an article in the Revue des Deux Mondes, which 
in 1852 had led to a personal friendship lasting till Milsand's 
death in 1886. Browning sent to him the proof-sheets of all his 
later works for revision. In 1877 Browning was at La Saisiaz 
on the Saleve, near Geneva, where an old friend, Miss Egerton 
Smith, was staying. She died suddenly almost in his presence. 
She had constantly accompanied him to concerts during his 
London life. After her death he almost ceased to care for 
music. The shock of her loss produced the singular poem 
called La Saisiaz, in which he argues the problem of personal 
immortality with a rather indefinite conclusion. In later years 
Browning returned to Italy, and passed several autumns at 
Venice. He never visited Florence after his wife's death there. 

Browning's literary activity continued till almost the end of 
his life. He wrote constantly, though he composed more slowly. 
He considered twenty-five or thirty lines to be a good day's 
work. His later writings covered a very great variety of subjects, 
and were cast in many different forms. They show the old 
characteristics and often the old genius. Browning's marked 
peculiarity, the union of great speculative acuteness with intense 
poetical insight, involved difficulties which he did not always 
surmount. He does not seem to know whether he is writing 
poetry or when he is versifying logic ; and when the speculative 
impulse gets the upper hand, his work suggests the doubt 
whether an imaginary dialogue in prose would not have been a 
more effective medium. He is analysing at length when he 
ought to be presenting a concrete type, while the necessities 
of verse complicate and obscure the reasoning. A curious 
example is the Prince Hohenstiel-Schwangau (1871),. an alias 
for Louis Napoleon. The attempt to show how a questionable 
hero apologizes to himself recalls the very powerful " Bishop 
Blougram," and '' Sludge, the medium," of earlier works, but 
becomes prolix and obscure. Fifine at the Fair (1872) is another 
curious speculation containing a defence of versatility in love- 
making by an imaginary Don Juan. Its occasionally cynical 
tone rather scandalized admirers, who scarcely made due 
iv 22 



allowance for its dramatic character. Browning's profound 
appreciation of high moral qualities is, however, always one 
main source of his power. In later years he became especially 
interested in stories of real life, which show character passing 
through some sharp ordeal. The Red Cotton Nightcap Country 
(1873), describing a strange tragedy which had recently taken 
place in France, and especially The Inn Album (1875), founded 
on an event in modern English society, are powerful applications 
of the methods already exemplified in The Ring and the Book. 
The Dramatic Idyls (1879 and 1880) are a collection of direct 
narratives, with less analytical disquisition, which surprised his 
readers by their sustained vigour. In the last volumes, Jocoseria 
(1883), Ferishtah's Fancies (1884), Parleyings with Certain 
People (1887) and Asolando (1880), the old power is still apparent 
but the hand is beginning to fail. They contain discussions of 
metaphysical problems, such as the origin of evil, which are 
interesting as indications of his creed, but can scarcely be 
regarded as successful either poetically or philosophically. 

Another group of poems showed Browning's interest in Greek 
literature. Balaustion's Adventure (1871) includes a " transcript 
from Euripides," a translation, that is, of part of the Alcestis. 
Aristophanes' Apology (1875) included another translation from 
the Heracles, and in 1877 he published a very literal translation 
of the Agamemnon. This, it seems, was meant to disprove the 
doctrine that /Eschylus was a model of literary style. Brown- 
ing shared his wife's admiration for Euripides, and takes a phrase 
from one of her poems as a motto for Balaustion's Adventure. 
In the Aristophanes' Apology this leads characteristically to a 
long exposition by Aristophanes of his unsatisfactory reasons 
for ridiculing Euripides. It recalls the apologies of "Blougram" 
and Louis Napoleon, and contains some interesting indications 
of his poetical theory. Browning was to many readers as much 
prophet as poet. His religious position is most explicitly, though 
still not very clearly, set forth in the Christmas Eve and Easter 
Day (1850). Like many eminent contemporaries, he combined 
a disbelief in orthodox dogma with a profound conviction of the 
importance to the religious instincts of the symbols incorporated 
in accepted creeds. Saul (1845), A Death in the Desert (1864), 
and similar poems, show his strong sympathy with the spirit 
of the old belief, though his argumentative works have a more 
or less sceptical turn. It was scarcely possible, if desirable, to be 
original on such topics. His admirers hold that he shows an 
affinity to German metaphysicians, though he had never read 
their works nor made any express study of metaphysical ques- 
tions. His distinctive tendency is to be found rather in the 
doctrine of life and conduct which both suggests and is illustrated 
by his psychological analyses. A very characteristic thought 
emphatically set forth in the Rabbi Ben Ezra (1864). and the 
Grammarian's Funeral (1855) is that a man's value is to be 
measured, not by the work done, but by the character which 
has been moulded. He delights in exhibiting the high moral 
instinct which dares to override ordinary convictions, or which 
is content with discharge of obscure duties, or superior to vulgar 
ambition and capable of self-sacrifice, because founded upon 
pure love and sympathy for human suffering. Browning's 
limitations are characteristic of the poetry of strong ethical 
preoccupations. His strong idiosyncrasy, his sympathy with 
the heroic .and hatred of the base, was hardly to be combined 
with the Shakespearian capacity for sympathizing with the most 
varied types of character. Though he deals with a great variety 
of motive with singularly keen analysis, he takes almost exclus- 
ively the moral point of view. That point of view, however, has 
its importance, and his morality is often embodied in poetry 
of surpassing force. Browning's love of the grotesque, somei 
times even of the horrible, creates many most graphic and inf 
delible portraits. The absence of an exquisite sense for t% right 
word is compensated by the singular power of striking the most 
brilliant flashes out of obviously wrong words, and forcing comic 
rhymes to express the deepest and most serious thoughts. 
Though he professed to care little for motive as apart from 
human interest, his incidental touches of description are un- 
surpassably vivid. 

11 



674 



BROWN-SEQUARD— BROWNSON 



The appreciation of Browning's genius became general in his 
later years, and zeal was perhaps a little heightened by the com- 
placency of disciples able to penetrate a supposed mist of 
obscurity. The Browning Society, founded in 1881 by Dr F. J. 
Furnivall and Miss E. H. Hickey, was a product of this apprecia- 
tion, and helped to extend the study of the poems. Browning 
accepted the homage in a simple and friendly way, though he 
avoided any action which would make him responsible for the 
publications. He received various honours: LL.D. degree from 
Cambridge in 1879, the D.C.L. from Oxford in 1882, and LL.D. 
from Edinburgh in 1884. He became foreign correspondent 
to the Royal Academy in 1886. His sen, who had settled at 
Venice, married in 1887, and Browning moved to De Vere 
Gardens. In the autumn of 1889 he went with his sister to visit 
his son, and stayed on the way at Asolo, which he had first seen 
in 1838, when it supplied the scenery of Pippa Passes. He was 
charmed with the place, and proposed to buy a piece of ground 
and to build upon it a house to be called " Pippa's Tower" — in 
memory of his early heroine. While his proposal was under con- 
sideration he went to his son at Venice. His health had been 
breaking for some time, and a cold, aggravated by weakness of 
the heart, brought on a fatal attack. He died on the 12th 
of December 1889. He was buried in Westminster Abbey 
on 31st December. It was suggested that his wife's body 
should be removed from Florence to be placed beside him; 
but their son rightly decided that her grave should not be 
disturbed. 

Browning's personal characteristics are so strongly stamped 
upon all his works that it is difficult to assign his place in con- 
temporary thought. He is unique and outside of all schools. 
His style is so peculiar that he is the easiest of all poets to parody 
and the most dangerous to imitate. In spite of his early Shelley 
worship he is in certain respects more closely related to Words- 
worth. Both of them started by accepting the poet's mission 
as quasi-prophetical or ethical. In other respects they are dia- 
metrically contrasted. Wordsworth expounded his philosophy 
by writing a poetical autobiography. Browning adheres to the 
dramatic method of which Wordsworth was utterly incapable. 
He often protested against the supposition that he put himself 
into his books. Yet there is no writer whose books seem to 
readers to be clearer revelations of himself. Nothing, in fact, 
is more characteristic of a man than his judgments of other men, 
and Browning's are keen and unequivocal. The revolutionary 
impulse had died out, and Browning has little to say either 
of the political questions which had moved Shelley and Byron, 
or of the social problems which have lately become more pro- 
minent. He represents the thought of a quieter epoch. He 
was little interested, too, in the historical or " romantic " aspect 
of life. He takes his subjects from a great variety of scenes 
and places — from ancient Greece, medieval Italy and modern 
France and England; but the interest for him is not in the 
picturesque surroundings, but in the human being who is to be 
found in all periods. Like Balzac, whom he always greatly 
admired, he is interested in the eternal tragedy and comedy of 
life. His problem is always to show what are the really noble 
elements which are eternally valuable in spite of failure to achieve 
tangible results. He gives, so far, another version of Words- 
worth's doctrine of the cultivation of the " moral being." The 
psychological acuteness and the subtle analysis of character are, 
indeed, peculiar to himself. Like Carlyle, with whom he had 
certain points of affinity, he protests, though rather by impli- 
cation than direct denunciation, against the utilitarian or 
materialistic view of life, and finds the divine element in the 
instincts which guide and animate every noble character. When 
he is really inspired by sympathy for such emotions he can make 
his most grotesque fancies and his most far-fetched analyses 
subservient to poetry of the highest order. It can hardly be 
denied that his intellectual ingenuity often tempts him to deviate 
from his true function, and that his observations are not to be 
excused because they result from an excess, instead of a de- 
ficiency, of intellectual acuteness. But the variety of his 
interests — aesthetic, philosophical and ethical — is astonishing, 



and his successes are poems which stand out as unique and 
unsurpassable in the literature of his time. 

The Life and Letters of Browning, by Mrs Sutherland Orr (1891), 
one of his most intimate friends in later years, and The Love Letters 
of Robert Browning and Elizabeth Barrett Barrett, 1845-1846, pub- 
lished by his son in 1899, are the main authorities. A collection of 
Browning's poems in 2 vols, appeared in 1849, another in 3 vols, in 
1863, another in 6 vols, in 1868, and a revised edition in 16 vols, in 
1888-1889; in 1896 Mr Augustine Birrell and Mr F. G. Kenyon 
edited a complete edition in 2 vols. ; another two-volume edition 
was issued by Messrs Smith, Elder in 1900. Among commentaries 
on Browning's works, Mrs Sutherland Orr's Handbook to the Works 
of Browning was approved by the poet himself. See also the 
Browning Society's Papers; and Mr T. J. Wise's Materials for a 
Bibliography of the Writings of Robert Browning, included in the 
Literary Anecdotes of the Nineteenth Century (1895), by W. Robertson 
Nicoll and T. J. Wise; Mr. Edmund Gosse's Robert Browning: 
Personalia (1890), from notes supplied by Browning himself. Among 
biographical and critical authorities may be mentioned: J. T. 
Nettleship, Essays (1868); Arthur Symons, An Introduction to the 
Study of Browning (1886); Stopford Brooke, The Poetry of Robert 
Browning (1902); G. K. Chesterton, Browning (1908) in the 
" English Men of Letters " series. (L. S.) 

BROWN - SEQUARD, CHARLES EDWARD (181 7-1894), 
British physiologist and neurologist, was born at Port Louis, 
Mauritius, on the 8th of April 181 7. His father was an American 
and his mother a Frenchwoman, but he himself always desired 
to be looked upon as a British subject, though in the restlessness 
of his life and the enthusiasm of his disposition, characteristics 
of his mother's nation were plainly visible. After graduating 
in medicine at Paris in 1846 he returned to Mauritius with the 
intention of practising there, but in 1852 he went to America. 
Subsequently he returned to Paris, and in 1859 he migrated to 
London, becoming physician to the national hospital for the 
paralysed and epileptic. There he stayed for about five years, 
expounding his views on the pathology of the nervous system 
in numerous lectures which attracted considerable attention. 
In 1864 he again crossed the Atlantic, and was appointed 
professor of physiology and neuro-pathology at Harvard. This 
position he relinquished in 1867, and in 1869 became professor at 
the Ecole de Medecine in Paris, but in 1873 he again returned to 
America and began to practise in New York. Finally, he went 
back to Paris to succeed Claude Bernard in 1878 as professor of 
experimental medicine in the College de France, and he remained 
there till his death, which occurred on the 2nd of April 1894 
at Sceaux. Brown-Sequard was a keen observer and experi- 
mentalist. He contributed largely to our knowledge of the blood 
and animal heat, as well as many facts of the highest importance 
on the nervous system. He was the first scientist to work out 
the physiology of the spinal cord, demonstrating that the 
decussation of the sensory fibres is in the cord itself. He also 
did valuable work on the internal secretion of organs, the results 
of which have been applied with the most satisfactory results 
in the treatment of myxoedema. Unfortunately in his extreme 
old age, he advocated the hypodermic injection of a fluid prepared 
from the testicles of sheep, as a means of prolonging human 
life. It was known, among scientists, derisively, as the Brown- 
Sequard Elixir. His researches, published in about 500 essays 
and papers, especially in the Archives de Physiclogie, which he 
helped to found in 1868, cover a very wide range of physiological 
and pathological subjects. 

BROWNSON, ORESTES AUGUSTUS (1803-1876), American 
theological, philosophical and sociological writer, was born in 
Stockbridge, Vermont, on the 16th of September 1803. Having 
spent some time in active religious, reformatory and political 
(Democratic) work in the interior of New York state, and at 
Walpole, New Hampshire, and Canton, Massachusetts, Brownson 
removed in 1839 to Chelsea, Mass. He at once began to take 
an independent part in the movements then agitating New 
England, which between 1830 and 1850 was stirred by discus- 
sions pertaining to Unitarianism, transcendentalism, spiritual- 
ism, abolitionism and various schemes for communistic living. 
He was one of the founders, in New York, of the short-lived 
Workingman's party in 1828, and established the BostonQuarterly 
Review, mainly written by himself, in 1838. This periodical 
was merged in the U.S. Democratic Review of New York in 1842. 



BROWNSVILLE— BRUCE, A. B. 



675 



In religion he first became a Prebysterian (1822); was a Uni- 
versalis! minister from 1826 to 183 1, editing for sometime 
the chief journal of this church, the Gospel Advocate ; was an 
independent preacher at Ithaca, N.Y., in 1831; became a 
Unitarian minister in 1832, and in 1836 organized in Boston the 
Society for Christian Union and Progress, of which he was the 
pastor for seven years. In 1844 he became a Roman Catholic 
and so remained, though the question of the orthodoxy of his 
writings was at one time submitted by the pope to Cardinal 
Franzelin, who recommended Brownson, to little purpose, to 
express his views with more moderation. In his philosophy 
Brownson was a more or less independent follower of Comte 
for a short time, and of Victor Cousin, who, in his Fragmens 
philosophiques, praised him; he may be said to have taught a 
modified intuitionalism. In his schemes for social reform he was 
at first a student of Robert Owen, until his later views led him 
to accept Roman Catholicism. His first quarterly was followed, 
in 1844, by Brownson' s Quarterly Review (first published in 
Boston and after 1855 in New York), in which he expressed his 
opinions on many themes until its suspension in 1864, and after 
its revival for a brief period in 1873-1875. Of his numerous 
publications in book form, the chief during his lifetime were 
Charles Elwood, or the Infidel Converted (1840, autobiographical), 
in which he strongly favoured the Roman Catholic Church; 
and The American Republic: its Constitution, Tendencies and 
Destiny (1865), in which he based government on ethics, declaring 
the national existence to be a moral and even a theocratic entity, 
not depending for validity upon the sovereignty of the people. 
Brownson died in Detroit, Michigan, on the 17th of April 1876. 

After his death, his son, Henry F. Brownson, collected and pub- 
lished his various political, religious, philosophical, scientific and 
literary writings, in twenty octavo volumes (Detroit, 1883-1887), 
of which a condensed summary appeared in a single volume, also 
prepared by his son, entitled Literary and Political Views (New 
York, 1893). The son also published a biography in three volumes 
(Detroit, 1898-1900). 

His daughter, Sarah M. Brownson (1839-1876), who married in 
1873 William J. Tenney, was the author of several novels, and wrote 
a Life of Demetrius Augustine Gallitzin, Prince and Priest (1873). 

BROWNSVILLE, a city and the county-seat of Cameron 
county, Texas, U.S.A., situated near the S. extremity of the 
state, on the Rio Grande river about 22 m. above its mouth, and 
opposite Matamoras, Mexico. Pop. (1890) 6134; (1900) 6305, 
including 2462 foreign-born and 18 negroes; (1910) 10,517. 
It is served by the St Louis, Brownsville & Mexico, and the 
Rio Grande railways, being connected by the former with 
Houston and Galveston and by the latter with Point Isabel on 
the Gulf coast. Its chief importance lies in its being the com- 
mercial and distributing centre for a rich and extensive agri- 
cultural region in southern Texas and northern Mexico, and an 
important market for rice, sugar-cane, fruit, vegetables a*nd 
live-stock. It has a United States custom house, the Cameron 
county court house, a Roman Catholic cathedral, St Joseph's 
College (Roman Catholic), and the Incarnate Word Academy 
(Roman Catholic). Before the Mexican War there was a small 
Mexican settlement on the site of Brownsville. In March 1846 
General Zachary Taylor erected fortifications here, and upon 
his withdrawal to Point Isabel, left a small garrison in command 
of Major Jacob Brown. The fort was assaulted by General 
Arista and shelled by batteries from the Mexican shore, and at 
last on the 10th of May was relieved by General Taylor, who in 
advancing to its aid had won the battles of Palo Alto (8th of May) 
and Resaca de la Palma (9th of May). The fort, originally 
named Fort Taylor, was renamed Fort Brown, by order of General 
Taylor, in memory of Major Brown, who was mortally wounded 
during the bombardment. In 1859 Brownsville was captured 
by a band of Mexican raiders under Juan Nepomuceno Cortina. 
During the Civil War, until its temporary occupation by Federal 
forces in 1863, and subsequent effective blockade, it was an 
active centre of operations of Confederate blockade runners. 
At Palmetto Ranch, near the battlefield of Palo Alto, took place 
(13th of May 1865), more than a month after General Lee's 
surrender,the last engagement between Federal and Confederate 



troops in the Civil War. In Brownsville, on the night of the 
13th of August 1906, certain persons unknown fired into houses 
and at citizens on the streets, killing on« man and injuring two. 
Suspicion pointed to negro soldiers of Companies B, C and D of 
the 25th Infantry, stationed at Fort Brown, and as it appeared 
that the culprits were being shielded by their comrades by a 
" conspiracy of silence," President Roosevelt dismissed the 170 
men of the three companies " without honor." Both in Congress 
and in the press a bitter attack was made on the president for 
his action. In 1907 the military reservation of Fort Brown was 
transferred to the Department of Agriculture. In March 1909 
Congress provided for a commission of army officers to report as to 
the eligibility of members of the negro regiments for re-enlistment. 

BRUAY, a town of northern France, in the department of 
Pas-de-Calais, on the Lawe, 19 m. N.N.W. of Arras by road. 
Pop. (1906) 16,169. The town is situated in a rich coal-mining 
district. Brewing is also a leading industry. 

BRUCE, the name of an old Scottish family of Norman descent, 
taken from Bruis between Cherbourg and Vallonges. Variations 
of the name are Braose, Breaux and Brus. The first Robert 
de Brus, a follower of William the Conqueror, was rewarded by 
the gift of many manors, chiefly in Yorkshire, of which Skelton 
was the principal. His son, the second Robert, received from 
David I., his comrade at the court of Henry I., a grant of the 
lordship of Annandale. The fourth Robert married Isabel, 
natural daughter of William the Lion, and their son, the fifth 
.Robert, married Isabel, second daughter of David, earl of 
Huntingdon, niece of the same Scottish king. The most famous 
member of the family is the eighth Robert, " the Bruce," 
who became king of Scotland in 1306. (See Robert the 
Bruce.) 

BRUCE, ALEXANDER BALMAIN (1831-1899), Scottish 
divine, was born at Aberargie near Perth on the 31st of January 
1 83 1 . His father suffered for his adherence to the Free Church at 
the Disruption in 1843, and removed to Edinburgh, where the 
son was educated, showing exceptional ability from the first. His 
early religious doubts, awakened especially by Strauss's Life of 
Jesus, made him throughout life sympathetic with those who 
underwent a similar stress. After serving as assistant first at 
Ancrum, then at Lochwinnoch, he was called to Cardross in 
Dumbartonshire in 1859, and to Broughty Ferry in 1868. There 
he published his first considerable exegetieal work, the Training 
of the Twelve. In 1874 he delivered his Cunningham Lectures, 
afterwards published as The Humiliation of Christ, and in the 
following year was appointed to the chair of Apologetics and 
New Testament exegesis at the Free Church College, Glasgow. 
This post he held for twenty-four years. He was one of the 
first British New Testament students whose work was received 
with consideration by German scholars of repute. The character 
and work of Christ were, he held, the ultimate proof and the best 
defence of Christianity; and his tendency was to concentrate 
attention somewhat narrowly on the historic Jesus. In The 
Kingdom of God (1889), which first encountered serious hostile 
criticism in his own communion, he accounted for some of the 
differences between the first and third evangelists on the principle 
of accommodation — maintaining that Luke had altered both the 
text and the spirit of his sources to suit the needs of those for 
whom he wrote. It was held that these admissions were not 
consistent with the views of inspiration professed by the Free 
Church. When the case was tried, the assembly held that the 
charge of heresy was based on a misunderstanding, but that " by 
want of due care in his mode of statement he had given some 
ground for the painful impressions which had existed." 

Bruce rendered signal service to his own communion in 
connexion with its service of praise. He was convener of the 
committee which issued the Free Church hymn book, and he 
threw into this work the same energy and catholicity of mind 
which marked the rest of his activities. He died on the 7th of 
August 1899, and was buried at Broughty Ferry. His chief 
works, beside the above, are : The Chief End of Revelation 
(Lond., 1881); The Parabolic Teaching of Christ (Lond., 1882); 
F. C. Baur and his Theory of the Origin of Christianity and of the 



6 7 6 



BRUCE, JAMES— BRUCE, MICHAEL 



New Testament Writings in " Present Day Tracts " (Lond., 1885) ; 
Apologetics, or Christianity Defensively Stated (Edin., 1892); 
St Paul's Conception of Christianity (Lond., 1894); Expos. Gk. 
Test, (the Synoptic Gospels, Lond., 1897). With Open Face 
(Lond., 1896); The Epistle to the Hebrews (Edin., 1899); The 
Providential Order of the World, and the Moral Order of the World 
in Ancient and Modern Thought (Gilford Lectures, 1896-1897; 
Lond., 1897, 1899). (D. Mn.) 

BRUCE, JAMES (1730-1794), Scottish explorer in Africa, 
was born at Kinnaird House, Stirlingshire, on the 14th of 
December 1730. He was educated at Harrow and Edinburgh 
University, and began to study for the bar; but his marriage 
to the daughter of a wine merchant resulted in his entering that 
business. His wife died in October 1754, within nine months of 
marriage, and Bruce thereafter travelled in Portugal and Spain. 
The examination of oriental MSS. at the Escurial led him to the 
study of Arabic and Geez and determined his future career. 
In 1758 his father's death placed him in possession of the estate 
of Kinnaird. On the outbreak of war with Spain in 1762 he 
submitted to the British government a plan for an attack on 
Ferrol. His suggestion was not adopted, but it led to his selection 
by the 2nd earl of Halifax for the post of British consul at 
Algiers, with a commission to study the ancient ruins in that 
country, in which interest had been excited by ithe descriptions 
sent home by Thomas Shaw 1 (1694-1751), consular chaplain 
atAlgiers, 1719-1731. Having spent six months in Italy studying 
antiquities, Bruce reached Algiers in March 1763. The whole 
of his time was taken up with his consular duties at the piratical 
court of the dey, and he was kept without the assistance promised. 
But in August 1765, a successor in the consulate having arrived, 
Bruce began his exploration of the Roman ruins in Barbary. 
Having examined many ruins in eastern Algeria, he travelled by 
land from Tunis to Tripoli, and at Ptolemeta took passage for 
Candia; but was shipwrecked near Bengazi and had to swim 
ashore. He eventually reached Crete, and sailing thence to 
Sidon, travelled through Syria, visiting Palmyra and Baalbek. 
Throughout his journeyings in Barbary and the Levant, Bruce 
made careful drawings of the many ruins he examined. He also 
acquired a sufficient knowledge of medicine to enable him to 
pass in the East as a physician. 

In June 1768 he arrived at Alexandria, having resolved to 
endeavour to discover the source of the Nile, which he believed 
to rise in Abyssinia. At Cairo he gained the support of the 
Mameluke ruler, Ali Bey; after visiting Thebes he crossed 
the desert to Kosseir, where he embarked in the dress of a 
Turkish sailor. He reached Jidda in May 1769, and after some 
stay in Arabia he recrossed the Red Sea and landed at Massawa, 
then in possession of the Turks, on the 19th of September. He 
reached Gondar, then the capital of Abyssinia, on the 14th of 
February 1770, where he was well received by the negus Tekla 
Haimanot II., by Ras Michael, the real ruler of the country, 
by the ras's wife, Ozoro Esther, and by the Abyssinians generally. 
His fine presence (he was 6 ft. 4 in. high), his knowledge of Geez, 
his excellence in sports, his courage, resource and self-esteem, 
all told in his favour among a people who were in general dis- 
trustful of all foreigners. He stayed in Abyssinia for two years, 
gaining knowledge which enabled him subsequently to present 
a perfect picture of Abyssinian life. On the 14th of November 
1 7 70 he reached' the long-sought source of the Blue Nile. Though 
admitting that the White Nile was the larger stream, Bruce 
claimed that the Blue Nile was the Nile of the ancients and 
that he was thus the discoverer of its source. The claim, however, 
was not well founded (see Nile : Story of Exploration) . Setting 
out from Gondar in December 1771, Bruce made his way, in spite 
of enormous difficulties, by Sennar to Nubia, being the first to 
trace the Blue Nile to its confluence with the White Nile. On 
the 29th of November 1772 he reached Assuan, presently re- 
turning to the desert to recover his journals and his baggage, 
which had been abandoned in consequence of the death of all 
his camels. Cairo was reached in January 1773, and in March 

1 Dr Shaw's Travels . . . relating to Several Parts of Barbary . . . 
was first printed at Oxford (1738). 



Bruce arrived in France, where he was welcomed by Buffon and 
other savants. He came to London in 1774, but, offended by 
the incredulity with which his story was received, retired to his 
home at Kinnaird. It was not until 1790 that, urged by his 
friend Daines Barrington, he published his Travels to Discover the 
Source of the Nile in the Years 1768-73, in five octavo volumes, 
lavishly illustrated. The work was very popular, but was assailed 
by other travellers as being unworthy of credence. The manner 
in which the book was written— twelve years after Bruce's 
return from Africa and without reference to his journals — gave 
some handle to his critics, but the substantial accuracy of every 
statement concerning his Abyssinian travels has since been 
amply demonstrated. He died on the 27th of April 1794. 

Bruce wrote an autobiography, part of which is printed in editions 
of his Travels, published in 1805 and 1813, accompanied by a bio- 
graphical notice by the editor, Alexander Murray. The best edition 
of the Travels is the third (Edinburgh, 1813, 8 vols.). Of the abridg- 
ments the best is that of Major (afterwards Sir Francis) Head, the 
author of a well-informed Life of Bruce (London, 1830). The best 
account of Bruce's travels in Barbary is contained in Sir R. Lambert 
Playfair's Travels in the Footsteps of Bruce (London, 1877), in which 
a selection of his drawings was published for the first time. Several 
of Bruce's drawings were presented to George III. and are in the 
royal collection at Windsor. 

BRUCE, MICHAEL (1746-1767), Scottish poet, was born at 
Kinnesswood in the parish of Portmoak, Kinross-shire, on the 
27th of March 1746. His father, Alexander Bruce, was a weaver, 
and a man of exceptional ability. Michael was taught to read 
before he was four years old, and one of his favourite books was 
a copy of Sir David Lyndsay's works. He was early sent to 
school, but his attendance was often interrupted. He had 
frequently to herd cattle on the Lomond Hills in summer, and 
this early companionship with nature greatly influenced his 
poetic genius. He was a delicate child, and grew up contem- 
plative, devotional and humorous, the pet of his family and his 
friends. His parents gave him an education superior to their 
position; he studied Latin and Greek, and at fifteen, when his 
school education was completed, a small legacy left to his mother, 
with some additions from kindly neighbours, provided means to 
send Michael to Edinburgh University, which he attended during 
the four winter sessions 1 762-1 765. In 1765 he taught during 
the summer months at Gairney Bridge, receiving about £1 1 a year 
in fees and free board in one or other of the homes of his pupils. 
He became a divinity student at Kinross of a Scottish sect known 
as the Burghers, and in the first summer (1766) of his divinity 
course accepted the charge of a new school at Forest Hill, near 
Clackmannan, where he led a melancholy life. Poverty, disease 
and want of companions depressed his spirits, but there he 
wrote " Lochleven," a poem inspired by the memories of his 
childhood. He had before been threatened with consumption, 
and now became seriously ill. During the winter he returned 
on foot to his father's house, where he wrote his last and finest 
poem, " Elegy written in Spring," and died on the 5th of July 
1767. 

As a poet his reputation has been spread, first, through sym^ 
pa thy for his early death; and secondly, through the alleged theft 
by John Logan (q.v.) of several of his poems. Logan, who had 
been a fellow-student of Bruce, obtained Bruce's MSS. from his 
father, shortly after the poet's death. For the letters, poems, &c. , 
that he allowed to pass out of his hands, Alexander Bruce took no 
receipt, nor did he keep any list of the titles. Logan edited in 
1770 Poems on Several Occasions, by Michael Bruce, in which the 
"Ode to the Cuckoo " appeared. In the preface he stated that 
" to make up a miscellany, some poems written by different 
authors are inserted." In a collection of his own poems in 1781, 
Logan printed the " Ode to the Cuckoo " as his own; of this the 
friends of Bruce were aware, but did not challenge its appropria- 
tion publicly. In a MS. Pious Memorials of Portmoak, drawn 
up by Bruce's friend, David Pearson, Bruce's authorship of the 
" Ode to the Cuckoo " is emphatically asserted. This book was 
in the possession of the Birrell family, and John Birrell, another 
friend of the poet, adds a testimony to the same effect. Pearson 
and Birrell also wrote to Dr Robert Anderson while he was 
publishing his British Poets, pointing out Bruce's claims. Their 



BRUCH— BRUCKER 



677 



communications were used by Anderson in the " Life " prefixed 
to Logan's works in the British Poets (vol. ii. p. 1029). The 
volume of 1770 had struck Bruce's friends as being incomplete, 
and his father missed his son's " Gospel Sonnets," which are 
supposed by the partisans of Bruce against Logan to have been 
the hymns printed in the 1781 edition of Logan's poems. Logan 
tried to prevent by law the reprinting of Bruce's poems (see James 
Mackenzie's Life of Michael Bruce, 1905, chap, xii.), but the book 
was printed in 1782, 1784, 1796 and 1807. Dr William M'Kelvie 
revived Bruce's claims in Lochleven and Other Poems, by Michael 
Bruce, with a Life of the Author from Original Sources (1837). 
Logan's authorship rests on the publication of the poems under 
his own name, and his reputation as author during his lifetime. 
His failure to produce the " poem book " of Bruce entrusted to 
him, and the fact that no copy of the " Ode to the Cuckoo " in his 
handwriting was known to exist during Bruce's lifetime, make it 
difficult to relieve him of the charge of plagiarism. Prof. John 
Veitch, in The Feeling for Nature in Scottish Poetry (1887, vol. ii. 
pp. 89-91), points out that the stanza known to be Logan's 
addition to this ode is out of keeping with the rest of the poem, 
and is in the manner of Logan's established compositions, in 
which there is nothing to suggest the direct simplicity of the 
little poem on the cuckoo. 

Bibliography. — Additions to Poems on Several Occasions (1770) 
were made by Dr M'Kelvie in his 1837 edition. He gives (p. 97) a 
list of the poems not printed in Logan's selection, and of those that 
are lost. See the " Lives " of Bruce and of Logan in Anderson's 
British Poets (1795); an admirable paper on Bruce in The Mirror 
(No. 36, 1779), said to be by William Craig, one of the lords of 
session ; The Poetical Works of Michael Bruce, with Life and Writings 
(1895), by William Stephen, who, like Dr A. B. Grosart in his edition 
(1865) of The Works of Michael Bruce, adopts M'Kelvie's view. 
A restatement of the case for Bruce's authorship, coupled with a 
rather violent attack on Logan, is to be found in the Life of Michael 
Bruce, Poet of Loch Leven, with Vindication of his Authorship of the 
" Ode to the Cuckoo "and other Poems, also Copies of Letters written by 
John Logan now first published (1905), by James Mackenzie. 

BRUCH, MAX (1838- ), German musical composer, son of 
a city official and grandson of the famous Evangelical cleric, 
Dr Christian Bruch, was born at Cologne on the 6th of January 
1838. From his mother {nee Almenrader), a well-known musician 
of her time, he learnt the elements of music, but under Breiden- 
stein he made his first serious effort at composition at the age of 
fourteen by the production of a symphony. In 1853 Bruch 
gained the Mozart Stipendium of 400 gulden per annum for four 
years at Frankfort-on-Main, and for the following few years 
studied under Hiller, Reinecke and Breunung. Subsequently 
he lived from 1858 to 1861 as pianoforte teacher at Cologne, in 
which city his first opera (in one act), Scherz, List und Rache, was 
produced in 1858. On his father's death in 1861, Bruch began 
a tour of study at Berlin, Leipzig, Vienna, Munich, Dresden and 
Mannheim, where his opera Lorelei was brought out in 1863. 
At Mannheim he lived till 1864, and there he wrote some of his 
best-known works, including the beautiful Frithjof. After a 
further period of travel he became musical-director at Coblenz 
(1865-1867), Hofkapellmeister at Sondershausen (1867-1870), 
and lived in Berlin (1871-1873), where he wrote his Odysseus, his 
first violin concerto and two symphonies being composed at 
Sondershausen. After five years at Bonn (1873-1878), during 
which he made two visits to England, Bruch, in 1878, became 
conductor of the Stern Choral Union; and in 1880 of the Liver- 
pool Philharmonic. In 1892 he was appointed director of the 
Berlin Hochschule. In 1893 he was given the honorary degree of 
Mus. Doc. by Cambridge University. Max Bruch has written in 
almost every conceivable musical form, invariably with straight- 
forward honest simplicity of design. He has a gift of refined 
melody beyond the common, his melodies being broad and suave 
and often exceptionally beautiful. - . 

BRUCHSAL, a town of Germany, in the grand-duchy of Baden, 
prettily situated on the Saalbach, 14 m. N. from Karlsruhe, 
and an important junction on the main railway from Mannheim 
to Constance. Pop. (1900), including a small garrison, 13,555. 
There are an Evangelical and four Roman Catholic churches, 
among the latter that of St Peter, the burial-place of the bishops 



of Spires, whose princely residence (now used as a prison) lies in 
the vicinity. Bruchsal has a fine palace, with beautiful grounds 
attached, a town hall, a classical, a modern and a commercial 
school, and manufactures of machinery, paper, tobacco, soap 
and beer, and does a considerable trade in wine. Bruchsal 
(mentioned in 937 as Bruxolegum) was originally a royal villa 
(Konigshof) belonging to the emperors and German kings. Given 
in 1002 to Otto, duke of Franconia, it was inherited by the cadet 
line of Spires, the head of which, the emperor Henry III., gave 
it to the see of Spires in 1095. From 1105 onward it became 
the summer residence of the bishops, who in n 90 bought the 
Vogtei (advocateship) from the counts of Calw, and the place 
rapidly developed into a town. It remained in the possession of 
the bishops till 1802, when by the treaty of Luneville it was 
ceded, with other lands of the bishopric on the right bank of the 
Rhine, to Baden. The Peasants' War during the Reformation 
period first broke out in Bruchsal. In 1609 it was captured by 
the elector palatine, and in 1676 and 1698 it was burnt down by 
the French. In 1849 it was the scene of an engagement between 
the Prussians and the Baden revolutionists. 

See Rossler, Geschichte der Siadt Bruchsal (2nd ed., Bruchsal, 1894). 

BRUCINE, C 2 3H 26 N 2 04, an alkaloid isolated in 1819 by J. 
Pelletier and J. B. Caventou from " false Angustura bark." 
It crystallizes in prisms with four molecules of water; when 
anhydrous it melts at 1 78°. It is very similar to strychnine (q.v.), 
both chemically and physiologically. 

BRUCITE, a mineral consisting of magnesium hydroxide, 
Mg(OH) 2 , and crystallizing in the rhombohedral system. It was 
first described in 1814 as " native magnesia " from New Jersey 
by A. Bruce, an American mineralogist, after whom the species 
was named by F. S. Beudant in 1824; the same name had, 
however, been earlier applied to the mineral now known as 
chondrodite. Brucite is usually found as platy masses, some- 
times of considerable size, which have a perfect cleavage parallel 
to the surface of the plates. It is white, sometimes with a tinge 
of grey, blue or green, varies from transparent to translucent, 
and on the cleavage surfaces has a pronounced pearly lustre. 
In general appearance and softness (H= 25) it is thus not unlike 
gypsum or talc, but it may be readily distinguished from these 
by its optical character, being uniaxial with positive birefringence, 
whilst gypsum is biaxial and talc has negative birefringence. 
The specific gravity is 2 -38-2 -40. In the variety known as 
nemalite the structure is finely fibrous and the lustre silky: 
this variety contains 5 to 8 % of ferrous oxide replacing magnesia, 
and has consequently a rather higher specific gravity, viz. 2-45. 
Another variety, manganbrucite, has the magnesia partly 
replaced by manganous oxide (14%), and thus forms a passage 
to the isomorphous mineral pyrochroite, Mn(OH) 2 . 

Brucite is generally associated with other magnesian minerals, 
such as magnesite and dolomite, and is commonly found in 
serpentine, or sometimes as small scales in phyllites and crystal- 
line schists; it has also been observed in metamorphosed 
magnesian limestone, such as the rock known as predazzite 
from Predazzo in Tirol. The best crystals and foliated masses 
are from Texas in Pennsylvania, U.S.A., and from Swinaness 
in Unst, one of the Shetland Isles. Nemalite is from Hoboken, 
New Jersey, and from Afghanistan. At all these localities the 
mineral forms veins in serpentine. (L. J. S.) 

BRUCKENAU, a town and fashionable watering-place of 
Germany, in the kingdom of Bavaria, on the Sinn, 16 m. N.W. 
of Kissingen. The mineral springs, five in number, situated 
in the pleasant valley of the Sinn, 2 m. from the town, were a 
favourite resort of Louis I. of Bavaria. Pop. 1700. 

BRUCKER, JOHANN JAKOB (1696-1770), German historian 
of philosophy, was born at Augsburg. He was destined for 
the church, and graduated at the university of Jena in 17 18. 
He returned to Augsburg in 1720, but became parish minister 
of Kaufbeuren in 1723. In 1731 he was elected a member of 
the Academy of Sciences at Berlin, and was invited to Augsburg 
as pastor and senior minister of the church of St Ulrich. His 
chief work, Historia Critica Philosophiae, appeared at Leipzig 
(5 vols., 1742-1744). Its success was such that a new edition 



6y8 



BRUCKMANN— BRUGES 



was published in six volumes (1766-1767; English translation 
by W. Enfield, 1701). It is' by this work alone that Brucker is 
now known. Its merit consists entirely in the ample collection of 
materials. 'He also wrote Tentamen Introductionis in His- 
toriam Doclrinae de Ideis, afterwards completed and republished 
under the title of Historia Philosophicae Doctrinae de Ideis 
(Augsburg, 1723); Olium Vindelicum (1731); Kurze Fragen 
aus der philosophischen Historie (7 vols., Ulm, 1731-1736), a 
history of philosophy in question and answer, containing many 
details, especially in the department of literary history, which 
he omitted in his chief work; Pinacotheca Scriptorum nostra 
aetate Uteris illustrium, &c. (Augsburg, 1741-1755); Ehrentempel 
der deutschen Gelehrsamkeit (Augsburg, 1747-1749); Instilutiones 
Historiae Philosophicae (Leipzig, 1747 and 1756; 3rd ed. with a 
continuation by F. G. B. Born (1743-1807) of Leipzig, in 1790); 
Miscellanea Historiae Philosophicae Literariae Crilicae olim 
sparsim edita (Augsburg, 1748); Erste Anfangsgrunde der 
philosophischen Geschichte (Ulm, 1751). He superintended an 
edition of Luther's translation of the Old and New Testament, 
with a commentary extracted from the writings of the English 
theologians (Leipzig, 1758-1770, completed by W. A. Teller). 
He died at Augsburg in 1770. 

BRUCKMANN, FRANZ ERNST (1697-1753), German miner- 
alogist, was born on the 27 th of September 1697 at Marienthal 
near Helmstadt. Having qualified as a medical man in 1721, he 
practised at Brunswick and afterwards at Wolfenbiittel. His 
leisure time was given up to natural history, and especially to 
mineralogy and botany. He appears to have been the first to 
introduce the term oolithus to rocks that resemble in structure 
the roe of a fish; whence the terms oolite and oolitic. He died 
at Wolfenbiittel on the 21st of March 1753. He published 
Magnalia Dei in locis subterrancis (Brunswick, 1727), Historia 
naturalis curiosa lapidis (1727), and Thesaurus subterraneus 
Ducaius Brunsvigii (1728). 

BRUCKNER, ANTON (1824-1896), Austrian musical composer, 
was born on the 4th of September 1824 at Ansfelden in upper 
Austria. He successfully competed for the organistship for 
Linz Cathedral in 1855. In 1867 he succeeded his former master 
of counterpoint, Sechter, as organist of the Hofkapelle in Vienna, 
and also became professor in the conservatorium. In 1875 he was 
appointed to a lectureship in the university. His most striking 
talent .was shown in his extemporizations on the organ. His 
success in an organ competition at Nancy in 1869 led to his play- 
ing in Paris and London (six recitals at the Albert Hall, 1871). 
His permanent reputation, however, rests on his compositions, 
especially his nine symphonies. In these gigantic efforts the 
influence of Wagner is paramount in almost every feature of 
harmony and orchestration; and if sustained seriousness of pur- 
pose and style were all that was necessary to give coherence 
to works in which these influences are stultified by the rhythmic 
uniformities of an experienced improvisator e and the impressions 
of classical form as taught in schools, then Bruckner would 
certainly have been what the extreme Wagnerian party called 
him, the symphonic successor of Beethoven, or the Wagner of 
the symphony. But their lack of organization and proportion, 
to say nothing of humour, will always make their revival a 
somewhat severe task. No composer has ever been more con- 
sistent to lofty ideals, though few who have ever had an ideal 
have shown less adroitness in their methods of embodying it. The 
most poetic and admired feature of his style is a slow growth to a 
gigantic climax, slow enough and gigantic enough for any situa- 
tion in Wagner's Nibelungen tetralogy. The symphonies in 
which these climaxes occur are in obviously unskilful classical 
form, with only an outward appearance of freedom; and the 
Great Pyramid would hardly be more out of place in an Oxford 
quadrangle than Bruckner's climaxes in his four-movement 
symphonies with their " second subjects " and recapitulations. 
Nor is it likely that Bruckner would have been much more 
successful in handling these gigantic things in their legitimate 
Wagnerian dramatic environment, for even in his last three 
symphonies he hardly ever frees himself from the trammels of 
square rhythm; and, as he accepts the classical sonata-forms 



without inquiry into their meaning or relevance, so he accepts 
the Wagnerian stage orchestra in its minutest details, without 
inquiry as to its relevance for the purposes and acoustics of the 
concert-room, and with the same lack of sense of relief that ruins 
the balance of his rhythmic periods. So unsophisticated a tem- 
perament may be not unpoetical, but it is eminently undramatic, 
as well as unsymphonic. Of Bruckner's choral works, which 
include three masses and several psalms and motets, the most 
famous is the Te Deum (1885?), 1 which shows his characteristic 
power in massive effect. Bruckner wished this to be appended 
to the three complete movements of his 9th symphony, which his 
last illness (ending in his death at Vienna on the nth of October 
1896) prevented him from finishing. This 9th symphony is 
designed, with characteristic tactlessness and simplicity, to follow 
Beethoven's 9th symphony in every possible point which could 
challenge comparison; in key (D minor), opening (mysterious 
tremolo leading to tremendous unison lulti), contrasts (return in 
first movement) and choral finale. The three complete move- 
ments were first performed in Vienna in 1903, and have done more 
for Bruckner's fame than anything since the production in 1884 
of his 7 th symphony (of which the slow movement is an elegy on 
the death of Wagner). It is probable that the impression pro- 
duced by this 9th symphony is the deeper as owing little or 
nothing to the musical politics which had gone far to prevent the 
7th symphony from standing on its own unmistakable merits. 
It does not, however, seem likely that Bruckner's work will have 
much influence on musical progress; for the modern character- 
istics in which its strength lies are obviously better realized in 
other forms which have often been handled successfully by 
composers greatly Bruckner's inferiors both in invention and 
sincerity. (D. F. T.) 

BRUGES (Flemish Brugge, a name signifying the bridge or 
place of bridges), the capital of West Flanders, Belgium. Pop. 
(1904) 53,728. The city contains some of the finest monuments 
of the great period of the Flemish communes, while its medieval 
appearance is better preserved, as a whole, than in the case of 
any other Belgian city. The cathedral of St Sauveur and the 
church of Notre-Dame, both specimens of early Pointed Gothic, 
date from the 13th and 14th centuries. Both are full of interest, 
but the cathedral was much injured by fire in 1839. The interior, 
however, is finely proportioned and exhibits beautiful modern 
polychrome decorations, numerous pictures and interesting 
monumental brasses. The church of Notre-Dame contains a fine 
De Crayer (The Adoration of the Magi), Michelangelo's marble 
group of the Virgin and Child, and the fine monuments with 
gilded copper effigies of Charles the Bold and his daughter, Mary 
of Burgundy. The hospital of St Jean, where the sick have been 
cared for since the 12 th century, contains the chief works of 
Memling, including the famous reliquary of St Ursula. The 
market-hall was built in 1 561-1 566 on the site of an older building, 
some portions of which were utilized in its successor. The belfry 
which rises in the centre of the facade dates from the end of the 
13th century; it has long been famous for its chime of bells, but 
the civic fathers have caused modern airs to be substituted for the 
old hymn. The hdtel de ville, the Chapelle du Saint-Sang and 
the church of St Jacques are all of interest. The first is Gothic 
and was begun about 13 76. The second is a chapel of two storeys, 
the lower dating from n 50, while the upper was rebuilt in the 
15th century, and there is a rich Flamboyant entrance with a 
stairway (1533). St Jacques' church is a foundation of the 13th 
century, but has extensive additions of the close of the 15th and 
17th centuries. The Palais de Justice, of the 18th century, on the 
site of the House of the Franc — the outside burghers of the Franc 
district admitted to the full privileges of citizenship — contains a 
fine carved chimney-piece (1 530) . The house is supposed to have 
formed part of the residence of the counts of Flanders. There are 
numerous other buildings of minor antiquarian interest; the fine 
museum contains a representative gallery of early Flemish 
paintings; and of the old fortifications three gates remain. The 

1 This date is given in Grove (new ed.), but the style of the work 
is far earlier than that of the 7th symphony (1884) which quotes it 
in the slow movement. 



BRUGSCH— BRUHL 



679 



manufacture of lace now gives employment to at least 6000 
persons in the town, and horticulture is carried on extensively 
in the suburbs.- Commercial activity has been assisted by the 
new ship-canal to Zeebrugge, and by direct steamship service 
from Hull to Bruges. The steady growth of the population is 
evidence of increased prosperity. In 1880 the population was 
only 44,500, but it had risen in 1900 to 51,657 and in 1904 it 
was 53,728. 

Bruges is said to have been a city in the 7th century, and the 
name Flanders was originally applied to it and not to the 
district. Baldwin II., count of Flanders, who married Elstrud, 
daughter of Alfred the Great, first fortified it, and made it his 
chief residence. Before the year 1 180 Bruges was the recognized 
capital of Flanders, and the formality of proclaiming the new 
counts was always performed on the marche du vendredi, where 
the railway station is to-day. After 11 80 the premier position 
was assumed by Ghent, but until access by sea was stopped by 
the silting up of the Zwyn, which was complete by the year 1490, 
Bruges was the equal in wealth and power of its neighbour. 
Proof of this is supplied by the marriage festivities in 1430, when 
Philip the Good, duke of Burgundy, wedded Isabel of Portugal, 
and founded the famous order of the Golden Fleece out of compli- 
ment to the staple industry of Bruges. Bruges was at the height 
of its prosperity in the 14th century, when it was the northern 
counterpart of Venice and its Bourse regulated the rate of ex- 
change in Europe. (D. C. B.) 

BRUGSCH, HEINRICH KARL (1827-1894), German Egypto- 
logist, was the son of a Prussian cavalry officer, and was born in 
the barracks at Berlin, on the 18th of February 1827. He early 
manifested a great inclination to Egyptian studies, in which, 
though encouraged by Humboldt, he was almost entirely self- 
taught. After completing his university course and visiting 
foreign museums he was sent to Egypt by the Prussian govern- 
ment in 1853, and contracted an intimate friendship with 
Mariette. On his return he received an appointment in the 
Berlin museum. In i860 he was sent to Persia on a special 
mission under Baron Minutoli, travelled over the country, and 
after Minutoli's death discharged the functions of ambassador. 
In 1864 he was consul at Cairo, in 1868 professor at Gottingen, 
and in 1870 director of the school of Egyptology, founded at 
Cairo by the khedive. From this post he was unceremoniously 
dismissed in 1879 by the European controllers of the public 
revenues, determined to economize at all hazards; and French 
influence prevented his succeeding his friend Mariette at the 
Bulaq Museum in 1883. He afterwards resided principally in 
Germany until his death on the 9th of September 1894, but 
frequently visited Egypt, took part in another official mission to 
Persia, and organized an Egyptian exhibit at the Philadelphia 
Exposition in 1876. He had been made a pasha by the khedive 
in 1 88 1. He published his autobiography in 1894, concluding 
with a warm panegyric upon British rule in Egypt. Brugsch's 
services to Egyptology are most important, particularly in the 
decipherment of demotic and the making of a vast hieroglyphic- 
demotic dictionary (1867-1882). 

See H. Brugsch, Mein Leben und mein Wandern; also art. Egypt, 
section Language and Writing. 

BRUHL, HEINRICH, Count von (i 700-1 763), German states- 
man at the court of Saxony, was born on the 13th of August 1700. 
He was the son of Johann Moritz von Briihl, a noble who held 
the office of Oberhofmarschall at the small court of Sachsen- 
Weissenfels. The father was ruined and compelled to part with 
his family estate, which passed into the hands of the prince. 
The son was first placed as page with the dowager duchess of 
Weissenfels, and was then received at her recommendation into 
the court of the elector of Saxony as Silberpage on the 16th of 
April 1 7 19. He rapidly acquired the favour of the elector 
Frederick Augustus, surnamed the Strong, who had been elected 
to the throne of Poland in 1697. Briihl, who began as page and 
chamberlain, was largely employed in procuring money for his 
profuse master. He made himself useful in muzzling the Saxon 
states and was successively chief receiver of taxes and minister 
for the interior in 1731. He was at Warsaw when his master 



died in 1733, and he secured a hold on the confidence of the 
electoral prince, Frederick Augustus, who was at Dresden, by 
laying hands on the papers and jewels of the late ruler and 
bringing them promptly to his successor. During the whole of 
the thirty years of the reign of Frederick Augustus II. he was 
the real inspirer of his master and the practical chief of the Saxon 
court. He had for a time to put up with the presence of old 
servants of the electoral house, but after 1738 he was in effect 
sole minister. The title of prime minister was created for him 
in 1746, but he was not only a prime minister — he filled all the 
offices. His titles spread over several lines of print, and he drew 
the combined pay of the places besides securing huge grants of 
land. Briihl must therefore be held wholly responsible for the 
ruinous policy which destroyed the position of Saxony in Germany 
between 1733 and 1763; for the mistaken ambition which led 
Frederick Augustus II. to become a candidate for the throne of 
Poland; for the engagements into which he entered in order to 
secure the support of the emperor Charles VI. ; for the shameless 
and ill-timed tergiversations of Saxony during the wars of the 
Austrian Succession; for the intrigues which entangled the 
electorate in the alliance against Frederick the Great, which led 
to the Seven Years' War; and for the waste and want of fore- 
sight which left the country utterly unprepared to resist the 
attack of the king of Prussia. He was not only without political 
or military capacity, but was so garrulous that he could not keep 
a secret. His indiscretion was repeatedly responsible for the 
king of Prussia's discoveries of the plans laid against him. 
Nothing could shake the confidence of his master, which survived 
the ignominious flight into Bohemia, into which he was trapped 
by Briihl at the time of the battle of Kesseldorf, and all the 
miseries of the Seven Years' War. The favourite abused the 
confidence of his master shamelessly. Not content with the 
67,000 talers a month which he drew as salary for his innumer- 
able offices, he was found when an inquiry was held in the next 
reign to have abstracted more than five million talers of public 
money for his private use. He left the work of the government 
offices to be done by his lackeys, whom he did not even supervise. 
His profusion was boundless. Twelve tailors, it is said, were 
continually employed in making clothes for him, and he wore a 
new suit every day. His library of 70,000 volumes was one of 
his forms of ostentation, and so was his gallery of pictures. He 
died on the 28th of October 1763, having survived his master 
only for a few weeks. The new elector, Frederick Christian, 
dismissed him from office and caused an inquiry to be held into 
his administration. His fortune was found to amount to a million 
and a half of talers, and was sequestered but afterwards restored 
to his family. In 1736 he had been made a count of the 
Empire and had married the countess Franziska von Kolowrat- 
Kradowska, a favourite of the wife of Frederick Augustus. 
Four sons and a daughter survived him. 

His youngest son, Hans Moritz von Briihl (d. 181 1), was before 
the Revolution of 1789 a colonel in the French service, and 
afterwards general inspector of roads in Brandenburg and 
Pomerania. By his wife Margarethe Schleierweber, the daughter 
of a French corporal, but renowned for her beauty and intellectual 
gifts, he was the father of Karl Friedrich Moritz Paul von Briihl 
(1 772-1837), the friend of Goethe, who as intendant-general of 
the Prussian royal theatres was of some importance in the 
history of the development of the drama in Germany. In 1830 
he was appointed intendant-general of the royal museums. 

See J. G. H. von Justi, Leben und Charakter des Grafen von Briihl 
(Gottingen, 1760-1761). 

BRUHL, a town of Germany, in the Prussian Rhine province, 
8 m. S.W. from Cologne on the main railway to Coblenz. Pop. 
(1900) 5000. Its pleasant situation at the foot of one of the 
spurs of the Eifel range and the beautiful grounds surrounding 
the royal palace render it a favourite resort of the inhabitants of 
Cologne. The palace, in Renaissance style, built in 1728 by 
Clement Augustus, elector of Cologne (1 700-1 761), was from 
1809 until 1813 in the possession of the French marshal Davout, 
and in 1842 was restored by King Frederick William IV. of 
Prussia. 



6.8 o 



BRUMAIRE— BRUNE 



BRUMAIRE, the name of the second month in the repub- 
lican calendar which was established in France by a decree of 
the National Convention on the 5 th of October in the year 
II. (1793), completed with regard to nomenclature by Fabre 
d'Eglantine, and promulgated in its new form on the 4th of 
Frimaire in the year II. (the 24th of November 1793). The 
month of Brumaire began on the day which corresponded, 
according to the year, to the 22nd or to the 23rd of October 
of the old calendar, and ended on the 20th or 21st of November. 
It was divided into "decades" like the other months of the 
republican calendar. Its name alludes to the fogs and mists 
frequent at that time of the year. The most important event 
in French history which took place during that month was the 
coup d'etat of the 18th Brumaire in the year VIII. (the 9th of 
November 1799), by which General Bonaparte overthrew the 
government of the Directory to replace it by the Consulate. 

On the republican calendar, see G. Villain, " Le Calendrier re- 
publicain," in La Revolution francaise for 1884-1885. 

BRUHATH, or Brumpt, a town of Germany, in the imperial 
territory of Alsace-Lorraine, on the Zorn and the Strassburg- 
Avricourt railway. Pop. 55°°- It has a Roman Catholic and a 
Protestant church, and occupies the site of the Roman Broco- 
magus. Its industries comprise tanning and saw-milling, and it 
has some trade in wine and tobacco and hops. 

BRUMMAGEM (an old local form of " Birmingham "), a 
name first applied to a counterfeit coin made in the city of 
Birmingham, England, in the 17th century, and later to the 
plated and imitation articles made there; hence cheap, showy 
or tawdry. The name was particularly used of the supporters 
of the Exclusion Bill in 1680, with the meaning of " sham 
Protestant." Similarly the Tory opponents of the Bill were 
nicknamed " Anti-Birminghams " or " Brummagems." 

BRUMMELL, GEORGE BRYAN (1778-1840), English man of 
fashion, known as " Beau Brummell," was born in London on 
the 7th of June 1778. His father was private secretary to Lord 
North from 1770 to 1782, and subsequently high sheriff of 
Berkshire; his grandfather was a shopkeeper in the parish of 
St James, who supplemented his income by letting lodgings to the 
aristocracy. From his early years George Brummell paid great 
attention to his dress. At Eton, where he was sent to school 
in 1790, and was extremely popular, he was known as Buck 
Brummell, and at Oxford, where he spent a brief period as an 
undergraduate of Oriel College, he preserved this reputation, and 
added to it that of a wit and good story-teller, while the fact 
that he was second for the Newdigate prize is evidence of his 
literary capacity. Before he was sixteen, however, he left 
Oxford, for London, where the prince of Wales (afterwards 
George IV.), to whom he bad been presented at Eton, and who 
had been told that Brummell was a highly amusing fellow, 
gave him a commission in his own regiment (1794). Brummell 
soon became intimate with his patron— indeed he was so constantly 
in the prince's company that he is reported not to have known 
his own regimental troop. In 1798, having then reached the 
rank of captain, he left the service, and next year succeeded 
to a fortune of about £30,000. Setting up a bachelor establish- 
ment in Mayfair, he became, thanks to the prince of Wales's 
friendship and his own good taste in dress, the recognized arbiter 
elegantiarum. His social success was instant and complete, his 
repartees were the talk of the town, and, if not accurately 
speaking a wit, he had a remarkable talent for presenting the 
most ordinary circumstances in an amusing light. Though he 
always dressed well, he was no mere fop — Lord Byron is credited 
with the remark that there was nothing remarkable about his 
dress save "a certain exquisite propriety." Fora time Brummell's 
sway was undisputed. But eventually gambling and extravagance 
exhausted his fortune, while his tongue proved too sharp for his 
royal patron. They quarrelled, and though for a time Brummell 
continued to hold his place in society, his popularity began to 
decline. In 1816 he fled to Calais to avoid his creditors. Here 
he struggled on for fourteen years, receiving help from time to 
time from his friends in England, but always hopelessly in debt. 
In 1830 the interest of these friends secured him the post of 



British consul at Caen, to which a moderate salary was attached, 
but two years later the office was abolished. In 183 5 Brummell's 
French creditors in Calais and Caen lost patience and he was 
imprisoned, but his friends once more came to the rescue, 
paid his debts and provided him with a small income. He 
had now lost all his interest in dress; his personal appearance 
was slovenly and dirty. In 1837, after two attacks of paralysis, 
shelter was found for him in the charitable asylum of Bon 
Sauveur, Caen, where he died on the 30th of March 1840. 

See Captain William Jesse, Life of Brummell (London, 1844, 
revised edition 1886) ; Percy H. Fitzgerald, Life of George IV. 
(London, 1881) ; R. Boutet de Monvel, Beau Brummel (trans. 1908). 

BRUNCK, RICHARD FRANCOIS PHILIPPE (1720-1803), 
French classical scholar, was born at Strassburg on the 30th 
of December 1729. He was educated at the Jesuits' College 
at Paris, and took part in the Seven Years' War as military 
commissary. At the age of thirty he returned to his native town 
and resumed his studies, paying special attention to Greek. 
He spent considerable sums of money in publishing editions of 
the Greek classics. The first work which he edited was the 
Anihologia Graeca or Analecta veterum Poetarum Graecorum 
(1772-1776), in which his innovations on the established mode 
of criticism startled European scholars; for wherever it seemed 
to him that an obscure or difficult passage might be made in- 
telligible and easy by a change of text, he did not scruple to make 
the necessary alterations, whether the new reading were sup- 
ported by manuscript authority or not. Other works by him 
are:— Editions of Anacreon (1778), several plays of the Greek 
tragedians, Apollonius Rhodius (1780), Aristophanes, with an 
excellent Latin translation (1781-1783), Gnomici poetae Graeci 
(1784), Sophocles (1786), with Latin translation, his best work, 
for which he received a pension of 2000 francs from the king. 
He also published editions of Virgil (1785), Plautus (1788) and 
Terence (1797)- At the outbreak of the French Revolution, in 
which he took an active part, he was imprisoned at Besancon, 
and lost his pension, being reduced to such extremities that hq 
was obliged to sell a portion of his library. In 1802 his pension 
was restored to him, but too late to prevent the sale of the 
remainder of his books. He died on the 12th of June 1803. 

BRUNDISIUM (Gr. TSpevrkaiov, mod. Brifidisi), an important 
harbour town of Calabria (in the ancient sense), Italy, on the 
E.S.E. coast. The name is said to mean " stag's head " in 
the Messapian dialect, in allusion to the shape of the harbour. 
Tradition varies as to its founders; but we find it hostile to 
Tarentum, and in friendly relations with Thurii. With a fertile 
territory round it, it became the most important city of the 
Messapians, but it was developed by the Romans, into whose 
hands it only came after the conquest of the Sallentini in 266 
B.C. They founded a colony there in 245 B.C., and the Via Appia 
was perhaps extended through Tarentum as far as Brundisium 
at this period. Pacuvius was born here about 220 B.C. After 
the Punic Wars it became the chief point of embarkation for 
Greece and the East, via Dyrrachium or Corcyra. In the Social 
War it received Roman citizenship, and was made a free port 
by Sulla. It suffered, however, from a siege conducted by 
Caesar in 49 B.C. {Bell. Civ. i.) and was again attacked in 42 
and 4.0 B.C. Virgil died here in 19 B.C. on his return from Greece. 
Trajan constructed the Via Trajana, a more direct route from 
Beneventum to Brundisium. The remains of ancient buildings 
are unimportant, though a considerable number of antiquities, 
especially inscriptions, have been discovered here: one column 
62 ft. in height, with an ornate capital, still stands, and near 
it is the base of another, the column itself having been removed 
to Lecce. They are said to have marked the termination of the 
Via Appia. 

See Ch. Hiilsen in Pauly-Wissowa, Realencyclopadie, iii. (1899), 
902 ; Notizie degli Scavi, passim. Also Brindisi. (T. As.) 

BRUNE, GUILLAUME MARIE ANNE (1763-1815), marshal of 
France, the son of an advocate, was born at Brives-la-Gaillarde 
(Correze), on the 13th of March 1763. Before the Revolution 
he went to Paris to study law, and here he became a political 
journalist, a Jacobin and a friend of Danton. He was appointed 



BRUNEAU— BRUNEI 



68 1 



in 1793 to a superior command in the army direct from civil life, 
and as a general of brigade he took part in the fighting of the 13th 
Vendemiaire. In 1796 he fought under Bonaparte in Italy, and 
was promoted general of division for good service in the field. 
In 1708 he commanded the French army which occupied Switzer- 
land, and in the following year he was in command of the French 
troops in Holland. His defence of Amsterdam against the Anglo- 
Russian expedition under the duke of York was completely 
successful; the invaders were defeated, and compelled, after 
a miserable retreat, to re-embark. He rendered further good 
service in Vendee and in Italy, and was made a marshal by 
Napoleon on the assumption by the latter of the imperial title in 
1804. In 1807 Brune held a command in North Germany, but he 
was not afterwards employed during the First Empire. It is 
said that he was accused of venality, and on that account dis- 
graced, but of this there is no proof. He was recalled to active 
service during the Hundred Days, and as commander of the army 
of the Var he defended the south of France against the Austrians. 
He was murdered by royalists during the White Terror at 
Avignon on the 2nd of August 1815. 

See Notice hislorique sur la vie politique et tnililaire du marechal 
Brune (Paris, 1821), and Vermeil de Conchard, L'Assassinat du 
marechal Brune (Paris, 1887). 

BRUNEAU, ALFRED (1857- ), French musical composer, 
was born in Paris. His parents were devoted to music, and he 
was brought up to play the 'cello, being educated at the Paris 
Conservatoire. He played in Pasdeloup's orchestra, and soon 
began to compose, writing a cantata, Genevieve de Paris, at an 
early age. In 1884 his Ouverture heroique was performed, followed 
by the choral symphonies, Leda (1884), La Belle au bois dormant 
(1886) and PentMsiUe. But he is best known as a dramatic 
composer. In 1887 his first opera, Kirim, was produced; and in 
1891 his successful opera Le Reve, with a libretto founded on 
Zola's story. Another subject from Zola resulted in the opera 
L'Attaque du moulin (1893), and libretti by Zola himself were 
written for his next operas Messidor (1897) and L'Ouragan (1901). 
Among Bruneau's other works may be mentioned his Requiem 
(1896), and his two collections of songs, Lieds de France and 
Chansons a danser. He was decorated with the Legion of Honour 
in 1895. His musical criticisms, published in several volumes, 
are remarkable for literary quality and vigour. 

See Arthur Hervey's volume on Bruneau (1907). 

BRUNEI, a state situated in the north-west of Borneo. It has 
been so diminished in area since the beginning of the 19th century 
as to have become in comparison with the other states of Borneo 
territorially insignificant. It formerly included the whole of 
northern Borneo and southern Palawan, and stretched down the 
west coast as far as Sambas. What remains of this once powerful 
sultanate is a triangular-shaped territory, the base of the triangle 
being represented by 80 m. of coast-line, and the two sides by the 
frontiers of Sarawak. The area is calculated to be about 1700 
sq. m. This great reduction of the extent of the territory has been 
brought about by the cession on successive occasions of strips 
of territory to Sarawak and to the British North Borneo Company 
on condition of annual payments of money. In 1 888 the state was 
placed under British protection. On the 2nd of January 1906 a 
treaty was made whereby the sultan of Brunei agreed to hand over 
the general administration of his state to a British resident. 
The sultan Mahommed Jomal-ul-alam, born in 1889, succeeded 
his father in May 1906. He receives an allowance of 12,000 
dollars a year from state funds, and his two principal ministers 
receive allowances of 6000 dollars a year each. The interior 
people have for centuries been subject to petty oppression, and 
there is too much of the old spirit left among the Malays to avoid 
acrimonious dispute and rebellion. 

The bulk of the inhabitants, who consist of Malays, Kadayans, 
Orang Bukits and a few Muruts, are to be found in and about the 
capital — also called Brunei — the population of the city being 
estimated at about 15,000, and the population of the whole 
territory being about 25,000. The city is prettily situated on the 
river, with a background of cleared hills, and in the distance 
heights clothed with magnificent forest. The dwelling-houses are 



built over the river on slender piles obtained from the Nibong 
palm which resists the action of the water for several years. 
Though there are practically no exports and imports, there 
is a certain amount of inland commerce, the Brunei Malay 
usually earning a living by trading with the interior tribes of 
Sarawak and British North Borneo. Some of them are skilled 
workers of brass, and the Brunei women make very beautiful 
cloth, interwoven and embroidered with gold thread. Sago is 
worked in the important river-valleys of the Tutong and the 
Balait, but only a small quantity of rice is cultivated. 

The history of this ancient and decaying sultanate is of some 
interest. Brunei, or, as it is called by the natives Bruni or Dar- 
ul-Salam (city of peace), possesses a historic tablet of stone upon 
which, in a.h. 1221 (1804), was engraved in Malay characters the 
genealogy of the sovereigns who have ruled over the country. 
The engraving was the work of Datu Imaum Yakub, the high 
priest at the time, who received the genealogy from the lips of 
Merhoum Bongsu, otherwise Sultan Muadin, and Sultan Kemal- 
Udin, who ordered this record of their forefathers to be written. 
This stone tablet now stands on the tomb of Sultan Mahommed 
Jemal-ul-Alam at the foot of Panggal hill, in the city of Brunei. 
The Selesilah, or book of descent, is kept in the palace by the 
sultan. The other heirlooms, which are also kept in the sultan's 
palace, and which descend to each sultan in turn, are the " Nobab 
Nagara " (two royal drums) from Johore and Menang-Kabau, 
and the " Gunta Alamat " (bells), the gift of Sultan Bahkei of 
Johore or Malacca. The first sultan of Brunei was Alak-ber- 
Tata, who was probably of Bisaya stock, and governed the 
country before the introduction of Islam, in the 15th century. 
He assumed the name of Mahommed on his conversion to Islam, 
which was brought about during a visit to the Malay peninsula. 
Brunei, at this time, was a dependency of Majapahit (Java), and 
paid a yearly tribute of a jar of areca juice obtained from the 
young green nuts of the areca palm, and of no monetary value. 
The Hindu kingdom of Menjapahit was destroyed by the Mahom- 
medans in 1478, and Brunei is mentioned in the history of Java as 
one of the countries conquered by Adaya Mingrat, the general of 
Angka Wijaya. Sultan Mahommed's only child was a daughter. 
His brother Akhmed married the daughter of Ong Chum Ping, 
a Chinese officer said to have been sent by his emperor to obtain a 
jewel from Mount Kinabalu in North Borneo,and was the successor 
of Sultan Mahommed in the sovereignty of Brunei. He was 
succeeded by Sultan Berkat, an Arab sherif of high rank, from the 
country of Taif in Arabia, who had married Sultan Akhmed's 
only child. Sultan Berkat built a mosque and enforced Mahom- 
medan law, and with the assistance of the Chinese built the stone 
wall, which is still in existence between the islands of Kaya Orang 
and Chermin, by sinking forty junks filled with rock across the 
mouth of the Brunei river. This work was completed before the 
arrival of Pigafetta in 1 521. In the reign of Sultan Bulkeiah 
Magellan's squadron anchored off the mouth of Brunei river in 
August 1 52 1, and Pigafetta makes mention of the splendid court 
and the imperial magnificence of the Borneo capital. Sultan 
Bulkeiah was otherwise known as Nakoda Ragam; he was the 
greatest warrior of Brunei and made military expeditions to 
Java, Malacca, Luzon and all the coasts of Borneo. His tomb, 
which is handsomely built of stone, is still to be seen in Brunei, 
and is constantly visited by Malays, who leave money and various 
articles on the tomb as offerings to his memory. Others, again, 
come and take away anything they can find, which they keep 
as charms and mementoes. The Spaniards captured Brunei in 
1580, the reigning sultan and his court retiring to Suai in the 
Baram district. The invaders were compelled to evacuate the 
place, however, in consequence of the heavy losses they sustained 
in the numerous attempts made for its recovery. The golden age 
of Brunei was nevertheless at an end, and there is little more 
of importance to record. Disputed successions and civil war, 
maladministration and the untrustworthiness of the Malay 
character, caused a steady decline in prosperity. The East India 
Company started a factory in the town in the 18th century, 
but commerce had already decayed and the establishment was 
abandoned. In the early part of the 19th centuiy Brunei was but 



68 2 



BRUNEL, I. K.— BRUNEL, SIR M. I. 



a resort for pirates and a market for the slave trade. During 
the 'forties Admiral (then Captain) Keppel and other officers 
of the British navy suppressed piracy in the neighbourhood. 
Sarawak was handed over to Raja Brooke, and, after the capture 
and temporary occupation of Brunei by Sir Thomas Cochrane, 
Labuan was ceded to the British empire. From this island it was 
possible to exercise a certain control over the townspeople, and 
a consul was stationed there to watch affairs. Nowadays the 
political consequence of Brunei largely arises from the exist- 
ence there of valuable seams of coal, leaded to the Sarawak 
government. (C. H.) 

BRUNEL, ISAMBARD KINGDOM (1806-1859), English 
engineer, only son of Sir M. I. Brunei, was born at Portsmouth 
on the 9th of April 1806. He displayed in childhood singular 
powers of mental calculation, great skill and rapidity as a 
draughtsman, and a true feeling for art. At the age of fourteen 
he was sent to Paris, to study at the College Henri Quatre. In 
1823 he entered his father's office as assistant-engineer, just at 
the time when the project of the Thames Tunnel was beginning 
to take shape; and during the later portion of the time, from 
1825, when the work was begun, till 1828, when it was stopped 
by an irruption of the river, he was both nominal and actual 
resident engineer. In November 1829 he sent in designs and 
plans for the projected suspension bridge over the Avon at 
Clifton, but in consequence of objections raised by Thomas 
Telford, the referee of the bridge committee, his plans were 
rejected. But a new design which he sent in on a second com- 
petition in 183 1 was accepted, and he was appointed engineer. 
The works were begun in 1836, but owing to lack of funds were 
not completed until 1864, after Brunei's death; his design, 
however, vyas closely adhered to, and the chains employed came 
from the old Hungerford suspension bridge (London), which he 
had built in 1841-1845, but which was displaced in 1862 by the 
Charing Cross railway bridge. 

In March 1833 Brunei, at the age of twenty-seven, was ap- 
pointed engineer of the newly-projected Great Western railway. 
For several years his energies were taxed to the utmost by the 
conflict with obstructive landowners and short-sighted critics; 
but he showed himself equal to the occasion, not only as a 
professional man, but as a persuasive negotiator. Among the 
engineering triumphs on that railway are the Hanwell viaduct, 
the Maidenhead bridge and the Box tunnel, at the time the 
longest in the world. The famous " battle ofthe gauges " took 
its rise from his introduction of the broad (7 ft.) gauge on that 
line. In 1846 he resigned his office as engineer of the Great 
Western railway. In 1844 he had recommended the adoption 
of the atmospheric system on the South Devon railway, but 
after a year's trial the system was abandoned. The last and 
greatest of Brunei's railway works was the Royal Albert bridge 
over the river Tamar at Saltash. This work, sanctioned by 
parliament in 1845, was constructed between 1853 and 1859. 

In addition to the arduous labours of railway engineering 
Brunei took a leading part in the systematic development of 
ocean steam navigation. As early as October 1835 he had sug- 
gested to the directors of the Great Western railway, that they 
should " make it longer, and have a steamboat to go from 
Bristol to New York, and call it the ' Great Western.' " The 
project was taken up, and the " Great Western " steamship 
was designed by Brunei, and built at Bristol under his super- 
intendence. It was much longer than any steamer of the day, 
and was the first steamship built to make regular voyages across 
the Atlantic. While the vessel was building a controversy 
was raised about the practicability of Brunei's scheme, Dr D. 
Lardner asserting dogmatically that the voyage could not be 
made, and backing his assertion with an array of figures. His 
view was widely accepted, but the work went on, and the voyage 
was accomplished in 1838. Brunei at once undertook a still 
larger design in the " Great Britain," which was the first large 
iron steamship, the largest ship afloat at that time, and the first 
large ship in which the screw-propeller was used. She made 
her first voyage from Liverpool to New York in August and 
September 1845; but in the following year was carelessly run 



upon the rocks in Dundrum Bay on the coast of Ireland. After 
lying there nearly a year without material damage she was 
got off and was employed in the Australian trade. Brunei soon 
after began to meditate a still vaster project, the construction 
of a vessel large enough to carry all the coal required for a long 
voyage out, and if coal could not be had at the out port, then 
to carry enough also for the return voyage. It seemed to hmi, 
further, that a great increase of size would give many advantages 
for navigation. During his connexion as engineer with the 
Australian Mail Company he worked out into a practical shape 
his conception of a "great ship"; and in 1852 his scheme 
was laid before the directors of the Eastern Steam Navigation 
Company. It was adopted, the projector being appointed 
engineer, and after much time occupied about contracts and 
specifications the work was begun in December 1853. Immense 
difficulties in the progress of construction caused delays from 
time to time. The operation of launching was several times 
attempted in vain; but at length the gigantic vessel, the " Great 
Eastern," was got afloat on the 31st of January 1858. Much 
remained to be done to complete the ship; and her engineer, 
overworked and worn out with worry, broke down and did not 
see her begin her first voyage on the 7th of September 1859. 
On the 5th he was brought home from the ship suffering from 
a paralytic stroke, and on the 15 th he died at his house in 
Westminster. 

In addition to the great works already described, Brunei 
was employed in the construction of many docks and piers, as at 
Monkwearmouth, Bristol, Plymouth, Briton Ferry, Brentford 
and Milford Haven. He was a zealous promoter of the Great 
Exhibition of 1851, and was a member of the committee on the 
section of machinery and of the building committee. He paid 
much attention to the improvement of large guns, and designed 
a floating gun-carriage for the attack on Kronstadt in the Russian 
War (1854); he also designed and superintended the construc- 
tion of the hospital buildings at Erenkeni on the Dardanelles 
(1855). He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1830, 
and in 1858 declined the presidency of the Institution of Civil 
Engineers through ill-health. He received the degree of D.C.L. 
from Oxford in 1857. In his work he was singularly free from 
professional jealousy, and was always ready to commend and 
help others, though, himself a man of remarkable industry and 
energy, he demanded a high standard of faithful service from 
his subordinates. 

See TheLifeof I.K .Brunei, C.E. (1870) , by his son, Isambard Brunei. 

BRUNEL, SIR MARC ISAMBARD (1769-1849), British in- 
ventor and engineer, was born at Hacqueville in Normandy on 
the 25th of April 1769. His father, a small landowner and 
farmer, intended him for the church, but his taste for mathe- 
matics and mechanics inclined him to another career, and he 
obtained a nomination for the navy, in which he served for six 
years. When his ship was paid off in 1792 and he returned to 
France, he found the Revolution at its height, and owing to his 
pronounced royalist opinions he was obliged to leave the country. 
Reaching New York in September 1793 he began to practise 
as an architect and civil engineer. His first employment was 
in land-surveying and canal-engineering. Later he submitted 
a highly ornamental design for the National Capitol at Wash- 
ington, which, however, was not accepted, and was engaged to 
design and superintend the construction of the Bowery theatre, 
New York, burnt down in 182 1. He fitted novel and ingenious 
machinery in the arsenal and cannon factory which he was 
commissioned to erect in New York, and he was asked to supply 
plans for the defences of the Narrows between the upper and 
lower bays of that port. Early in 1799 he sailed for England 
in order to submit to the British government his plans for the 
mechanical production of ships' blocks, in substitution for the 
manual processes then employed. After the usual difficulties 
and delays his proposals were adopted, largely through the 
recommendation of Sir Samuel Bentham, and about 1803 the 
erection of his machines was begun at Portsmouth dockyard. 
They were constructed by Henry Maudslay, and formed one of 
the earliest examples of a complete range of machine tools, each 



BRUNELLESCHI— BRUNETIERE 



683 



performing its part in a long series of operations. Not only was 
the quality of the product much improved but the cost was 
greatly diminished, and the saving effected in the first year in 
which the machines were in full work was estimated at £24,000, 
of which about two-thirds was awarded to Brunei. A little later 
he was occupied in devising improved machines for sawing and 
bending timber, and in 181 1 and 181 2 he was employed by the 
government in erecting saw-mills at Woolwich and Chatham, 
carrying out at the latter dockyard a complete reorganization 
of the system for handling timber. About 181 2 he devised 
machinery for making boots which was adopted for the purposes 
of the army, but abandoned a few years later when, owing to 
the cessation of war, the demand became less and the supply of 
manual labour cheaper. At the same time he interested himself 
in the establishment of steam navigation on the Thames between 
London and Ramsgate. In 1814 he succeeded in persuading the 
admiralty to try steam-tugs for towing warships out to sea. 
The experiments were made at his own expense, for a few months 
after undertaking to contribute to the cost the admiralty re- 
voked its promise on the ground that the attempt was " too 
chimerical to be seriously entertained." Another vain enter- 
prise on which he wasted much time and money was an attempt 
to use liquefied gases as a source of motive power. His round 
stocking-frame or tricoteur was patented in 1816, and among his 
other inventions were machines for winding cotton-thread into 
balls, for copying drawings, for making small wooden boxes such 
as are used by druggists, and for the manufacture of nails, 
together with processes of preparing tinfoil for decorative pur- 
poses and improvements in stereotype plates for printing. 

In 1821, partly as the result of the damage done by fire in 
1814 to the saw-mills he owned at Battersea, and partly because 
his commercial abilities were far from equal to his mechanical 
genius, he got into financial difficulties and was thrown into 
prison for debt, only regaining his freedom through a grant of 
£5000 which his friends obtained for him from the government. 
Subsequently his attention was mainly devoted to projects of 
civil engineering, the most noteworthy being the Thames Tunnel. 
In 1820 he had prepared plans of bridges for erection in Rouen 
and St Petersburg and in the island of Bourbon. In 1823 he 
designed swing-bridges, and in 1826 floating landing-stages, for 
the port of Liverpool. A company, which was supported by the 
duke of Wellington, was formed in 1824 to carry out his scheme 
for boring a tunnel under the Thames between Wapping and 
Rotherhithe. The work was begun at the beginning of 1825, 
the excavation being accomplished by the aid of a "shield," 
which he had patented in 1818. Many difficulties were en- 
countered. The river broke through the roof of the tunnel in 
1827, and after a second irruption in 1828 work was discontinued 
for lack of funds. Seven years later it was resumed with the aid 
of money advanced by the government, and after three more 
irruptions the tunnel was completed and opened in 1843. Aided 
by his son, Brunei displayed extraordinary skill and resource 
in the various emergencies with which he had to deal, but the 
anxiety broke down his health. He recovered sufficiently from 
one paralytic stroke to attend the opening ceremony, but he was 
able to undertake little more professional work. A second stroke 
followed in 1845, anc > Iour years later he died in London on the 
1 2th of December 1849. He received the order of the Legion 
of Honour in 1829 and was knighted in 1841. 

See Richard Beamish, Memoirs of Sir Marc Isambard Brunei 
(1862). 

BRUNELLESCHI (or Brunellesco), FILIPPO (1379-1446), 
Italian architect, the reviver in Italy of the Roman or Classic 
style, was born at Florence in 1379. His father, a notary, had 
destined him for his own profession, but observing the boy's 
talent for all sorts of mechanism, placed him in the gild of 
goldsmiths. Filippo quickly became a skilled workman, and 
perfected himself in the knowledge of sculpture, perspective 
and geometry. He designed some portions of houses in Florence, 
and in 1401 he was one of the competitors for the design of the 
gates of the baptistery of San Giovanni. He was unsuccessful, 
though his work obtained praise, and he soon afterwards set out 



for Rome. He studied hard, and resolved to do what he could 
to revive the older classical style, which had died out in Italy. 
Moreover, he was one of the first to apply the scientific laws of 
perspective to his work. In 1407 he returned to Florence, just 
at the time when it was resolved to attempt the completion of 
the cathedral church of Santa Maria del Fiore. Brunelleschi's 
plan for effecting this by a cupola was approved, but it was not 
till 14 1 9, and after innumerable disputes, that the work was 
finally entrusted to him. At first he was hampered by his 
colleague Ghiberti, of whom he skilfully got rid. He did not 
live to see the completion of his great work, and the lantern on 
the summit was put up not altogether in accordance with the 
instructions and plans left by him. The great cupola, one of 
the triumphs of architecture, exceeds in some measurements 
that of St Peter's at Rome, and has a more massive and striking 
appearance. Besides this masterpiece Brunelleschi executed 
numerous other works, among the most remarkable of which 
are the Pitti palace at Florence, on the pattern of which are 
based the Tuscan palaces of the 15th century, the churches of 
San Lorenzo and Spirito Santo, and the still more elegant 
Capella del Pazza. The beautiful carved crucifix in the church 
of Santa Maria Novella in Florence is also the work of Brunel- 
leschi. He died in Florence on the 16th of April 1446, and was 
buried in the cathedral church of his native city. 

See Manetti, Vita di Brunelleschi (Florence, 1812) ; Guasti, La 
cupola di Santa Maria del Fiore (Florence, 1857) ; von Fabriczy, 
Filippo Brunelleschi (Stuttgart, 1892). 

BRUNET, JACQUES CHARLES (1780-1867), French biblio- 
grapher, was born in Paris on the 2nd of November 1780. He 
was the son of a bookseller, and in 1802 he printed a supple- 
ment to the Dictionnaire bibliographique de livres rares (1790) of 
Duclos and Cailleau. In 18 10 there appeared the first edition 
of his Manuel du libraire et de I' amateur des livres (3 vols.). 
Brunet published successive editions of his great bibliographical 
dictionary, which rapidly came to be recognized as the first 
book of its class in European literature. He died on the 14th 
of November 1867. Among his other works are Nouvelles 
Recherches bibliographiques (1834), Recherches . . . sur les 
editions originates . . . de Rabelais (1852), and an edition 
of the French poems of J. G. Alione d'Asti, dating from the 
beginning of the 16th century (1836). 

See also a notice by Le Roux de Lincy, prefixed to the catalogue 
(1868) of his own valuable library. A supplement to the 5th edition 
(1860-1865) of the Manuel du libraire was published (1878-1880) by 
P. Deschamps and G. Brunet. 

BRUNETIERE, FERDINAND (1840-1906), French critic and 
manofletters, was born at Toulon on the 19th of July 1849. After 
attending a school at Marseilles, he studied in Paris at the Lycee 
Louis-le- Grand. Desiring to follow the profession of teaching, he 
entered for examination at the Ecole Normale Supfirieure, but 
failed, and the outbreak of war in 1870 debarred him from a 
second attempt. He turned to private tuition and to literary 
criticism. After the publication of successful articles in the 
Revue Bleue, he became connected with the Revue des Deux 
Mondes, first as contributor, then as secretary and sub-editor, 
and finally, in 1893, as principal editor. In 1886 he was ap- 
pointed professor of French language and literature at the Ecole 
Normale, a singular honour for one who had not passed through 
the academic mill; and later he presided with distinction over 
various conferences at the Sorbonne and elsewhere. He was 
decorated with the Legion of Honour in 1887, and became a 
member of the Academy in 1893. The published works of M. 
Brunetiere consist largely of reprinted papers and lectures. 
They include six series of Etudes critiques (1880- 1898) on French 
history and literature; Le Roman naturaliste (1883); Histoire et 
Litter ature, three series (1884- 1886); Questions de critique (1888; 
second series, 1890). The first volume of L'£volution de genres 
dans I'histoire de la literature, lectures in which a formal classi- 
fication, founded on the Darwinian theory, is applied to the 
phenomena of literature, appeared in 1890; and his later works 
include a series of studies (2 vols., 1894) on the evolution of 
French lyrical poetry during the 19th century, a history of 



68 4 



BRUNHILD— BRUNN 



French classic literature begun in 1904, a monograph on Balzac 
(1906), and various pamphlets of a polemical nature dealing with 
questions of education, science and religion. Among these may 
be mentioned Discours acadimiques (1901), Discours de combat 
(1900, 1903), L' Action sociale du christianisme (1904), Sur les 
chemins de la croyance (1905). M. Brunetiere was an orthodox 
Roman Catholic, and his political sympathies were in the main 
reactionary. He possessed two prime qualifications of a great 
critic, vast erudition and unflinching courage. He was never 
afraid to diverge from the established critical view, his mind 
was closely logical and intensely accurate, and he rarely made a 
trip in the wide field of study over which it ranged. The most 
honest, if not the most impartial, of magisterial writers, he had a 
hatred of the unreal, and a contempt for the trivial ; nobody was 
more merciless towards those who affected effete and decadent 
literary forms, or maintained a vicious standard of art. On the 
other hand, his intolerance, his sledge-hammer methods of attack 
and a certain dry pedantry alienated the sympathies of many 
who recognized the remarkable qualities of his mind. The 
application of universal principles to every question of letters 
is a check to dilettante habits of thought, but it is apt to detain 
the critic in a somewhat narrow and dusty path. M.Brunetiere's 
influence, however, cannot be disputed, and it was in the main 
thoroughly sound and wholesome. He died on the 9th of 
December 1906. 

His Manual of the History of French Literature was translated into 
English in 1898 by R. Derechef. Among critics of Brunetiere see 
J. Lemaitre, Les Contemporains (1887, &c), and J. Sargeret, Les 
Grands Convertis (1906). 

BRUNHILD (M.H.Ger. Brunhilt or Prunhilt, Nor. Brynhildr), 
the name of a mythical heroine of various versions of the legend 
of the Nibelungs. The name means " the warrior woman in 
armour " (from 0. H. Ger. brunjd, brunja, M. H. Ger. brunige, 
brilnje, briinne, a cuirass or coat of mail, 0. Eng. byrnie, and 
0. H. Ger. hiltja, hilta, war), and in the Norse versions of the 
Nibelung myth, which preserves more of the primitive traditions 
than the Nibelungenlied, Brunhild is a valkyrie, the daughter of 
Odin, by whom, as a punishment for having against his orders 
helped a warrior to victory, she has been cast under a spell of 
sleep on Hindarfjell, a lonely rock summit, until the destined 
hero shall penetrate the wall of fire by which she is surrounded, 
and wake her. This is a variant of the widespread myth which 
survives in the popular fairy-story of "the sleeping beauty." 
The ingenuity of some German scholars has made of Brunhild 
a personification of the day, held prisoner upon the hill-tops till 
in the morning the sun-god comes to her rescue, then triumphing 
with him awhile, only to pass once more under the spell of the 
powers of mist and darkness. 'She is thus by some commentators 
contrasted with " the masked warrior woman " Kriemhild 
(<?.».), a personification of the power of night and death. But 
whatever be the dim original of the character of Brunhild — 
as to which authorities are by no means agreed — even in the 
northern versions its mythical interest is quite subordinate to 
its purely human interest. In the V olsungasaga she is the 
heroine of a tragedy of passion and wounded pride ; it is she who 
compasses the death of Sigurd, who has broken his troth plighted 
to her, and then immolates herself on his funeral pyre in order 
that in the world of the dead he may be wholly hers. In the 
Nibelungenlied, on the other hand, she plays a comparatively 
colourless role. She still possesses superhuman attributes: 
like Atalanta, she can only be won by the man who is able to 
overcome her in trials of speed and strength; but, instead of a 
valkyrie sleeping on a lonely rock, she is, when Sigfrid goes to 
woo her on behalf of Gunther, queen of Islant (Isenlant), living 
in a castle called the Isenstein. In the tragedy of the death of 
Sigfrid her part is completely overshadowed by that of " the 
grim Hagen," and from the moment that the murder is decided 
on she drops almost completely out of the story. The poet of the 
Nibelungenlied evidently knew nothing of the tale of her self- 
immolation; for, though he has nothing definite to say about 
her after Sigfrid's death, he keeps her alive in a sort of dignified 
retirement. In the last 5000 lines or so of the poem Brunhild 



is only mentioned four times and takes no active part in the 
story. (See further under Nibelungenlied.) (W. A. P.) 

BRUNHILDA (Brunechildis), queen of Austrasia (d. 613), 
was a daughter of Athanagild, king of the Visigoths. In 567 
she was asked in marriage by Sigebert, who was reigning at 
Metz. She now abjured Arianism and was converted to the 
orthodox faith, and the union was celebrated at Metz; on which 
occasion Fortunatus, an Italian poet, who was then at the 
Frankish court, composed the epithalamium. Chilperic, brother 
of Sigebert, and king of the west Frankish kingdom, jealous of 
the renown which this marriage brought to his elder brother, 
hastened to ask the hand of Galswintha, sister of Brunhilda; 
but at the instigation of his mistress Fredegond, he assassinated 
his wife. Sigebert was anxious to avenge his sister-in-law, 
but on the intervention of Guntram, he accepted the compensa- 
tion offered by Chilperic, namely the cities of Bordeaux, Cahors 
and Limoges, with Beam and Bigorre. 

This treaty did not prevent war soon again breaking out 
between Sigebert and Chilperic. So long as her husband lived, 
Brunhilda played asecondary part, but having been made captive 
byChilperic after her husband's assassination (575), she succeeded 
in escaping from her prison at Rouen, after a series of extra- 
ordinary adventures, by means of a marriage with Merovech, the 
son of her conqueror. From this time on, she took the lead; 
in Austrasia she engaged in a desperate struggle against the 
nobles, who wished to govern in the name of her son Childebert 
II.; but she was worsted in the conflict and for some time had to 
seek refuge in Burgundy. After the death of Childebert II. (597) 
she aspired to govern Austrasia and Burgundy in the name of 
her grandsons Theudebert and Theuderich II. She was expelled 
from Austrasia, and then stirred up Theuderich II. against his 
brother, whom he defeated at Toul and Tolbiac, and put to death. 
Theuderich II. died shortly after this victory, and Brunhilda 
caused one of her great-grandchildren to be proclaimed king. 
The nobles of Austrasia and Burgundy, however, now summoned 
Clotaire II., son of Fredegond, and king of Neustria, to help them 
against the queen. Brunhilda was given up to him, and died 
a terrible death, being dragged at the heels of a wild horse (613). 

Brunhilda seems to have had political ideas, and to have 
wished to attain to the royal power. She was a protectress 
of the Church, and Pope Gregory I. (590-604) addressed a 
series of letters to her, in which he showered praises upon her. 
She took it upon herself, however, to supervise the bishoprics 
and monasteries, and came into conflict with Columban (Colum- 
banus), abbot of Luxeuil. As Brunhilda was a great queen, 
tradition ascribes to her the construction of many old castles, 
and a number of old Roman roads are also known by the name 
of Chausstes de Brunehaut. 

Authorities. — Gregory of Tours, Historia Francorum, bks. iv.-x. ; 
the so-called Chronicle of Fredegarius ; Aug. Thierry, Recits des 
temps merovingiens (2 vols., Paris, 8th ed., 1864) ; G. Kurth, " La 
Reine Brunehaut," in the Revue des questions historiques, vol. xxvi. 
(1891). (C. Pf.) 

BRUNI, LEONARDO (1369-1444), Italian scholar, author of the 
History of Florence, was born at Arezzo, and is generally known 
as Leonardo Aretino. He was secretary to the papal chancery 
under Innocent VII. and John XXII. From 1427 to his death 
in 1444 he was chancellor to the republic of Florence. He was 
buried at the expense of the state in Sta Croce, where his laurelled 
statue is still to be seen. He was the first to free the history of 
Florence from its fabulous elements, but his book, though not 
unintelligent, only repays very laborious study. The only 
Latin edition is Hisloriarum Florentinarum libri xii . . . exempto 
in lucent edit. stud, el op. Sixti Brunonis (Argentor. 1610, fol.). 
A translation into Tuscan was published by Donato Acciajuoli in 
1476 at Venice, was republished at Florence in 1492, and again, 
with Sansovino's continuation, at Venice in 1561. 

BRUNN (Czech Brno), the capital of the Austrian margraviate 
and crownland of Moravia, 89 m. N. of Vienna by rail. Pop. 
(1900) 108,944, of whom 70% are Germans and 30% are Czechs. 
Briinn is situated for the most part between two hills at the con- 
fluence of the Schwarzawa and the Zwittawa, and consists o"f 



BRUNNER— BRUNO 



6«5 



the old town and extensive suburbs. On one of the hills, known 
as the Spielberg (945 ft.), stands a castle which has long been 
used as a prison, famous for its connexion with Silvio Pellico, 
who was confined within its walls from 1822 to 1830. The 
fortifications of the old town have now been entirely removed, 
giving place to handsome gardens and well-built streets, which 
put it in communication with its adjoining suburbs. The old town, 
although comparatively small, with narrow and crooked but well- 
paved streets, contains the most important buildings in the city. 
The Rathaus, which dates from 1511, has a fine Gothic portal, 
and contains several interesting antiquities. The ecclesiastical 
buildings comprise the cathedral of St Peter, situated on the 
lower hill; the fine Gothic church of St Jacob, built in the 15th 
century, with its iron tower added in 1845, and a remarkable 
collection of early prints; the church of the Augustinia'n friars, 
dating from the 14th century; and that of the Minorites, with 
its frescoes, its holy stair and its Loretto-house. Amongst 
the new buildings are the hall of the provincial diet, opened in 
1881; a handsome new synagogue; the national museum of 
Moravia and Silesia and several high educational establishments, 
including a technical academy and a theological seminary, 
which are the remnants of the former university of Briinn. It 
is the seat of a Roman Catholic bishop and of a Protestant 
consistory. Briinn, which is sometimes styled "the Austrian 
Manchester," is one of the most industrial towns of Austria 
and the chief seat of the cloth industry in the whole empire. 
Other important branches of industry are: the manufacture 
of various woollen, cotton and silk goods, leather, the machinery 
required in the textile factories, brewing, distilling and milling, 
and the production of sugar, oil, gloves and hardware. It is 
also an important railway junction and carries on a very active 
trade. 

Briinn probably dates from the oth century. In the nth 
century it was bestowed by Duke Wratislas II. on his son Otto. 
A place of great strength, it held out successfully against sieges 
— in 1428 by the Hussites, in 1467 by King George of Bohemia, 
in 1645 by the Swedish general Torstenson, and in 1742 by the 
Prussians. In 1805 it was the headquarters of Napoleon before 
the battle of Austerlitz. 

See Trautenberger, Die Chronik der Landeshauptstadt Briinn 
(Briinn, 1893-1897, 5 vols.). 

BRUNNER, HENRY (1840- ), German historian, was 
born at Wels in Upper Austria on the 22nd of June 1840. After 
studying at the universities of Vienna, Gottingen and Berlin, 
he became professor at the university of Lemberg in 1866, and 
in quick succession held similar positions at Prague, Strassburg 
and Berlin. From 1872 Brunner devoted himself especially 
to studying the early laws and institutions of the Franks and 
kindred peoples of western Europe, and on these subjects his 
researches have been of supreme value. He also became a 
leading authority on modern German law. He became a member 
of the Berlin Academy of Sciences in 1884, and in 1886, after the 
death of G. Waitz, undertook the supervision of the Leges section 
of the Monumenta Germaniae historica. His chief works are: 
Die Entstehung der Schwurgerichte (Berlin, 1872); Zeugen und 
Tnquisilionsbeiveis der karolingischen Zeit (Vienna, 1866); Das 
anglonormannische Erbfolgesystem, nebst einem Excurs iiber die 
Slteren norm&nnischen Coutumes (Leipzig, 1869); Zur Rechts- 
geschichle der romischen und germanischen Urkunde (Berlin, 
1880); Deutsche Rechtsgeschichte (Leipzig, 1887-1892); Mithio 
und Speranles (Berlin, 1885); Die Landschenkungen der Mero- 
winger und Agilolfinger (Berlin, 1885); Das Gerichtszeugnis und 
die frankische Konigsurkunde (Berlin, 1873); Forschungen zur 
Geschichte des deutschen und franzosischen Rechts (Stuttgart, 
1894); Grundziige der deutschen Rechtsgeschichte (Leipzig, 1901). 

BRtfNNOW, FRANZ FRIEDRICH ERNST (1821-1891), 
German astronomer, was born in Berlin on the 18th of November 
1821. Between the ages of eight and eighteen he attended the 
Friedrich-Wilhelm gymnasium. In 1839 he entered the univer- 
sity of Berlin, where he studied mathematics, astronomy and 
physics, as well as chemistry, philosophy and philology. After 
graduating as Ph.D. in 1843, he took an active part in 



astronomical work at the Berlin observatory, under the direction 
of J. F. Encke, contributing numerous important papers on the 
orbits of comets and minor planets to the Astronomische Nach- 
richten. In 1847 he was appointed director of the Bilk obser- 
vatory, near Dusseldorf, and in the following year published the 
well-known Mimoire sur la comete elliptique de De Vico, for which 
he received the gold medal of the Amsterdam Academy. In 
1851 he succeeded J. G. Galle as first assistant at the Berlin 
observatory, and accepted in 1854 the post of director of the 
new observatory at Ann Arbor, Michigan, U.S.A. Here he 
published, 1858-1862, a journal entitled Astronomical Notices, 
while his tables of the minor planets Flora, Victoria and Iris 
were severally issued in 1857, 1859 and 1869. In i860 he went, 
as associate director of the observatory, to Albany, N. Y. ; but 
returned in 1861 to Michigan, and threw himself with vigour 
into the work of studying the astronomical and physical con- 
stants of the observatory and its instruments. In 1863 he 
resigned its direction and returned to Germany; then, on the 
death of Sir W. R. Hamilton in 1865, he accepted the post of 
Andrews professor of astronomy in the university of Dublin 
and astronomer-royal of Ireland. His first undertaking at the 
Dublin observatory was the erection of an equatorial telescope 
to carry the fine object-glass presented to the university by 
Sir James South; and on its completion he began an import- 
ant series of researches on stellar parallax. The first, second 
and third parts of the Astronomical Observations and Researches 
made at Dunsink contain the results of these labours, and 
include discussions of the distances of the stars a Lyrae, <r 
Draconis, Groombridge 1830, 85 Pegasi, and Bradley 3077, and 
of the planetary nebula H. iv. 37. In 1873 the observatory, on 
Dr Briinnow's recommendation, was provided with a first-class 
transit-circle, which he proceeded to test as a preliminary to 
commencing an extended programme of work with it, but in 
the following year, in consequence of failing health and eyesight, 
he resigned the post and retired to Basel. In 1880 he removed 
to Vevey, and in 1889 to Heidelberg, where he died on the 20th 
of August 1891. The permanence of his reputation was secured 
by the merits of his Lehrbuch der sphiirischen Astronomic, which 
were at once and widely appreciated. In i860 part i. was 
translated into English by Robert Main, the Radcliffe observer 
at Oxford; Briinnow himself published an English version in 
1865; it reached in the original a 5th edition in 1881, and was 
also translated into French, Russian, Italian and Spanish. 

See Month. Notices Roy. Astr. Society, Hi. 230; J. C. Poggendorff's 
Biog. Lit. Handworterbuch, Bd. iii. ; Nature, xliv. 449. 

BRUNO, SAINT, founder of the Carthusians, was born in 
Cologne about 1030; he was educated there and afterwards at 
Reims and Tours, where he studied under Berengar. He was 
ordained at Cologne, and thence, in 1057, he was recalled to 
Reims to become scholasticus, or head of the cathedral school, 
and overseer of the schools of the diocese. He was made also 
canon and diocesan chancellor. Having protested against the 
misdoings of a new archbishop, he was deprived of all his offices 
and had to fly for safety (1076). On the deposition of the arch- 
bishop in 1080, Bruno was presented by the ecclesiastical 
authorities to the pope for the see, but Philip I. of France 
successfully opposed the appointment. After this Bruno left 
Reims and retired, with six companions, to a desert among 
the mountains near Grenoble, and there founded the Carthusian 
order (1084). After six years Urban II. called him to Rome 
and offered him the archbishopric of Reggio; but he refused it, 
and withdrew to a desert in Calabria, where he established two 
other monasteries, and died in 1101. He wrote Commentaries 
on the Psalms and the Pauline Epistles, to be found in Migne, 
Pair. Lat. clii. and cliii. ; some works by namesakes have been 
attributed to him. 

His Life will be found in the Bollandists' Acta Sanctorum (6th of 
October). The best study on St Bruno's life and works is Hermann 
Lobbel, Der Stifter des Kartliauser-Ordens, 1899 (vol. v. No. 1 of 
" Kirchengeschichtliche Studien," Munster). (E. C. B.) 

BRUNO, or Brun (925-965), archbishop of Cologne, third son 
of the German king, Henry I., the Fowler, by his second wife 
Matilda, was educated for the church at Utrecht, where he 



686 



BRUNO, GIORDANO 



distinguished himself by his studious zeal. In 940 his brother, 
King Otto, afterwards the emperor Otto the Great, appointed 
him chancellor, and some years later arch-chaplain, and under his 
leadership the chancery was reformed and became a training 
ground for capable administrators. He rendered valuable assist- 
ance to his brother Otto in his efforts to suppress the risings 
which marked the earlier part of his reign, services which were 
rewarded in 953 when Bruno was made archbishop of Cologne, 
and about the same time duke of Lorraine. Bruno is chiefly 
renowned as a scholar and a patron of learning. He consorted 
eagerly with learned foreigners, tried to secure a better education 
for the clergy, and was mainly instrumental in making his 
brother's court a centre of intellectual life. He built many 
churches, and, aided by the tendency of the time, sought to 
purify monastic life. He died at Reims on the nth of October 
965, and was buried in the church of St Pantaleon at Cologne. 

See Ruotger, "Vita Brunonis archiepiscopi Coloniensis," in the 
Monumenla Germaniae Historica, Scriptores, Band iv. (Hanover and 
Berlin, 1826-1892) ; E. Meyer, DeBrunonel. Archiepiscopo ColoniensL 
(Berlin, 1867); J. P. Pfeiffer, Historisch-Kritische Beitrage zur 
Geschichte Bruns I. (Cologne, 1870) ; K. Martin, Beitrage zur 
Geschichte Briinos I. von Koln (Jena, 1878). 

BRUNO, GIORDANO (c. 1548-1600), Italian philosopher of 
the Renaissance, was born near Nola in the village of Cicala. 
Little is known of his life. He was christened Filippo, and took 
the name Giordano only on entering a religious order. In his 
fifteenth year he entered the order of the Dominicans at Naples, 
and is said to have composed a treatise on the ark of Noah. 
Why he submitted to a discipline palpably unsuited to his fiery 
spirit we cannot tell. In consequence of his views on transub- 
stantiation and the immaculate conception he was accused of 
impiety, and after enduring persecution for some years, he fled 
from Rome about 1576, and wandered through various cities, 
reaching Geneva in 1 5 79. The home of Calvinism was no resting- 
place for him (T. Dufour, Giordano Bruno a Geneve, Geneva, 
1884), and he travelled on through Lyons, Toulouse and Mont- 
pellier, arriving at Paris in 1 58 1 . Everywhere he bent his energies 
to the exposition of the new thoughts which were beginning to 
effect a revolution in the thinking world. He had drunk deeply 
of the spirit of the Renaissance, the determination to see for 
himself the noble universe, unclouded by the mists of authori- 
tative philosophy and church tradition. The discoveries of 
Copernicus were eagerly accepted by him, and he used them as the 
lever by which to push aside the antiquated system that had come 
down from Aristotle, for whom, indeed, he had a perfect hatred. 
Like Bacon and Telesio he preferred the older Greek philosophers, 
who had looked at nature for themselves, and whose speculations 
had more of reality in them. He had read widely and deeply, 
and in his own writings we come across many expressions 
familiar to us in earlier systems. Yet his philosophy is no eclecti- 
cism. He owed something to Lucretius, something to the Stoic 
nature-pantheism, something to Anaxagoras, to Heraclitus, to 
the Pythagoreans, and to the Neoplatonists, who were partially 
known to him; above all, he was a profound student of Nicolas 
of Cusa, who was indeed a speculative Copernicus. But his own 
system has a distinct unity and originality; it breathes through- 
out the fiery spirit of Bruno himself. 

Bruno had been well received at Toulouse, where he had 
lectured on astronomy; even better fortune awaited him at 
Paris, especially at the hands of Henry III. He was offered a 
chair of philosophy, provided he would receive the Mass. He at 
once refused, but was permitted to deliver lectures. These seem 
to have been altogether devoted to expositions of a certain logical 
system which Bruno had taken up with great eagerness, the Ars 
Magna of Raimon Lull. With the exception of a satiric comedy, 
II Candelajo, all the works of this period are devoted to this logic 
— De Utnbris Idearum, A rs Memoriae, Be compendiosa architectura 
et complemento artis Lullii, and Canlus Circaeus. To many it has 
seemed a curious freak of Bruno's that he should have so eagerly 
adopted a view of thought like that of Lull, but in reality it 
is in strict accordance with the principles of his philosophy. 
Like the Arabian logicians, and some of the scholastics, who 
held that ideas existed in a threefold form — ante res, in rebus 



and post res — he laid down the principle that the archetypal 
ideas existed metaphysically in the ultimate unity or intelli- 
gence, physically in the world of things, and logically in 
signs, symbols or notions. These notions were shadows of 
the ideas, and the Ars Magna furnished him with a general 
scheme, according to which their relations and correspondences 
should be exhibited. It supplied not only a memoria technica, 
but an organon, or method by which the genesis of all ideas from 
unity might be represented intelligibly and easily. It provided 
also a substitute for either the Aristotelian or the Ramist logic, 
which was an additional element in its favour. 

Under the protection' of the French ambassador, Michel de 
Castelnau, sieur de Mauvissiere, Bruno passed over in 1583 to 
England, where he resided for about two years. He was dis- 
gusted with the brutality of English manners, which he paints 
in no flattering colours, and he found pedantry and superstition 
as rampant in Oxford as in Geneva. Indeed, there still existed on 
the statute a provision that " Masters and Bachelors who did not 
follow Aristotle faithfully were liable to a fine of five shillings for 
every point of divergence, and for every fault committed against 
the logic of the Organon." But he indulges in extravagant 
eulogies of Elizabeth. He is generally said to have formed the 
acquaintance of Sir Philip Sidney, Fulke Greville and other 
eminent Englishmen, but there has been much controversy as to 
the facts of his life in London. It seems probable that he lived 
in the French embassy in some secretarial or tutorial position. 
He may conceivably have met Bacon, but it is quite incredible 
that he met Shakespeare in the printing shop of Thomas Vau- 
trollier. In Oxford he was allowed to hold a disputation with 
some learned doctors on the rival merits of the Copernican and 
so-called Aristotelian systems of the universe, and, according to 
his own report, had an easy victory. The best of his works were 
written in the freedom of English social life. The Cena de le 
Ceneri, or Ash Wednesday conversation, devoted to an exposition 
of the Copernican theory, was printed in 1584. In the same year 
appeared his two great metaphysical works, De la Causa, Prin- 
cipio, ed Uno, and De I' Infinito, Universo, e Mondi; in the year 
following the Eroici Furori and Cabala del Cavallo Pegaseo. In 1 584 
also appeared the strange dialogue, Spaccio della Bcstia Trionfante 
(Expulsion of the Triumphant Beast), an allegory treating chiefly 
of moral philosophy, but giving the essence of Bruno's philosophy. 
The gods are represented as resolving to banish from the heavens 
the constellations, which served to remind them of their evil 
deeds. In their places are put the moral virtues. The first of 
the three dialogues contains the substance of the allegory, which, 
under the disguise of an assault on heathen mythology, is a direct 
attack on all forms of anthropomorphic religion. But in a 
philosophical point of view the first part of the second dialogue 
is the most important. Among the moral virtues which take the 
place of the beasts are Truth, Prudence, Wisdom, Law and 
Universal Judgment, and in the explanation of what these mean 
Bruno unfolds the inner essence of his system. Truth is the 
unity and substance which underlies all things; Prudence or 
Providence is the regulating power of truth, and comprehends 
both liberty and necessity; Wisdom is providence itself in its 
supersensible aspect — in man it is reason which grasps the truth 
of things; Law results from wisdom, for no good law is irrational, 
and its sole end and aim is the good of mankind; Universal 
Judgment is the principle whereby men are judged according to 
their deeds, and not according to their belief in this or that 
catechism. Mingled with his allegorical philosophy are the most 
vehement attacks upon the established religion. The monks are 
stigmatized as pedants who would destroy the joy of life on earth, 
who are avaricious, dissolute and the breeders of eternal dis- 
sensions and squabbles. The mysteries of faith are scoffed at. 
The Jewish records are put on a level with the Greek myths, and 
miracles are laughed at as magical tricks. Through all this runs 
the train of thought resulting naturally from Bruno's fundamental 
principles, and familiar in modern philosophy as Spinozism, the 
denial of particular providence, the doctrine of the uselessness of 
prayer, the identification in a sense of liberty and necessity, and 
the peculiar definition of good and evil. 



BRUNO OF QUERFURT, ST— BRUNSWICK, DUKE OF 687 



In 1585-1586 he returned with Castelnau to Paris, where his 
anti-Aristotelian views were taken up by the college of Cambrai, 
but was soon driven from his refuge, and we next find him at 
Marburg and Wittenberg, the headquarters of Lutheranism. 
There is a tradition that here or in England he embraced the 
Protestant faith; nothing in his writings would lead one to 
suppose so. Several works, chiefly logical, appeared during his 
stay at Wittenberg {De Lampade combinatoria Lulliana, 1587, 
and De Progressu et Lampade venatoria logicorum, 1587). In 
1588 he went to Prague, then to Helmstadt. In 1501 he was at 
Frankfort, and published three important metaphysical works, De 
Triplici Minimo et Mensura; De Monade, Numero, et Figura; De 
Immenso et Innumerabilibus. He did not stay long at Prague, 
and we find him next at Zurich, whence he accepted an invitation 
to Venice from a young patrician, Giovanni Mocenigo. It was 
a rash step. The emissaries of the Inquisition were on his track; 
he was thrown into prison, and in 1593 was brought to Rome. 
Seven years were spent in confinement. On the 9th of February 
1600 he was excommunicated, and on the 17th was burned at 
the stake. ' 

For more than two centuries Bruno received scarcely the 
consideration he deserved. On the 9th of June 1889, however, 
as a result of a strong popular movement, a statue to him 
was unveiled in Rome in the Campo dei Fiori, the place of his 
execution. 

To Bruno, as to all great thinkers, philosophy is the search for 
unity. Amid all the varying and contradictory phenomena of the 
universe there is something which gives coherence and intelligibility 
to them. Nor can this unity be something apart from the things ; 
it must contain in itself the universe, which develops from it; it 
must be at once all and one. This unity is God, the universal sub- 
stance, — the one and only principle, or causa immanens, — that 
which is in things and yet is distinct from them as the universal is 
distinct from the particular. He is the efficient and final cause of 
all, the beginning, middle, and end, eternal and infinite. By his 
action the world is produced, and his action is the law of his nature, 
his necessity is true freedom. He is living, active intelligence, the 
principle of motion and creation, realizing himself in the infinitely 
various forms of activity that constitute individual things. To the 
infinitely actual there is necessary the possible; that which deter- 
mines involves somewhat in which its determinations can have 
existence. This other of God, which is in truth one with him, is 
matter. The universe, then, is a living cosmos, an infinitely animated 
system, whose end is the perfect realization of the variously graduated 
forms. The unity which sunders itself into the multiplicity of things 
may be called the monas monadum, each thing being a monas or 
self -existent, living being, a universe in itself. Of these monads the 
number is infinite. The soul of man is a thinking monad, and stands 
mid-way between the divine intelligence and the world of external 
things. As a portion of the divine life, the soul is immortal. Its 
highest function is the contemplation of the divine unity, discoverable 
under the manifold of objects. 

Such is a brief summary of the principal positions of Bruno's 
philosophy. It seems quite clear that in the earlier works.particularly 
the two Italian dialogues, he approached more nearly to the pan- 
theistic view of things than in his later Latin treatises. The unity 
expounded at first is simply an anima mundi, a living universe, but 
not intelligent. There is a distinct development traceable towards 
the later and final form of his doctrine, in which the universe appears 
as the realization of the divine mind. 

Bruno's writings had been much neglected when Tacobi brought 
therri into notice in his Briefe uber die Lehre Spinozas (2nd ed., 1879). 
Since then many have held that Descartes, Spinoza and Leibnitz 
were indebted to him for their main principles. So far as Descartes 
is concerned, it is highly improbable that he had seen any of Bruno's 
works. Schelling, however, called one of his works after him, Bruno. 

Bibliography. — The chief edition of the Latin works is that 
published at the public expense by F. Fiorentino, F. Tocco and H. 
Vitelli (Naples, 1879-1891), which superseded that of A. F. Gfrorer 
(Stuttgart, 1834, incomplete). The Italian works were collected by 
A. Wagner (Leipzig, 1830), and a new edition was published by P. de 
Lagarde (Gottingen, 1888-1889) ; also Opere Italiane, ed. Croce and 
G. Gentile (1907 foil.), with notes by the latter. In Germany, 
Gesammelte Werke, trans. L. Kuhlenbeck (1904 foil.). English 
translations : — The Spaccio, by Morehead, not' as has been supposed 
by J. Toland (dated 1713, but probably printed earlier and very 
rare) ; of the preface to De V Infinite (J. Toland in posthumous 
works); Eroici Furores, L. Williams (1888). There are also French 
and German translations. 

The chief English work on Giordano Bruno is that of J. Lewis 
M'Intyre (London, 1903), containing life, commentary and biblio- 
graphy. See also C. Bartholmess, /. Bruno (Paris, 1846-1847) ; 
Domenico Berti, Giordano Bruno da Nola (2nd ed., 1889) ; H. 



Brunnhofer, Giordano Brunos Weltanschauung (Leipzig, 1883); 
M. Carricre, Philosophische Weltanschauung der Reformationszeit, 
pp. 411-494 (2nd ed.,. 1887); F. J. Clemens, Giordano Bruno und 
Nicolaus von Cusa (Bonn, 1847); Miss I. Frith, Life of Giordano 
Bruno the Nolan (London, 1887) ; C. E. Plumptre, Life and Works of 
Giordano Bruno (London, 1884) ; Chr. Sigwart, in Kleine Schriften, 
1st series, pp. 49-124, 293-304; A. Riehl, G. Bruno (1889, ed. 1900; 
Eng. trans. Agnes Fry, 1905); Landsbeck, Bruno, der Marlyrer der 
neuen Weltanschauung (1890); Owen, in Sceptics of the Italian 
Renaissance (London, 1893); C. H. von Stein, G. Bruno (1900); 
R. Adamson, Development of Modern Philosophy (Edinburgh and 
London, 1903) ; G. Louis, G. Bruno, seine Weltanschauung und 
Lebensauffassung (1900); 0. Juliusberger, G. Bruno und die Gegen- 
wart (1902); J. Reiner, G. Bruno und seine Weltanschauung (1907). 
The most important critical works are perhaps those of Felice Tocco, 
Le Opere Latine di Giordano Bruno (Florence, 1 889), Le Opere Inedite 
di Giordano Bruno (Naples, 1891), Le Fonti piu recenti dellafilos. del 
Bruno (Rome, 1892). See also H. Hoffding, History of Modern 
Philosophy (Eng. trans., 1900) ; J. M. Robertson, Short History of 
Freethought (London, 1906) ; G. Gentile, Giordano Bruno nella 
Storia delta cultura (1907). For other works see G. Graziano, 
Bibliografia Bruniana (1900). (R. Ad.; J. M. M.) 

BRUNO (Brun, Bruns) OF QUERFURT, SAINT (c. 975- 
1009), German missionary bishop and martyr, belonged to the 
family of the lords of Querfurt in Saxony. He was educated 
at the famous cathedral school at Magdeburg, and at the age of 
twenty was attached to the clerical household of the emperoi 
Otto III. In 996 he accompanied the emperor to Rome, and 
there gave up his post and entered the monastery of SS. Alexius 
and Bonifacius on the Aventine, taking " in religion " the name 
of Bonifacius. When the news reached Rome of the martyr- 
dom of Adalbert, bishop of Prague (997), Bruno determined 
to take his place, and in 1004, after being consecrated by the 
pope as archbishop of the eastern heathen, he set out for Ger- 
many to seek aid of the emperor Henry II. The emperor, how- 
ever, being at war with Boleslaus of Poland, opposed his enter- 
prise, and he went first to the court of St Stephen of Hungary, 
and, finding but slight encouragement there, to that of the 
grand prince Vladimir at Kiev. He made no effort to win over 
Vladimir to the Roman obedience, but devoted himself to the 
conversion of the pagan Pechenegs who inhabited the country 
between the Don and the Danube. In this he was so far success- 
ful that they made peace with the grand prince and were for 
a while nominally Christians. In 1008 Bruno went to the court 
of Boleslaus, and, after a vain effort to persuade the emperor 
to end the war between Germans and Poles, determined at all 
hazards to proceed with his mission to the Prussians. With 
eighteen companions he set out; but on the borders of the 
Russian (Lithuanian) country he and all his company were 
massacred by the heathens (February 14, 1009). 

During his stay in Hungary (1004) Bruno wrote a life of St 
Adalbert, the best of the three extant biographies of the saint 
(in Pertz, Mon. Germ. Hist. Scriptores, iv. pp. 577, 596-612), 
described by A. Potthast (Bibliotheca hist. med. aev.) as " in 
the highest degree attractive both in manner and matter." 

A life of St Bruno was written by Dietmar, bishop of Merseburg 
(976-1019). This, with additions from the life of St Romuald, is 
published in the Bollandist Ada Sanctorum (June 19), vi. I, pp. 
223-225. See further U. Chevalier, Repertoire ales sources historiques, 
Bio-Bibliographie (Paris, 1904), s.v. " Brunon de Querfurt." 

BRUNSBUTTEL, a seaport town of Germany, in the 
Prussian province of Schleswig-Holstein, on the N. bank of the 
Elbe, 60 m. N.W. from Hamburg. Pop. (1905) 2500. Bruns- 
biittel is the west terminus of the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal, which 
is closed there by double locks. Here also are an inner harbour, 
1640 ft. long and 656 ft. wide, a coaling station, and a small 
harbour for the tugs and other vessels belonging to the canal 
company. 

BRUNSWICK, KARL WILHELM FERDINAND, Duke of 
(173 5-1 806), German general, was born on the 9th of October 
1735 at Wolfenbuttel. He received an unusually wide and 
thorough education, and travelled in his youth in Holland, 
France and various parts of Germany. His first military ex- 
perience was in the North German campaign of 1757, under the 
duke of Cumberland. At the battle of Hastenbeck he won great 
renown by a gallant charge at the head of an infantry brigade; 



688 



BRUNSWICK 



and upon the capitulation of Kloster Zeven he was easily per- 
suaded by his uncle Ferdinand of Brunswick, who succeeded 
Cumberland, to continue in the war as a general officer. The 
exploits of the hereditary prince, as he was called, soon gained 
him further reputation, and he became an acknowledged master 
of irregular warfare. In pitched battles, and in particular at 
Minden and Warburg, he proved himself an excellent subordinate. 
After the close of the Seven Years' War, the prince visited 
England with his bride, the daughter of Frederick, prince of 
Wales, and in 1766 he went to France, being received both by 
his allies and his late enemies with every token of respect. In 
Paris he made the acquaintance of Marmontel; in Switzerland, 
whither he continued his tour, that of Voltaire; and in Rome, 
where he remained for a long time, he explored the antiquities of 
the city under the guidance of Winckelmann. After a visit to 
Naples he returned to Paris, and thence, with his wife, to Bruns- 
wick. His services to the dukedom during the next few years 
were of the greatest value; with the assistance of the minister 
Feronce von Rotenkreuz he rescued the state from the bank- 
ruptcy into which the war had brought it. His popularity was 
unbounded, and when he succeeded his father, Duke Karl L, in 
1780, he soon became known as a model to sovereigns. He was 
perhaps the best representative of the benevolent despot of 
the 1 8th century — wise, economical, prudent and kindly. His 
habitual caution, if it induced him on some occasions to leave 
reforms uncompleted, at any rate saved him from the failures 
which marred the efforts of so many liberal princes of his time. 
He strove to keep his duchy from all foreign entanglements. At 
the same time he continued to render important services to the 
king of Prussia, for whom he had fought in the Seven Years' 
War; he was a Prussian field marshal, and was at pains to 
make the regiment of which he was colonel a model one, and he 
was frequently engaged in diplomatic and other state affairs. 
He resembled his uncle Frederick the Great in many ways, 
but he lacked the supreme resolution of the king, and in civil 
as in military affairs was prone to excessive caution. As an 
enthusiastic adherent of the Germanic and anti-Austrian policy 
of Prussia he joined the Ftirstenbund, in which, as he now had 
the reputation of being the best soldier of his time, he was the 
destined commander-in-chief of the federal army. 

Between 1763 and 1787 his only military service had been in 
the brief War of the Bavarian Succession; in the latter year, 
however, the duke, as a Prussian field marshal, led the army 
which invaded Holland. His success was rapid, complete and 
almost bloodless, and in the eyes of contemporaries the cam- 
paign appeared as an .example of perfect generalship. Five 
years later Brunswick was appointed to the command of the 
allied Austrian and German army assembled to invade France 
and crush the Revolution. In this task he knew that he must 
encounter more than a formal resistance. He was so far in 
acknowledged sympathy with French hopes of reform, that 
when he gave an asylum in his duchy to the " comte de Lille " 
(Louis XVIII.) the revolutionary government made no protest. 
Indeed, earlier in this year (1792) he had been offered supreme 
command of the French army. As the king of Prussia took the 
field with Brunswick's army, the duke felt bound as a soldier to 
treat his wishes as actual orders. (For the events of the Valmy 
campaign see French Revolutionary Wars.) The result 
of Brunswick's cautious advance on Paris was the cannonade 
of Valmy followed by the retreat of the allies. The following 
campaign of 1703 showed him perhaps at his best as a careful 
and exact general; even the fiery Hoche, with the " nation 
in arms " behind him, failed to make any impression on the 
veteran leader of the allies. But difficulties and disagreements 
at headquarters multiplied, and when Brunswick found himself 
unable to move or direct his army without interference from 
the king, he laid down his command and returned to govern 
his duchy. He did not, however, withdraw entirely from 
Prussian service, and in 1803 he carried out a successful and 
diplomatic mission to Russia. In 1806, at the personal request 
of Queen Louise of Prussia, he consented to command the 
Prussian army, but here again the presence of the king of Prussia 



and the conflicting views of numerous advisers of high rank 
proved fatal. At the battle of Auerstadt the old duke was 
mortally wounded. Carried for nearly a month in the midst of 
the routed Prussian army he died at last on the 10th of Novem- 
ber 1806 at Ottensen near Hamburg. 

His son and successor, Friedrich Wilhelm (1771-1815), 
who was one of the bitterest opponents of Napoleonic domination 
in Germany, took part in the war of 1809 at the head of a corps 
of partisans; fled to England after the battle of Wagram, and 
returned to Brunswick in 1813, where he raised fresh troops. 
He was killed at the battle of Quatre Bras on the 16th of June 

1815. 

See Lord Fitzmaurice, Charles W. F., duke of Brunswick (London, 
1901); memoir in Allgemeine deutsche Biographie, vol. ii. (Leipzig, 
1882); and, for an interesting sketch of his military character. 
A. Chuquet, Les Guerres de la Revolution — La Premiere Invasion 
prussienne (Paris, n.d.). 

BRUNSWICK, a city and the county-seat of Glynn county, 
Georgia, U.S.A., and a port of entry, on St Simon Sound, about 
12 m. from the Atlantic Ocean, and about 100 m. S. of Savannah. 
Pop. (1890) 8459; (1900) 9081, of whom 5184 we're of negro 
descent; (191° U.S. census) 10,182. It is one of the seaports of 
Georgia, the Federal government having dredged a channel in 
the inner harbour 21 ft. deep at mean low water and a channel 
across the outer bar 119-3 ft. deep at mean low water — there is a 
rise of 7-2 ft. at high tide. St Simon Island and Jekyl Island 
(a winter resort of wealthy men), lying between the ocean and 
the mainland, protect the harbour. The city is served by the 
Southern, the Atlanta, Birmingham & Atlantic, and the Atlantic 
Coast Line railways; it is also connected by lines of steamboats 
with various ports along the coast, including New York and 
Boston. Brunswick's growth has been retarded by the successful 
rivalry of other cities,?notably Savannah; but it has a consider- 
able export trade, principally in lumber, cross-ties and naval 
stores — its exports were valued at $13,387,838 in 1908 — and 
various manufactories, including planing mills, cooperage works 
and oyster canneries. It was settled about 1772, and received a 
city charter in 1856. 

BRUNSWICK (Ger. Braunschweig), a sovereign duchy of 
northern Germany, and a constituent state of the German 
empire, comprising three larger and six smaller portions of 
territory. The principal or northern part, containing the towns 
of Brunswick, Wolfenbiittel and Helmstedt, is situated between 
the Prussian provincesof Hanover and Saxony to the south-east 
of the former. The western part, containing Holzminden and 
Gandersheim, extends eastward from the river Weser to Goslar. 
The Blankenburg, or eastern portion, lies to the south-east of the 
two former, between Prussia, the duchy of Anhalt and the 
Prussian province of Hanover. The six small enclaves, lying in 
the Prussian provinces of Hanover and Saxony, are the districts 
Thedinghausen, Harzburg and Kalvorde, and the three demesnes 
of Bodenburg, Olsburg and Ostharingen. A portion of the Harz 
mountains was, down to 1874, common to Brunswick and 
Prussia (Hanover) and known as the Communion Harz. In 
1874 a partition was effected, but the mines are still worked in 
common, four-sevenths of the revenues derived from them falling 
to Prussia and the remaining three-sevenths to Brunswick. 

The northern portion of the duchy has its surface diversified 
by hill and plain; it is mostly arable and has little forest. The 
other two principal portions are intersected by the Harz moun- 
tains, and its spurs and the higher parts are covered with forests 
of fir, oak and beech. The greatest elevations are the Wurmberg 
(3230 ft.), and the Achtermannshohe (3100 ft), lying south of 
the Brocken. Brunswick belongs almost entirely to the basin 
of the river Weser, into which the Oker, the Aller and the Leine, 
having their sources.in the Harz, discharge their waters. The 
climate is mild in the north, but in the hilly country raw and cold 
in winter, and in autumn and spring damp. The area of the 
duchy is 1424 sq. m., and of this total fully one-half is arable 
land, 10% meadow and pasture, and 33% under forest. The 
population in 1905 was 485,655. The religion is, in the main; 
that of the Lutheran Evangelical church; but there is a large 
Roman Catholic community centred in and round Hildesheim, 



BRUNSWICK 



689 



the seat of the bishopric of North Germany. The Jews have 
several synagogues, with a rabbinate in Brunswick. The birth- 
rate is 35-3, and the death-rate 21-6 per thousand inhabitants. 
In the rural districts, broad Low German is spoken; but the 
language of the upper and educated classes is distinguished by 
its purity of style and pronunciation. 

The land devoted to agriculture is excellently farmed, and 
cereals, beet (for sugar), potatoes and garden produce of all 
kinds, particularly fruit, obtain the best market prices. The 
pasture land rears cattle and sheep of first-rate quality, and 
great attention is paid to the breeding of horses, in which the 
famous stud farm at Harzburg has of late years been eminently 
conspicuous. Timber cutting, in the forests of the Harz, employs 
a large number of hands. But agriculture, which, until recently, 
formed the chief wealth of the duchy, has now given way to the 
mining industry, both in point of the numbers of inhabitants 
employed and in the general prosperity distributed by it. The 
chief seat of the mining industry is the Harz, and its development 
annually increases in extent and importance. Coal (bituminous) , 
iron, lead, copper, sulphur, alum, marble, alabaster, lime and 
salt are produced in large quantities, and the by-products of 
some of these, particularly chemicals and asphalt, constitute 
a great source of revenue. The manufactures embrace sugar 
(from beet), spinning, tobacco, paper, soap machines, glass, 
china, beer and sausages. The last are famous throughout 
Germany. The principal articles of export are thread, dyes, 
cement, chicory, beer, timber, preserves, chemicals and sausages. 
The railways, formerly belonging to the state, were, in 1870, 
leased to private companies and in 1884 purchased by Prussia^ 
and have a length of about 320 m. The roads, of which one 
quarter are in the hands of the state, are excellently kept, and 
vie with those of any European country. 

The constitution is that of a limited monarchy, and dates 
from a revision of the fundamental law on the 12th of October 
1832. The throne is hereditary in the house of Brunswick- 
Luneburg, according to the law of primogeniture, and in the 
male line of succession, but the rightful heir, Ernest, duke of 
Cumberland, was not allowed to take possession. The parliament 
of the duchy. (Landes- or Standeversamndung) is an assembly of 
estates forming one house of 48 deputies, of whom 30 are elected 
by municipal and rural communities, while the remainder repre- 
sent the Evangelical church, the large landed proprietors, manu- 
facturers and the professions. The house, however, has little 
power in initiating legislation, but it can refuse taxation, im- 
peach ministers and receive petitions. The executive functions 
of the administration and government reside in the ministry 
(Staatsministerium) consisting of three responsible ministers, 
assisted by a council of the holders of the other chief offices of 
state. The public debt amounts to about 3 J millions sterling, 
and the civil list to about £56,000 a year, mostly derived from 
the revenues of the state domains. By virtue of a convention 
with Prussia, of March 1886, the Brunswick contingent to the 
imperial forces forms a part of the Prussian army and is attached 
to the X. army corps. The convention can be rescinded only 
after a two years' notice. 

History. — The lands which comprise the modern duchy of 
Brunswick belonged in the 10th century to the family of the 
Brunos, whence the name Brunswick is derived, of the counts of 
Nordheim, and the counts of Supplinburg. Inherited during 
the 12th century by Henry the Proud, duke of Saxony and 
Bavaria, and a member of the family of Welf , they subsequently 
formed part of the extensive Saxon duchy ruled by his son, 
Henry the Lion. 

When Henry was placed under the imperial ban and his duchy 
dismembered in 1181, he was allowed to retain his hereditary 
possessions, which consisted of a large part of Brunswick and 
Luneburg. The bulk of these lands came subsequently to Henry's 
grandson, Otto, and in 1235 the emperor Frederick II., anxious 
to be reconciled with the Welfs, recognized Otto's title and 
created him duke of Brunswick and Luneburg. Otto added 
several counties and the town of Hanover to his possessions, 
and when he died in 1252 was succeeded by his sons Albert and 



John. In 1267 these princes divided the duchy, Albert becoming 
duke of Brunswick, and John duke of Luneburg. The dukes of 
Luneburg increased the area of their duchy, and when the family 
died out in 1369 a stubborn contest took place for its possession. 
Claimed by Magnus II., duke of Brunswick-Wolfenbuttel, this 
prince was forced by the emperor Charles IV. to abandon his 
pretensions, but in 1388 his sons succeeded in incorporating 
Luneburg with Brunswick-Wolfenbuttel. In 1285 the duchy 
of Brunswick had been divided between Duke Albert's three 
sons, whose relations with each other were far from harmonious, 
and the lines of Wolfenbuttel, Gottingen and Grubenhagen 
had been established. The Wolfenbuttel branch died out in 
1 292, but was refounded in 1345 by Magnus I., a younger member 
of the Gottingen family; the elder Gottingen branch died out 
in !463, and the Grubenhagen branch in 1596. Magnus I., 
duke of Brunswick-Wolfenbuttel from 1345 to 1369, was the 
ancestor of the later dukes of Brunswick. His grandsons, 
Frederick, Bernard and Henry, secured Luneburg in 1388, but 
in 1428 Bernard, the only survivor of the three, was forced to 
make a division of the duchy, by which he received Luneburg, 
while his nephews, William and Henry, obtained Brunswick, 
which in 1432 they divided into Calenberg and Wolfenbuttel. 
In 1473, however, William, who had added Gottingen to his 
possessions in 1463, united these lands; but they were again 
divided from 1495 to 1584. In 1584 Brunswick was united 
by Duke Julius, and in 1596 Grubenhagen was added to it. 
Duke Frederick Ulrich, however, was Obliged to cede this territory 
to Luneburg in 1617, and when he died in 1634 his family became , 
extinct, and Brunswick was divided between the two branches 
of the Luneburg family. 

The duchy of Luneburg, founded by Bernard in 1428, remained 
undivided until 1520, when Duke Henry abdicated and his three 
sons divided the duchy. Two of the branches founded at this 
time soon died out; and in 1569, after the death of Ernest I., 
the representative of the third branch, his two sons agreed upon 
a partition which is of considerable importance in the history 
of Brunswick, since it established the lines of Dannenberg and 
of Liineburg-Celle, and these two families divided the duchy of 
Brunswick-Wolfenbuttel in 1635. The dukes of Liineburg-Celle 
subsequently took the name of Hanover, and were the ancestors 
of the later kings of Hanover (q.v.). After the acquisition of 1635 
the family of Dannenberg took the title of Brunswick-Wolfen- 
buttel, and ruled in the direct line until 1735. It was then 
followed by the family of Brunswick-Bevern, which had split off 
from the parent line in 1666 and ruled until 1884. 

Brunswick has not played a very important part in German 
politics. Many counties were added to its area, but it was 
weakened by constant divisions of territory, and during the 
period of the Reformation some of the princes took one side 
and some the other. The treaty of Westphalia in 1648 made 
little difference to its prestige, but its subsequent position was 
greatly affected by the growth of Prussia. During the Seven 
Years' War Brunswick supported Frederick the Great, and in 
return was severely ravaged by the French. Duke Charles I., 
who accumulated a large amount of debt, sought to discharge 
his liabilities by sending his soldiers as mercenaries to assist 
England during the American War of Independence. The suc- 
ceeding duke, Charles William Ferdinand, brought order into 
the finances, led the Prussian troops against Napoleon, and 
died in 1806 from wounds received at the battle of Auerstadt. 
Napoleon then declared the ducal family deposed and included 
Brunswick in the kingdom of Westphalia. In 1813 it was restored 
to Duke Frederick William, who was killed in 181 5 at the battle 
of Quatre Bras. His son, Charles II., while a minor, was under 
the regency of George, afterwards the English king George IV., 
who ruled the duchy through Ernest, Count Munster-Ledenburg 
(1766-1839), assisted by Justus von Schmidt-Phiseldeck (1769- 
1851). A new constitution was granted in 1820, but after Charles 
came of age in 1823 a period of disorder ensued. The duke, 
who was very unpopular with his subjects,' quarrelled with his 
relatives, and in 1830 a revolution drove him from the country. 
The government was undertaken by his brother William, and in 



690 



BRUNSWICK 



1 83 1 Charles was declared incapable of ruling, and William was 
appointed as his successor. The ex-duke, who made a fine 
collection of diamonds, died childless at Geneva in August 1873. 
William's long reign witnessed many excellent and necessary 
reforms. A new constitution was granted in 1832, and in 1844 
Brunswick joined the Prussian Zollverein. Trial by jury and 
freedom of the press were established, many religious disabilities 
were removed, and measures were taken towards the freedom 
of trade. 

Brunswick took very little part in the war between Prussia 
and Austria in 1866, but her troops fought for Prussia during 
the Franco-German War of 1870-71. The duchy joined the 
German Confederation in 1815, the North German Confederation 
in 1866, and became a state of the German empire in 1871. 

In 1866 the question of the succession to Brunswick became 
acute. Duke William was unmarried, and according to the exist- 
ing conventions it would pass to George, king of Hanover, who 
had just been deprived of his kingdom by the king of Prussia. 
In 1879, however, the duke and the estates, with the active 
support of Prussia, concluded an arrangement for a temporary 
council cf regency to take over the government on William's 
death. Moreover, if in this event the rightful heir was unable 
to take possession of the duchy, the council was empowered to 
appoint a regent. William died on the 18th of October 1884, 
and George's son, Ernest, duke of Cumberland, claimed Bruns- 
wick and promised to respect the German constitution. This claim 
was disregarded by the council of regency, and the Bundesrat 
declared that the accession of the duke of Cumberland would be 
inimical to the peace and security of the empire on account of his 
attitude towards Prussia. In the following year the council 
chose Albert, prince of Prussia, as regent, a step which brought 
Brunswick still more under the influence of her powerful neigh- 
bour. Albert died in September 1906, and after some futile 
negotiations with the duke of Cumberland, the Brunswick diet 
chose Duke John Albert of Mecklenburg-Schwerin (b. 1857) as 
regent in May 1907. 

See O. von Heinemann, Geschichle Braunschweigs und Hannovers 
(Gotha, 1882-1892) ; W. Havemann, Geschichte der Lande Braun- 
schweig und Liineburg (Gottingen, 1853-1857J; H. Sudendorf, Ur- 
kundenbuch zur Geschichte der Herzoge von Braunschweig und Liineburg 
und ihrer Lande (Hanover, 1859-1883) ; H. Guthe, Die Lande 
Braunschweig und Hannover (Hanover, 1890); J. Beste, Geschichte 
der braunschweigischen Landeskirche von der Reformation bis auf 
unsere Tage (Wolfenbuttel, 1889) ; A. Kocher, Geschichte von 
Hannover und Braunschweig 1648-1714 (Leipzig, 1884). 

BRUNSWICK, a city of Germany, capital of the duchy of that 
name, situated in a fertile and undulating country, on the Oker, 
37 m. S.E. from Hanover and 53 N.W. from Magdeburg, on the 
main line of railway from Berlin. Pop. (1900) 128,226; (1905) 
136,423, of which number about 9000 were Roman Catholics and 
1000 Jews. Brunswick is an interesting place and retains much 
of its medieval character. The fortifications which formerly 
environed it were dismantled in 1797, and have given place to a 
regular circle of gardens and promenades, which rank among the 
finest in Germany. Within them lies the old town, with some- 
what narrow and crooked streets, remarkable for its numerous 
ancient houses, with high gables and quaintly Carved exteriors. 
In picturesqueness it vies with Liibeck and Liineburg among 
North German towns. Among its churches, the cathedral, St 
Blasius, or Burgkirche, a Romanesque structure begun by Henry 
the Lion about n 73 and finished in 1194, is of interest. The 
chmcel is decorated with 12th-century frescoes by Johannes 
Gallicus, and contains the tombs of the founder and his consort, 
with beautiful effigies in relief, and also that of the emperor Otto 
IV. In the vault beneath rest the remains of the Guelphs of the 
Brunswick line (since 1681). Remarkable among other churches 
are the Magnikirche (consecrated in 103 1; the present edifice 
being built between the 13 th and 15th centuries and restored in 
1877); the Martinikirche, with Romanesque towers, originally 
a Romanesque basilica (1180-1190), enlarged in the 13th cen- 
tury in early Gothic by the addition of vaulted aisles and a 
choir (1490-1500), and remarkable further for the splendid late 
Gothic Annenkapelle (1434) and three magnificent portals; the 



Katharinenkirche, with a fine tower, begun by Henry the Lion in 
1172, added to in 1252 and finished (choir) in 1500; the Briider- 
kirche (1361-1451, restored 1869-1870), formerly the church of a 
Franciscan house, the refectory of which (i486) is now used for 
military stores; the Andreaskirche (1200, 1360-1420), partly 
transitional, partly late Gothic, with a tower 318 ft. high; and 
the Aegidienkirche (1278-1434), now used for exhibitions and 
concerts. 

In secular buildings, both ancient and modern, Brunswick is 
also rich. The most noticeable of these is the town hall (14th and 
15th centuries), a gem of Gothic architecture. In front of it is a 
beautiful Gothic leaden fountain of the early 15th century. 
Close by the cathedral is the Dankwarderode, a two-storeyed 
Romanesque building, erected in 1884 on the site of the ancient 
citadel of the same name which was destroyed by fire in 1873; 
the cloth merchants' hall (Gewandhaus) of the 13th century, with 
a richly ornamented facade in Renaissance style, now occupied by 
the chamber of commerce; the restored Huneborstelsche Haus 
with its curious and beautiful oak carving of the 16th century. 
The ducal palace is a fine modern structure, erected since 1865, 
when most of the previous building, which dated only from 1831, 
was destroyed by fire. The famous Quadriga of Rietschel, which 
perished at the same time, has been replaced by a copy by Georg 
Howaldt (1802-1883). The theatre lies on a spacious square close 
to the ducal gardens, and immediately outside the promenades; 
to the south is the handsome railway station. Among other 
numerous buildings of modern erection may be mentioned the 
new town hall (1893-1900) and the ministry of finance, both in 
early Gothic style. The scientific and art collections of Brunswick 
are numerous. The ducal museum contains a rich collection of 
antique and medieval curiosities, engravings and pictures. There 
are also a municipal museum, a museum of natural history, a 
mineralogical collection, a botanical garden and two libraries. 
The educational and charitable institutions of Brunswick are 
many. Of the former may be mentioned the Collegium Caro- 
linum, founded in 1745, the technical high school, two gymnasia 
and an academy of forestry. Among the latter are a deaf and 
dumb institution, a blind asylum, an orphanage and various 
hospitals and infirmaries. A monument, 60 ft. high, to Duke 
Frederick William, who was slain at Quatre Bras, gives its name 
to the Monumentsplatz. Another to the south-east of the town 
perpetuates the memory of Schill Ferdinand (1776-1809) and his 
companions. There are also statues of Franz Abt, the composer, 
of Lessing and of the astronomer K. F. Gauss. 

The industries of the town are considerable. Especially im- 
portant are the manufacture of machinery, boilers, gasometers, 
pianos, preserves, chemicals, beer and sausages. Brunswick 
is also a leading centre of the book trade. The communications 
between the inner town and the extensive suburbs are maintained 
by an excellent service of electric tramways. 

Brunswick is said to have been founded about 861 by Bruno, 
son of Duke Ludolf of Saxony, from whom it was named Bruns- 
wick (from the Old High German Wick, hamlet). Afterwards 
fortified and improved by Henry the Lion, it became one of the 
most important cities of northern Germany. For a long time its 
constitution was rather peculiar, as it consisted of five separate 
townlets, each with its own walls and gates, its own council and 
Rathaus — a condition traces of which are still evident. In the 
13th century it ranked among the first cities of the Hanseatic 
League. After this era, however, it declined in prosperity, in 
consequence of the divisions of territory among the branches of the 
reigning house, the jealousy of the neighbouring states, the Thirty 
Years' War, and more recently the French occupation, under 
which it was assigned to the kingdom of Westphalia. During 
the time of the Reformation the sympathies of the citizens were 
with the new teaching, and the city was a member of the League 
of Schmalkalden. In 1830 it was the scene of a violent revolu- 
tion, which led to the removal of the reigning duke. In 1834 it 
attained municipal self-government. 

See F. Knoll, Braunschweig und Vmgebung (1882); Sack, Kurze 
Geschichte der Stadt Braunschweig (1861); and H. Diirre, Geschichte 
der Stadt Braunschweig im Mittelalter (1875). 



BRUNSWICK— BRUSH, G. DE F. 



691 



BRUNSWICK, a village of Cumberland county, Maine,U.S.A., 
in the township of Brunswick, on the Androscoggin river, 9 m. 
W. of Bath, and 27 m. N.N. E. of Portland. Pop. of the township 
(1900) 6806; (1910) 6621; of the village (1900) 5210 (1704 
foreign-born); (1910) 5341. Brunswick is served by the Maine 
Central railway, and by the Lewiston, Brunswick & Bath, and 
the Portland & Brunswick electric railways. Opposite Bruns- 
wick and connected with it by a bridge is the township of 
Topsham (pop. in 1910, 2016). The village of Brunswick lies 
only 63 ft. above sea-level, shut within rather narrow bounds by 
hills or bluffs, from which good views may be obtained of the 
island-dotted sea and deeply-indented coast to the south and 
east and of the White Mountains to' the west. The river falls in 
three successive stages for a total distance of 41 ft., furnishing 
good water-power for paper and cotton mills and other manu- 
factories; the first cotton-mill in Maine was built here about 
1809. The settlement of the site of Brunswick was begun by 
fishermen in 1628 and the place was called Pejepscot; in 1717 
Brunswick was constituted a township under its present name 
by the Massachusetts general court, and in 1 739 the township was 
regularly incorporated. The village was incorporated in 1836. 

Brunswick is best known as the seat of Bowdoin College, a 
small institution of high educational rank. There are eleven 
buildings on a campus of about 40 acres, 1 m. from the river- 
bank at the end of the principal village thoroughfare. The 
chapel (King Chapel, named in honour of William King, the first 
governor of Maine), built of undressed granite, is of Romanesque 
style, and has twin towers and spires rising to a height of 120 ft.; 
the interior walls are beautifully decorated with frescoes and 
mural paintings. The Walker Art Building (built as a memorial 
to Theophilus W. Walker) is of Italian Renaissance style, has 
mural decorations by John la Farge, Elihu Vedder, Abbott 
H. Thayer and Kenyon Cox, and contains a good collection of 
paintings and other works of art. Among the paintings, many 
of which were given by the younger James Bowdoin, are examples 
of van Dyck, Titian, Poussin and Rembrandt. The library 
building is of Gothic style, and in 1908 contained 88,000 volumes 
(including the private library of the younger James Bowdoin). 
Among the other buildings are an astronomical observatory, a 
science building, a memorial hall, a gymnasium and three 
dormitories. The building of the Medical School of Maine (1820), 
which is a department of the college, is on the same campus. 
Bowdoin was incorporated by the general court of Massachusetts 
in 1794, but was not opened until 1802. It was named in honour 
of James Bowdoin (1726-1790), whose son was a liberal bene- 
factor. The college has been maintained as a non-sectarian 
institution largely by Congregationalists, and is governed by a 
board of trustees and a board of overseers. Among the dis- 
tinguished alumni have been Nathaniel Hawthorne, Franklin 
Pierce, Henry W. Longfellow, John P. Hale, William P. 
Fessenden, Melville W. Fuller, and Thomas B. Reed. 

BRUNSWICK-BEVERN, AUGUST WILHELM, Duke of 
(1715-1781), Prussian soldier, son of Ernst Ferdinand, duke of 
Brunswick-Bevem, was born at Brunswick in 1715, and entered 
the Prussian army in 1731, becoming colonel of an infantry 
regiment in 1739. He won great distinction at Hohenfriedeberg 
as a major-general, and was promoted lieutenant-general in 1750. 
He was one of the most experienced and exact soldiers in the 
army of Frederick the Great. He commanded a wing in the 
battle of Lobositz in 1756, and defeated the Austrians under 
Marshal Konigsegg in a well-fought battle at Reichenberg on 
the 2 1 st of April 1757. He took part in the battles of Prague 
and Kolin and the retreat to Gorlitz, andsubsequently commanded 
the Prussians left behind by Frederick in the autumn of 1757 
when he marched against the French. Bevern conducted a 
defensive campaign against overwhelming numbers with great 
skill, but he soon lost the valuable assistance of General Winter- 
feld, who was killed in a skirmish at Moys; and he was eventually 
brought to battle and suffered a heavy defeat at Breslau on the 
22nd of November. He fell into the hands of the Austrians on 
the following morning, and remained prisoner for a year. He 
was made general of infantry in 1759, and on the nth of August 



1762 inflicted a severe defeat at Reichenbach on an Austrian 
army endeavouring to relieve Schweidnitz. Bevern retired, after 
the peace of Hubertusburg, to his government of Stettin, where 
he died in 1781. 

BRUNTON, MARY (1778-1818), Scottish novelist, was born 
on the 1st of November 1778 in the island of Varra, Orkney. 
She was the daughter of Captain Thomas Balfour of Elwick. 
At the age of twenty she married Alexander Brunton, minister 
of Bolton in Haddingtonshire, and afterwards professor of 
oriental languages at Edinburgh. Mrs Brunton died on the 19th 
of December 1818. She was the author of two novels, popular 
in their day, Self-control (18 10), and Discipline (1814; 1832 
edition with memoir) ; and of a posthumous fragment, Emmeline 
(1819). 

BRUSA, or Broussa (anc. Prusa), the capital of the Brusa 
(Khudavendikiar) vilayet of Asia Minor, which includes parts of 
ancient Mysia, Bithynia, and Phrygia, and extends in a south- 
easterly direction from Mudania, on the Sea of Marmora, to 
Afium-Kara-Hissar on the Smyrna-Konia railway. The vilayet 
is one of the most important in Asiatic Turkey, has great mineral 
and agricultural wealth, many mineral springs, large forests, 
and valuable industries. It exports cereals, silk, cotton, opium, 
tobacco, olive-oil, meerschaum, boracite, &c. The Ismid- Angora 
and Eskishehr-Konia railways pass through the province. 
Population of the province,, 1,600,000 (Moslems, 1,280,000; 
Christians, 317,000; Jews, 3000). 

The city stretches along the lower slopes of the Mysian 
Olympus or Kechish Dagh, occupying a position above the 
valley of the Nilufer (Odrysses) not unlike that of Great Malvern 
above the vale of the Severn. It is divided by ravines into three 
quarters, and in the centre, on a bold terrace of rock, stood the 
ancient Prusa. The modern town has clean streets and good 
roads made by Ahmed Vefyk Pasha when Vali, and it contains 
mosques and tombs of great historic and architectural interest; 
the more important are those of the sultans Murad I., Bayezid 
(Bajazet) I., Mahommed I., and Murad II., 1403-1451, and the 
Ulu Jami'. The mosques show traces of Byzantine, Persian and 
Arab influence in their plan, architecture and decorative details. 
The circular church of St Elias, in which the first two sultans, 
Osman and Orkhan, were buried, was destroyed by fire and 
earthquake, and rebuilt by Ahmed Vefyk Pasha. There are in 
the town an American mission and school, and a British orphanage. 
Silk-spinning is an important industry, the export of silk in 1902 
being valued at £620,000. There are also manufactories of silk 
stuffs, towels, burnus, carpets, felt prayer-carpets embroidered 
in silk and gold. The hot iron and sulphur springs near Brusa, 
varying in temperature from 112 to 178° F., are still much used. 
The town is connected with its port, Mudania, by a railway and 
a road. There is a British vice-consul. Pop. 75,000 (Moslems, 
40,000; Christians, 33,000; Jews, 2000). 

Prusa, founded, it is said, at the suggestion of Hannibal, was 
for a long time the seat of the Bithynian kings. It continued to 
flourish under the Roman and Byzantine emperors till the 10th 
century, when it was captured and destroyed by Saif-addaula 
of Aleppo. Restored by the Byzantines, it was again taken in 
1327 by the Ottomans after a siege of ten years, and continued 
to be their capital till Murad I. removed to Adrianople. In 1402 
it was pillaged by the Tatars; in 1413 it resisted an attack of 
the Karamanians; in 151 2 it fell into the power of Ala ed-Din; 
and in 1607 it was burnt by the rebellious Kalenderogli. In 1S83 
it was occupied by the Egyptians under Ibrahim Pasha, and 
from 1852-1855 afforded an asylum to Abd-el-Kader. 

See L.de Laborde, Voyage de VAsie Mineure (Paris, 1838); C. 
Texier, Asie Mineure (Paris, 1839). 

BRUSH, GEORGE DE FOREST (1855- ), American 
painter, was born at Shelbyville, Tennessee, on the 28th of 
September 1855. He was a pupil of J. L. Ger6me at Paris, and 
became a member of the National Academy of Design, New 
York. From 1883 onwards, he attracted much attention by his 
paintings of North American Indians, his " Moose Hunt," 
" Aztec King " and " Mourning her Brave " achieving great 
popularity and showing the strong influence of Gerdme. These 



692 



BRUSH—BRUSSELS 



were followed by picture portraits, particularly of mother and 
child, largely suggestive of the work of the Dutch, Flemish and 
German masters, carefully arranged as to line and mass, and 
worked out in great detail with consummate technical skill. 
Several of his paintings have for subject his own children and 
his wife; one of these is in the Boston Museum of Fine 
Arts. 

BRUSH (from Fr. brosse, which, like the English word, means 
both the undergrowth of a wood and the instrument; if the 
word in both these meanings is ultimately the same, then the 
origin is from a bundle of brushwood used as a brush or broom, 
but this is historically doubtful, and others connect it with the 
Ger. Borsle, bristle), an instrument for removing dust or dirt 
from surfaces or for applying paint, whitewash, &c, composed 
of a tuft or cufts of some fibrous or flexible material secured to 
a solid basis or stock. Brushes made of the twigs of trees like 
the birch and provided with long handles are often called brooms, 
and the same term is applied to some brushes used in the house- 
hold for removing dust (e.g. carpet-broom, whisk-broom) but 
not to those used for applying paint. Among the numerous 
materials employed for the manufacture of brushes of various 
kinds are feathers, pig's bristles, the hair of certain animals, 
whalebone, rubber, split-cane, broom-corn (a variety of sorghum) 
and Coir. 

Brushes are of two kinds, simple and compound. The former 
consist of but one tuft, as hair pencils and painters' tools. The 
latter have more than one tuft. Brushes with the tufts placed 
side by side on flat boards, as plasterers' brushes, are called stock- 
brushes. The single tuft brushes, or pencils for artists, are 
made of the hair of the camel, badger, goat and other animals 
for the smaller kind, and pig's bristles for the larger. The hairs 
for pencils are carefully arranged so as to form a point in the 
centre, and, when tied together, are passed into the wide end of 
the quill or metal tube and drawn out at the other end to the 
extent required. The small ends of the quills, having been pre- 
viously moistened, contract as they dry and bind the hair. A 
similar effect is produced with metal tubes by compression. 
Compound brushes are — first, set or pan-work; second, drawn- 
work. Of the former, an example is the. common house-broom, 
into the stock of which holes are drilled of the size wanted. The 
necessary quantity of bristles, hair, or fibre to fill each hole being 
collected together, the thick ends are dipped into molten cement 
chiefly composed of pitch, bound round with thread, dipped 
again, and then set into a hole of the stock with a peculiar twist- 
ing motion. In drawn-brushes, of which those for shoes, teeth, 
nails and clothes are examples,: the holes are more neatly bored, 
and have smaller on.es at the top communicating with the back 
of the brush, through which a bight or loop of wire passes from 
the back of the stock. Half the number of hairs of fibres needed 
for the tufts to fill the holes are passed into the bight of the wire, 
which is then pulled smartly so as to double the hairs and force 
them into the loop-hole as far as possible. With all brushes, 
when the holes have been properly filled, the ends of the fibres 
outside are cut with shears, either to an even length or such 
form as may be desired. The backs are then covered with 
veneer or other material to conceal the wire and other crudities 
of the work. In trepanned brushes the bristles are inserted in 
holes that do not pass right through the stock, and are secured 
by threads or wires running in drawholes which are drilled 
through the stock at right angles to them. The ends of these 
drawholes are plugged So as to be as inconspicuous as possible, 
and the method avoids the necessity of a veneer on the back. 
The Woodbury machine, one of the earliest mechanical devices 
for the manufacture of brushes, which was invented in America 
about 1870, produced brushes of this kind. One of the most 
important purposes to which brushes have been applied is that 
of sweeping chimneys, and so far back as 1 789 John Elin patented 
an arrangement of brushes for this purpose. Revolving brushes 
for sweeping rooms were patented in 1811, and the first patent 
in which they were applied to hair-dressing appears in 1862. 
Many inventions for sweeping and cleaning roads by means of 
revolving brushes and other contrivances have been introduced, 



one of the first being that of Edmund Henning in 1699' for 
" a new engine for sweeping the streets of London, or any city 
or town." 

Brushes with tufts formed of steel wire are used for cleaning 
tubes and flues of steam boilers, for the purpose of removing 
the scale formed by the products of combustion. Steel-wire 
brushes are also used for cleaning scale from the interior surfaces 
of a boiler, and for removing the sand from the surface of a 
casting. Occasionally such brushes are revolved in a machine, 
for more convenient use on the article to be cleaned or polished. 
Snyer's patent elastic clutch or Coupling, used for such purposes 
as coupling up or disconnecting a steam-engine from a line of 
shafting or dynamo, consists essentially of two disks, the adjacent 
faces of which are provided, one with a ring of brushes made of 
flat steel wire, the other with a number of finely serrated teeth. 
One of the disks is movable longitudinally on its shaft, and with 
the brushes clear of the serrations the clutch is free. On bring- 
ing the disks together, which may be done with the engine run- 
ning at speed, the elasticity of the brush permits the motion t6 
be imparted gradually and without shock to the standing part, 
until both rotate and are locked together. These clutches are 
very powerful, and are capable of transmitting as much as 3000 
horse-power. 

In dynamo-electric machinery the device used to conduct 
current into or out of the rotating armature is termed a " brush." 
There are usually two brushes to each dynamo or motor, and 
they are placed diametrically opposite, lightly touching the 
commutator of the armature. It is important that there should 
be good metallic contact between the brushes and the com- 
mutator, and at the same time the frictional resistance resulting 
from the contact must be a minimum. To effect this result 
brushes are variously made. A kind of brush frequently used 
consists of a number of copper wires laid side by side and soldered 
together at one end, where the brush is held. Brushes are also 
made of strips of spongy copper cut like a comb, which give a 
number of bearing points on the commutator. Very good results 
are obtained from brushes made of copper gauze wound closely 
until it takes the exterior form of a rectangular block, which is 
held radially in a spring holder, and bears at the end on the 
commutator. In place of the gauze block " brushes " of hard 
carbon blocks are frequently used (see Dynamo). 

BRUSSELS (Fr. Bruxelles, Flem. Brussel), the capital of the 
kingdom of Belgium, and of the province of Brabant, situated 
in 50 51' N., 4 22' E., about 70 m. from the sea at Ostend. 
It occupies the plain or valley of the Senne, and the sides and 
crest of the hill lying to the east and south-east of that valley. 
It is now extending over the hills west of the valley, and to the 
north is the town or commune of Laeken, which is practically 
part of the city. 

Brussels suffered severely in 1695 from the bombardment of 
the French under Villeroi, who fired into the town with red-hot 
shot. Sixteen churches and 4000 houses were burnt down, and 
the historic buildings on the Grand Place were seriously injured, 
the houses of the Nine Nations on the eastern side being com- 
pletely destroyed. In 1 73 1 the famous palace of the Netherlands 
was destroyed by fire, and the only remains of this edifice are 
some ruined arches and walls in a remote comer of the grounds 
of the king's palace. The Porte de Hal is the only one of the 
eight gates in the old wall left standing. It dates from 1381^ and 
is well worth more careful examination than it receives. In the 
latter half of the 18th century it served as a kind of bastille for 
political prisoners, and is now used as a museum in which a 
rather nondescript collection of articles, some from Mexico, 
has been allowed to accumulate. With regard to the fine 
boulevards of the Upper Town, it may be mentioned that about 
1765 they were planted with the double row of lime trees which 
still constitute their chief ornament by Prince Charles of Lor- 
raine while governing the Netherlands for his sister-in-law, the 
empress Maria Theresa. The residence of this prince was the 
palace of William the Silent, before he declared against Spain, 
and it is now used partly for the royal library, which contains 
the famous librairpe de Bowgogne, and partly for the museum 



BRUSSELS 



6 93 ! 



of modern pictures. The only other " hotel " or palace in 
Brussels is that of the duke d'Arenberg. In the 16th century 
this was the residence of Count Egmont, but very little of the 
building of his day remains. In the same street, the rue des 
Petits Carmes, was the H6tel Culembourg in which the famous 
oath of the beggars was taken. It has long been demolished 
and the new barracks of the Grenadier regiment have been 
erected on the site. 

The only other buildings of importance dating from medieval 
times are the three churches of Ste Gudule (often erroneously 
railed the cathedral), Notre-Dame des Victoires or Church of 
the Sablon, and Notre-Dame de la Chapelle, or simply la Chapelle, 
and the hotel de ville and the Maison du Roi on the Grand Place. 
The church of Ste Gudule, also dedicated to St Michael, is built 
on the side of the hill originally called St Michael's Mount, and 
now covered by the fashionable quarters which are included 
under the comprehensive description of the Upper Town. It 
was begun about the year 1220, and is considered one of the 
finest specimens left of pointed Gothic. It is said to have been 
completed in 1273, with the exception of the two towers which 
were added in the 14th or 15th century. Some of the stained 
glass is very rich, dating from the 13th to the 15th century. 
In many of the windows there are figures of leading members 
of the houses of Burgundy and Habsburg. The curious oak 
pulpit representing Adam and Eve expelled from the Garden 
of Eden came originally from the Jesuit church at Louvain, and 
is considered the masterpiece of Verbruggen. The church of the 
Sablon is said to have been founded in 1304 by the gild of 
Crossbowmen to celebrate the battle of Woeringen. In a side 
chapel is a fine monument to the princely family of Thurn and 
Taxis, which had the monoply of the postal service in the old 
empire. La Chapelle is still older, dating nominally from 1210, 
the choir and transept being considered to date from about 
fifty years later. There are some fine monuments, especially 
one to the duke de Croy who died in 1624. The two churches 
last named have undergone much renovation both outside and 
inside. 

The Grand Place is by its associations one of the most interest- 
ing public squares in Europe. On its flags were fought out many 
feuds between rival gilds; Egmont and Horn, and many other 
gallant men whose names have been forgotten, were executed 
here under the shadow of its ancient buildings, and in more 
recent times Dumouriez proclaimed the French Republic where 
the dukes of Brabant and Burgundy were wont to hold their 
jousts. Apart from its associations the Grand Place contains 
two of the finest and most ornate buildings not merely in the 
capital but in Belgium. Of these the hotel de ville, which is far 
the larger of the two, occupies the greater part of the south side 
of the square. Its facade has the disadvantage of having had 
one half begun about half a century before the other. The older, 
which is the richer in design, forms the left side of the building 
and dates from 1410, while the right, less rich and shorter, was 
begun in 1443. The fine tower, 360 ft. in height, is crowned by 
the golden copper figure of St Michael, 16 ft. in height, erected 
here as early as 1454. This tower lies behind the extremity of 
the left wing of the building. Opposite the town-hall is the 
smaller but extremely ornate Maison du Roi. This was never a 
royal residence as the name would seem to imply, but its descrip- 
tion appears to have been derived from the fact that it was 
usually in this building that the royal address was read to the 
states-general. As this building was almost destroyed by 
Villeroi's bombardment it possesses no claim to antiquity, indeed 
the existing building was only completed in 1877. Egmont and 
Horn were sentenced in the hotel de ville, and passed their last 
night in the Maison du Roi. 

Among the principal buildings erected in the city during the 
18th century are the king's palace and the house of parliament 
or Palais de la Nation, which face the south and north sides of 
the park respectively. The palace occupies part of the site 
covered by the old palace burnt down in 1731, and it was built 
In the reign of the empress Maria Theresa. It originally consisted 
of two detached buildings, but in 1826-1827 King William I. 



of the Netherlands caused them to be connected. The palace 
contains two fine rooms used for court ceremonies, and a con- 
siderable number of pictures. In 1904 a bill was passed in the 
chambers for the enlargement and embellishment of the palace. 
The adjacent buildings, viz. the department of the civil list, 
formerly the residence of the marquis d'Assche, and the Hotel 
de Bellevue, held under a kind of perpetual lease granted by the 
empress Maria Theresa, were absorbed in the palace, and a new 
facade was constructed which occupies the entire length of the 
Place du Palais. At the same time a piece was cut off the park 
to prevent the undue contraction of the Place by the necessary 
bringing forward of the palace, and the pits which played a 
certain part in the revolution of 1830 when the Dutch defended 
the park for a few days against the Belgians were filled up. 
The Palais de la Nation was constructed between 1779 and 1783, 
also during the Austrian period. It was intended for the states- 
general and government offices. During the French occupation 
the law courts sat there, and from 181 7 to 1830 it was assigned 
for the sittings of the states-general. It is now divided between 
the senate and the chamber of representatives. In 1833 the part 
assigned to the latter was burnt out, and has since been recon- 
structed. The buildings flanking the chambers and nearer the 
park are government offices with residences for the ministers 
attached. 

The improvements effected in Brussels during the 19th century 
were enormous, and completely transformed the city. The 
removal of the old wall was followed by the creation of the 
quartier Leopold, and at a later period of the quartier Louis 
in the Upper Town. In the lower, under the energetic direction 
of two burgomasters, De Brouckere and Anspach, not less 
sweeping changes were effected. The Senne was bricked in, 
and the fine boulevards du Nord, Anspach, Hainaut and Midi 
took the place of slums. The Bourse and the post-office are two 
fine modern buildings in this quarter of the city. The Column 
of the Congress — i.e. of the Belgian representatives who founded 
the kingdom of Belgium— surmounted by a statue of .King 
Leopold I., was erected in 1859, and in 1866 the foundation-stone 
was laid of the Palais de Justice, which was not finished till 1883, 
at a cost of sixty million francs. This edifice, the design of the 
architect Poelaert, is in the style of Karnak and Nineveh, but 
surmounted with a dome, and impresses by its grandiose pro- 
portions (see Architecture, Plate XL fig. 121). It is well 
placed on the brow of the hill at the southern extremity of the 
rue de la Regence (the prolongation of the rue Royale), and can 
be seen from great distances. In the rue de la Regence are the 
new picture gallery, a fine building with an exceedingly good 
collection of pictures, the palace of the count of Flanders, and 
the garden of the Petit Sablon, which contains statues of Egmont 
and Horn, and a large number of statuettes representing the 
various gilds and handicrafts. Immediately above this garden 
is the Palais d'Arenberg. Perhaps the memorial that attracts 
the greatest amount of public interest in Brussels is that to the 
Belgians who were killed during the fighting with the Dutch in 
September 1830. This has been erected in a little square called 
the Place des Martyrs, not far from the Monnaie theatre. Outside 
Brussels at Evere is the chief cemetery, with fine monuments 
to the British officers killed at Waterloo (removed from the 
church in that village), to the French soldiers who died on 
Belgian soil in 1870-71, and another to the Prussians. 

Many as were the changes in Brussels during the 19th century, 
those in progress at its close and at the beginning of the 20th 
have effected a marked alteration in the town. These have been 
rendered possible only by the excellent system of electric tram- 
ways' which have brought districts formerly classed as pure 
country within reach of the citizens. The construction of the fine 
Avenue de Louise (i|m. long) from the Boulevard de Waterloo 
to the Bois de la Cambre was the first of these efforts to bring 
the remote suburbs within easy reach, at the same time furnish- 
ing an approach to the " bois " of Brussels that might in some 
degree be compared with the Champs Elysees in Paris. Another 
avenue of later construction (6£ m. in length) connects the park 
of the Cinquantenaire with Tervueren. This route is extremely 



6 9 4 



BRUT 



picturesque, traverses part of the forest of Soignies, and is lined 
by many fashionable villas and country houses. Other improve- 
ments projected in 1908 on the slope of the hill. immediately 
below the Place Royale included the removal of the old tortuous 
and steep street called the " Montagne de la Cour " to give place 
to a Mont des Arts. A little lower down and not far from the 
university (which occupies the house of the famous cardinal 
Granvelle of the 16th century) a central railway terminus was 
designed on a vast scale. These improvements connote the 
obliteration of the insanitary and overcrowded courts and alleys 
which were to be found between all the main streets, few in 
number, connecting the upper and the lower towns. The ridge 
on the west and north-west of the Senne valley never formed part 
of the town, and it was from it that Villeroi bombarded the city. 
The suburbs on this ridge, from south to north, are Anderlecht, 
Molenbeek and Koekelberg, and Laeken with its royal chateau 
and park forms the northern part of the Brussels conglomeration. 
Brussels has been growing at such a rapid rate that the inclusion 
of this ridge, and more particularly at Koekelberg, within the 
town limits, was contemplated in 1908. 

The completion of the harbour works, making Brussels a sea- 
port by giving sea-going vessels access thereto, was taken in 
hand in 1897. The completed work provides for a waterway 
for steamers drawing 24 ft. by the Willibroek Canal into the 
Ruppel and the Scheldt. There are steamers plying direct from 
Brussels to London, and 372 vessels of a total tonnage of 76,000 
entered and left the port in 1905. The Willibroek Canal was 
made in the 16th century, and William I. of the Netherlands 
is entitled to the credit of having first thought of converting 
it into a ship canal from Brussels to the Scheldt. Nothing was 
done, however, in his time to carry out the scheme. The distance 
from Brussels to the Ruppel is only 20 m., and thus Brussels 
is only about 33 m. farther from the sea than Antwerp. 

In addition to the advantages it enjoys from being the seat 
of the court and the government, Brussels is the centre of many 
prosperous industries. The manufactures of lace, carpets and 
curtains, furniture and carriages may be particularly mentioned, 
but it is chiefly as a place of residence for the well-to-do that the 
city has increased in size and population. Schools of all kinds 
are abundant. At the Ecole Militaire youths are trained nomin- 
ally for the army, but many go there who intend to enter one of 
the professions or the public service. This school used to occupy 
part of the old abbey of the Cambre, situated in a hollow near the 
bois and the avenue Louise, but owing to its insanitary position 
it has been removed to a new building near the Cinquantenaire. 
There is a university, to which admission is easy and where 
the fees are moderate, and the Conservatoire provides as good 
musical teaching as can be found in Europe. Music can be 
enjoyed every day in the year either out of doors or under cover. 
During the winter and spring the opera continues without a 
break at the Theatre de la Monnaie, which may be called the 
national theatre. Concerts are held frequently, as the Belgians 
are a musical people. Of late years sport has taken a prominent 
part in Belgian life. There are athletic institutions, and football 
is quite a popular game. Horse-racing has also come into vogue, 
and Boitsfort, in the bois, and Groenendael, farther off in the 
Foret de Soignies, are fashionable places of reunion for society. 

The town of Brussels has a separate administration, which is 
directed by a burgomaster and sheriffs at the head of a town 
council, whose headquarters are in the hotel de ville. In the 
Brussels agglomeration are nine suburbs or communes, each 
self-governing with burgomaster and sheriffs located in a Maison 
Communale. These suburbs (beginning on the north and 
following the circumference eastward) are Schaerbeek, St 
Josse-ten-Noode, Etterbeek, Ixelles, St Gilles, Cureghem, Ander- 
lecht, Molenbeek and Koekelberg. Laeken, which is really a 
tenth suburb, is classified as a town. In 1856 the population 
of Brussels alone was 152,828, and by 1880 it had only increased 
to 162,498. In 1890 the figures were 176,138; in 1900, 183,686; 
and in December 1904, 194,196. The great increase has been 
in the suburbs, amounting to nearly 80 % in twenty-five years. 
In 1880 the population of the ten suburbs including Laeken 



was 248,079. In 1904 the total was 436,453, thus giving for the 
whole of Brussels a grand total of 630,649. 

History. — The name Brussel seems to have been derived from 
Broeksele, the village on the marsh or brook, and probably it 
was the most used point for crossing the Senne on the main 
Roman and Frank road between Tournai and Cologne. The 
Senne, a small tributary of the Scheldt, flows through the lower 
town, but since 1868 it has been covered in, and some of the 
finest boulevards in the lower town have been constructed over 
the course of the little river. The name Broeksele is mentioned 
by the chroniclers in the 8th century, and in the 10th the church 
of Ste Gudule is said to have been endowed by the emperor 
Otto I. In the next two centuries Brussels grew in size and 
importance, and its trade gilds were formed on lines similar 
to those of Ghent. In 13 12 Duke John II. of Brabant granted 
the citizens their charter, distinguished from others as that of 
Cortenberg. In 1 3 56 Duke Wenceslas confirmed this charter and 
also the Golden Bull of the emperor Charles IV. of 1349 by his 
famous " Joyous Entry " into Louvain, the capital of the duchy. 
These three deeds or enactments constituted the early con- 
stitution of the South Netherlands, which, with one important 
modification in the time of Charles V., remained intact till the 
Brabant revolution in the reign of Joseph II. In 1357 Wenceslas 
ordered a new wall embracing a greater area than the earlier 
one to be constructed round Brussels, and this was practically 
intact until after the Belgian revolution in 1 830-1 831. It took 
twelve, or, according to others, twenty-two years to build. • In 
1383 the dukes of Brabant transferred their capital from Louvain 
to Brussels, although for some time they did not trust themselves 
out of the strong castle which they had erected at Vilvorde, 
half-way between the two turbulent cities. During this period 
the population of Brussels is supposed to have been 50,000, or 
one-fifth of that of Ghent. In 1420 the gilds of Brussels obtained 
a further charter recognizing their status as the Nine Nations, 
a division still existing. Having fixed their seat of government 
at Brussels the dukes of Brabant proceeded to build a castle and 
place of residence on the Caudenberg hill, which is practically 
the site of the Place Royale and the king's palace to-day. This 
ducal residence, enlarged and embellished by its subsequent 
occupants, became eventually the famous palace of the Nether- 
lands which witnessed the abdication of Charles V. in 1555, and 
was destroyed by fire in 1731. In 1430 died Philip, last duke 
of Brabant as a separate ruler, and the duchy was merged in the 
possessions of the duke of Burgundy. 

In the 17th century Brussels was described (Comte de Segur, 
quoting the memoirs of M. de la Serre) as " one of the finest, 
largest and best-situated cities not only of Brabant but of the 
whole of Europe. The old quarters which preserve in our time 
an aspect so singularly picturesque with their sloping and 
tortuous streets, the fine hotels of darkened stone sculptured 
in the Spanish fashion, and the magnificence of the Place of 
the hotel de ville were buried behind an enceinte of walls 
pierced by eight lofty gates flanked with one hundred and 
twenty-seven round towers at almost equal distance from 
each other like the balls of a crown. At a distance of less than a 
mile was the forest of Soignies with great numbers of stags, 
red and roe deer, that were hunted on horseback even under 
the ramparts of the town. On the promenade of the court there 
circulated in a long file ceaselessly during fashionable hours 
five or six hundred carriages, the servants in showy liveries. 
In the numerous churches the music was renowned, the archduke 
Leopold being passionately given to the art, maintaining at his 
own cost forty or fifty musicians, the best of Italy and Germany. 
Under the windows of the palace stretched the same park that 
we admire to-day, open all the year to privileged persons and 
twice a year to the public, a park filled with trees of rare essences 
and the most delicious flowers so artistically disposed, and so 
refreshing to the eyes, that M. de la Serre declared that if he had 
seen there an apple tree he would assuredly have taken it for 
an earthly Paradise." (D. C. B.) 

BRUT, Brute, or Brutus the Trojan, a legendary British 
character, who, according to Geoffrey of Monmouth and others. 



BRUTE— BRUTTII 



6 95 



Was the eponymous hero of Britain. He was reputed to be 
grandson of Aeneas, and the legend was that he was banished 
from Italy and made his way to Britain, where he founded New 
Troy (London). The name is an obvious confusion between 
Bry t (a Briton) and the classical name Brutus. 
For the romance literature of the subject see Wace ; and Barbour. 
BRUTE, SIMON WILLIAM GABRIEL (1779-1839), American 
prelate, first Roman Catholic bishop of the diocese of Vincennes, 
Indiana, U.S.A., was born at Rennes, France, on the 20th of 
March 1779, his father, Simon Gabriel Guillaume Brute de 
Remur (1729-1786), being superintendent of the crown lands in 
Brittany. He was educated for the medical profession, but 
entered the Sulpician Seminary of Paris in November 1803, was 
ordained priest in 1808, refused the post of chaplain to Napoleon, 
was professor of theology in the Diocesan Seminary at Rennes in 
1808-1810, and in August 1810 settled in Baltimore, Maryland, 
whither his long general interest in missions, and particularly his 
acquaintance with Bishop Flaget of Kentucky, had drawn him. 
After teaching for two years (1810-1812) in Baltimore, he was 
sent to Mount St Mary's College, Emmitsburg, Maryland, where 
he remained until 181 5, acting both as teacher and as pastor. 
He next visited France in the interest of American missions, and 
on his return in November 1815, became president of St Mary's 
College, Baltimore. In 1818 he resumed his labours at Emmits- 
burg, and from this time until 1834 he held an almost unparalleled 
place in the American church, being constantly consulted by 
clergy throughout the country, besides lecturing, teaching, 
preaching and caring for his parish. The see of Vincennes was 
created in 1834; and Brute, nominated its first bishop and 
consecrated in the same year, went to France for financial aid, 
with which he built his cathedral and several useful institutions. 
Here, too, he was professor of theology in his seminary, teacher 
in one of his academies, as well as pastor and bishop. Interesting 
stories are told of the high respect in which he was held by the 
neighbouring Indians, who called him " chief of the Black robes " 
and " man of the true prayer." He died in Vincennes, Indiana, 
on the 26th of June 1839. His great influence on the entire 
church, his wonderful success in planning, financing, and carrying 
out necessary ecclesiastical reforms, and the constructive and 
executive ability he displayed in his diocese, make him one of the 
foremost Catholic emigrants to the United States. He wrote 
Brief Notes on his experiences in France in 1793, in which he 
describes state persecution of Catholic priests. 

See James Roosevelt Bayley, The Memoirs of the Rt. Rev. Simon 
William Gabriel Brute, First Bishop of Vincennes (New York, 1 861), 
containing much autobiographical matter. 

BRUTTII, an ancient tribe of lower Italy. This tribe, called 
Bruttii and Brittii in Latin inscriptions, and Bpemoi on Greek 
coins and by Greek authors, occupied the south-western peninsula 
of Italy in historical times, the ager Bruttius (wrongly called 
Bruttium) corresponding almost exactly to the modern Calabria. 
It was separated from Lucania on the north by a line drawn 
from the mouth of the river Laus on the west to a point a little 
south of the river Crathis on the east. To part or the whole of this 
peninsula the name Italia was first applied. In alliance with the 
Lucanians the Bruttii made war on the Greek colonies of the 
coast and seized on Vibo in 356 B.C., and, though for a time over- 
come by the Greeks who were aided by Alexander of Epirus and 
Agathocles of Syracuse, they reasserted their mastery of the town 
from about the beginning of the 3rd century B.C., and held it 
until it became a Latin colony at the end of the same century 
(see Corp. Inscr. Lat. x. p. 7, and the references there given). 
At this time they were speaking Oscan as well as Greek, and two 
of three Oscan inscriptions in Greek alphabet still testify to the 
language spoken in the town in the 3rd century B.C. We know, 
however, that the Bruttians, though at this date speaking the 
same language (Oscan) as the Samnite tribe of the Lucani, were 
not actually akin to them. The name Bruttii was used by the 
Lucanians to mean " runaway slaves," but it is considerably 
more likely that this signification was attached to the tribal 
name of the Bruttii from the historical fact that they had been 
conquered and expelled by the Samnite invaders (cf. the use of 



SxiWai to mean " policemen " at Athens, and still more closely 
the German, French and English word " slave " derived from 
" Slav "), than that the tribe when living in territory it could 
call its own should have adopted an opprobrious name taken 
from the language of hostile neighbours (see Strabo vi. 1, 4; 
Diod. Sic. xvi. r 5). Mommsen pointed out ( Unterital. Dialekte, 
p. 97) the evidence of tradition (especially Aristotle, Pol. 4 [7] 10) 
showing that the customs of the Bruttii had a certain affinity 
with those of the pre-Hellenic inhabitants of Greece, and it has 
been argued (Ridge way apud Conway, Ital. Dialects, p. 16) that a 
tradition (preserved in Stephanus of Byzantium, s.v. XT01) 
made it probable that they were called HeKao-yoi. This evidence 
points to the conjecture that they were part of what is now 
generally called the Mediterranean race (see, e.g. G. Sergi, The 
Mediterranean Race, Eng. trans., 1901; W. Z. Ripley, Races of 
Europe, p. 128). Many Indo-European elements appear in their 
place-names (e.g. Sila= Latin silva, Greek v\rj; Temesa, cf. 
Gr. Te/ievos or Sanskrit tamas, darkness, shadow), and none that 
suggest a non-Indo-European origin. A priori considerations 
suggest that they may have been akin to the Siceli, but of this at 
present no positive evidence can be given. 

As we have seen, the Bruttii were at the height of their power 
during the 3rd' century B.C. Their chief towns were Consentia 
(Cosenza), Petelia (near Strongoli), and Clampetia (Amantea). 
To this period (about the time of the Roman War against Pyrrhus) 
is to be assigned the series of their coins, and they appear to have 
retained the right of coinage even after their final subjugation by 
the Romans (see B. V. Head, Historia Numorum, p. 77). The 
influence of Hellenism over them is shown by finds in the tombs 
and the fact that they spoke the Greek language as well as their 
own (bilingues in Ennius). The mountainous country, ill-suited 
for agricultural purposes, was well adapted for these hardy 
warriors, whose training was Spartan in its simplicity and severity. 
The Bruttii first came into collision with the Romans during 
the war with Pyrrhus, to whom they sent auxiliaries; after his 
defeat, they submitted, and were deprived of half their territory 
in the Sila forest, which was declared state property. In the war 
with Hannibal, they were among the first to declare in his favour 
after the battle of Cannae, and it was in their country that Hanni- 
bal held his ground during the last stage of the war (at Castrum 
Hannibalis on the gulf of Scylacium). (R. S. C.) 

The Bruttii entirely lost their freedom at the end of the Hanni- 
balic war; in 194 colonies of Roman citizens were founded at 
Tempsa and Croton, and a colony with Latin rights at Hipponium 
called henceforward Vibo Valentia. In 132 the consul P. 
Popillius built the great inland road from Capua through Vibo 
and Consentia to Rhegium, while the date of the construction of 
the east and west coast roads is uncertain. Neither in the Social 
War, nor in the rising of Spartacus, who held out a long time in 
the Sila (7 1 B.C.) , do the Bruttii play a part as a people. Vibo was 
the naval base of Octavian in the conflict with Sextus Pompeius 
(42-36 B.C.). 

The most important product of the district was the wood from 
the forests of the Sila, and the pitch produced from it. The Sila 
also contained minerals, which were worked out in very early 
times. The coast plains were in parts very fertile, especially 
the (now malarious) lower valley of the Crathis.- Under the 
empire, however, the whole district remained backward and 
was remarkable for the absence of important towns, as the 
scarcity of ancient inscriptions, both Greek and Latin, shows: 
the Sila was state domain, and most of the rest in the hands 
of large proprietors. Augustus joined it with Lucania (from 
which it was divided by the rivers Laus and Crathis) to form 
the third region of Italy. In the 2nd and 3rd centuries, for 
administrative and juridical purposes, it was sometimes (with 
Lucania) joined to Apulia and Calabria. Diocletian placed 
Lucania and Brittii (as the name was then spelt) under a cor- 
rector, whose residence was at Rhegium. The boundaries of the 
original third Augustan region had by that time become some- 
what altered, Metapontum belonging to Calabria, and Salernum 
and the territory of the Picentini to the third region instead of 
the first (Campania). From the 6th century, after the fall of 



6 9 6 



BRUTUS— BRttX 



the Ostrogothic power, and the establishment of that of ByZani 
tium in its place in south Italy, the name Calabria was applied 
to the whole of the south Italian possessions of the Eastern 
empire, and the name of the Brittii entirely disappeared; and 
after the eastern peninsula (the ancient Calabria) had been 
taken by the Lombards about a.d. 668, the western retained 
the name, and has kept it till the present day. (T. As.) 

See Strabo vi. p. 253-265; Dion. Halic. xx. I, 4, 15; Pliny, 
Nat. Hist. iii. 71-74; Justin xii. 2, xxiii. 1; F. Lenormant, La 
Grande-Grece, i. (1881-1884); H. Nissen, Italische Landeskunde 
(1883-1902); C. Hiilsen in Pauly-Wissowa's Realencyclopddie, iii. 
pt. i. (1897) ; E. H. Bunbury in Smith's Dictionary of Greek and 
Roman Geography; R. S. Conway, The Italic Dialects (1897), for 
Bruttian inscriptions and local and personal names; P. Orsi in Atti 
del congresso storico (Rome, 1904), v. 193 seq.; M. Schipa, La 
Migrazione del nome Calabria (1895), whose conclusions are summar- 
ized in J. B. Bury's edition of Gibbon's Decline and Fall, v. p. 24, 
note; other authorities in J. Jung, " Geographie von Italien ' 
(1897) in I. Miiller's Handbuch der klassischen Altertumswissenschaft, 
iii, Abteilung 3. 

BRUTUS (originally an adjective meaning "heavy," "stupid," 
kindred with Gr. fiapvs, cf. Eng. "brute," " brutal"), the 
surname of several distinguished Romans belonging to the 
Junian gens. 

I. Lucius Junius Brutus, one of the first two consuls, 
509 B.C. According to the legends, his mother was the sister of 
Tarquinius Superbus, the last of the Roman kings, and his father 
and his elder brother had been put to death by the reigning 
family in order to get possession of his wealth. Junius, the 
younger, owed his safety to his reputed dullness of intellect 
(whence his surname), which character', however, he had only 
assumed for prudential reasons (Dion., Halic. iv. 67, 77). The 
story is probably an invention to account for his name; in any 
case his dullness did not prevent his appointment as master of 
the horse. When Lucretia, wife of Collations', was outraged by 
Sextus Tarquinius (the incident which inspired Shakespeare's 
Rape of Lucrece), Brutus, together with her husband and father, 
took a leading part in expelling the Tarquinii from Rome. He 
and Collatinus were therefore elected consuls — or rather praetors, 
which was the original title '(Livy i. 59). In a conspiracy formed 
for the restoration of the dynasty, the two sons of Brutus Were 
deeply implicated, and were executed by sentence of their father, 
and in his sight (Livy ii. 3) . The Etruscans of Veii and Tarquinii 
making an attempt to restore Tarquinius, a battle took place 
between them and the Romans, in which Junius Brutus engaged 
Aruns, son of the deposed king, in single combat on horseback, 
and each fell by the other's hand (Livy ii. 6; Dion. Halic. v. 14). 
The" Roman matrons mourned a year for him, as " the avenger 
of woman's honour," and a statue was erected to him On the 
Capitol. The conspiracy of his sons is the subject of a tragedy 
by Voltaire. 

The patrician branch of the family appears to have become 
extinct with L. Junius Brutus; the chief representatives of the 
plebeian branch in later times are dealt with below. 

II. Decimus Junius Brutus, consul 138, surnamed Gallaecus 
from his victory over the Gallaeci (136) in the north-west of 
Spain (Plutarch, Tib. Gracchus, 21). He was a highly educated 
man, a patron of literature, and a friend of the poet Accius 
(Livy, Epit.' $$; Appian, Hisp. 71-73; Veil. Pat. ii. 5; Cicero, 
Brutus, 28). 

III. Marcus Junius Brutus, a jurist of high authority, was 
considered as one of the founders of Roman civil law (Cicero, 
De Oratore, ii. 33, 55). 

IV. His son, of the same name, made a great reputation at 
the bar, and from the vehemence and bitterness of his speeches 
became known as " the Accuser " (Cicero, De Officiis, ii. 15). 

V. Decimus Junius Brutus (Albinus), born about 84 B.C., 
first served under Caesar in Gaul, and afterwards commanded his 
fleet. Caesar, who esteemed him very highly, made him his 
master of the horse and governor of Gaul, and, in case of 
Octavian's death, nominated him as one of his heirs. Neverthe- 
less he joined in the conspiracy against his patron, and, like his 
relative Marcus Junius Brutus (see below), was one of his as- 
sassins. He afterwards resisted the attempt of Antony to obtain 



absolute power; and after heading the republican armies against 
him for some time with success, was deserted by his soldiers in 
Gaul, betrayed by one of the native chiefs, and put to death by 
order of Antony (43), while attempting to escape to Brutus and 
Cassius in Macedonia. He figures in Cicero's correspondence: 
(See Appian, B.C. iii. 97; Dio Cassius xlvi. 53; Caesar, B.G. 
iii. n, B.C. i. 36, 45.) 

VI. Marcus Junius Brutus (85, according to some, 79 or 
78-42 B.C.), spn of a father of the same name and of Servilia, 
half-sister of Cato of Utica, is the most famous of the name, 
and is the real hero of Shakespeare's Julius Caesar. His father 
had been treacherously put to death by order of Pompey during 
the civil wars. At that time young Marcus was only eight years 
oid, and was educated with great care by his mother and uncles. 
He at first practised as an advocate. In spite of his father's fate, 
he supported the cause of Pompey against Caesar, but was 
pardoned by the latter after the victory of Pharsalus, and subse- 
quently appointed by him to the government of Cisalpine Gaul 
(46). .His justice and moderation won him great honour from 
the provincials under his rule. In 44 he was city praetor, and 
Caesar promised him the governorship of Macedonia at the 
expiration of his term of office. Influenced probably by his friend 
Gaius Cassius, he afterwards joined in the conspiracy against the 
great dictator, and was one of the foremost in his assassination. 
He maintained the cause of the republic by seizing and holding 
against Antony's forces the province of Macedonia, where he was 
joined by Cassius. But at Philippi (42) they were defeated by 
Antony and Octavian, and, rather than be taken prisoner, he 
fell on his sword. His wife Porcia, daughter of Cato of Utica, 
afterwards committed suicide, it is said, by swallowing red-hot 
coals (Dio Cassius xlvii. 20-49; Plutarch, Brutus; Appian, 
B.C. iv.; Veil. Paterculus ii. 72). 

Brutus was an earnest student through all his active life, and 
is said to have been working on an abridgment of Pausanias 
the night before Pharsalus. He was generally friendly with 
Cicero, who dedicated several of his works to him (amongst 
them his Orator), and gave the name of Brutus to his dialogue on 
famous orators; but there were frequent disagreements between 
them, and Cicero frequently speaks of his coldness and lack of 
enthusiasm. It is difficult to understand his great influence over 
the Romans (he was only forty-three when he died); probably 
they admired him for his respectability, the old-fashioned 
gravitas. He was slow in decision, amazingly obstinate, lacking 
in sympathy save towards his womenkind — who unduly in- 
fluenced him — and in his financial dealings with the provincials 
both extortionate and cruel (Cic. ad Alt. vi. 1.7). Shakespeare's 
portrait of him is far too flattering. It has been held that he 
was really an illegitimate son of Julius Caesar. If so we may 
find an explanation of his joining the conspirators by the fact 
that in 45 Caesar had appointed Octavian as his heir. He wrote 
several philosophical treatises (de Virtute, de Officiis, de Patientia) 
and some poetry, but nothing has survived. On the other hand, 
we possess part of his correspondence with Cicero (two books out 
of an original nine), the authenticity of which, though formerly 
disputed, is now regarded as firmly established, with the possible 
exception of two of the letters. The letters of Brutus written 
in Greek are probably the composition of some rhetorician. 
■ See E. T. Bynum, Das Leben des M. J. Brutus (Halle a/S., 1898); 
Tyrrell and Purser's edition of Cicero's Letters (refs. in index vol. s.v., 
" Iunius Brutus," especially introductions to vols. iii. and v.); 
G. Boissier, Cicero and his Friends (Eng. trans. 1897) ; J. L. Strachan- 
Bavidson, Cicero (1894); other authorities under Caesar; Cicero. 
BRUX, a town of Bohemia, Austria, 93 m. N.N.W. of 
Prague by rail. Pop. (1000) 21,525. It is dominated by the 
Schlossberg (1307 ft.), on which is situated the ruins of an old 
castle, demolished in 165 1, and possesses a very interesting 
church, in late-Gothic style, built in 151 7. Briix is situated in 
the centre of a region very rich in lignite deposits and has, 
besides, important sugar, iron and hardware, distilling, brewing 
and milling industries. To the south of Briix are the villages 
of Piillna, Seidlitz and Seidschutz with well-known saline 
springs. Briix is mentioned in documents of the early nth 
century. It fell to the crown under Pfemysll. or Wenceslaus II. 



BRY— BRYANT; J. 



697 



and was made a royal city by Ottakar II. in the 13th century. 
In 1421 the Hussites were defeated here by King Sigismund 
and the Saxons, and in 1426 besieged the town in vain. In 1456 
George of Podebrad captured the town and castle, which had 
for some time been occupied by the Saxon princes. 

BRY, THEODORUS [Dirk] DE (1528-1598), German engraver 
and publisher, was born at Liege in 1528. In the earlier years 
of his career he worked at Strassburg. Later he established an 
engraving and publishing business at Frankfort-on-Main, and 
also visited London in or before 1587. Here he became 
acquainted with the geographer Richard Hakluyt, with whose 
assistance he collected materials for a finely illustrated collection 
of voyages and travels, Collectiones Peregrinationum in Indiam 
Orientalem et Indiam Occidentalem (25 parts, 1 590-1634). Among 
other works he engraved a set of 12 plates illustrating the Pro- 
cession of the Knights of the Garter in 1576, and a set of 34 
plates illustrating the Procession at the Obsequies of Sir Philip 
Sidney; plates for T. Hariot's Briefe and True Report of the 
new found Land of Virginia (Frankfort, 1595); the plates for 
the first four volumes of J. J. Boissard's Romanae Urbis Topo- 
graphia et Antiquitates (1 597-1 598), and a series of portraits 
entitled Icones Virorum Illustrium (1 597-1 599). De Bry died 
at Frankfort on the 27th of March 1598. He had been assisted 
by his eldest son Johannes Theodorus de Bry (1561-1623), who 
after his father's death . carried on the Collectiones and the 
illustration of Boissard's work, and also added to the Icones. 
His brother Johannes Israel de Bry (d. 161 1) collaborated 
with him. 

BRYAN, WILLIAM JENNINGS (i860- ), American 
political leader, son of Silas Lillard Bryan, a native of Culpeper 
county, Virginia, who was a lawyer and from i860 to 1897 a 
state circuit judge, was born at Salem, Marion county,. Illinois, 
on the 19th of March i860. He graduated from Illinois College 
as valedictorian in 1881, and from the Union College of Law, 
Chicago, in 1883; during his course he studied in the law office 
of Lyman Trumbull. He practised law at Jacksonville from 
1883 to 1887, when he removed to Lincoln, Nebraska. There 
he soon became conspicuous both as a lawyer and as a politician, 
attracting particular attention by his speeches during the 
presidential campaign of 1888 on behalf of the candidates of 
the Democratic party. From 1891 to 1895 he represented the 
First Congressional District of Nebraska, normally Republican, 
in the national House of Representatives, and received the 
unusual honour of being placed on the important Committee 
on Ways and Means during his first term. He was a hard and 
conscientious worker and became widely known for his ability 
in debate. Two of his speeches in particular attracted attention, 
one against the policy of protection (16th of March 1892), and 
the other against the repeal of the silver purchase clause of the 
Sherman Act (16th of August 1893). In the latter he advocated 
the unlimited coinage of silver, irrespective of international 
agreement, at a ratio of 16 to 1, a policy with which his name 
was afterwards most prominently associated. In a campaign 
largely restricted to the question of free-silver coinage he was 
defeated for re-election in 1894, and subsequently was also 
defeated as the Democratic candidate for the United States 
Senate. As editor of the Omaha World-Herald he then cham- 
pioned the cause of bimetallism in the press as vigorously as he 
had in Congress and on the platform, his articles being widely 
quoted and discussed. 

The Democratic party was even more radically divided on 
the question of monetary policy than the Republican; and 
President Cleveland, by securing the repeal of the silver purchase 
clause in the Sherman Act by Republican votes, had alienated 
a great majority of his party. In the Democratic national 
convention at Chicago in 1896, during a long and heated debate 
with regard to the party platform, Bryan, in advocating the 
" plank " declaring for the free coinage of silver, of which he was 
the author, delivered a celebrated speech containing the passage, 
" You shall not press down upon the brow of labour this crown 
of thorns; you shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold." 
This speech made him the idol of the " silver " majority of the 



convention and brought him the Democratic nomination for 
the presidency on the following day. Subsequently he received 
the nominations of the People's and National Silver parties, 
In the ensuing presidential campaign he travelled over 18,000 
m. and made altogether 600 speeches in 27 different states— 
an unprecedented number. In the election, however, he was 
defeated by William McKinley, the Republican candidate, 
receiving 176 electoral votes to 271. But though defeated, he 
remained the leader of his party. Between 1896 and 1900, 
except during the Spanish-American War when he was colonel 
of the 3rd Nebraska Volunteers, though he saw no active service, 
he devoted his time to the interest of his party. His ability, 
sincerity of character, and wide information, and his attitude 
towards the new issues arising from the war, in which he took 
the side opposed to "imperialism," increased his following. 
Although he had advised the ratification of the Peace Treaty, 
he opposed the permanent acquisition of the Philippine Islands. 
In 1900 he was nominated for the presidency by the Democratic, 
Silver Republican, and Populist party conventions; but although 
" imperialism " was declared to be the paramount issue, he had 
insisted that the " platforms " should contain explicit advocacy 
of free-coinage, and this declaration, combined with the popu- 
larity of President McKinley, the Republican candidate for 
re-election, again turned the scales against him. In the 
November election after a canvass that almost equalled in activity 
that of 1896 he was again defeated, receiving only 155 electoral 
votes to 292. 

After the 1900 election he established and edited at Lincoln 
a weekly political journal, The Commoner, which attained a wide 
circulation. In 1904 although not actively a candidate for the 
Democratic nomination (which eventually went to Judge 
Parker), he was to the very last considered a possible nominee; 
and he strenuously opposed in the convention the repudiation 
by the conservative element of the stand taken in the two 
: previous campaigns. The decisive defeat of Parker by President 
Roosevelt did much to bring back the Democrats to Mr Bryan's 
banner. In 1 905-1906 he made a trip round the world, and 
in London was cordially received as a great American orator. 
He was again nominated for the presidency by the Demo- 
cratic party in 1908. The free-silver theory was now dead, 
and while the main question was that of the attitude to be 
taken towards the Trusts it was much confused by personal 
issues, Mr Roosevelt himself intervening strongly in favour of 
the Republican nominee, Mr Taft. After a heated contest Mr 
Bryan again suffered a decisive defeat, President Taft securing 
321 electoral votes to Mr .Bryan's 162. 

BRYANSK, a town of Russia, in the government of Orel, 
83 m. by rail W.N.W. of the city of that name, in 53 15' N. and 
34 10' E. on the river Desna. It is mentioned in 1 146, being 
then also known as Debryansk. It afterwards formed a separate 
principality, which came to an end in 1356 with the death of 
the prince. After the Mongol invasion of 1241, Bryansk fell 
into the power of the Lithuanians; and finally became incor- 
porated with the Russian empire in the beginning of the 17th 
century. Bryansk was taken by the followers of the first false 
Demetrius, but it successfully resisted the attacks of the second 
impostor of that name. Under the empress Anne a dock was 
constructed for the building of ships, but it was closed in 1739. 
In 1783 an arsenal was established for the founding of cannon. 
The cathedral was built in 1526, and restored in the end of the 
17th century. There are two high schools; and the industrial 
establishments include iron, rope, brick and tallow-boiling 
works, saw-mills and flour-mills, tobacco-factories and a brewery. 
Some distance north of the town are the Maltsov iron-works, with 
glass factories and rope-walks, employing 20,000 men. A 
considerable trade is carried on, especially in wood, tar, hemp, 
pitch, hemp-seed-oil and cattle. In 1867 the population num- 
bered 13,881, and in 1897 23,520. 

BRYANT, JACOB (1715-1804), English antiquarian and 
writer on mythological subjects, was born at Plymouth. His 
father had a place in the customs there, but was afterwards 
stationed at Chatham. The son was first sent to a school near 



6 9 8 



BRYANT, W. C. 



Rochester, whence he was removed to Eton. In 1736 he was 
elected to a scholarship at King's College, Cambridge, where he 
took his degrees of B.A. (1740) and M.A. (1744), subsequently 
being elected a fellow. He returned to Eton as private tutor 
to the duke of Marlborough, then marquess of Blandford; and 
in 1756 he accompanied the duke, then master-general of 
ordnance and commander-in-chief of the forces in Germany, 
to the continent as private secretary. He was rewarded by a 
lucrative appointment in the ordnance department, which 
allowed him ample leisure to indulge his literary tastes. He 
twice refused the mastership of the Charterhouse. Bryant died 
on the 14th of November 1804 at Cippenham near Windsor. 
He left his library to King's College, having, however, previously 
made some valuable presents from it to the king arid the duke 
of Marlborough. He bequeathed £2000 to the Society for the 
Propagation of the Gospel, and £1000 for the use of the super- 
annuated collegers of Eton. 

His principal works are: Observations and Inquiries relating to 
various Parts of Ancient History (1767); A New System, or an 
Analysis, of Ancient Mythology, wherein an attempt is made to divest 
Tradition of Fable, and to reduce Truth to its original Purity (1774- 
1776), which is fantastic and now wholly valueless; Vindication of 
the Apamean Medal (1775), which obtained the support of the great 
numismatist Eckhel; An Address to Dr Priestley upon his Doctrine 
of Philosophical Necessity (1780); Vindiciae Flavianae, a Vindication 
of the Testimony of Josephus concerning Jesus Christ (1780) ; Observa- 
tions on the Poems of Thomas Rowley, in which the Authenticity of 
those Poems is ascertained (1781); Treatise upon the Authenticity of 
the Scriptures, and the Truth of the Christian Religion (1792) ; Observa- 
tions upon the Plagues inflicted upon the Egyptians (1794) ; Observa- 
tions on a Treatise, entitled Description of the Plain of Troy, by Mr 
de Chevalier (1795); A Dissertation concerning the War of Troy, 
and the Expedition of the Grecians, as described by Homer, with the 
view of showing that no such expedition was ever undertaken, and that 
no such city as Phrygia existed (1796); The Sentiments of Philo 
Judaeus concerning the \6yos or Word of God (1797). 

BRYANT, WILLIAM CULLEN (1794-1878), American poet 
and journalist, was born at Cummington, a farming village in 
the Hampshire hills of western Massachusetts, on the 3rd of 
November 1794. He was the second son of Peter Bryant, a 
physician and surgeon of no mean scholarship, refined in all his 
tastes, and a public-spirited citizen. Peter Bryant was the great- 
grandson of Stephen Bryant, an English Puritan emigrant to 
Massachusetts Bay about the year 1632. The poet's mother, 
Sarah Snell, was a descendant of " Mayflower " pilgrims. He 
was born in the log farmhouse built by his father two years before, 
at the edge of the pioneer settlement among those boundless 
forests, the deep stamp of whose beauty and majesty he carried 
on his own mind and reprinted upon the emotions of others 
throughout a long life spent mainly amid the activities of his 
country's growing metropolis. By parentage, by religious and 
political faith, and by hardness of fortune, the earliest of important 
American poets was appointed to a life typical of the first century 
of American national existence, and of the strongest single racial 
element by which that nation's social order has been moulded 
and promoted. Rated by the amount of time given to school 
books and college classes, Bryant's early education was limited. 
After the village school he received a year of exceptionally good 
training in Latin under his mother's brother, the Rev. Dr 
Thomas Snell, of Brookfield, followed by a year of Greek under 
the Rev. Moses Hallock, of Plainfield, and at sixteen entered the 
sophomore class of Williams College. Here he was an apt and 
diligent student through two sessions, and then, owing to the 
straitness of his father's means, he withdrew without graduating, 
and studied classics and mathematics for a year, in the vain hope 
that his father might yet be able to send him to Yale College. 
But the length of his school and college days would be a very 
misleading measure of his training. He was endowed by nature 
with many of those traits which 'it is often only the final triumph 
of books and institutional regimen to establish in character, and 
a double impulse toward scholarship and citizenship showed its 
ruling influence with a precocity and an ardour which gave every 
day of systematic schooling many times its ordinary value. It 
is his own word that, two months after beginning with the Greek 
alphabet, he had read the New Testament through. On 



abandoning his hope to enter Yale, the poet turned to and pur- 
sued, under private guidance at Worthington and at Bridgewater, 
the study of law. At twenty-one he was admitted to the bar, 
opened an office in Plainfield, presently withdrew from there, 
and at Great Barrington settled for nine years in the attorney's 
calling, with an aversion for it which he never lost. His first 
book of verse, The Embargo, or Sketches of the Times; A Satire 
by a Youth of thirteen, had been printed at Boston in 1808. 

At the age of twenty-six Bryant married, at Great Barrington, 
Miss Frances Fairchild, with whom he enjoyed a happy union 
until her death nearly half a century later. In the year of his 
marriage he suffered the bereavement of his father's death. 
In 1825 he ventured to lay aside the practice of law, and removed 
to New York City to assume a literary editorship. Here for 
some months his fortunes were precarious, until in the next 
year he became one of the editors of the Evening Post, In the 
third year following, 1829, he came into undivided editorial 
control, and became also chief owner. He enjoyed his occupation, 
fulfilling its duties with an unflagging devotion to every worthy 
public interest till he died in 1878, in the month of his choice,' 
as indicated in his beautiful poem entitled " June." 

Though Bryant's retiring and contemplative nature could not 
overpower his warm human sympathies, it yet dominated them 
to an extent that made him always, even in his journalistic 
capacity and in the strenuous prose of daily debate, a councillor 
rather than a leader. It was after the manner of the poet, the 
seer, that he was a patriot, standing for principles much more 
than for measures, and, with an exquisite correctness which 
belonged to every phase of his being, never prevailing by the 
accommodation of himself to inferiors in foresight, insight or 
rectitude. His vigorous and stately mind found voice in one of 
the most admirable models of journalistic style known in America. 
He was founder of a distinct school of American journalism, 
characterized by an equal fidelity and temperance, energy and 
dignity. Though it is as a poet that he most emphatically belongs 
to history, hisyerse was the expression of only the gentler motions 
of his mind; and it gathers influence, if not lustre, when behind 
it is seen a life intrepid, upright, glad, and ever potent for the 
nobler choice in all the largest affairs of his time. His renown 
as a poet antedated the appearance of his first volume by some 
four or five years. " American poetry," says Richard Henry 
Stoddard, " may be said to have commenced in 181 7 with . . . 
(Bryant's) ' Thanatopsis ' and ' Inscription for the entrance of a 
wood.' " " Thanatopsis," which revealed a voice at once as 
new and as old as the wilderness out of which it reverberated, 
had been written at Cummington in the poet's eighteenth year, 
and was printed in 1817 in the North American Review; the 
" Inscription " was written in his nineteenth, and in his twenty- 
first, while a student of law at Bridgewater, he had composed 
his lines " To a Water-fowl," whose exquisite beauty and exalted 
faith his own pen rarely, if ever, surpassed. The poet's gift for 
language made him a frequent translator, and among his works 
of this sort his rendering of Homer is the most noted and most 
valuable. But the muse of Bryant, at her very best, is always 
brief -spoken and an interpreter initially of his own spirit. Much 
of the charm of his poems lies in the equal purity of their artistic 
and their moral beauty. On the ethical side they are more than 
pure, they are — it may be said without derogation — Puritan. 
He never commerces with unloveliness for any loveliness that 
may be plucked out of it, and rarely or never discovers moral 
beauty under any sort of mask. As free from effeminacy as 
from indelicacy, his highest and his deepest emotions are so 
dominated by a perfect self-restraint that they never rise (or 
stoop) to transports. There is scarcely a distempered utterance 
in the whole body of his poetical works, scarcely one passionate 
exaggeration. He faces life with an invincible courage, an 
inextinguishable hope and heavenward trust, and the dignity 
of a benevolent will which no compulsion can break or bend. 
The billows of his soul are not waves, but hills which tempests 
ruffle but can never heave. Even when he essays to speak for 
spirits unlike his own — characters of history or conceptions of 
his own imagination — he never with signal success portrays 



BRYAXIS— BRYENNIUS 



699 



them in the bonds, however transient, of any overmastering 
passion. For merriment he has a generous smile, for sorrow a 
royal one; but the nearest he ever comes to mirth is in his dainty 
rhyme, " Robert of Lincoln," and the nearest to a wail in those 
exquisite notes of grief for the loss of his young sister, " The 
Death of the Flowers," which only draw the tear to fill it with 
the light of a perfect resignation. As a seer of large and noble 
contemplation, in whose pictures of earth and sky the presence 
and care of the Divine mind, and every tender and beautiful 
relation of man to his Creator and to his fellow, are melodiously 
celebrated, his rank is among the master poets of America, of 
whom he is historically the first. 

Bryant published volumes of Poems in 1821 (Cambridge) and 
1832 (New York), and many other collections were issued under his 
supervision, the last being the Poetical Works (New York, 1876). 
Among his volumes of verse were " The Fountain " and other poems 
(New York, 1842) ; The White-Footed Deer and Other Poems (New 
York, 1844); Thirty Poems (New York, 1864); and blank-verse 
translations of The Iliad of Homer (Boston, 1870) and of The 
Odyssey of Homer (Boston, 1871). His Poetical Works and his 
Complete Prose Writings (New York, 1883 and 1884) were edited by 
Parke Godwin, who also wrote A Biography of William Cullen Bryant, 
with Extracts from his private Correspondence (New York, 1883). 
See also J. Grant Wilson, Bryant and his Friends (New York, 1886) ; 
John Bigelow, William Cullen Bryant (Boston, 1890), in the "American 
Men of Letters " series; W. A. Bradley, Bryant, in the " English 
Men of Letters " series (1905) ; E. C. Stedman, Poets of America 
(1885); and biographical and bibliographical introductions by 
Henry C. Sturges and Richard Henry Stoddard to the " Roslyn 
edition " of his Poetical Works (New York, 1903). (G. W. Ca.) 

BRYAXIS, one of the four great sculptors who worked on the 
mausoleum at Halicarnassus, about 350 B.C. His work on that 
monument cannot be separated from that of his companions, 
but a basis has been discovered at Athens bearing bis signature, 
and adorned with figures of horsemen in relief. He is said to have 
made a great statue of Serapis for Sinope, but as to this there 
are grave historic difficulties. He also made a great statue of 
Apollo, set up at Daphne near Antioch (see E. A. Gardner, 
Handbook of Greek Sculpture, ii. 374). 

BRYCE, JAMES (1838- ), British jurist, historian and 
politician, son of James Bryce (LL.D. of Glasgow, who had a 
school in Belfast for many years), was born at Belfast, 
Ireland, on the 10th of May 1838. After going through the 
high school and university courses at Glasgow, he went to 
Trinity College, Oxford, and in 1862 was elected a fellow of 
Oriel. He went to the bar and practised in London for a few 
years, but he was soon called back to Oxford as regius professor 
of civil law (1870-1893). His reputation as a historian had 
been made as early as 1864 by his Holy Roman Empire. He 
was an ardent Liberal in politics, and in 1880 he was elected 
to parliament for the Tower Hamlets division. of London; in 
1885 he was returned for South Aberdeen, where he was re- 
elected on succeeding occasions. His intellectual distinction 
and political industry made him a valuable member of the 
Liberal party. In 1886 he was made under secretary for foreign 
affairs; in 1892 he joined the cabinet as chancellor of the duchy 
of Lancaster; in 1894 he was president of the Board of Trade, 
and acted as chairman of the royal commission on secondary 
education; and in Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman's cabinet 
(1905) he was made chief secretary for Ireland; but in February 
1907 he was appointed British ambassador at Washington, 
and took leave of party politics, his last political act being a 
speech outlining what was then the government scheme for 
university reform in Dublin — a scheme which was promptly 
discarded by his successor Mr Birrell. As a man of letters 
Mr Bryce was already well known in America. His great work 
The American Commonwealth (1888; revised edition, 1910) was the 
first in which the institutions of the United States had been 
thoroughly discussed from the point of view of a historian and 
a constitutional lawyer, and it at once became a classic. His 
Studies in History and Jurisprudence (1901) and Studies in 
Contemporary Biography (1903) were republications of essays, 
and in 1897, after a visit to South Africa, he published a volume 
of Impressions of that country, which had considerable weight 
in Liberal circles when the Boer War was being discussed. 



Meanwhile his academic honours from home and foreign univer- 
sities multiplied, and he became a fellow of the Royal Society 
in 1894. In earlier life he was a notable mountain-climber, 
ascending Mount Ararat in 1876, and publishing a volume 
on Transcaucasia and Ararat in 1877; in 1899-1901 he was 
president of the Alpine Club. 

BRYDGES, SIR SAMUEL EGERTON (1762-1837), English 
genealogist and miscellaneous writer, was born on the 30th 
of November 1762. He studied at Queens' College, Cambridge, 
and was entered at the Middle Temple in 1782, being called to 
the bar in 1787. In 1789 he persuaded his elder brother that 
their family were the heirs to the barony of Chandos, being 
descended from a younger branch of the Brydges who first held 
the title. The case was tried and lost, but Brydges never gave 
up his claim, and used to sign himself Per legem terrae B. C. of S. 
{i.e. Baron Chandos of Sudeley). He re-edited Collins 's Peerage, 
inserting a statement about his supposed right. In 18 14 he was 
made a baronet, and in 1818 he left England. He died at Geneva 
on the 8th of September 1837. Sir Egerton was a most prolific 
author; he is said to have written 2000 sonnets in one year. 
His numerous works include Poems (1785); Censura Liter aria 
(1805-1809); The British Bibliographer (4 vols., 1810-1814), 
with J. Haslewood; Restituta (4 vols., 1814-1816), containing 
accounts of old books; and Autobiography, Times, Opinions and 
Contemporaries of Sir S. E. Brydges (1834). In 1813 Brydges 
began to supply material to a private printing press established 
at Lee Priory, Kent, by a compositor and a pressman, who were 
to receive any profits which might arise from the sale of the works 
published. In this way Brydges published various Elizabethan 
texts, at considerable expense to himself, which increased the 
services he had already rendered to the study of Elizabethan 
literature by his bibliographical works. 

For a full list of his works see W. T. Lowndes, Bibliographer's 
Manual (ed. H. G. Bohn, 1857-1864). 

BRYENNIUS, NICEPHORUS (1062-1137), Byzantine soldier, 
statesman and historian, was born at Orestias (Adrianople). 
His father, of the same name, had revolted against the feeble 
Michael VII., but had been defeated and deprived of his eyesight. 
The son, who was distinguished for his learning, personal beauty 
and engaging qualities, gained the favour of Alexius I. (Comnenus) 
and the hand of his daughter Anna, with the titles of Caesar 
(then ranking third) and Panhypersebastos (one of the new 
dignities introduced by Alexius). Bryennius successfully de- 
fended the walls of Constantinople against the attacks of Godfrey 
of Bouillon (1097); conducted the peace negotiations between 
Alexius and Bohemund, prince of Antioch (1108); and played 
an important part in the defeat of Malik-Shah, the Seljuk sultan 
of Iconium (1116). After the death of Alexius, he refused to 
enter into the conspiracy set on foot by his mother-in-law and 
wife to depose John, the son of Alexius, and raise himself to the 
throne. His wife attributed his refusal to cowardice, but it 
seems from certain passages in his own work that he really re- 
garded it as a crime to revolt against the rightful heir; the only 
reproach that can be brought against him is that he did not nip 
the conspiracy in the bud. He was on very friendly terms with 
the new emperor John, whom he accompanied on his Syrian 
campaign (113 7), but was forced by illness to return to Byzantium, 
where he died in the same year. At the suggestion of his mother- 
in-law he wrote a history (called by him "TXrj 'Iaroptas, materials 
for a history) of the period from 1057 to 1081, from the victory 
of Isaac I. (Comnenus) over Michael VI. to the dethronement 
of Nicephorus Botaneiates by Alexius. The work has been 
described as rather a family chronicle than a history, the object 
of which was the glorification of the house of Comnenus. Part 
of the introduction is probably a later addition. In addition to 
information derived from older contemporaries (such as his 
father and father-in-law) Bryennius made use of the works 
of Michael Psellus, John Scylitza and Michael Attaliota. As 
might be expected, his views are biased by personal considera- 
tions and his intimacy with the royal family, which at the same 
time, however, afforded him unusual facilities for obtaining 
material. His model was Xenophon, whom he has imitated with 



700 



BRYNMAWR— BRYOPHYTA 



a tolerable measure of Success; he abstains from an excessive 
use of simile and metaphor, and his style is concise arid simple. 

Editio princeps, P. Possinus, 1661 ; in Bonn Corpus Scriptorum 
Hist. Byz., by E. Meineke (1836), with du Cange's valuable com- 
mentary; JVhgne, Patrologia Graeca, cxxvii.; see also J. Seger, 
Byzantinische Historiker des 10. und 11. Jahrhunderts (1888), and C. 
Krumbacher, Geschichte der byzantinischen Litteratur (1897). The 
estimate of his work in R. Nicolai, Griechische LiteratUrgeschichte, 
iii. p. 76 (1878), is too unfavourable. 

BRYNMAWR, a market town of Brecknockshire, Wales, 
143 m - S.E. of Brecknock and 156 m. from London by rail. Pop. 
of urban district (1901) 6833. It is on the London & North- 
Western and Rhymney joint railway connecting Rhymney 
and Abergavenny, being also a junction for a branch line to 
Pontypool via Blaenavon, and the terminus of the Great Western 
line from Newport via Nantyglo. The town owes its origin to 
the development during the first half of the 19th century of iron- 
works at the upper ends of the valleys that converge in its 
neighbourhood, its site being previously known as Waun Helygen 
(Willow-tree Common) . The Nantyglo ironworks afford occupa- 
tion to large numbers of the inhabitants of Brynmawr. Both 
coal and iron ore were formerly worked, but the coal is exhausted 
and the ore unsuitable for modern processes. Brynmawr was 
formed into an ecclesiastical parish in 1875 out of portions of 
the civil parishes of Llanelly and Llangattock. In 1894 this was 
formed into an urban district, which was enlarged in 1900 by 
the addition of a portion of the parish of Aberystruth in Mon- 
mouthshire, the whole being at the same time consolidated into 
a civil parish. 

BRYN MAWR COLLEGE, an institution of advanced learning 
for women, at Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania, U.S.A., 5 m. W. of 
Philadelphia. The site occupies 52 acres and overlooks a broad 
expanse of rolling country. The buildings are of grey stone in 
the Jacobean Gothic style, and consist of an administration and 
lecture hall, a science hall, a library containing in 1908 about 
55,000 volumes mostly for special study, a gymnasium; a hospital 
and six halls of residence. The requirements for matriculation 
are high; students are required to choose their studies according 
to the " group system," which permits them to specialize in two 
or more subjects; and instruction is given largely by means of 
lectures. The college is open to " hearers " who are not required 
to matriculate, to undergraduate matriculated students who 
are not studying for a degree, to undergraduate matriculated 
students who are candidates for the degree of B.A., and to 
graduate students who are candidates for the degree of M.A. 
or Ph.D. The government rests in a board of thirteen trustees 
and sixteen directors, all the trustees being members of the 
board of directors. The president of the college is a trustee and 
director. The institution was founded by Dr Joseph W. Taylor 
(18 10-1880), a member of the Society of Orthodox Friends, and 
he provided that the trustees also should be members, but 
otherwise Bryn Mawr College is non-sectarian. It was incor- 
porated in j 880, and was opened for instruction in 1885. In 
1908 it had 419 students. 

BRYOPHYTA, the botanical name of the second great sub- 
division of the vegetable kingdom, which includes the mosses 
and liverworts. They are all plants of small, often minute, 
size, and, as the absence of popular names indicates, the different 
kinds are not commonly recognized. Even the distinction 
between liverworts and mosses is not clearly made, not only the 
former but other small plants of higher groups being popularly 
called mosses. A little careful observation soon shows, however, 
that the Bryophytes form a well-defined class., including several 
subordinate groups. Though their study necessarily involves 
minute observation they possess many features of interest. The 
adaptations they show to their conditions of life are often very 
perfect and present interesting analogies with the adaptive 
characters of the higher plants. They are of great scientific 
interest not only as representing a special type of life-history 
and organization, but because in several of the subordinate 
groups series of forms can be traced, which enable the general 
course, of their evolution to be inferred even in the practical 
absence of fossil remains of any antiquity. 



Bryophytes are very generally distributed over the earth, 
and those of a single country, such as Britain, afford examples 
of all the chief natural groups. Sometimes, as is the case with the 
bog-mosses and some arctic mosses, they may cover considerable 
tracts. As a rule, however, they occupy a subordinate place 
in the vegetation, and the different kinds require to be carefully 
looked for. Covering, as they often do, what would otherwise 
be bare ground, they are of value in assisting to retain moisture 
in the soil and in preparing the way for its colonization by higher 
plants. Although many forms are capable of withstanding 
periods of drought they succeed best in relatively moist climates 
and localities. This is shown both by their unequal abundance 
in different localities of one country and in their scarcity in 
certain geographical regions as compared with their luxuriance 
in others. 

The external appearance and general organization show great 
variety. In all mosses and many liverworts (figs. 8, 11) the plant 
consists of a stem bearing small leaves. In a number of liverworts 
(figs. 2, 7), on the other hand, it presents no distinction of stem and 
leaf, but is a flat, dorsiventral body usually closely applied to the 
substratum on which it grows. This, in contradistinction to the 
leafy shoot, is termed a thallus. True roots are never present, the 
plants being attached to the soil by rhizoids, which resemble the 
root-hairs of higher plants. 

The reproductive organs borne by the thallus or plant are called 
antheridia and archegonia, and serve for sexual reproduction. The 
antheridium (figs. 5, 15) has a longer or shorter stalk and consists of 
a wall formed of a single layer of flat cells enclosing a mass of minute 
cells from which the spermatozoids are developed. In the cases 
which have been most carefully investigated two spermatozoids 
have been found to arise from each of the small cubical cells of the 
central tissue. When mature the antheridium opens on being 
moistened and the spermatozoids become free in the water by the 
dissolution of the mucilaginous cell-walls enclosing them. Each 
has the form (fig. 5, D) of a more or less spirally twisted, club-shaped 
body, bearihg at the pointed anterior end two long cilia by means 
of which it moves through the water. The archegonium (fig. 1) has 




Fig. 1. — Archegonia of Marchantia polymorpha. (After Sachs.) 



1. Mature but unopened arche- 

gonium. e, Ovum ; b, ven- 
tral-canal cell; d, lid-cells of 3. 
neck. 

2. Archegonium ready for fer- 

tilization; a passage leads 



down to the rounded 
ovum e. 
Archegonium after fertiliza- 
tion; the fertilized ovum is 
developing into a sporo- 
gonium/; d, perianth. 



the form of a narrow flask with a long neck. It usually has a short 
stalk and consists of a central row of cells enclosed by a layer of cells 
forming the wall. The egg-cell or ovum lies within the wider basal 
region or venter, and above it come the ventral canal-cell and canal- 
cells within the neck of the archegonium. When the archegonium 
opens by the separation of the cells at the tip, the disorganized 
canal-cells escape, leaving a narrow tubular passage leading down 
to the ovum. Each antheridium or archegonium arises from a single 
cell, and while the mature structure is similar in the two groups, 
the development presents differences in liverworts and mosses. 
Without entering into details it may be mentioned that in the 
mosses it proceeds both in the archegonium and antheridium by the 
segmentation of an apical cell, while this is not the case in the liver- 
worts. Fertilization is effected by the passage of a spermatozoid, 
attracted probably by means of a chemical stimulus, down the 
passage of the archegonial neck and its fusion with the ovum. It 
thus, as in other cases of sexual reproduction, involves the union of 



BRYOPHYTA 



701 



two cells, and the vegetative plant; since it bears the sexual organs, 
is called the sexual generation or gametophyte. 

From the fertilized ovum another and very different stage arises, 
which remains attached to the sexual plant and has thus the appear- 
ance of a fruit borne on it. It consists of a capsule usually borne 
on a longer or shorter stalk or seta, the base of which is inserted 
into the tissues of the gametophyte. This basal region, which 
serves to absorb nourishment, is called the foot. Within the capsule 
numerous reproductive cells, the spores, are developed. In contrast 
to the sexual generation this stage is called the spore-bearing genera- 
tion (sporogonium, sporophyte). The examination of any moss " in 
fruit " (fig. 11, B) will show the readily detachable sporogonium 
borne on the leafy sexual plant, and the relation existing between 
the two generations will be evident from figs. 2, 3, 9, and 16. In 
liverworts (with one or two exceptions) the mature capsule is filled 
with spores mingled with sterile cells or elaters and opens by splitting 
into valves. In mosses (fig. 11, C) the sporogonium is more highly 
organized; a central column of sterile tissue (the columella) is 
found in the capsule, which opens by the removal of a lid or oper- 
culum, and there are no elaters among the spores. By the opening 
of the capsule the spores are set free, and under suitable conditions 
germinate and give rise to the sexual generation. In mosses (fig. 12) 
a filamentous growth, the protonema, is first formed, and the leafy 
plants arise upon this. In liverworts this preliminary phase of the 
sexual generation is as a rule ill-marked or absent, and the plant 
may be said to develop directly from the spore. 

It will be evident that the two generations exhibit a regular 
succession or alternation in the life-history of all Bryophytes. The 
gametophyte is developed from the spore and bears the sexual organs ; 
the sporogonium is developed from the fertilized egg and produces 
spores. An important cytological difference between the two genera- 
tions can only be mentioned here. By the union of the nuclei of 
the spermatozoid and ovum in fertilization the number of chromo- 
somes in the resulting nucleus is doubled, and this double number 
is maintained throughout all the cell-divisions of the sporogonium. 
On the development of the spores, which takes place by the division 
of each spore-mother-cell into four, the number of chromosomes 
becomes one half of what it has been in all the nuclei of the sporo- 
gonium. This reduced number is maintained throughout the 
development of the sexual generation. Thus in Pellia the nuclei 
of the gametophyte have eight chromosomes and those of the 
sporophyte sixteen. The relation in which the two generations 
stand to one another is the most important common characteristic 
of the Bryophyta. The gametophyte is always the independently 
living individual upon which the spore-bearing generation is through- 
out its life dependent. In all plants higher than the Bryophyta the 
sporophyte becomes an independently rooted plant and is the 
conspicuous stage in the life-history. Thus in the fern the sexual 
generation is the small prothallus developed from the spore, while 
the familiar fern-plant is the spore-bearing generation (see Pterido- 
ph yta) . On the other hand a corresponding alternation of generations 
is only indicated in the lower plants (Thallophyta). 

The Bryophyta are divided into the Hepaticae (liverworts) 
and Musci (mosses). In the Hepaticae we can recognize three 
subordinate groups — the Marchantiales, Jungermanniales and 
Anthocerotales; and in the Musci also three groups — the Sphag- 
nales, Andreaeales and Bryales. Since these series of forms 
differ considerably among themselves, it is difficult to express 
in a definition the distinction between a liverwort and a moss 
which is readily made in practice. We may therefore leave it 
to the description of the several groups of Hepaticae and Musci 
to supplement the differences mentioned above and to bring out 
the exceptions which exist. 

Hepaticae (Liverworts) . 

The range of form and structure of both generations in the 
liverworts is so great that no one form can be taken as a satis- 
factory type. It will, however, be of use to preface the more 
general description by a brief account of a particular example, 
and we may take for this purpose a very common and easily 
recognized thalloid liverwort belonging to the Junger- 
manniales. 

Pellia epiphylla (fig. 2) can be found at any season growing 
in large patches on the damp soil of woods, banks, &c. The broad 
flat thallus is green and may be a couple of inches long. It is 
sparingly branched, the branching being apparently dichoto- 
mous; the growing point is situated in a depression at the 
anterior end of each branch. The wing-like lateral portions 
of the thallus gradually thin out from the midrib; from the 
projecting lower surface of this numerous rhizoids spring. 
These are elongated superficial cells, and serve to fix the thallus 
to the soil and obtain water and salts from it. No leaf-like 




appendages are borne on the thallus, but short glandular hairs 
occur behind the apex. The plant is composed throughout 
of very similar living cells, the more superficial ones contain- 
ing numerous chlorophyll grains, while starch is stored in the 
internal cells of the midrib. The cells contain a number of oil- 
bodies the function of which is imperfectly understood. The 
growth of the thallus proceeds by the regular segmentation of a 
single apical cell. The sexual 
organs are borne on the 
upper surface, and both 
antheridia and archegonia 
occur on the same branch 
(fig. 3, A). The antheridia 
(an) are scattered over the 
middle region of the thallus, 
and each is surrounded by 
a tubular upgrowth from 
the surface. The archegonia 
(ar) are developed in a 
group behind the apex, and 
the latter continues to grow 
for a time after their forma- 
tion, so that they come to 
be seated in a depression 
of the upper surface. They 
are further protected by 

the growth of the hinder margin of the depression to form 
a scale-like involucre (in) . Fertilization takes place about June, 
and the sporogonium is fully developed by the winter. The 
embryo developed from the fertilized ovum consists at first 
of a number of tiers of cells. Its terminal tier gives rise to the 
capsule, the first divisions in the four cells of the tier marking 
off the wall of the capsule from the cells destined to produce the 
spores. In fig-. 4, C, which represents a longitudinal section of 
a young embryo of Pellia, these archesporial cells are shaded. 
The tiers below give rise to the seta and foot. The mature 
sporogonium (fig. 3, B) consists of the foot embedded in the 
tissue of the thallus, the seta, which remains short until just 
before the shedding of the spores, and the spherical capsule. 
It remains for long enclosed within the calyptra formed by the 
further development of the archegonial wall and surmounted 
by the neck of the archegonium. The calyptra is ultimately 
burst through, and in early spring the seta elongates rapidly, 
raising the dark-coloured capsule (fig. 2). In the young con- 
dition the wall of the capsule, which consists of two layers of 
cells, encloses a mass of similar cells developed from the arche- 
sporium. Some of these become spore-mother-cells and give 
rise by cell division to four spores, while others remain undivided 
and become the elaters. The latter are elongated spindle-shaped 



From Cooke, Handbook oj British Hepaticae.. 

Fig. 2. — Pellia epiphylla. Group 
of plants bearing mature sporogonia. 




Fig. 3. — Pellia epiphylla, 

A, Longitudinal section of thallus 

at the time of fertilization. 
an, Antheridia; ar, arche- 
gonia; in, involucre. 

B, Longitudinal section of almost 



mature sporogonium at- 
tached to the thallus. in, 
Involucre; col, calyptra; 
/, foot; s, seta; caps, cap- 
sule (semi-diagrammatic). 



cells with thick brown spiral bands on the inside of their thin 
walls. They radiate out from a small plug of sterile cells pro- 
jecting into the base of the capsule, and some are attached to 
this, while others lie free among the spores. The latter are large, 
and at first are unicellular; but in Pellia, which in this respect 
is exceptional, they commence their further development 
within the capsule, and thus consist of several cells when shed. 



702 



BRYOPHYTA 



The cells of the capsule wall have incomplete, brown, thickened 
rings on their walls, and the capsule opens by splitting into four 
valves, which bend away from one another, allowing the loose 
spores to be readily dispersed by the wind, assisted by the hygro- 
scopic movements of the elaters. On falling upon damp soil 
the spores germinate, growing into a thallus, which gradually 
attains its full size and bears sexual organs. 

While the general course of the life-history of all liverworts re- 
sembles that of Pellia, the three great groups into which they are 
divided differ from one another in the characters of both genera- 
tions. Each group exhibits a series leading from more simple to 
more highly organized forms, and the differentiation has proceeded 
on distinct and to some extent divergent lines in the three groups. 
The Marchantiales are a series of thalloid forms, in which the 
structure of the thallus is specialized to enable them to live in 
more exposed situations. The lowest members of the series 
(Riccia) possess the simplest sporogonia known, consisting of a 
wall of one layer of cells enclosing the spores. In the higher forms 
a sterile foot and seta is present, and sterile cells or elaters occur 
with the spores. The lower members of the Jungermanniales are 
also thalloid, but the thallus never has the complicated structure 
characteristic of theMarchantiales,and progress is in the direction 
of the differentiation of the plant into stem and leaf. Indications 

of how this may 
have come about 
are afforded by the 
lower group of the 
Anacrogynous Jun- 
germanniaceae, and 
throughout the 
Acrogynous Junger- 
manniacae the 
plant has well- 
marked stem and 
leaves. The sporo- 
gonium even in the 
simplest forms has 
a sterile foot, but in 
this series also the 
origin of elaters 
from sterile cells can 
be traced. The 
Anthocerotales are 
a small and very 
distinct group, in 
which the gameto- 
phyte is a thallus, 
while the sporo- 
and is capable of 
The mode of 




Fig. 4. — Semi-diagrammatic figures of 
young embryos of Liverworts in longitudinal 
section. The cells which will produce the 
sporogenous tissue are shaded. (After Kienitz- 
Gerloff and Leitgeb.) 

A, Riccia. D, Anthoceros laevis. 

B, Marchantia poly- E, Cephalozia bicus- 

morpha. pidata. 

C, Pellia epiphylla. F, Radula complanata. 

gonium possesses a sterile columella 
long-continued growth and spore production 
development of the sporogonium presents important differences 
in the three series that may be briefly referred to here. In 
fig. 4 young sporogonia of a number of liverworts are shown in 
longitudinal section, and the archesporial cells from which the 
spores and elaters will arise are shaded. In Riccia (fig. 4, A) the 
whole mass of cells derived from the ovum forms a spherical 
capsule, the only sterile tissue being the single layer of peripheral 
cells forming the wall. In other Marchantiales (fig. 4, B) the 
lower half of the embryo separated by the first transverse wall 
(1,1) forms the sterile foot and seta, while in the upper half (ka) 
the peripheral layer forms the wall of the capsule, enclosing the 
archesporial cells from which spores and elaters arise. In the 
Jungermanniales (fig. 4, C, E, F) the embryo is formed of a 
number of tiers of cells, and the archesporium is defined by the 
first divisions parallel to the surface in the cells of one or more of 
the upper tiers; a number of tiers go to form the seta and foot, 
while the lowest segment (a) usually forms a small appendage of 
the latter. In the Anthocerotales (fig. 4, D) the lowest tiers 
form the foot, and the terminal tier the capsule. The first 
periclinal divisions in the cells of the terminal tier separate a 
central group of cells which form the sterile columella (col) . The 
archesporium arises by the next divisions in the outer layer of 



cells, and thus extends over the summit of the columella. In 
none of the liverworts does the sporogonium develop by means of 
an apical cell, as is the rule in mosses. 

Leaving details of form and structure to be considered under 
the several groups, some general features of the Hepaticae may be 
looked at here in relation to the conditions under which the plants 
live. The organization of the gametophyte stands in the closest 
relation to the factors of light and moisture in the environment. 
With hardly an exception the liverworts are dorsiventral, and 
usually one side is turned to the substratum and the other exposed 
to the light. In thalloid forms a thinner marginal expansion or a 
definite wing increasing the surface exposed to the light can be 
distinguished' from a thicker midrib serving for storage and 
conduction. The leaves and stem of the foliose forms effect the 
same division of labour in another way. The relation of the plant 
to its water supply varies within the group. In the Marchantiales 
the chief supply is obtained from the soil by the rhizoids, and its 
loss in transpiration is regulated and controlled. In most liver- 
worts, on the other hand, water is absorbed directly by the whole 
general surface, and the rhizoids are of subordinate importance. 
Many forms only succeed in a constantly humid atmosphere, 
while others sustain drying for a period, though their powers of 
assimilation and growth are suspended in the dry state. The 
cell-walls are capable of imbibing water rapidly, and their thick- 
ness stands in relation to this rather than to the prevention of loss 
of water from the plant. The large surface presented by the 
leafy forms facilitates the retention and absorption of water. 
The importance of prolonging the moistened condition as long 
as possible is further shown by special adaptations to retain 
water either between the appressed lobes of the leaves or in 
special pitcher-like sacs. In thalloid forms fimbriate or lobed 
margins or outgrowths from the surface lead to the same result. 
Sometimes adaptations to protect the plant during seasons of 
drought, such as the rolling up of the thallus in many xerophytic 
Marchantiales, can be recognized, but more often a prolonged dry 
season is survived in some resting state. The formation of sub- 
terranean tubers, which persist when the rest of the plant is 
killed by drought, is an interesting adaptation to this end, and is 
found in all three groups (e.g. in species of Riccia, Fossombronia 
and Anthoceros). No examples of total saprophytism or of 
parasitism are known, but two interesting cases of a symbiosis 
with other organisms which is probably a mutually beneficial one, 
though the nature of the physiological relation between the 
organisms is not clearly established, may be mentioned. Fungal 
hyphae occur in the rhizoids and in the cells of the lower region 
of the thallus of many liverworts, as in the endotrophic mycorhiza 
of higher plants. Colonies of Nostoc are constantly found in the 
Anthocerotaceae and in Blasia. In the latter they are protected 
by special concave scales, while in the Anthocerotaceae they 
occupy some of the mucilage slits between the cells of the lower 
surface of the thallus. 

Other adaptations concern the protection of the sexual organs 
and sporogonia, and the retention of water in the neighbourhood 
of the archegonia to enable the spermatozoid to reach the ovum. 
In thalloid forms the sexual organs are often sunk in depressions, 
while in the foliose forms protection is afforded by the surrounding 
leaves. In addition special involucres around the archegonia 
have arisen independently in several series. The characters of 
the sporogonium have as their object the nutrition and effective 
distribution of the spores, and only exceptionally, as in the 
Anthocerotaceae, are concerned with independent assimilation. 
In most forms the capsule is raised above the general surface at 
the time of opening, usually by the rapid growth of the seta, but 
in the Marchantiaceae by the sporogonia being raised on a special 
archegoniophore. The elaters serve as lines of conduction of 
plastic material to the developing spores, and later usually assist 
in their dispersal. The spores, with few exceptions, are unicellular 
when shed, and may develop at once or after a resting period. 
In their germination a short filament of a few cells is usually 
developed, and the apical cell of the plant is established in the 
terminal cell. In other cases a small plate or mass of cells is 
formed. With one or two exceptions, however, this preliminary 



BRYOPHYTA 



703 



phase, which may be compared with the protonema of mosses, is 
of short duration. 

The power of vegetative propagation is widely spread. When 
artificially divided small fragments of the gametophyte are found 
to be capable of growing into new individuals. Apart from the 
separation of branches by the decay of older portions, special 
gemmae are found in many species. In Aneura the contents of 
superficial cells, after becoming surrounded by a new wall and 
dividing, escape as bi-cellular gemmae. Usually the gemmae 
arise by the outgrowth of superficial cells, and become free by 
breaking away from their stalk. When separated they may be 
single cells or consist of two or numerous cells. In Blasia and 
Marchantia the gemmae are formed within tubular or cup-shaped 
receptacles, out of which they are forced by the swelling of 
mucilage secreted by special hairs. 

Marchantiales. — The plants of this group are most abundant in 
warm sunny localities, and grow for the most part on soil or rocks 
often in exposed situations. Nine genera are represented in Britain. 
Targionia is found on exposed rocks, but the other forms are less 
strikingly xerophytic; Marchantia, polymorphs, and Lunularia 
spread largely by the gemmae formed in the special gemma-cups on 
the thallus, and occur commonly in greenhouses. The large thallus 
of Conocephalus covers stones by the waterside, while Dumortiera 
is a hygrophyte confined to damp and shady situations. Among 
the Ricciaceae, most of which grow on soil; Ricciocarpus and Riccia 
nutans occur floating on still water. The dorsiventral thallus is 
constructed on the same plan throughout the group, and shows a 
lower region composed of cells containing little chlorophyll and an 
upper stratum specialized for assimilation and transpiration. The 
lower region usually forms a more or less clearly marked midrib, 
and consists of parenchymatous cells, some of which may contain 
oil-bodies or be differentiated as mucilage cells or sclerenchyma 
fibres. Behind the apex, which has a number of initial cells, a 
series of amphigastria or ventral scales is formed. These consist 
of a single layer of cells, and their terminal appendages often fold 
over the apex and protect it. Usually they stand in two rows, but 
sometimes accessory rows occur, and in Riccia only a single median 
row is present. The thallus bears two sorts of rhizoids, wider ones 
with smooth walls which grow directly down into the soil, and longer, 
narrower ones, with peg-like thickenings of the wall projecting into 
the cell-cavity. The peg-rhizoids, which are peculiar to the group, 
converge under shelter of the amphigastria to the midrib, berjeath 
which they form a wick-like strand. Through this water is conducted 
by capillarity as well as in the cell cavities. The upper stratum of 
the thallus is constructed to regulate the giving off of the water thus 
absorbed. It consists of a series of air-chambers (fig. 6, B) formed 
by certain lines of the superficial cells growing up from the surface, 
and as the thallus increases in area continuing to divide so as to roof 
in the chamber. The layer forming the roof is called the " epi- 
dermis," and the small opening left leading into the chamber is 
bounded by a special ring of cells and forms the " stoma " or air-pore. 
In most species of Riccia the air-chambers are only narrow passages, 
but in the other Marchantiales they are more extended. In the 




Fig. 5. — Marchantia polymorpha. (After Sachs.) 

A. Portion of thallus (/) bearing surface (o) ; b, scales; h, 

twostalkedantheridiophores rhizoids. 

(hu). C. Longitudinalsectionofanther- 

B. Longitudinal section through idium; st, stalk; w, 

a young antheridiophore. wall. 

The antheridia (a) are seated D. Twospermatozoids. 

in depressions of the upper 

simplest cases the sides and base of the chambers perform the work 
of assimilation (e.g. Corsinia). Usually the surface is extended by 
the development of partitions in the chambers (Reboulia), or by the 
growth from the floor of the chamber of short filaments of chloro- 
phyllous cells (Targionia. Marchantia, fig. 6). The stomata may be 
simply surrounded by one or more series of narrower cells, or, as in 
the thallus of Marchantia and on the archegoniophores of other 



forms, may become barrel-shaped structures by the division of the 
ring of cells bounding the pore. In some cases the lowermost circle 
of cells can be approximated so as to close the pore. In Dumortiera 
the air-chambers are absent, their formation being only indicated 
at the apex. 

The sexual organs are always situated on the morphologically 
upper surface of the thallus. In Riccia they are scattered singly 
and protected by the air-chamber layer. The scattered position of 
the antheridia is also found in some of the higher forms, but usually 




From Strasburger's Text-book oj Botany. 

Fig. 6. — Marchantia polymorpha. A, Stoma in surface view. 
B, Air-chamber with the filaments of assimilating cells and stoma 
in vertical section. 

they are grouped on special antheridiophores which in Marchantia 
are stalked, disk-shaped branch-systems (fig. 5). The individual 
antheridia are sunk in depressions from which the spermatozoids 
are in some cases forcibly ejected. The archegonial groups in 
Corsinia are sunk in a depression of the upper surface, while in 
Targionia they are displaced to the lower side of the anterior end 
of a branch. In all the other forms they are borne on special arche- 
goniophores which have the form of a disk-shaped head borne on a 
stalk. The archegoniophore may be an upgrowth from the dorsal 
surface of the thallus (e.g. Plagiochasma) , or the apex of the branch 
may take part in its formation. When the disk, around which 
archegonia are developed at intervals, is simply raised on a stalk-like 
continuation of the branch, a single groove protecting a strand of 
peg-rhizoids is found on the ventral face of the stalk {Reboulia). 
In the highest forms {e.g. Marchantia) the archegoniophore corre- 
sponds to the repeatedly branched continuation of the thallus, and 
the archegonia arise in relation to the growing points which are 
displaced to the lower surface of the disk. In this case two grooves 
are found in the stalk. The archegonia are protected by being sunk 
in depressions of the disk or by a special two-lipped involucre. 
In Marchantia and Fimbriaria an additional investment termed in 
descriptive works the perianth, grows up around each fertilized 
archegonium (fig. 1, 3, d). The simple sporogonium found in the 
Ricciaceae (fig. 4, A) has been described above; as the spores 
develop, the wall of the spherical capsule is absorbed and the spores 
lie free in the calyptra, by the decay of which they are set free. In 
Corsinia the capsule has a well-developed foot, but the sterile cells 
found among the spore-mother-cells do not become elaters, but 
remain thin-walled and simply contribute to the nutrition of the 
spores. In all other forms elaters with spirally thickened walls are 
found. The seta is short, the capsule being usually raised upon the 
archegoniophore. Dehiscence takes place either by the upper 
portion of the capsule splitting into short teeth or falling away as a 
whole or in fragments as a sort of operculum. The spores on germina- 
tion form a short germ-tube, in the terminal cell of which the apical 
cell is established, but the direction of growth of the young thallus 
is usually not in the same straight line as the germ-tube. The 
Marchantiales are divided into a number of groups which represent 
distinct lines of advance from forms like the Ricciaceae, but the 
details of their classification cannot be entered upon here. The 
general nature of the progression exhibited by the group as a whole 
will, however, be evident from the above account. 

Jungermanniales. — This large series of liverworts, which presents 
great variety in the organization of the sexual generation, is divided 
into two main groups according to whether the formation of arche- 
gonia terminates the growth of the branch or does not utilize the 
apex. The latter condition is characteristic of the more primitive 
group of the Anacrogynous Jungermanniaceae, in which the branch 
continues its growth after the formation of archegonia so that they 
(and later the sporogonia) stand on the dorsal surface of the thallus 
or leafy plant. In the Acrogynous JungermanniaceSe the plant is 
throughout foliose, and the archegonia occupy the ends of the main 
shoot or of its branches. The antheridia are usually globular and 
long-stalked. The capsule opens by splitting into four halves. 

Jungermanniaceae Anacrogynae. — The great range of form in the 
sexual plant is well illustrated by the nine genera of this group 



7°4 



BRYOPHYTA 



which occur in Britain. One thalloid form has already been described 
in Pellia (fig. 2). Sphaerocarpus, which occurs rarely in stubble 
fields, is in many respects one of the simplest of the liverworts. 
The small thallus bears the antheridia and archegonia, each of which 
is surrounded by a tubular involucre, on the upper surface of distinct 
individuals. The sporogonium has a small foot, but the sterile cells 
among the spores do not develop into elaters. The same is true of 
the capsule of Riella. The plants of this genus, none of the species 
of which are British, grow in shallow water rooted in the mud, and 
are unlike all other liverworts in appearance. The usually erect 
thallus has a broad wing-like outgrowth from the dorsal surface and 
two rows of rather large scales below. No provision for the opening 
of the capsule exists in either of these genera. In Anetira the form 
of the plant may be complicated by a division of labour between 
root-like, stem-like and assimilating branches of the thallus. The 
sexual organs are borne on short lateral branches, while in the related 
genus Metzgeria, which occurs on rocks and tree trunks, the small 
sexual branches spring from the lower surface of the midrib of the 
narrow thallus. In these two genera the elaters are attached to a 
sterile group of cells projecting into the upper end of the Capsule, 
and on dehiscence remain connected with the_ tips of the valves. 
Pallavicinia and some related genera have a definite midrib and broad 
wings formed of one layer of cells, and are of interest owing to the 
presence of a special water-conducting strand in the midrib. This 
consists of elongated lignified cells with pitted walls. Blasia pusilla, 
which occurs commonly by ditches and streams, affords a transition 
to the foliose types. Its thallus (fig. 7) has thin marginal lobes of 
limited growth, which are comparable to the more definite leaves of 
other anacrogynous forms. The ventral surface bears flat scales in 
addition to the concave scales which, as mentioned above, are in- 
habited by Nostoc. This interesting liverwort produces two kinds of 

gemmae, and in the localities in 
which it grows is largely reproduced 
by their means. In Fossombronia, 
of which there are a number of 
British species, the plant consists 
of a flattened stem creeping on 
muddy soil and bearing two rows of 
large obliquely-placed leaves. The 
sexual organs are borne on the 
upper surface of the midrib, and the 
sporogonium is surrounded by a bell- 
shaped involucre which grows up 
after fertilization. Treubia, which 
grows on rotting wood in the moun- 
tain forests of Java, is similarly 
differentiated into stem and leaf, 
and is the largest liverwort known, 
reaching a length of thirty centi- 
metres. Lastly Haplomitrium, a rare 
British genus, forms with the exotic 
Calobryum, an isolated group which 
is most naturally placed among the 
anacrogynous forms although the 
archegonia are in terminal groups. 
The erect branches bear three rows of leaves, and spring from a 
creeping axis from which root-like branches destitute of rhizoids 
extend into the substratum. 

Jungermanniaceae Acrogynae.- — The plant consists of leafy shoots, 
the origin of which can be understood in the light of the foliose forms 
described above. The great majority of existing liverworts belong 
to this group, the general plan of construction of which is throughout 
very similar. In Britain thirty-nine genera with numerous species 
are found. With few exceptions the stem grows by means of a 
pyramidal apical cell cutting off three rows of segments. Each 
segment gives rise to a leaf, but usually the leaves of the ventral 
row (amphigastria) are smaller and differently shaped from those 
of the two lateral rows; in a number of genera they are wanting 
altogether. Sometimes the leaves retain their transverse insertion 
on the stem, and the two lobes of which they consist are developed 
equally. More often they come to be obliquely inserted, the anterior 
edge of each leaf lying Under or over the edge of the leaf in front. 
The two lobes are often unequally developed. In Scapania the 
upper lobe is the smaller, while in Radula, Porella and the Lejeuneae 
this is the case with the lower lobe. The folding of one lobe against 
another assists in the retention of water. Pitcher-like structures 
have arisen in different ways in a number of genera, and are especially 
common in epiphytic forms (Frullania, Lepidolaena, Pleurozia). 
In some forms the leaves are finely divided, and along with the hair- 
like paraphyllia form a loose weft around the stem (Trichocolea). 
The rhizoids spring from the lower surface of the stem, and sometimes 
from the bases of the leaves. The branches arise below and by the 
side of the leaves. 

The sexual organs may occur on the same or on distinct individuals! 
The antheridia are protected by leaves which are often modified in 
shape. The archegonia are borne at the apex of the main stem or of 
a lateral branch. A single archegonium may arise from the apical 
cell (Lejeunea); more commonly a number of others are formed 
from the surrounding segments. The leaves below the archegonial 
group are frequently modified in size and shape, but the chief pro- 




From Strasburger's Text-book 0} Bo- 
tany. 

Fig. 7. — Blasia pusilla. 
The margin of the thallus 
bears leaf-like lobes. 7, Rhi- 
zoids; s, sporogonium. 



tection is afforded by a tubular perianth, which corresponds to a 
coherent whorl of leaves and grows up independently of fertilization. 
The perianth serves also to enclose and protect the sporogonium 
during its development. In a number of forms belonging to different 
groups the end of the stem on which the sporogonium is borne grows 




Fig. 8. — Chiloscyphus polyanthos. The plant bears three mature 
sporogonia which show the elongation of the seta. One of the 
sporogonia has opened. B, The " perianth " with the small peri- 
chaetial leaves below it. (After Goebel.) 

downwards so as to form a hollow tubular sac enclosing the sporo- 
gonium ; in other cases this marsupial sac is formed by the base of 
the sporogonium boring into the thickened end of the stem. The 
sac usually penetrates into the soil and bears rhizoids on its outer 
surface. Kantia, Calypogeia and Saccogyna are British forms, 
which have their sporogonia protected in this way. The sporogonium 
is ve.ry similar throughout the group (figs. 8, 9). At maturity the 
seta elongates rapidly, and the wall of the capsule splits more or less 
completely into four valves, allowing the elaters and spores to escape. 
In the lubuloideae, which in other respects form a well-marked 
group, the seta is short and the elaters extend from the upper part 
of the capsule to the base; at dehiscence they remain fixed to the 
valves into which the capsule splits. The germinating spore usually 
forms a short filament, but 
in other cases a flat plate 
of cells growing by a two- 
sided apical cell is first 
formed {Radula, Lejeunea). 
In one or two tropical forms 
the pro-embryonic stage is 
prolonged, and leafy shoots 
only arise in connexion 
with the sexual organs. 
In Protocephalozia, which 
grows on bare earth in 
South America, this pro- 
embryo is filamentous, while 
in Lejeunea Metzgeriopsis, 
which grows on the leaves 
of living plants, it is a flat 
branched thalius closely 
applied to the substratum. 
Other cases of the plant 
being, with the exception 
of the sexual branches, 
apparently thalloid, are on 
the other hand to be ex- Fig. 9. — Cephalozia bicuspidata. 
plained as due to the re- Longitudinal section of the summit of a 
duction of the leaves and shoot bearing a nearly mature sporo- 
flattening of the stem of a gonium, sg, still enclosed in the cal- 
shoot (Pteropsiella,Zoopsis). yptra; or , archegonia which have re- 

The Acrogynous Junger- mained unfertilized; st, stem; ft, leaf, 
manniaceae fall into a p, perianth. (After Hofmeister.) 
number of natural groups, 

which cannot, however, be followed out here. They occur in 
very various situations, on the ground, on rocks and stones, on 
tree trunks, and, in the damp tropics, on leaves. Usually they form 
larger or smaller tufts of a green colour, but some forms have a 
reddish tint. 

Anthocerotales. — This small and very natural group includes the 
three genera Anthoceros, Dendroceros and Notothyias, and stands in 




BRYOPHYTA 



705 




many respects in an isolated position among the Bryophyta. Three 
species of Anthoceros occur in Britain, growing on the damp soil of 
fields, ditches, &c. The dark green thallus has an ill-defined midrib, 
and is composed of parenchymatous cells. In each assimilating cell 
there is usually a single large chloroplast. The apical region, which 
has a single initial cell, is protected by mucilage secreted by the 
mucilage slits, which are small pit-like depressions between superficial 
cells of the lower surface. Mucilage is also often formed in inter- 
cellular spaces within the thallus. Colonies of Nostoc are constantly 
found living in some of the mucilage slits which then become enlarged. 
The sexual organs are scattered over the upper surface. The stalked 
globular antheridia are exceptional in being formed endogenously, 
and are situated in groups in special intercellular spaces. The 
superficial layer of cells bounding the 
cavity does not break down until the 
antheridia are nearly mature. Occasion- 
ally antheridia develop on the surface of 
shaded portions of the thallus. The 
necks of the archegonia hardly project 
above the general surface of the thallus. 
In structure and development they agree 
with other Hepaticae, though differ- 
ences of detail exist. The young sporo- 
gonium is protected by a thick calyptra 
derived from the tissue of the thallus 
around the archegonium. The sporo- 
From strasburger's Text-book of gonium consists of a large bulbous foot, 
Botany. the superficial cells of which grow out 

Fig. 10. — Anthoceros into processes, and a long capsule, 
laevis. sp, Sporogonium ; which continues to grow for months by 
c columella. the activity of a zone of cells be- 

' tween it and the foot, and may attain 

the length of an inch and a half. The wall of the capsule is 
several layers of cells thick, and since the epidermis contains 
functional stomata and the underlying cells possess chlorophyll it is 
capable of assimilation. In the centre of the capsule is a strand of 
narrow elongated cells forming the columella, and between this 
and the wall spores mixed with elaters are formed from the dome- 
shaped archesporium, the origin of which has already been described 
(fig. 4, D). The capsule opens by splitting into two valves from the 
apex downwards, and the mature spores escape while others are 
developing in succession below. In Dendroceros, which grows as an 
epiphyte in the tropics, the thallus has a well-defined midrib and 
broad wings composed of a single layer of cells. The capsule is 
similar to that of Anthoceros, but has no stomata, and the elaters 
have spirally thickened walls. Some species of Anthoceros agree 
with it in these respects. Nolothylas resembles Anthoceros in its 
thallus, but the sporogonium is much smaller. In some species, 
although the columella and archesporium arise in the usual way, 
both give rise to mingled spores and elaters, and no sterile columella 
is developed. 

Musci (Mosses). 

Though the number of species of mosses is far greater than of 
liverworts, the group offers much less diversity of form. The 
sexual generation is always a leafy plant, which is not developed 
directly from the spore but is borne on a well-marked and usually 
filamentous protonema. The general course of the life-history 
and the main features of form and structure will be best under- 
stood by a brief account of a particular example. 

Funaria hygrometrica is a moss of very common occurrence 
even in towns on the soil of paths, at the foot of walls and in 
similar places. The small plants grow closely crowded in tufts, 
and consist of short leafy shoots attached to the soil by numerous 
fine rhizoids. The latter, in contrast to the rhizoids of liverworts, 
are composed of rows of elongated cells and are branched. The 
leaves are simple, and except for the midrib are only one layer 
of cells thick. The structure of the stem though simple is more 
complicated than in any liverwort. The superficial cells are 
thick-walled, and there is a central strand of narrow cells forming 
a water-conducting tissue. The small strand of elongated cells 
in the midrib of the leaf runs down into the stem, but is not 
usually connected with the central strand. The sexual organs 
are developed in groups at the apices, the antheridial group 
usually terminating the main axis while the archegonia are borne 
on a lateral branch. The brown tint of the hair-like paraphyses 
mixed with antheridia (fig. 15) makes the male branch con- 
spicuous, while the archegonia have to be carefully looked for 
enclosed by the surrounding leaves (fig. 16, B). The sporogonium 
developed from the fertilized ovum grows by means of a two- 
sided apical cell (fig. 16 A), and is at first of uniform thickness. 
After a time the upper region increases in diameter and forms 

rV. »j 




the capsule, while the lower portion forms the long seta and the 
foot which is embedded in the end of the stem. With the growth 
of the sporogonium the archegonial wall, which for a time kept 
pace with it, is broken through, 
the larger upperpart terminated 
by the neck being carried up 
on the capsule as the calyptra., 
while the basal portion remains 
as a tubular sheath round the 
lower end of the seta (cf. figs. 
16, C, and fig. 11, A, B). The 
seta widens out at the base of 
the capsule into a region known 
as the apophysis. The peri- 
pheral cells of the seta are 
thick-walled, and it has a 
central strand of elongated 
conducting cells. In the epi- 
dermis of the apophysis func- 
tional stomata, similar to those 
of the higher plants, are present 
and, since cells containing 
chlorophyll are present below 
the superficial layers of the 
apophysis and capsule, the 
sporogonium is capable of inde- 
pendent assimilation. The con- 
struction of the capsule will be 
best understood from the 
median longitudinal section 
(fig. 1 1 , C) . The central region 
extending between the apo- 
physis and the operculum is 
composed of sterile tissue and 
forms the columella {c ) . Im- 
mediately around this is the 
layer of cells from which the 
spores will be developed (s), and the layers of cells on either 
side of this form the walls of the spore-sac, which will contain 
the spores. Between the wall of the capsule, which is composed 
of several layers of cells, and the spore-sac is a wide intercellular 
space (k) bridged across by trabeculae consisting of rows of 
chlorophyll-containing cells. At the junction of the operculum 
(d) with the rest of the capsule is a circle of cells forming the 



(From Goebei's Pflanzenmorphologie, 
permission of W. Engelmann.) 

Fig. 11. — Funaria hygrometrica- 
A, Leafy shoot (g) bearing a 
young sporogonium enclosed 
in the calyptra (c). 
Similar plant with an almost 
mature sporogonium ; s.seta; 
/, capsule ; c, calyptra. 
Median longitudinal section of 
a capsule, with the seta 
gradually widening into the 
apophysis at its base; d, 
operculum; p, peristome; 
a, annulus; c, columella; 
s, archesporium; h, air- 
space between the spore-sac 
and the wall of the capsule. 



B 



C, 




Fig. 12. — Funaria hygrometrica. (After Goebel.) 



with brown walls from which 
the filaments of chlorophyll- 
containing cells (6) arise; .k, 
young moss-plant; w, its first 
rhizoid. 



A, Germinating spores, s, Wall 

of spore; v, vacuole; w, 
rhizoid. 

B, Part of a developed proto- 

nema. h, Creeping filament 

annulus (a), by help of which the operculum is detached at 
maturity as a small lid. Its removal does not, however, leave 
the mouth of the capsule wide open, for around the margin are 
two circles of pointed teeth forming the peristome. These are 
the thickened cell-walls of a definite layer of cells (p), and appear 

11 



706 



BRYOPHYTA 



as separate teeth owing to the breaking down of the unthickened 
cell-walls. The numerous spores which have been developed in 
the spore sac can thus only escape from the pendulous capsule 
through narrow slits between the teeth, and these are closed in 
damp air. The unicellular spores when supplied with moisture 
germinate (fig. 12) and give rise to the sexual generation. A 
filamentous protonema is first developed, some of the branches 
of which are exposed to the light and contain abundant 
chlorophyll, while others penetrate the substratum as brown or 
colourless rhizoids. The moss-plants arise from single project- 
ing cells, and numerous plants may spring from the protonema 
developed from a single spore. 

The majority of the mosses belong to the same great group 
as Funaria, the Bryales. The other two subdivisions of the 
Musci are each represented by a single genus. In the Andreaeales 
the columella does not extend to the upper end of the capsule, 
and the latter opens by a number of lateral slits. The Sphagnales 
also have a dome-shaped spore-sac continued over the columella, 
and, though their capsule opens by an operculum, they differ 
widely from other mosses in the development of the sporogonium 
as well as in the characters of the sexual generation. The three 
groups are described separately below, but some more general 
features of the mosses may be considered here. 

On the whole mosses grow in drier situations than the liver- 
worts, and the arrangements they present for the conduction 
of water in the plant are also more complete and suggest in some 
cases comparisons with the higher plants. In spite of this, 
however, they are in great part dependent on the absorption of 
water through the general surface of the shoot, and the power of 
rapid imbibition possessed by their cell-walls, the crowded 
position of the small leaves on the stem, and special adaptations 
for the retention of water on the surface, have the same signifi- 
cance as in the foliose liverworts. The different appearance of 
exposed mosses in dry weather and after a shower illustrates 
this relation to the water supply. The protonema is always a 
well-marked stage in the life-history. Not only does a moss- 
plant never arise directly from the spore, but in all cases of 
vegetative reproduction, apart from the separation of branches 
by decay of older regions of the plant, a protonema is found. 
Usually the protonema is filamentous and ceases to be evident 
after the plants have developed. But in some small mosses 
(e.g. Ephemerum) it plays the chief part in assimilation and lives 
on from year to year. In Sphagnum, Andreaea and some genera 
of the Bryales the protonema or some of its branches have the 
form of fiat plates or masses of cells. The formation of the 
moss-plant on the protonema is always from a single cell and is 
similar in all mosses. The first three walls in this cell intersect 
one another, and define the three-sided pyramidal apical cell 
by means of which the shoot continues to grow. In Fissidens 
and a few other mosses the apical cell is two-sided. The leaves 
formed by the successive segments gradually attain their normal 
size and structure. Each segment of the initial cell gives rise to 
a leaf and a portion of the stem; the branches arise from the 
lower portion of a segment and stand immediately below a leaf. 
The leaves may form three vertical rows, but usually their 
arrangement, owing to the direction of the segment walls at the 
apex, becomes more complicated. Their growth proceeds by 
means of a two-sided apical cell, and the midrib does not become 
more than one cell thick until later. In addition to the leaves 
the stem often bears hair-like structures of different kinds, some 
of which correspond to modified branches of protonema. The 
branched filamentous rhizoids which spring from the lower 
region of the stem also correspond to protonemal branches. 
The structure of both stem and leaf reaches a high grade of 
organization in some mosses. Not only are thick-walled scleren- 
chymatous cells developed to give rigidity to the periphery of the 
stem and the midrib of the leaf, but in many cases a special 
water-conducting tissue, consisting of elongated cells, the end 
walls of which are thin and oblique, forms a definite central 
strand in the stem. In the forms in which it is most highly 
developed (Polytrichaceae) this tissue, which is comparable 
with the xylem of higher plants, is surrounded by a zone of 



tissue physiologically comparable to phloem, and in the rhizome 
may be limited by an endodermis. The conducting strands in 
the leaves show the same tissues as in the central strand of the 
stem, and in the Polytrichaceae and some other mosses are in 
continuity with it. The independent origin of this conducting 
system is of great interest for comparison with the vascular 
system of the sporophyte of the higher plants. 

The sexual organs, with the exception of the antheridia of 
Sphagnum, are borne at the apices of the main shoot or of 
branches. Their general similarity to the mature antheridia 
and archegonia of liverworts and the main difference in their 
development have been referred to. The antheridia open by 
means of a cap cell or groups of cells with mucilaginous contents. 
The details of construction of the sporogonium are referred to 
below. In all cases (except Archidium) a columella is present, 
and all the cells derived from the archesporium produce spores, 
no elaters being formed. In a few cases the germination of the 
spore commences within the capsule. The development of the 
sporogonium proceeds in all cases (except in Sphagnum) by 
means of an apical cell cutting off two rows of segments. The 
first periclinal division in the region forming the capsule separates 
an inner group of cells (the endothecium) form the peripheral 
layer (amphithecium) . In Sphagnum, as in Anthoceros, the 
archesporium is derived from the amphithecium; in all other 
mosses it is the outermost layer of the endothecium. 

Vegetative propagation is widely spread in the mosses, and, 
as mentioned above, a protonema is always formed in the 
development of the new plant. The social growth of the plants 
characteristic of many mosses is a result of the formation of 
numerous plants on the original protonema and on developments 
from the rhizoids. Besides this, gemmae may be formed on the 
protonema, on the leaves or at the apex, and some mosses have 
specialized shoots for their better protection or distribution. 
Thus in Georgia the stalked, multicellular gemmae are borne 
at the ends of shoots surrounded by a rosette of larger leaves, 
and in Aulacomnium androgynum they are raised on an elongated 
leafless region of the shoot. In other cases detached leaves or 
shoots may give rise to new plants, and when a moss is artificially 
divided almost any fragment may serve for reproduction. 

Even in those rare cases in which the sexual generation can be 
developed without the intervention of spore production from 
the tissues of the sporogonium, a protonema is formed from cut 
pieces of the seta or in some cases from intact sporogonia 
still attached to the plant. This phenomenon of apospory was 
first discovered in mosses, but is now also known in a number 
of ferns (see Ptekidophyta). 

Sphagnales. — The single genus Sphagnum occupies a very distinct 
and isolated position among mosses. The numerous species, which 
are familiar as the bog-mosses, are so similar that minute structural 
characters have to be relied on in their identification. The plants 
occur in large patches of a pale green or reddish colour on moors, and, 
when filling up small lakes or pools, may attain a length of some feet. 
Their growth has played a large part in the formation of peat. The 
species are distributed in temperate and arctic climates, but in the 
tropics only occur at high levels. The protonema forms a flat, lobed, 
thalloid structure attached to the soil by rhizoids, and the plants arise 
from marginal cells. The main shoot bears numerous branches 
which appear to stand in whorls; some of them bend down and 
become applied to the surface of the main axis. The structure of 
the stem and leaves is peculiar. The former shows on cross-section 
a thin-walled central tissue surrounded by a zone of thick-walled 
cells. Outside this come one to five layers of large clear cells, which 
when mature are dead and empty; their walls are strengthened 
with a spiral thickening and perforated with round pores. They 
serve to absorb and conduct water by capillarity. The leaves have 
no midrib and similar empty cells occur regularly among the narrow 
chlorophyll-containing cells, which thus appear as a green network. 
The antheridia are globular and have long stalks. They stand by 
the side of leaves of special club-shaped branches. The archegonial 
groups occupy the apices of short branches (fig. 13, A.). The mature 
sporogonium consists of a wide foot separated by a constriction from 
the globular capsule (B). There is no distinct seta, but the capsule is 
raised on a leafless outgrowth of the end of the branch called a pseudo- 
podium (C, qs). The capsule, the wall of which bears rudimentary , 
stomata, has a small operculum but no peristome. There is a short, 
wide columella, over which the dome-shaped spore-sac extends, and 
no air-space is present between the spore-sac and the wall. In the 
embryo a number of tiers of cells are first formed. The lower tiers 



BRYOPHYTA 



707 



form the foot, while in the upper part the Crst divisions mark off the 
columella, around which the archesppriuro, derived from the amphi- 
thecium, extends. The sporogonium when nearly mature bursts the 
calyptra irregularly. The capsule opens explosively in dry weather, 
the operculum and spores being thrown to a distance. The spore on 
germination forms a short filament which soon broadens out into 

the thalloid protonema. Some 
twelve species of Sphagnum are 
found in Britain. 

A ndreaeales. — The species of 
A the single genus Andreaea (fig. 
14) are small, dark-coloured 
mosses growing for the most part 
in tufts on bare rocks in alpine 
and arctic regions. Four species 
occur on alpine rocks in Britain. 
The spore on germination gives 
rise to a small mass of cells from 
which one or more short fila- 
ments grow. The filament soon 
broadens into a ribbon-shaped 
thallus, several cells thick, which 
is closely applied to the rock. 
Erect branches may arise from 
the protonema, and gemmae may 
be developed on it. The stem of 
the plant, which arises in the 
usual way, has no conducting 
strand and the leaves may or 
may not have midribs. The leaf 
grows by a dome-shaped instead 
of by the usual two-sided 
initial cell. The antheridia are 
long-stalked. The upper portion 
of the archegonial wall is carried 
up as a calyptra on the sporo- 
gonium, which, as in Sphagnum, 
has no seta and is raised on a 
Fig. 13. — Sphagnum acutifolium. pseudopodium. The development 
(After Schimper.) of the sporogonium proceeds as 

. T . ,. . , in the Bryales, but the dome- 

A. Longitudinal section of apex shaped a rchesporium extends 

of a bud bearing archegoma over the summit of the colu- 
(or), enclosed by the large me lla and an air-space is wanting, 
leaves (y) ; ch, small pen- The capsu le does not open by an 
chaetial leaves, operculum but by four or six 

B. Longitudinal section of the longitudinal slits, which do not 
sporogonium borne on the reach either the base or apex, 
pseudopodium (ps) ; c, calyp 
tra; ar, neck of archegon- 
ium; sg, foot; sg, capsule. 

C. S. squarrosum. Ripe sporo 




From GoebePs Pfianzennwrphologie. 



In one exotic species the splits 
occur only at the upper part of 
the capsule, and the terminal 
cap breaks away. This isolated 

gonium raised on the pseudo- e £ am P le ^ us . a PPf rs to approach 
podium (55) above the enclos- the Bryales in its mode of de- 
ing leaves (ch) ; c, the rup- nls cence. 

tured calyptra ; sg, capsule ; Bryales.— In contrast to the 
d, operculum. preceding two tms group includes 

a very large number 01 genera 
and species. Thus even in Britain 
between five and six hundred species belonging to more than one 
hundred genera are found. They occur in the most varied situations, 
on soil, on rocks and trees, and, in a few instances (Fontinalis), in 
water. Although exhibiting a wide range in size and in the struc- 
tural complexity of both generations, they all conform to a general 
type, so that Funaria, described above, will serve as a fair example 
of the group. The protonema is usually filamentous, and in some 
of the simplest forms is long-lived, while the small plants borne on it 
serve mainly to protect the sexual organs and sporogonia. This is 
the case in Ephemerum, which grows on the damp soil of clayey 
fields, and the plants are even more simply constructed in Bux- 
baumia, which occurs on soil rich in humus and is possibly partially 
saprophytic. In this moss the filamentous protonema is capable 
of assimilation, but the leaves of the small plants are destitute of 
chlorophyll, so that they are dependent on the protonema. The 
male plant has no definite stem, and consists of a single concave 
leaf protecting the antheridium. The female plant is rather more 
highly organized, consisting of a short stem bearing a few leaves 
around the group of archegonia. The sporogonium is of large size and 
highly organized, though it presents peculiar features in the peri- 
stome. Buxbaumia has been regarded by Goebel as representing 
a stage which other mosses have passed, and has been described by 
him as the simplest type of moss. In Ephemerum also we may prob- 
ably regard the relation of the small plants to the protonema as a 
primitive one. On the other hand, in the case of Ephemeropsis, 
which grows on the leaves of living plants in Java, the high organiza- 
tion of the sporogonium makes it probable that the persistent 
protonema is an adaptation to the peculiar conditions of life. A 
highly developed protonema provided with leaf-like assimilating 
organs is found in Georgia, Diphyscium and Oedipodium, all of which 
show peculiarities in the sporogonium as well. The cells of the 



protonema of Schistostega, which lives in the shade of caves, are so 
constructed as to concentrate the feeble available light on the 
chloroplasts. 

We may perhaps regard the persistent protonema bearing small 
leafy plants as a primitive condition, and look upon those larger 
plants which remain unbranched and bear the sexual organs at the 
apex (e.g. Schistostega) as representing the next stage. From this 
condition different lines of specialization in the form and structure 
of the plant can be recognized. A large number of mosses stand at 
about the same grade as Funaria, in that the plants are small, 
sparingly branched, usually radial, and do not show a very highly 
differentiated internal structure. In others the form of the plant 
becomes more complex by copious branching and the differentiation 
of shoots of different orders. In these cases the shoot system is 
often more or less dorsiventral, and the sexual organs are borne on 
short lateral branches (e.g. Thuidium tamariscinum) . The Polytri- 
chaceae, on the other hand, show a specialization in structure rather 
than in form. The high organization of their conducting system 
has been referred to above, but though many species are able to exist 
in relatively dry situations, the plants are still dependent on the 
absorption of water by the general surface. The parallel lamellae 
of assimilating cells which grow from the upper surface of the leaf 
in these and some other mosses probably serve to retain water in the 
neighbourhood of the assimilating cells and so prolong their activity. 
As common adaptive features in the leaves the occurrence of papillae 
or outgrowths of the cell-walls to retain water, and the white hair- 
like leaf tips, which assist in protecting the young parts at the apex 
of many xerophytic mosses, may be mentioned. The leaves of 
Leucobryum, which occurs in pale green tufts in shaded woods, show 
a parallel adaptation to that found in Sphagnum. They are several 
cells thick, and the small assimilating cells lie between two layers of 
empty water-storage cells, the walls of which are perforated by pores. 

With the possible exception of Archidium, the sporogonium is 
throughout the Bryales constructed on one plan. Archidium is a 
small moss occurring occasionally on the soil of wet fields. The 
protonema is not persistent, and the plants are well developed, 
resembling those of Pleuridium. The sporogonium has a small foot 
and practically no seta, and differs in the development and structure 
of its capsule from all other mosses. The spores are derived from 
the endothecium, but no distinction of a sterile columella and an 
archesporium is established in this, a variable number of its cells 
becoming spore-mother-cells, while the rest serve to nourish the 
spores. The layer of cells immediately around the endothecium 
becomes the spore-sac, and an air-space forms between this and the 
wall of the capsule. The very large, thin-walled spores escape on 
the decay of the capsule, which ruptures the 
archegonial wall irregularly. On account of 
the absence of a columella Archidium is 
sometimes placed in a distinct group, but 
since its peculiarities have possibly arisen 
by reduction it seems at present best retained 
among the Bryales. In all other Bryales 
there is a definite columella extending from 
the base to the apex of the capsule, the arche- 
sporium is derived from the outermost layer 
of cells of the endothecium, and an air space 
is formed between the spore-sac and the 
wall. In the Polytrichaceae another air 
space separates the spore-sac from the col- 
umella. There is great variety in the length 
of the seta, which is sometimes practically 
absent. The apophysis, which may be a more 
or less distinct region, usually bears stomata 
and is the main organ of assimilation. In 
the Splachnaceae it is expanded for this pur- 
pose, while in Oedipodium it constitutes most 
of the long pale stalk which supports the 
capsule. A distinct operculum is usually 
detached by the help of the annulus, and its 
removal may leave the mouth of the capsule 
widely open. More usually there is a peri- 
stome, consisting of one or two series of teeth, 
which serves to narrow the opening and in From Strasburge , 
various ways to ensure the gradual shedding book «/ Botany. 
of the spores in dry weather. In most 




rger's Text 



Fig. 



. — An- 



mosses the teeth are portions of thickened , rlu - 14- 
cell-walls, but in the Polytrichaceae they are d ' me \ * t^phila 
formed of a number of sclerenchymatous Plant bearing opened 
cells. In Polytrichum a membranous epi- ca P sule - 
phragm stretches across the wide mouth of (&) 
the capsule between the tips of the short 
peristome teeth, and closes the opening except 
for the interspaces of the peristome. 

In a number of forms, which were for- 
merly grouped together, the capsule does 

not open to liberate the spores. These cleistocarpous forms 
are now recognized as related to various natural groups, in 
which the majority of the species possess an operculum. In such 
forms as Phascum the columella persists, and the only peculiarity 
is in the absence of arrangements for dehiscence. In Ephemerum 



ps, Pseudopo- 
dium. 

c, Calyptra. 

spf, Foot of 
gonium. 



sporo- 



708 



BRZOZOWSKI 



(and the closely related Nanomitrium which has a small operculum) 
the columella becomes absorbed during the development of the 
spores. Stomata are present on the wall of the small capsule. Such 
facts as these suggest that in many cases the cleistocarpous condition 
is the result of reduction rather than primitive, and that possibly 
the same holds for Archidium. 

The former subdivision of the Bryales into Musci Cleistocarpi 
and Musci Stegocarpi according to the absence or presence of an 
operculum is thus clearly artificial. The same holds even more 
obviously for the grouping of the stegocarpous forms into those in 
which the archegonial group terminates a main axis (acrocarpi) 
and those in which it is borne on a more or less developed lateral 
branch (pleurocarpi). Modern classifications of the Bryales depend 
mainly on the construction of the peristome. 

It remains to be considered to what extent the several natural 
groups of plants classed together in the Bryophyta can be placed 
in a phylogenetic relation to one another. Practically no help 
is afforded by palaeobotany, and only the comparison of existing 
forms can be depended on. The indications of probable lines of 
evolution are clearest in the Hepaticae. The Marchantiales 




Fig. 15. — Funaria hygrometrica. Longitudinal section through 

the summit of a male branch. (After Sachs.) 
e, Leaves. [ribs. c, Paraphyses. 

d, Leaves cut through the mid- b, Antheridia, 

form an obviously natural evolutionary group, and the same is 
probably true of the Jungermanniales, although in neither case 
can the partial lines of progression within the main groups be 
said to be quite clear. Such a form as Spkaerocarpus, which 
has features in common with the lower Marchantiales, enables 
us to form an idea of the divergence of the two groups from 
a common ancestry. The Anthocerotales, on the other hand, 
stand in an isolated position, and recent researches have served 
to emphasize this rather than to confirm the relationship with 
the Jungermanniales suggested by Leitgeb. The indications of 
a serial progression are not so clear in the mosses, but the majority 
of the forms may be regarded as forming a great phylogenetic 
group in the evolution of which the elaboration of the moss-plant 
has proceeded until the protonema appears as a mere preliminary 
stage to the formation of the plants. Parallel with the evolu- 
tion of the gametophyte in form and structure, a progression 
can be traced in the sporogonium, although the simplest 
sporogonia available for study may owe much of their simplicity 
to reduction. The Andreaeales may perhaps be looked on as a 
divergent primitive branch of the same stock. On the other 



hand, the Sphagnales show such considerable and important 
differences from the rest of the mosses, that like the Anthocero- 
tales among the liverworts, they may be regarded as a group, the 
relationship of which to the main stem is at least problematical. 
Between the Hepaticae, Anthocerotales, Sphagnales and Musci, 
there are no connecting forms known, and it must be left as an 
open question whether the Bryophyta are a monophyletic Oi 
polyphyletic group. 

The question of the relationship of the Bryophyta on the one 
hand to the Thallophyta 
and on the other to the 
Pteridophyta lies even 
more in the region of 
speculation, on slender 
grounds without much 
hope of decisive evidence. 
In a general sense we 
may regard the Bryo- 
phyta as derived from 
an algal ancestry, with- 
out being able to suggest 
the nature of the an- 
cestral forms or the geo- 
logical period at which 
they arose. Recent re- 
searches on those Algae 
such as Coleochaete which 
appeared to afford a close 
comparison in their alter- 
nation of generations with 
Riccia, have shown that 
the body resulting from 
the segmentation of the 
fertilized ovum is not so 
strictly comparable in the 
two cases as had been 
supposed. The series of 
increasingly complex 
sporogonia among Bryo- Fig. 16.— Funaria hygrometrica. 
phytes appears to be (After Goebel.) 

most naturally explained a. Longitudinal section of the very 
on an hypothesis of pro- young sporogonium (/, /') enclosed 
gressive sterilization of in the archegonial wall (b, h). 
tnnmwnnnq ti<wne such B ' C - Further stages of the development 
sporogenous tissue, sucn o{ the sporogon ; um (j) enclosed in 

as has been advanced by tne calyptra formed from the arche- 
Bower. On the other gonial wall (c) and still bearing the 
hand there are not neck W- The foot of the s P oro 
wanting indications of SSft^WSKA Z 
reduction in the Bryo- moss-plant, 

phyte sporogonium which 

make an alternative view of its origin at least possible. With 
regard to the relationship of the Bryophyta and Pteridophyta 
the article on the latter group should be consulted. It will 
be sufficient to say in conclusion that while the alternating 
generations in the two groups are strictly comparable, no 
evidence of actual relationship is yet forthcoming. 

For further information consult: Campbell, Mosses and Ferns 
(London, 1906) ; Engler and Prantl, Die natiirlichen Pflanzen- 
familien, Teil i. Abt. 3 (Leipzig, .1893-1907) ; Goebel, Organography 
of Plants (Oxford, 1905). Full references to the literature of the 
subject will be found in these works. For the identification of the 
British species of liverworts and mosses the following recent works 
will be of use : Pearson, The Hepaticae of the British Isles (London, 
1902) ; Dixon and Jameson, The Student's Handbook of British 
Mosses (London, 1896) ; Braithwaite, British Moss Flora (London, 
1887-1905). (W. H. L.) 

BRZOZOWSKI, THADDEUS (d. 1820), nineteenth general of 
the Jesuits, was appointed in succession to Gabriel Gruber on 
the 2nd of September 1805. In 1801 Pius VII. had given the 
Jesuits liberty to reconstitute themselves in north Russia (see 
Jesuits : History) , and in 1 8 1 2 Brzozowski secured the recognition 
of the Jesuit college of Polotsk as a university, though he could 
not obtain permission to go to Spain to agitate for the recognition 




BUBASTIS— BUCCANEERS 



709 



of the Spanish Jesuits. In 1814 Pius VII., In accordance with 
the bull SoUicitudo omnium ecclesiarum, gave to Brzozowski 
among others full authority to receive those who desired to enter 
the society. The Russian government, however, soon began to 
be alarmed at the growth of the Jesuits, and on the 20th of 
December 1815 published an edict expelling them from St 
Petersburg. Brzozowski, having vainly requested to be allowed 
to retire to Rome, died on the 5th of February 1820. He is 
interesting mainly from the fact that he was general of the 
Society at the time of its restoration throughout Europe. 

BUBASTIS, the Graecized name of the Egyptian goddess 
Ubasti, meaning "she of [the city] Bast" (Bls-t), a city 
better known by its later name, P-ubasti, " place of Ubasti "; 
thus the goddess derived her name Ubasti from her city (Bast), 
and in turn the city derived its name P-ubasti from that of the 
goddess; the Greeks, confusing the name of the city with that of 
the goddess, called the latter Bubastis, and the former also 
Bubastis (later Bubastos). Bubastis, capital of the 19th nome 
of Lower Egypt, is now represented by a great mound of ruins 
called Tell Basta, near Zagazig, including the site of a large 
temple (described by Herodotus) strewn with blocks of granite. 
The monuments discovered there, although only those in hard 
stone have survived, are more important than at any other site 
in the Delta except Tanis and cover a wider range, commencing 
with Khufu (Cheops) and continuing to the thirtieth dynasty. 

Ubasti was one of many feline goddesses, figured with the head 
of a lioness. In the great development of reverence for sacred 
animals which took place after the New Kingdom, the domestic 
cat was especially the animal of Bubastis, although it had also 
to serve for all the other feline goddesses, owing no doubt to the 
scarcity and intractability of its congeners. Her hieratic and 
most general form was still lioness-headed, but a popular form, 
especially in bronze, was a cat-headed women, often holding in 
her right hand a lion aegis, i.e. a broad semicircular pectoral 
surmounted by the head of a lioness, and on the left arm a basket. 
The cat cemetery on the west side of the town consisted of 
numbers of large brick chambers, crammed with burnt and 
decayed mummies, many of which had been enclosed in cat-shaped 
cases of wood and bronze. Herodotus describes the festival of 
Bubastis, which was attended by thousands from all parts of 
Egypt and was a very riotous affair; it has its modern equivalent 
in the Mo-lem festival of the sheikh Said el Badawi at Tanta. 
The tablet of Canopus shows that there were two festivals of 
Bubastis, the great and the lesser: perhaps the lesser festival 
was held at Memphis, where the quarter called Ankhto contained 
a temple to this goddess. Her name is found on monuments 
from the third dynasty onwards, but a great stimulus was given 
to her worship by the twenty-second (Bubastite) dynasty and 
generally by the increased importance of Lower Egypt in later 
times. Her character seems to have been essentially mild and 
playful, in contrast to Sokhmi and other feline goddesses. The 
Greeks equated Ubasti with their Artemis, confusing her with 
the leonine Tafne, sister of Shoou (Apollo). The Egyptians 
themselves delighted in identifying together goddesses of the 
most diverse forms and attributes; but Ubasti was almost 
indistinguishable in form from Tafne. The name of her son 
Iphthimis (Nfr-tm), pronounced Eftem, may mean " All-good," 
and, in the absence of other information about him, suggests a 
reason why he was identified with Prometheus. 

See K. Sethe in Pauly-Wissowa's Realencyclopadie; E. Naville, 
Bubastis, and Festival Hall of Osorkon II.; Herodotus ii. 67, 137-156; 
Grenfell and Hunt, Hibeh Papyri, i. (F. Ll. G.) 

BUCARAMANGA, a city of Colombia, capital of the depart- 
ment of Santander, about 185 m. N.N.E. of Bogota. Pop. 
(estimate, 1902) 25,000. It is situated on the Lebrija river, 
3248 ft. above sea-level, in a mountainous country rich in 
gold, silver and iron mines, and having superior coffee-pro- 
ducing lands in the valleys and on the lower slopes. The city 
is laid out with wide, straight streets, is well built, and has 
many public buildings of a substantial character. 

BUCCANEERS, the name given to piratical adventurers of 
different nationalities united in their opposition to Spain, who 



maintained themselves chiefly in the Caribbean Sea during the 
17 th century. 

The island of Santo Domingo was one of several in the West 
Indies which had early in the 16th century been almost depopu- 
lated by the oppressive colonial policy of Spain. Along its coast 
there were several isolated establishments presided over by 
Spaniards, who were deprived of a convenient market for the 
produce of the soil by the monopolies imposed by the mother 
country. Accordingly English, Dutch and French vessels were 
welcomed and their cargoes readily bought. The island, thinned 
of its former inhabitants, had become the home of immense herds 
of wild cattle; and it became the habit of smugglers to provision 
at Santo Domingo. The natives still left were skilled in pre- 
serving flesh at their little establishments called boucans. The 
adventurers learned " boucanning " from the natives; and 
gradually Hispaniola became the scene of an extensive and illicit 
butcher trade. Spanish monopolies filled the seamen who sailed 
the Caribbean with a natural hate of everything Spanish. The 
pleasures of a roving life, enlivened by occasional skirmishes with 
forces organized and led by Spanish officials, gained upon them. 
Out of such conditions arose the buccaneer, alternately sailor and 
hunter, even occasionally a planter — roving, bold, unscrupulous, 
often savage, with an intense detestation of Spain. As the 
Spaniards would not recognize the right of other races to make 
settlements, or even to trade in the West Indies, the governments 
of France, England and Holland would do nothing to control their 
subjects who invaded the islands. They left them free to make 
settlements at their own risk. Each nation contributed a band of 
colonists, who selected the island of St Kitts or St Christopher, 
in the West Indies, where the settlers of both nations were 
simultaneously planted. The English andFrench were, however, 
not very friendly; and in 1629, after the retirement of several of 
the former to an adjoining island, the remaining colonists were 
surprised and partly dispersed by the arrival of a Spanish fleet of 
thirty-nine sail. But on the departure of the fleet the scattered 
bands returned, and encouragement was given to their country- 
men in Santo Domingo. For buccaneering had now become a 
most profitable employment, operations were extended, and a 
storehouse secure from the attacks of the Spaniards was required. 
The small island of Tortuga (north-west of Hispaniola) was seized 
for this purpose in 1630, converted into a magazine for the goods 
of the rivals, and made their headquarters, Santo Domingo 
itself still continuing their hunting ground. A purely English 
settlement directed by a company in London was made at Old 
Providence, an island in the Caribbean Sea, now belonging to 
Colombia. It began a little before 1630, and was suppressed by 
the Spaniards in 1641. 

Spain was unable to take immediate action. Eight years later, 
however, watching their opportunity when many buccaneers 
were absent in the larger island, the Spaniards attacked Tortuga, 
and massacred every settler they could seize. But the others 
returned; and the buccaneers, now in open hostility to the 
Spanish arms, began to receive recruits from every European 
tradir g nation, and for three-quarters of a century became the 
scourge of the Spanish-American trade and dominions. 

France, throughout ail this, had not been idle. She had named 
the governor of St Kitts " Governor-General for the French West 
India Islands," and in 1641 he took possession of Tortuga, 
expelled all English from the island, and attempted the same 
with less success in Santo Domingo. England was absorbed in 
the Civil War, and the buccaneers had to maintain themselves 
as best they could, — now mainly on the sea. 

In 1654 the Spaniards regained Tortuga from the French, into 
whose hands it again, however, fell after six years. But this 
state of affairs was too insecure even for these rovers, and they 
would speedily have succumbed had not a refuge been found for 
them by the fortunate conquest of Jamaica in 1655 by the navy 
of the English Commonwealth. These conquests were not made 
without the aid of the buccaneers themselves. The taking and 
re-taking of Tortuga by the French was always with the assist- 
ance of the roving community; and at the conquest of Jamaica 
the English navy had the same influence in its favour. The 



yio 



BUCCANEERS 



buccaneers, in fact, constituted a mercenary navy, ready for em- 
ployment against the power of Spain by any other nation, on 
condition of sharing the plunder; and they were noted for their 
daring, their cruelty and their extraordinary skill in seamanship. 

Their history now divides itself into three epochs. The first of 
these extends from the period of their rise to the capture of 
Panama by Morgan in 167 1, during which time they were 
hampered neither by government aid nor, till near its close, by 
government restriction. The second, from 1671 to the time of 
their greatest power, 1685, when the scene of their operations was 
no longer merely the Caribbean, but principally the whole range 
of the Pacific from California to Chile. The third and last period 
extends from that year onwards; it was a time of disunion and 
disintegration, when the independence and rude honour of the 
previous periods had degenerated into unmitigated vice and 
brutality. 

It is chiefly during the first period that those leaders flourished 
whose names and doings have been associated with all that was 
really influential in the exploits of the buccaneers — the most 
prominent being Mansfield and Morgan. The floating commerce 
of Spain had by the middle of the 17 th century become utterly 
insignificant. But Spanish settlements remained; and in 1654 
the first great expedition on land made by the buccaneers, though 
attended by considerable difficulties, was completed by the 
capture and sack of New Segovia, on the mainland of America. 
The Gulf of Venezuela, with its towns of Maracaiboand Gibraltar, 
were attacked and plundered under the command of a Frenchman 
named L'Ollonois, who performed, it is said, the office of execu- 
tioner upon the whole crew of a Spanish vessel manned with 
ninety seamen. Such successes removed the buccaneers further 
and further from the pale of civilized society, fed their revenge, 
and inspired them with an avarice almost equal to that of the 
original settlers from Spain. Mansfield indeed, in 1664, conceived 
the idea of a permanent settlement upon a small island of the 
Bahamas, named New Providence, and Henry Morgan, a Welsh- 
man, intrepid and unscrupulous, joined him. But the untimely 
death of Mansfield nipped in the bud the only rational scheme of 
settlement which seems at any time to have animated this wild 
community; and Morgan, now elected commander, swept the 
whole Caribbean, and from his headquarters in Jamaica led 
triumphant expeditions to Cuba and the mainland. He was 
leader of the expedition wherein Porto Bello, one of the best- 
fortified ports in the West Indies, was surprised and plundered. 

This was too much for even the adverse European powers; 
and in 1670 a treaty was concluded between England and Spain, 
proclaiming peace and friendship among the subjects of the two 
sovereigns in the New World, formally renouncing hostilities of 
every kind. Great Britain was to hold all her possessions in the 
New World as her own property (a remarkable concession on the 
part of Spain) , and consented, on behalf of her subjects, to forbear 
trading with any Spanish port without licence obtained. 

The treaty was very ill observed in Jamaica, where the 
governor, Thomas Modyford (1620-1670), was in close alliance 
with the " privateers," which was the official title of the buc- 
caneers. He had already granted commissions to Morgan and 
others for a great attack on the Isthmus of Panama, the route by 
which the bullion of the South American mines was carried to 
Porto Bello, to be shipped to Spain. The buccaneers to the 
number of 2000 began by seizing Chagres, and then marched to 
Panama in 167 1 . After a difficult journey on foot and in canoes, 
they found themselves nearing the shores of the South Sea and in 
view of the city. On the morning of the tenth day they com- 
menced an engagement which ended in the rout of the defenders 
of the town. It was taken, and, accidentally or not, it was burnt. 
The sack of Panama was accompanied by great barbarities. 
The Spaniards had, however, removed the treasure before the city 
was taken. When the booty was divided, Morgan is accused of 
having defrauded his followers. It is certain that the share per 
man was small, and that many of the buccaneers died of starva- 
tion while trying to return to Jamaica. Modyford was recalled, 
and in 167 2 Morgan was called home and imprisoned in the Tower. 
In 1674 he was allowed to come back to the island as lieutenant- 



governor with Lord Vaughan. He had become so unpopular 
after the expedition of 167 1 that he was followed in the streets 
and threatened by the relations of those who had perished. 
During his later years he was active in suppressing the buccaneers 
who had now inconvenient claims on him. 

From 1671 to 1685 is the time of the greatest daring, prosperity 
and power of. the buccaneers. The expedition against Panama 
had not been without its influence. Notwithstanding their many 
successes in the Caribbean and on la,nd, including a second 
plunder Of Porto Bello, their thoughts ran frequently on the 
great expedition across the isthmus, and they pictured the 
South Sea as a far wider and more lucrative field for the display 
of their united power. 

In 1680 a body of marauders over 300 strong, well armed and 
provisioned, landed on the shore of Darien and struck across 
the country; and the cruelty and mismanagement displayed 
in the policy of the Spaniards towards the Indians were now 
revenged by the assistance which the natives eagerly rendered 
to the adventurers. They acted as guides during a difficult 
journey of nine days, kept the invaders well supplied with food, 
provided them with canoes, and only left them after the taking 
of the fort of Santa Maria, when the buccaneers were fairly 
embarked on a broad and safe river which emptied itself into 
the South Sea. With John Coxon as commander they entered 
the Bay of Panama, where rumour had been before them, and 
where the Spaniards had hastily prepared a small fleet to meet 
them. But the valour of the buccaneers won for them another 
victory; within a week they took possession of four Spanish 
ships, and now successes flowed upon them. The Pacific, hitherto 
free from their intrusion, showed many sail of merchant vessels, 
while on land opposition south of the Bay of Panama was of 
little avail, since few were acquainted with the use of fire-arms. 
Coxon and seventy men returned as they had gone, but the others, 
under Sawkins, Sharp and Watling, roamed north and south 
on islands and mainland, and remained for long ravaging the 
coast of Peru. Never short of silver and gold, but often in want 
of the necessaries of life, they continued their practices for a 
little longer; then, evading the risk of recrossing the isthmus, 
they boldly cleared Cape Horn, and arrived in the Indies. Again, 
in 1683, numbers of them under John Cook departed for the 
South Sea by way of Cape Horn. On Cook's death his successor, 
Edward Davis, undoubtedly the greatest and most prudent 
commander who ever led the forces of the buccaneers at sea, met 
with a certain Captain Swan from England, and the two captains 
began a cruise which was disastrous to the Spanish trade in the 
Pacific. 

In 1685 they were joined in the Bay of Panama by large 
numbers of buccaneers who had crossed the isthmus under 
Townley and others. This increased body of men required an 
enlarged measure of adventure, and this in a few months was 
supplied by the viceroy of Peru. That officer, seeing the trade 
of the colony cut off, supplies stopped, towns burned and raided, 
and property harassed by continual raids, resolved by vigorous 
means to put an end to it. But his aim was not easily accom- 
plished. In this same year a Spanish fleet of fourteen sail met, 
but did not engage, ten buccaneer vessels which were found 
in the Bay of Panama. 

At this period the power of the buccaneers was at its height. 
But the combination was too extensive for its work, and the 
different nationality of those who composed it was a source of 
growing discord. Nor was the dream of equality ever realized 
for any length of time. The immense spoil obtained on the 
capture of wealthy cities was indeed divided equally. But in 
the gambling and debauchery which followed, nothing was more 
common than that one-half of the conquerors should find them- 
selves on the morrow in most pressing want; and while those 
who had retained or increased their share would willingly have 
gone home, the others clamoured for renewed attacks. The 
separation of the English and French buccaneers, who together 
presented a united front to the Spanish fleet in 1685, marks the, 
beginning of the third and last epoch in their history. 

The brilliant exploits begun by the sack of Leon and Realejo 



BUCCARI— BUCCINA 



711 



"by the English under Davis have, even in their variety and 
daring, a sameness which deprives them of interest, and the 
wonderful confederacy is now seen to be falling gradually to 
pieces. The skill of Davis at sea was on one occasion displayed 
in a seven day$' engagement with two large Spanish vessels, and 
the interest undoutedly centres in him. Townley and Swan 
had, however, by this time left him, and after cruising together 
for some time, they, too, parted. In 1688 Davis cleared Cape 
Horn and arrived in the West Indies, while Swan's ship, the 
" Cygnet," was abandoned as unseaworthy, after sailing as 
far as Madagascar. Townley had hardly joined the French 
buccaneers remaining in the South Sea ere he died, and the 
Frenchmen with their companions crossed New Spain to the 
West Indies. And thus the Pacific, ravaged so long by this 
powerful and mysterious band of corsairs, was at length at peace. 

The West Indies had by this time become hot enough even 
for the banded pirates. They hung doggedly along the coasts 
of Jamaica and Santo Domingo, but their day was nearly over. 
Only once again — at the siege of Carthagena — did they appear 
great; but even then the expedition was not of their making, 
and they were mere auxiliaries of the French regular forces. 
After the treachery of the French commander of this expedition 
a spirit of unity and despairing energy seemed reawakened in 
them; but this could not avert and scarcely delayed the rapidly 
approaching extinction of the community. 

The French and English buccaneers could not but take sides 
in the war which had arisen between their respective countries 
in 1689. Thus was broken the bond of unity which had for 
three-quarters of a century kept the subjects of the two nations 
together in schemes of aggression upon a common foe. In the 
short peace of 1 697-1 700 England and France were using all 
their influence, both in the Old World and in the New, to in- 
gratiate themselves into the favour of the king of Spain. With 
the resumption of hostilities in 1700 and the rise of Spain 
consequent upon the accession of the French claimant to the 
throne the career of the buccaneers was effectually closed. 

But the fall of the buccaneers is no more accounted for fully 
by these circumstances than is their rise by the massacre of the 
islanders of Santo Domingo. There was that in the very nature 
of the community which, from its birth, marked it as liable to 
speedy decline. 

The principles which bound the buccaneers together were, 
first the desire for adventure and gain, and, in the second place, 
hatred of the Spaniard. The first was hardly a sufficient bond 
of union, among men of different nationalities, when booty 
could be had nearly always by private venture under the colours 
of the separate European-powers. Of greater validity was their 
second and great principle of union, namely, that they warred 
not with one another, nor with every one, but with a single and a 
common foe. For while the buccaneer forces included English, 
French and Dutch sailors, and were complemented occasionally 
by bands of native Indians, there are few instances during the 
time of their prosperity and growth of their falling upon one 
another, and treating their fellows with the savagery which 
they exulted in displaying against the subjects of Spain. The 
exigencies, moreover, of their perilous career readily wasted 
their suddenly acquired gains. 

Settled labour, the warrant of real wealth, was unacceptable 
to those who lived by promoting its insecurity. Regular trade — 
though rendered attractive by smuggling — and pearl gathering 
and similar operations which were spiced with risk, were open in 
vain to them, and in the absence of any domestic life, a hand-to- 
mouth system of supply and demand rooted out gradually the 
prudence which accompanies any mode of settled existence. 
In everything the policy of the buccaneers, from the beginning 
to the end of their career, was one of pure destruction, and was, 
therefore, ultimately suicidal. 

Their great importance in history lies in the fact that they 
opened the eyes of the world, and specially of the nations from 
whom these buccaneers had sprung, to the whole system of 
Spanish-American government and commerce — the former in 
its rottenness, and the latter in its possibilities in other hands. 



From this, then, along with other causes, dating primarily from 
the helplessness and presumption of Spain, there arose the West 
Indian possessions of Holland, England and France. 

A work published at Amsterdam in 1678, entitled De Americaensche 
Zee Roovers, from the pen of a buccaneer named Exquemelin, was 
translated into several European languages, receiving additions at the 
hands of the different translators. The French translation by Fron- 
tignieres is named Histoire des avanturiers qui se sont signalez dans 
les Indes; the English edition is entitled The Bucaniers of America. 
Other works are Raynal's History of the Settlements and Trade of the 
Europeans in the East and West Indies, book x., English translation 
1782; Dampier's Voyages; Geo. W. Thornbury's Monarchs of the 
Main, &c. (1855) ' Lionel Wafer's Voyage and Description of the 
Isthmus of America (1699) ; and the Histoire de Visle Espagnole, &c, 
and Histoire et description generate de la Nouvelle France of Pere 
Charlevoix. The statements in these works are to be received with 
caution. A really authentic narrative, however, is Captain James 
Burney's History of the Buccaneers of America (London, 1816). 
The Calendar of State Papers, Colonial Series (London, i860 et seq.), 
contains much evidence for the history of the buccaneers in the 
West Indies. (D. H.) 

BUCCARI (Serbo-Croatian Bakar), a royal free town of 
Croatia-Slavonia, Hungary; situated in the county of Modrus- 
Fiume, 7 m. S.E. of Fiume, on a small bay of the Adriatic Sea. 
Pop. (1900) 1870. The Hungarian state railway from Zakany and 
Agram terminates 25 m. from Buccari. The harbour, though 
sometimes dangerous to approach, affords good anchorage to 
small vessels. Owing to competition from Fiume, Buccari lost 
the greater part of its trade during the 19th century. The staple 
industry is boatbuilding, and there is an active coasting trade 
in fish, wine, wood and coal. The tunny-fishery is of some 
importance. In the neighbourhood of the town is the old castle 
of Buccarica, and farther south the flourishing little port of 
Porto Re or Kraljevica. 

BUCCINA (more correctly BUcina, Gr. fHvnavr], connected with 
bucca, cheek, and Gr. /3i>f w) , a brass wind instrument extensively 
used in the ancient Roman army. The Roman instrument 
consisted of a brass tube measuring some n to 12 ft. in length, 
of narrow cylindrical bore, and played by means of a cup-shaped 
mouthpiece. The tube is 
bent round upon itself 
from the mouthpiece to 
the bell in the shape of 
a broad C and is strength- 
ened by means of a bar 
across the curve, which 
the performer grasps 
while playing, in order 
to steady the instrument; 
the bell curves over his 
head or shoulder as in 
the modern helicon. 
Three Roman buccinas 
were found among the 
ruins of Pompeii and are 
now deposited in the 
museum at Naples. V. 
C. Mahillon, of Brussels l 
has made a facsimile of 
one of these instruments; 
it is in G and has almost 
the same harmonic series 




From a photo by Brogi. 

; Fig. 1. — Buccina in the National 
Museum, Naples. 

the French horn and the 



trumpet. The buccina, the cornu (see Horn), and the tuba 
were used as signal instruments in the Roman army and 
camp to sound the four night watches (hence known as 
buccina prima, secunda, &c), to summon them by means of the 
special signal known as classicum, and to give orders. 2 Frontinus 
relates 3 that a Roman general, who had been surrounded by 
the enemy, escaped during the night by means of the stratagem 
of leaving behind him a buccinator (trumpeter), who sounded 

1 See Catalogue descriplif (Ghent, 1880), p. 330, and illustration, 
vol. ii. (1896), p. 30. 

2 Livy vii. 35, xxvi. 15; Prop. v. 4, 63 _; Tac. Ann. xv. 30; 
Vegetius, De re militari, ii. 22, iii. 5; Polyb. vi. 365, xiv. 3, 7. 

3 Stratagematicon, i. 5, § 17. 



BUCCLEUCH, DUKES OF— BUCENTAUR 




712 

the watches throughout the night. 1 Vegetius gives brief descrip- 
tions of the three instruments, which suffice to establish their 
identity; the tuba, he says, is straight; the buccina is of bronze 
bent in the form of a circle. 2 

The buccina, in respect of its technical construction and 
acoustic properties, was the ancestor of both trumpet and 
trombone; the connexion is further established by the deriva- 
tion of the words Sackbut and Posaune (the German for trombone) 
from buccina. The relation was fully recognized in Germany 

during the 15th and 16th 
centuries, as two trans- 
lations of Vegetius, pub- 
lished at Ulm in 1470, 
and at Augsburg in 1534, 
clearly demonstrate: 
" Bucinadas ist die trumet 
oder pusan" 3 (" thebucina 
is the trumpet or trom- 
bone "), and " Bucina ist 
die trummet die wirt ausz 
und eingezogen" 4 ("the 
bucina is the trumpet which 
is drawn out and in ")• A 
Fig. 2.— Busine, 14th century. French translation by Jean 
(From MS. R. 10 E. IV. Brit. Mus.) de Meung ( PariSj I4 g 8 ) )6 

renders the passage (chap. iii. 5) thus: " Trompe est longue 
et droite; buisine est courte et rerlechist en li meisme si 
comme partie de cercle." On Trajan's column 6 the tuba, 
the cornu and the buccina are distinguishable. Other illustra- 
tions of the buccina may be seen in Francois Mazois' Les 
Ruines de Pompii (Paris, 1824-1838), pt. iv, pi. xlviii. fig. 1, 
and in J. N. von Wilmowsky's Eine romische Villa zu Nennig 
(Bonn, 1865), pi. xii. (mosaics), where the buccinator is accom- 
panied on the hydraulus. The military buccina described is 
a much more advanced instrument than its prototype the 
buccina marina, a primitive trumpet in the shape of a conical 
shell, often having a spiral twist, which in poetry is often called 
concha. The buccina marina is frequently depicted in the hands 
of Tritons (Macrobius i. 8), or of sailors, as for instance on 
terra-cotta lamp shown by G. P. Bellori (Lucernae veterum 

sepulcrales iconicae, 1702, 
iii. 12). The highly im- 
aginative writer of the 
apocryphal letter of St 
Jerome to Dardanus also 
has a word to say con- 
cerning the buccina among 
the Semitic races: " Bucca 
vocatur tuba apud Hebreos : 
deinde per diminutionem 
buccina dicitur." After the 
fall of the Roman empire 
the art of bending metal 
tubes was gradually lost, 
and although the buccina 
survived in Europe both 
in name and in principle 
of construction during the 




Fig. 3. — Busine, 14th century. 
(From MS. R. 10 E. IV. Brit. Mus.) 



middle ages, it lost for ever the characteristic curve like a 
" C " which it possessed in common with the cornu, an in- 
strument having a conical bore of wider calibre. Although 
we regard the buccina as essentially Roman, an instrument 

1 For another instance see Caesar, Comm. Bell. Civ. ii. 35. 

2 Vegetius, op. cit. iii. 5. 

3 Idem, ii. 7. « Idem, iii. 5. 

6 A reprint edited by Ulysse Robert has been published by the 
Soc. des Anciens Textes Francak (Paris, 1897). 

6 See Conrad Cichorius, Die Reliefs der Traiansdule, 3 vols, of 
text and 2 portfolios of heliogravures (Berlin, 1896, &c), Bd. i. pi. x. 
buccina and tubae; pi. viii. buccina; pi. lxxvi. buccina and two 
cornua; pi. xx. cornu, &c. ; or W. Froehner, La Colonne de Trajan 
(Paris, 1872), vol. i. pi. xxxii., xxxvi., Ii., tome ii. pi. lxvi., tome iii. 
pi. cxxxiv., &c. 



of the same type, but probably straight and of kindred 
name, was widely known and used in the East, in Persia, 
Arabia and among the Semitic races. After a lapse of years 
during which records are almost wanting, the buccina reappeared 
all over Europe as the busine, buisine, pusin, busaun, pusun, 
posaun, busna (Slav), &c. ; whether it was a Roman survival or a 
re-introduction through the Moors of Spain in the West and the 
Byzantine empire in the East, we have no records to show. An 
11th-century mural painting representing the Last Judgment 
in the cathedral of S. Angelo in Formis (near Capua), shows the 
angels blowing the last trump on busines. 7 

There are two distinct forms of the busine which may be traced 
during the middle ages: — (1) a long straight tube (fig. 2) con- 
sisting of 3 to 5 joints of narrow cylindrical bore, the last joint 
alone being conical and ending in a pommel-shaped bell, precisely 
as in the curved buccina (fig. 1); (2) a long straight cylindrical 
tube of somewhat wider bore than the busine, ending in a wide 
bell curving out abruptly from the cylindrical tube (fig. 3). 

The history of the development of the trumpet, the sackbut and 
the trombone from the buccina will be found more fully treated 
under those headings; for the part played by the buccina in the 
evolution of the French horn see Horn. (K. S.) 

BUCCLEUCH, DUKES OF. The substantial origin of the 
ducal house of the Scotts of Buccleuch- dates back to the large 
grants of lands in Scotland to Sir Walter Scott of Kirkurd and 
Buccleuch, a border chiefj by James II., in consequence of the 
fall of the 8th earl of Douglas (1452); but the family traced 
their descent back to a Sir Richard le Scott (1 240-1 285). The 
estate of Buccleuch is in Selkirkshire. Sir Walter Scott of 
Branxholm and Buccleuch (d. 1552) distinguished himself at 
the battle of Pinkie (1547), and furnished material for his later 
namesake's famous poem; The Lay of the Last Minstrel; and his 
great-grandson Sir Walter (1565-1611) was created Lord Scott 
of Buccleuch in 1606. An earldom followed in 1619. The 
second earl's daughter Anne (1651-1732), who succeeded him 
as a countess in her own right, married in 1663 the famous duke 
of Monmouth (q.v.), who was then created ist duke of Buccleuch; 
and her grandson Francis became 2nd duke. The latter's son 
Henry (1746-1812) became 3rd duke, and in 1810 succeeded 
also, on the death of William Douglas, 4th duke of Queensberry, 
to that dukedom as well as its estates and other honours, accord- 
ing to the entail executed by his own great-grandfather, the 2nd 
duke of Queensberry, in 1706; he married the duke of Montagu's 
daughter, and was famous for his generosity and benefactions. 
His son Charles William Henry (d. 1819), grandson Walter 
Francis Scott (1806-1884), and great-grandson William Henry 
Walter Montagu Douglas Scott (b. 1831), succeeded in turn as 
4th, 5th and 6th dukes of Buccleuch and 6th, 7th, and 8th 
dukes of Queensberry. The 5th duke was lord privy seal 1842- 
1846, and president of the council 1846. It was he who at a 
cost of over £500,000 made the harbour at Granton, near Edin- 
burgh. He was president of the Highland and Agricultural 
Society, the Society of Antiquaries and of the British Association. 
The 6th duke sat in the House of Commons as Conservative 
M.P. for Midlothian, 1853-1868 and 1874-1880; his wife, a 
daughter of the ist duke of Abercorn, held the office of 
mistress of the robes. 

See Sir W. Fraser, The Scotts of Buccleuch (1878). 

BUCENTAUR (Ital. bucintoro), the state gallery of the doges 
of Venice, on which, every year on Ascension day up to 1789, 
they put into the Adriatic in order to perform the ceremony of 
" wedding the sea." The name bucintoro is derived from the 
Ital. buzino d' oro, " golden bark," latinized in the middle ages 
as bucentaurus on the analogy of a supposed Gr. fiovKtVTavpos, 
ox-centaur (from fiovs and Kkvravpos). This led to the 
explanation of the name as derived from the head of an ox 
having served as the galley's figurehead. This derivation is, 
however, fanciful; the name bucentaurus is unknown in ancient 
mythology, and the figurehead of the bucentaurs, of which 
representations have come down to us, is the lion of St Mark. 

7 See F. X. Kraus, ' ' Die Wandgemalde von San Angelo in Formis," 
in Jahrbuch der kgl. preuss. Kunstsamml. (1893), pi. i. 



BUCEPHALUS— BUCH 



7i3 



The name bucentaur seems, indeed, to have been given to any 
great and sumptuous Venetian galley. Du Cange (Gloss., s.v. 
" Bucentaurus ") quotes from the chronicle of the doge Andrea 
Dandolo (d. 1354): cum uno artificioso et solemni Bucentauro, 
super quo venit usque ad S. Clementem, quo jam pervenerat 
principalior et solemnior Bucentaurus cum consiliariis, &c. The 
last and most magnificent of the bucentaurs, built in 1729, was 
destroyed by the French in 1798 for the sake of its golden 
decorations. Remains of it are preserved at Venice in the 
Museo Civico Correr and in the Arsenal; in the latter there is 
also a fine model of it. 

The " Marriage of the Adriatic," or more correctly " of the 
sea " (Sposalizio del Mar) was a ceremony symbolizing the 
maritime dominion of Venice. The ceremony, established about 
a.d. 1000 to commemorate the doge Orseolo II. 's conquest 
of Dalmatia, was originally one of supplication and placation, 
Ascension day being chosen as that on which the doge had set 
out on his expedition. The form it took was a solemn procession 
of boats, headed by* the doge's maesta nave, afterwards the 
Bucentaur (from 13 11) out to sea by the Lido port. A prayer 
was offered that " for us and all who sail thereon the sea may be 
calm and quiet," whereupon the doge and the others were 
solemnly aspersed with holy water, the rest of which was thrown 
mto the sea while the priests chanted " Purge me with hyssop 
and I shall be clean." To this ancient ceremony a sacramental 
character was given by Pope Alexander III. in 1177, in return 
for the services rendered by Venice in the struggle against the 
emperor Frederick I. The pope drew a ring from his finger and, 
giving it to the doge, bade him cast such a one into the sea each 
year on Ascension day, and so wed the sea. Henceforth the 
ceremonial, instead of placatory and expiatory, became nuptial. 
Every year the doge dropped a consecrated ring into the sea, 
and with the words Desponsamus te, mare (We wed thee, sea) 
declared Venice and the sea to be indissolubly one (see H. F. 
Brown, Venice, London, 1893, pp. 69, no). 

BUCEPHALUS (Gr. |9ouKe</>aAos), the favourite Thracian 
horse of Alexander the Great, which died in 326 B.C., either of 
wounds received in the battle on the Hydaspes, or of old age. 
In commemoration Alexander built the city of Bucephala 
(Boukephala) , the site of which is almost certainly to be identified 
with a mound on the bank of the river opposite the modern 
Jhelum. 

See especially Arrian v. 20; other stories in Plutarch, Alex. 6; 
Curtius vi. 8. For the identification of Bucephala, Vincent A. 
Smith, Early Hist, of India (2nd ed., 1908), pp. 65, 66 note. 

BUCER (or Butzer), MARTIN (1491-1 551), German Protestant 
reformer, was born in 1491 at Schlettstadt in Alsace. In 1506 
he entered the Dominican order, and was sent to study at 
Heidelberg. There he became acquainted with the works of 
Erasmus and Luther, and was present at a disputation of the 
latter with some of the Romanist doctors. He became a convert 
to the reformed opinions, abandoned his order by papal dispensa- 
tion in 1 52 1, and soon afterwards married a nun. In 1522 he 
was pastor at Landstuhl in the palatinate, and travelled hither 
and thither propagating the reformed doctrine. After his ex- 
communication in 1523 he made his headquarters at Strassburg, 
where he succeeded Matthew Zell. Henry VIII. of England 
asked his advice in connexion with the divorce from Catherine 
of Aragon. On the question of the sacrament of the Lord's 
Supper, Bucer's opinions were decidedly Zwinglian, but he was 
anxious to maintain church unity with the Lutheran party, 
and constantly endeavoured, especially after Zwingli's death, 
to formulate a statement of belief that would unite Lutheran, 
south German and Swiss reformers. Hence the charge of 
ambiguity and obscurity which has been laid against him. In 
1548 he was sent for to Augsburg to sign the agreement, called 
the Interim, between the Catholics and Protestants. His stout 
opposition to this project exposed him to many difficulties, and 
he was glad to accept Cranmer's invitation to make his home 
in England. On his arrival in 1549 he was appointed regius 
professor of divinity at Cambridge. Edward VI. and the 
protector Somerset showed him much favour and he was con- 



sulted as to the revision of the Book of Common Prayer. But 
on the 27th of February 1551 he died, and was buried in the 
university church, with great state. In 1557, by Mary's com- 
missioners, his body was dug up and burnt, and his tomb 
demolished; it was subsequently reconstructed by order of 
Elizabeth. Bucer is said to have written ninety-six treatises, 
among them a translation and exposition of the Psalms and a 
work De regno Christi. His name is familiar in English literature 
from the use made of his doctrines by Milton in his divorce 
treatises. 

A collected edition of his writings has never been published. A 
volume known as the Tomus Anglicanus (Basel, 1577) contains those 
written in England. See J. W. Baum, Capito and Butzer (Strassburg, 
i860); A. Erichson, • Martin Butzer (1891); and the articles in the 
Diet. Nat. Biog. (by A. W. Ward), and in Herzog-Hauck's Real- 
encyklopddie (by Paul Griinberg). 

BUCH, CHRISTIAN LEOPOLD VON, Baron (1774-1853), 
German geologist and geographer, a member of an ancient and 
noble Prussian family, was born at Stolpe in Pomerania on the 
26th of April 1774. In 1 790-1 793 he studied at the mining 
school of Freiberg under Werner, one of his fellow-students 
there being Alexander von Humboldt. He afterwards completed 
his education at the universities of Halle and Gottingen. His 
Versuch einer mineralogischen Beschreibung von Landeck (Breslau, 
1797) was translated into French (Paris, 1805), and into English 
as Attempt, at a Mineralogical Description of Landeck (Edinburgh, 
1 8 10); he also published in 1802 Entwurf einer geognostischen 
Beschreibung von Schlesien (Geognostische Beobachlungen auf 
Reisen durch Deutschland und Italien, Band i.). He was at this 
time a zealous upholder of the Neptunian theory of his illustrious 
master. In 1797 he met Humboldt at Salzburg, and with him 
explored the geological formations of Styria, and the adjoining 
Alps. In the spring of the following year, von Buch extended 
his excursions into Italy, where his faith in the Neptunian theory 
was shaken. In his previous works he had advocated the 
aqueous origin of basaltic and other formations. In 1799 he 
paid his first visit to Vesuvius, and again in 1805 he returned to 
study the volcano, accompanied by Humboldt and Gay Lussac. 
They had the good fortune to witness a remarkable eruption, 
which supplied von Buch with data for refuting many erroneous 
ideas then entertained regarding volcanoes. In 1802 he had 
explored the extinct volcanoes of Auvergne. The aspect of the 
Puy de Dome, with its cone of trachyte and its strata of basaltic 
lava, induced him to abandon as untenable the doctrines of 
Werner on the formation of these rocks. The scientific results 
of his investigations he embodied in his Geognostische Beobach- 
lungen auf Reisen durch Deutschland und Italien (Berlin, 1802- 
1809). From the south of Europe von Buch repaired to the 
north, and spent two years among the Scandinavian islands, 
making many important observations on the geography of 
plants, on climatology and on geology. He showed that many 
of the erratic blocks on the North German plains must have 
come from Scandinavia. He also established the fact that the 
whole of Sweden is slowly but continuously rising above the 
level of the sea from Frederikshald to Abo. The details of these 
discoveries are given in his Reise durch Norwegen und Lappland 
(Berlin, 1810). In i8i5hevisitedtheCanaryIslandsincompany 
with Christian Smith, the Norwegian botanist. His observations 
here convinced him that these and other islands of the Atlantic 
owed their existence to volcanic action of the most intense kind, 
and that the groups of islands in the South Sea are the remains 
of a pre-existing continent. The physical description of the 
Canary Islands was published at Berlin in 1825, and this work 
alone is regarded as an enduring monument of his labours. 
After leaving the Canaries von Buch proceeded to the Hebrides 
and the coasts of Scotland and Ireland. Palaeontology also 
claimed his attention, and he described in 183 1 and later years 
a number of Cephalopods, Brachiopods and Cystidea, and 
pointed out their stratigraphical importance. In addition to the 
works already mentioned von Buch published in 1832 the 
magnificent Geological Map of Germany (42 sheets, Berlin). 
His geological excursions were continued without interruption 
till his 78th year. Eight months before his death he visited 



7 r 4 



BUCHAN, EARLS OF— BUCHANAN, GEORGE 



the mountains of Auvergne; and on returning home he read a 
paper on the Jurassic formation before the Academy of Berlin. 
He died at Berlin on the 4th of March 1853. Von Buch had 
inherited from his father a fortune more than sufficient for his 
wants. He was never married, and was unembarrassed by 
family ties. His excursions were always taken on foot, with 
a staff in his hand, and the large pockets of his overcoat filled 
with papers and geological instruments. Under this guise, the 
passer-by would not easily have recognized the man whom 
Humboldt pronounced the greatest geologist of his time. 

A complete edition of his works was published at Berlin (1867- 
1885). 

BUCHAN, EARLS OF. The earldom of Mar and Buchan was 
one of the seven original Scottish earldoms; later, Buchan was 
separated from Mar, and among the early earls of Buchan were 
Alexander Comyn (d. 1289), John Comyn (d. c. 1313), both 
constables of Scotland, and Henry Beaumont (d. 1340), who 
had married a Comyn. John Comyn's wife, Isabel, was the 
countess of Buchan who crowned Robert the Bruce king at 
Scone in 1306, and was afterwards imprisoned at Berwick; not, 
however, in a cage hung on the wall of the castle. About 1382 
Sir Alexander Stewart (d. c. 1404), the " wolf of Badenoch," a 
son of King Robert II., became earl of Buchan, and the Stewarts 
appear to have held the earldom for about a century and a half, 
although not in a direct line from Sir Alexander. 1 Among the 
most celebrated of the Stewart earls were the Scottish regent, 
Robert, duke of Albany, and his son John, who was made 
constable of France and was killed at the battle of Verneuil in 
1424. In 1617 the earldom came to James Erskine (d. 1640), a 
son of John Erskine, 2nd (or 7th) earl of Mar, whose wife Mary 
had inherited it from her father, James Douglas (d. 1601), and 
from that time it has been retained by the Erskines. 

Perhaps the most celebrated of the later earls of Buchan was 
the eccentric David Steuart Erskine, nth earl (1742-1829), a son 
of Henry David, 10th earl (d. 1767), and brother of Henry 
Erskine (q.v.), and of Thomas, Lord Erskine (q.v.). His per- 
tinacity was instrumental in effecting a change in the method of 
electing Scottish representative peers, and in 1780 he succeeded 
in founding the Scottish Society of Antiquaries. Among his 
correspondents was Horace Walpole, and he wrote an Essay 
on the Lives 0} Fletcher of Saltoun and the Poet Thomson (1792), 
and other writings. He died at his residence at Dryburgh in 
April 1829, leaving no legitimate children, and was followed as 
12th earl by his nephew Henry David (i783-i8'S7), the ancestor 
of the present peer. The nth earl's natural son, Sir David 
Erskine (1772-1837), who inherited his father's unentailed 
estates, was an antiquary and a dramatist. 

BUCHAN, ELSPETH (1738-1791), founder of a Scottish re- 
ligious sect known as the Buchanites, was the daughter of John 
Simpson, proprietor of an inn near Banff. Having quarrelled 
with her husband, Robert Buchan, a potter of Greenock, she 
settled with her children in Glasgow, where she was deeply 
impressed by a sermon preached by Hugh White, minister of 
the Relief church at Irvine. She persuaded White and others 
that she was a saint with a special mission, that in fact she was 
the woman, and White the man-child, described in Revelation 
xii. White was condemned by the presbytery, and the sect, 
which ultimately numbered forty-six adherents, was expelled 
by the magistrates in 1784 and settled in a farm, consisting 
of one room and a loft, known as New Cample in Dumfriesshire. 
Mrs Buchan claimed prophetic inspiration and pretended to 
confer the Holy Ghost upon her followers by breathing upon 
them; they believed that the millennium was near, and that they 
would not die, but be translated. It appears that they had 
community of wives and lived on funds provided by the richer 
members. Robert Burns, the poet, in a letter dated August 
1784, describes the sect as idle and immoral. In 1785 White 
and Mrs Buchan published a Divine Dictionary, but the sect 
broke up on the death of its founder in spite of White's attempts 

1 In August 1908, during some excavations at Dunkeld, remains 
were found which are supposed to be those of Alexander Stewart, 
the "wolf of Badenoch." 



to prove that she was only in a trance. Even White was eventu- 
ally undeceived. Andrew Innes, the last survivor, died in 1848. 
See J. Train, The Buchanites from First to Last (Edinburgh, 1846). 

BUCHAN, PETER (1790-1854), Scottish editor, was born 
at Peterhead, Aberdeenshire, in 1790. In 1816 he started in 
business as a printer at Peterhead, and was successful enough 
to be able eventually to retire and devote himself to the collection 
and editing of Scottish ballads. His Ancient Ballads and Songs 
of the North of Scotland (1828) contained a large number of 
hitherto unpublished ballads, and newly discovered versions 
of existing ones. Another collection made by him was published 
by the Percy Society, under the title Scottish Traditional Versions 
of Ancient Ballads (1845). Two unpublished volumes of Buchan's 
ballad collections are in the British Museum. He died on the 
19th of September 1854. 

BUCHANAN, CLAUDIUS (.1766-1815), English divine, was 
born at Cambuslang, near Glasgow, and educated at the univer- 
sities of Glasgow and Cambridge. He was ordained in 1795, 
and after holding a chaplaincy in India at Barrackpur (1797- 
1799) was appointed Calcutta chaplain and vice-principal of 
the college of Fort William. In this capacity he did much to 
advance Christianity and native education in India, especially 
by organizing systematic translations of the Scriptures. An 
account of his travels in the south and west of India, which added 
considerably to our knowledge of nature life, is given in his 
Christian Researches in A sia ( Cambridge, 1 8 1 1 ) . After his return 
to England in 1808, he still took an active part in matters con- 
nected with India, and by his book entitled Colonial Ecclesiastical 
Establishment (London, 1813), he assisted in settling the contro- 
versy of 1 8 1 3, which ended in the establishment of the Indian 
episcopate. 

BUCHANAN, GEORGE (1506-1582), Scottish humanist, was 
born in February 1506. His father, a younger son of an old 
family, was the possessor of the farm of Moss, in the parish 
of Killearn, Stirlingshire, but he died at an early age, leaving 
his widow and children in poverty. His mother, Agnes Heriot, 
was of the family of the Heriots of Trabroun, Haddingtonshire, 
of which George Heriot, founder of Heriot's hospital, was also 
a member. Buchanan is said to have attended Killearn school, 
but not much is known of his early education. In 1520 he was 
sent by his uncle, James Heriot, to the university of Paris, where, 
as he tells us in an autobiographical sketch, he devoted himself 
to the writing of verses " partly by liking, partly by compulsion 
(that being then the one task prescribed to youth)." In 1522 
his uncle died, and Buchanan being thus unable to continue 
longer in Paris, returned to Scotland. After recovering from 
a severe illness, he joined the French auxiliaries who had been 
brought over by John Stewart, duke of Albany, and took part 
in an unsuccessful inroad into England (see the account in his 
Hist, of Scotland) . In the following year he entered the university 
of St Andrews, where he graduated B.A. in 1525. He had gone 
there chiefly for the purpose of attending the celebrated John 
Major's lectures on logic; and when that teacher removed to 
Paris, Buchanan followed him in 1526. In 1527 he graduated 
B.A., and in 1528 M.A. at Paris. Next year he was appointed 
regent, or professor, in the college of Sainte-Barbe, and taught 
there for upwards of three years. In 1529 he was elected Pro- 
curator of the " German Nation " in the university of Paris, 
and was re-elected four times in four successive months. He 
resigned his regentship in 1531, and in 1532 became tutor to 
Gilbert Kennedy, 3rd earl of Cassilis, with whom he returned 
to Scotland about the beginning of 1537. 

At this period Buchanan was content to assume the same 
attitude towards the Church of Rome that Erasmus maintained. 
He did not repudiate its doctrines, but considered himself free 
to criticize its practice. Though he listened with interest to the 
arguments of the Reformers, he did not join their ranks before 
1553. His first production in Scotland, when he was in Lord 
Cassilis's household in the west country, was the poem Somnium, 
a satirical attack upon the Franciscan friars and monastic life 
generally. This assault on the monks was not displeasing to 
James V., who engaged Buchanan as tutor to one of his natural 



BUCHANAN, GEORGE 



7i5 



sons, Lord James Stewart (not the son who was afterwards 
the regent Murray), and encouraged him to a still more daring 
effort. In these circumstances the poems Palinodia and Fran- 
ciscanus &° Fratres were written, and, although they remained 
unpublished for many years, it is not surprising that the author 
became an object of bitterest hatred to the order and their 
friends. Nor was it yet a safe matter to assail the church. In 
1539 there was a bitter persecution of the Lutherans, and 
Buchanan among others was arrested. He managed to effect 
his escape and with considerable difficulty made his way to 
London and thence to Paris. In Paris, however, he found his 
enemy, Cardinal David Beaton, who was there as an ambassador, 
and on the invitation of Andre de Gouvea, proceeded to Bor- 
deaux. Gouvea was then principal of the newly founded college 
of Guienne at Bordeaux, and by his exertions Buchanan was 
appointed professor of Latin. During his residence here several 
of his best works, the translations of Medea and Alcestis, and the 
two dramas, Jephthes {sive Votum) and Baptistes {sive Calumnia) , 
were completed. Montaigne was Buchanan's pupil at Bordeaux 
and acted in his tragedies. In the essay Of Presumption he 
classes Buchanan with Aurat, Beza, de L'H6pital, Montdore 
and Turnebus, as one of the foremost Latin poets of his time. 
Here also Buchanan formed a lasting friendship with Julius 
Caesar Scaliger; in later life he won the admiration of Joseph 
Scaliger, who wrote an epigram on Buchanan which contains 
the couplet, famous in its day: — 

" Imperii fuerat Romani Scotia limes; 
Romani eloquii Scotia limes erit?" 

In 1542 or 1543 he returned to Paris, and in 1544 was appointed 
regent in the college of Cardinal le Moine. Among his colleagues 
were the renowned Muretus and Tumebus. 

In 1547 Buchanan joined the band of French and Portuguese 
humanists who had been invited by Andre de Gouvea to lecture 
in the Portuguese university of Coimbra. The French mathe- 
matician Elie Vinet, and the Portuguese historian, Jeronimo 
de Osorio, were among his colleagues; Gouvea, called by 
Montaigne le plus grand principal de France, was rector of the 
university, which had reached the summit of its prosperity 
under the patronage of King John III. But the rectorship had 
been coveted by Diogo de Gouvea, uncle of Andre and formerly 
head of Sainte-Barbe. It is probable that before Andre's death 
at the end of 1547 Diogo had urged the Inquisition to attack 
him and his staff; up to 1906, when the records of the trial were 
first published in full, Buchanan's biographers generally attri- 
buted the attack to the influence of Cardinal Beaton, the Fran- 
ciscans, or the Jesuits, and the whole history of Buchanan's 
residence in Portugal was extremely obscure. 

A commission of inquiry was appointed in October 1549 and 
reported in June 1550. Buchanan and two Portuguese, Diogo 
de Teive and Joao da Costa (who had succeeded to the rector- 
ship), were committed for trial. Teive and Costa were found 
guilty of various offences against public order, and the evidence 
shows that there was ample reason for a judicial inquiry. 
Buchanan was accused of Lutheran and Judaistic practices. 
He defended himself with conspicuous ability, courage and 
frankness, admitting that some of the charges were true. About 
June 1 551 he was sentenced to abjure his errors, and to be im- 
prisoned in the monastery of Sao Bento in Lisbon. Here he 
was compelled to listen to edifying discourses from the monks, 
whom he found " not unkind but ignorant." In his leisure he 
began to translate the Psalms into Latin verse. After seven 
months he was released, on condition that he remained in Lisbon; 
and on the 28th of February 1552 this restriction was annulled. 
Buchanan at once sailed for England, but soon made his way 
to Paris, where in 1553 he was appointed regent in the college 
of Boncourt. He remained in that post for two years, and then 
accepted the office of tutor to the son of the Marechal de Brissac. 
It was almost certainly during this last stay in France, where 
Protestantism was being repressed with great severity by 
Francis I., that Buchanan ranged himself on the side of the 
Calvinists. 

In 1560 or 1561 he returned to Scotland, and in April 1562 



we find him installed as tutor to the young queen Mary, who was 
accustomed to read Livy with him daily. Buchanan now openly 
joined the Protestant, or Reformed Church, and in 1566 was 
appointed by the earl of Murray principal of St Leonard's 
College, St Andrews. Two years before he had received from the 
queen the valuable gift of the revenues of Crossraguel Abbey. 
He was thus in good circumstances, and his fame was steadily 
increasing. So great, indeed, was his reputation for learning and 
administrative capacity that, though a layman, he was made 
moderator of the general assembly in 1567. He had sat in the 
assemblies from 1563. 

Buchanan accompanied the regent Murray into England, 
and his Detectio (published in 1572) was produced to the com- 
missioners at Westminster. In 1570, after the assassination of 
Murray, he was appointed one of the preceptors of the young 
king, and it was through his tuition that James VI. acquired his 
scholarship. While discharging the functions of royal tutor 
he also held other important offices. He was for a short time 
director of chancery, and then became lord privy seal, a post 
which entitled him to a seat in the parliament. He appears to 
have continued in this office for some years, at least till 1579. 
He died on the 28th of September 1582. 

His last years had been occupied with two of his most im- 
portant works. The first was the treatise De Jure Regni apud 
Scotos, published in 1579. In this famous work, composed in 
the form of a dialogue, and evidently intended to instil sound 
political principles into the mind of his pupil, Buchanan lays 
down the doctrine that the source of all political power is the 
people, that the king is bound- by those conditions under which 
the supreme power was first committed to his hands, and that it 
is lawful to resist, even to punish, tyrants. The importance of 
the work is proved by the persistent efforts of the legislature to 
suppress it during the century following its publication. It 
was condemned by act of parliament in 1584, and again in 1664; 
and in 1683 it was burned by the university of Oxford. The 
second of his larger works is the history of Scotland, Rerum 
Scolicarum Historia, completed shortly before his death (1579), 
and published in 1 582. It is of great value for the period person- 
ally known to the author, which occupies the greater portion of 
the book. The earlier part is based, to a considerable extent, 
on the legendary history of Boece. Buchanan's purpose was to 
" purge " the national history " of sum Inglis lyis and Scottis 
vanite " {Letter to Randolph), but he exaggerated his freedom 
from partisanship and unconsciously criticized his work when 
he said that it would "content few and displease many." 

Buchanan is one of Scotland's greatest scholars. For mastery 
over the Latin language he has seldom been surpassed by any 
modern writer. His style is not rigidly modelled upon that of 
any classical author, but has a certain freshness and elasticity 
of its own. He wrote Latin as if it had been his mother tongue. 
But in addition to this perfect command over the language, 
Buchanan had a rich vein of poetical feeling, and much originality 
of thought. His translations of the Psalms and of the Greek 
plays are more than mere versions; the smaller satirical poems 
abound in wit and in happy phrase; his two tragedies, Baptistes 
and Jephthes, have enjoyed from the first an undiminished 
European reputation for academic excellence. In addition to the 
works already named, Buchanan wrote in prose Chamaeleon, a 
satire in the vernacular against Maitland of Lethington, first 
printed in 171 1; a Latin translation of Linacre's Grammar 
(Paris, 1533); Libellus de Prosodia (Edinburgh, 1640); and 
Vita ab ipso scripta biennio ante mortem (1608), edited by 
R. Sibbald (1702). His other poems are Fratres Fraterrimi, 
Elegiae, Silvae, two sets of verses entitled Hendecasyllabon 
Liber and Iambon Liber; three books of Epigrammata; a book 
of miscellaneous verse; De Sphaera (in five books), suggested 
by the poem of Joannes de Sacrobosco, and intended as a defence 
of the Ptolemaic theory against the new Copernican view. 

There are two editions of Buchanan's works: — (a) Georgii 
Buchanani Scoti, Poetarum sui seculi facile principis, Opera Omnia, 
in two vols, fol., edited by Ruddiman (Edinburgh, Freebairn, 
I 7 I 5); (b) edited by Burman, 4to, 1725. The Vernacular Writings, 



716 



BUCHANAN, JAMES 



consisting of the Chamaeleon (u.s.),a tract on the Reformation of St 
Andrews University, Ane Admonitioun to the Trew Lordis, and two 
letters, were edited for the Scottish Text Society by P. Hume 
Brown. The principal biographies are : — David Irving, Memoirs of 
the Life and Writings of George Buchanan (Edinburgh, 1807 and 1817) ; 
P. Hume Brown, George Buchanan, Humanist and Reformer (Edin- 
burgh, 1890), George Buchanan and his Times (Edinburgh, 1906); 
Rev. D. Macmillan, George Buchanan, a Biography (Edinburgh, 
1906). Buchanan's quatercentenary was celebrated at different 
centres in Scotland in 1906, and was the occasion of several encomia 
and studies. The most important of these are: George Buchanan: 
Glasgow Quatercentenary Studies (Glasgow, 1 906), and George 
Buchanan, a Memoir, edited by D. A. Millar (St Andrews, 1907). 
A verse translation of the Baptistes, entitled Tyrannicall-Government 
Anatomized (1642), has been attributed to Milton; its authorship is 
discussed in the Glasgow Quatercentenary Studies. The records of 
Buchanan's trial, discovered by the Portuguese historian, G. J. C. 
Henriques, were published by him under the title George Buchanan 
in the Lisbon Inquisition. The Records of his Trial, with a Transla- 
tion thereof into English, Facsimiles of some of the Papers, and an 
Introduction (Lisbon, 1906). 

BUCHANAN, JAMES (1791-1868), fifteenth president of the 
United States, was born near Foltz, Franklin county, Pennsyl- 
vania, on the 23rd of April 1791. Both parents were of Scottish- 
Irish Presbyterian descent. He graduated at Dickinson College, 
Carlisle, Pennsylvania, in 1809, studied law at Lancaster in 1809- 
1812, and was admitted to the bar in 1812. He served in the 
lower house of the state legislature in 1814-1816, and as a repre- 
sentative in Congress from 1821 to 1831. As chairman of the 
judiciary committee he conducted the impeachment trial (1830) 
of Judge James H. Peck, led an unsuccessful movement to 
increase the number of Supreme Court judges and to relieve them 
of their circuit duties, and succeeded in defeating an attempt 
to repeal the twenty-fifth section of'the Judiciary Act of 1789, 
which gave the Supreme Court appellate jurisdiction by writ 
of error to the state courts in cases where federal laws and treaties 
are in question. After the dissolution of the Federalist party, of 
which he had been a member, he supported the Jackson- Van 
Buren faction, and soon came to be definitely associated with the 
Democrats. He represented the United States at the court of 
St Petersburg in 1832-1833, and there negotiated an important 
commercial treaty. . He was a Democratic member of the United 
States Senate from December 1834 until March 1845, ardently 
supporting President Jackson, and was secretary of state in the 
cabinet of President Polk from 1845 to 1849 — a period marked 
by the annexation of Texas, the Mexican War, and negotiations 
with Great Britain relative to the Oregon question. After four 
years of retirement spent in the practice of his profession, he was 
appointed by President Pierce minister to Great Britain in 1853. 
Up to this time Buchanan's attitude on the slavery question 
had been that held by the conservative element among Northern 
Democrats. He felt that the institution was morally wrong, 
but held that Congress could not interfere with it in the states 
in which it existed, and ought not to hinder the natural tendency 
toward territorial expansion through a fear that the evil would 
spread. He voted for the bill to exclude anti-slavery literature 
from the mails, approved of the annexation of Texas, the war 
with Mexico, and the Compromise of 1850, and disapproved of 
the Wilmot Proviso. Fortunately for his career he was abroad 
during the Kansas-Nebraska debates, and hence did not share 
in the unpopularity which attached to Stephen A. Douglas as 
the author of the bill, and to President Pierce as the executive 
who was called upon to enforce it. At the same time, by joining 
with J. Y. Mason and Pierre Soule in issuing the Ostend Mani- 
festo in 1854, he retained the good-will of the South. 1 Accord- 
1 This " manifesto," which was bitterly attacked in the North, 
was agreed upon (October 18, 1854) by the three ministers after 
several meetings at Ostend and at Aix-la-Chapelle, arranged in 
pursuance of instructions to therr. from President Pierce to " com- 
pare opinions, and to adopt measures for perfect concert of action 
in aid of the negotiations at Madrid " on the subject of reparations 
demanded from Spain by the United States for alleged injuries to 
American commerce with Cuba. In the manifesto the three ministers 
asserted that " from the peculiarity of its geographical position, 
and the considerations attendant upon it, Cuba is as necessary to 
the North American republic as any of its present members"; 
spoke of the danger to the United States of an insurrection in Cuba ; 
asserted that " we should be recreant to our duty, be unworthy 



ingly on his return from England in 1856 he was nominated by 
the Democrats as a compromise candidate for president, and 
was elected, receiving 174 electoral votes to 114 for John C. 
Fremont, Republican, and 8 for Millard Fillmore, American or 
" Know-Nothing. " 

His high moral character, the breadth of his legal knowledge, 
and his experience as congressman, cabinet member and diplo- 
mat, would have made Buchanan an excellent president in 
ordinary times; but he lacked the soundness of judgment, the 
self-reliance and the moral courage needed to face a crisis. At 
the beginning of his administration he appointed Robert J. 
Walker of Mississippi, territorial governor of Kansas, and 
Frederick P. Stanton of Tennessee, secretary, and assured them 
of his determination to adhere to the popular sovereignty prin- 
ciple. He soon began to use his influence, however, to force 
the admission of Kansas into the Union under the pro-slavery 
Lecompton Constitution, contrary to the wishes of the majority 
of the settlers. Stanton was removed from office for opposing the 
scheme, and Walker resigned in disgust. This change of policy 
was doubtless the result of timidity rather than of a desire to 
secure re-election by gaining the favour of the Southern Demo- 
cracy. Under the influence of Howell Cobb of Georgia, secretary 
of the treasury, and Jacob Thompson of Mississippi, secretary 
of the interior, the president was convinced that it was the only 
way to avoid civil war. Federal patronage was freely used to 
advance the Lecompton measure and the compromise English 
Bill, and to prevent Douglas's election to the Senate in 1858. 
Some of these facts were brought out in the famous Covode 
Investigation conducted by a committee of the House of Re- 
presentatives in i860. The investigations, however, were very 
partisan in character, and there is reason to doubt the con- 
stitutional power of the House to make it, except as the basis 
for an impeachment trial. 

The call issued by the South Carolina legislature just after 
the election of Lincoln for a state convention to decide upon 
the advisability of secession brought forward the most serious 
question of Buchanan's administration. The part of his annual 
message of the 4th of December i860 dealing with it is based 
upon a report prepared by Attorney-General Jeremiah S. Black 
of Pennsylvania. He argued that a state had no legal right to 
secede, but denied that the federal government had any power 
forcibly to prevent it. At the same time it was the duty of the 
president to call out the army and navy of the United States 
to protect federal property or to enforce federal laws. Soon 
after the secession movement began the Southern members of 
the cabinet resigned, and the president gradually came under 
the influence of Black, Stanton, Dix, and other Northern leaders. 
He continued, however, to work for a peaceful settlement, 
supporting the Crittenden Compromise and the work of the 
Peace Congress. He disapproved of Major Anderson's removal 
of his troops from Fort Moultrie to Fort Sumter in December 
i860; but there is probably no basis for the charge made by 
Southern writers that the removal itself was in violation of a 
pledge given by the president to preserve the status quo in 
Charleston harbour until the arrival of the South Carolina 
commissioners in Washington. Equally unfounded is the 
assertion first made by Thurlow Weed in the London Observer 
(9th of February 1862) that the president was prevented from 
ordering Anderson back to Fort Moultrie only by the threat of 
four members of the cabinet to resign. 

of our gallant forefathers, and commit base treason against our 
posterity, should we permit Cuba to be Africanized and become a 
second Santo Domingo, with all its attendant horrors to the white 
race, and suffer the flames to extend to our own neighboring shores, 
seriously to endanger or actually destroy the fair fabric of our 
Union"; and recommended that "the United States ought, if 
practicable, to purchase Cuba as soon as possible." To Spain, they 
argued, the sale of thei island would be a great advantage. The 
most startling declaration of the manifesto was that if Spain should 
refuse to sell " after we shall have offered a price for Cuba far beyond 
its present value," and if Cuba, in the possession of Spain, should 
seriously endanger " our internal peace and the existence of our 
cherished Union," then " by every law, human and divine, we shall 
be justified in wresting it from Spain if we have the power." 



BUCHANAN, R. W.— BUCHAREST 



7*7 



On the expiration of his term of office(March 4, 1861) Buchanan 
retired to his home at Wheatland, near Lancaster, Pennsylvania, 
where he died on the 1st of June 1868. His mistakes as president 
have been so emphasized as to obscure the fact that he was a 
man of unimpeachable honesty, of the highest patriotism, and 
of considerable ability. He never married. 

See George Ticknor Curtis, The Life of James Buchanan (2 vols., 
New York, 1883), the standard biography; Curtis, however, was a 
close personal and political friend, and his work is too eulogistic. 
More trustworthy, but at times unduly severe, is the account given 
by James Ford Rhodes in the first two volumes of his History of the 
United States since the Compromise of 1850 (New York, new edition, 
.1902-1907). John Bassett Moore has edited The Works of James 
Buchanan, comprising his Speeches, State Papers, and Private Corre- 
spondence (Philadelphia, 1908-1910). 

BUCHANAN, ROBERT WILLIAMS (1841-1901), British poet, 
novelist and dramatist, son of Robert Buchanan (1813-1866), 
Owenite lecturer and journalist, was born at Caverswall, Stafford- 
shire, on the 18th of August 1841. His father, a native of Ayr, 
after living for some years in Manchester, removed to Glasgow, 
where Buchanan was educated, at the high school and the univer- 
sity, one of his fellow-students being the poet David Gray. His 
essay on Gray, originally contributed to the Cornhill Magazine, 
tells the story of their close friendship, and of their journey to 
London in i860 in search of fame. After a period of struggle 
and disappointment Buchanan published Undertones in 1863. 
This " tentative " volume was followed by Idyls and Legends 
of Inverbum (1865), London Poems (1866), and North Coast and 
other Poems (1868), wherein he displayed a faculty for poetic 
narrative, and a sympathetic insight into the humbler conditions 
of life. On the whole, Buchanan is at his best in these narrative 
poems, though he essayed a more ambitious flight in The Book 
of Orm: A Prelude to the Epic, a study in mysticism, which 
appeared in 1870. He was a frequent contributor to periodical 
literature, and obtained notoriety by an article which, under the 
nom de plume of Thomas Maitland, he contributed to the Contem- 
porary Review for October 187 1, entitled " The Fleshly School 
of Poetry." This article was expanded into a pamphlet (1872), 
but he subsequently withdrew from the criticisms it contained, 
and it is chiefly remembered by the replies it evoked from D. G. 
Rossetti in a letter to the Athenaeum (16th December 1871), 
entitled " The Stealthy School of Criticism," and from Mr 
Swinburne in Under the Microscope (1872). Buchanan himself 
afterwards regretted the violence of his attack, and the " old 
enemy " to whom Cod and the Man is dedicated was Rossetti. 
In 1876 appeared The Shadow of the Sword, the first and one of 
the best of a long series of novels. Buchanan was also the 
author of many successful plays, among which may be mentioned 
Lady Clare, produced in 1883; Sophia (1886), an adaptation of 
Tom Jones; A Man's Shadow (1890); and The Chatlatan (1894). 
He also wrote, in collaboration with Harriett Jay, the melodrama 
Alone in London. In 1896 he became, so far as some of his work 
was concerned, his own publisher. In the autumn of 1900 he 
had a paralytic seizure, from which he never recovered. He 
died at Streatham on the 10th of June 1901. 

Buchanan's poems were collected into three volumes in 1874, 
into one volume in 1884; and as Complete Poetical Works (2 vols., 
1901). Among his poems should also be mentioned: " The 
Drama of Kings" (1871); "St Abe and his Seven Wives," 
a lively tale of Salt Lake City, published anonymously in 1872; 
and "Balder the Beautiful" (1877); "The City of Dream" 
(1888); " The Outcast: a Rhyme for the Time " (1891); and 
" The Wandering Jew " (1893). His earlier novels, The Shadow 
of the Sword, and God and the Man (1881), a striking tale of a 
family feud, are distinguished by a certain breadth and simplicity 
of treatment which is not so noticeable in their successors, 
among which may be mentioned The Martyrdom of Madeline 
(1882); Foxglove Manor (1885); Effie Hetherington (1896); 
and Father Anthony (1898). David Gray and other Essays, 
chiefly on Poetry (1868); Master Spirits (1873); A Poet's 
Sketch Book (1883), in which the interesting essay on Gray 
is reprinted; and A Look round Literature (1887), contain 
Buchanan's chief contributions to periodical literature. More 



valuable is The Land of Lome (2 vols., 1871), a vivid record of 
yachting experiences on the west coast of Scotland. 

See also Harriett Jay, Robert Buchanan; some Account of his Life 
(1903)- 

BUCHAREST (Bucuresci), also written Bucarest, Bukarest, 
Bukharest, Bukorest and Bukhorest, the capital of Rumania, 
and chief town of the department of Ilfov. Although Bucharest 
is the conventional English spelling, the forms Bucarest and 
Bukarest more nearly represent the correct pronunciation. The 
population in 1900 was 282,071, including 43,274 Jews, and 
53,056 aliens, mostly Austro-Hungarian subjects. With its 
outlying parts, Bucharest covers more than 20 sq. m. It lies 
in a hollow, traversed from north-west to south-east by the 
river Dimbovitza (Ddmbovita or Dtmbovita), and is built mainly 
on the left bank. A range of low hills affords shelter on the west 
and south-west; but on every other side there are drained, 
though still unhealthy, marshes, stretching away to meet the 
central Walachian plains. From a distance, the multitude of 
its gardens, and the turrets and metal-plated or gilded cupolas 
of its many churches give Bucharest a certain picturesqueness. 
In a few of the older districts, too, where land is least valuable, 
there are antique one-storeyed houses, surrounded by poplars and 
acacias; while the gipsies and Rumans, wearing their brightly 
coloured native costumes, the Russian coachmen, or sleigh- 
drivers, of the banished Lipovan sect, and the pedlars, with 
their doleful street cries, render Bucharest unlike any western 
capital. Nevertheless, the city is modern. Until about i860, 
indeed, the dimly lit lanes were paved with rough stone blocks, 
imbedded in the clay soil, which often subsided, so as to leave 
the surface undulating like a sea. Drains were rare, epidemics 
common. Owing to the frequency of earthquakes, many houses 
were built of wood, and in 1847 fully a quarter of the city 
was laid waste by fire. The plague visited Bucharest in 17 18, 
1738, 1793, when an earthquake destroyed a number of old 
buildings, and in 1813, when 70,000 of the inhabitants died in 
six weeks. From the accession of Prince Charles, in 1866, a 
gradual reform began. The river was enclosed between stone 
embankments; .sewerage and pure water were supplied, gas and 
electric light installed; and horse or electric tramways laid 
down in the principal thoroughfares, which were paved with 
granite or wood. The older houses are of brick, overlaid with 
white or tinted plaster, and ornamented with figures or foliage 
in terra-cotta; but owing to the great changes of temperature 
in Rumania, the plaster soon cracks and peels off, giving a 
dilapidated appearance to many streets. The chief modern 
buildings, such as the Athenaeum, with its Ionic facade and 
Byzantine dome, are principally on the quays and boulevards, 
and are constructed of stone. 

Bucharest is often called " The Paris of the East," partly from 
a supposed social resemblance, partly from the number of its 
boulevards and avenues. Three main thoroughfares, the Plevna, 
Lipscani, and Vacaresci, skirt the left bank of the river; the 
Elizabeth Boulevard, and the Calea Victoriel, or " Avenue of 
Victory," which commemorates the Rumanian success at 
Plevna, in 1877, radiate east and north, respectively, from the 
Lipscani, and meet a broad road which surrounds all sides of 
Bucharest, except the north-west. The Lipscani was originally 
the street of merchants who obtained their wares from the annual 
fair at Leipzig; for almost ail crafts or gilds, other than the 
bakers and tavern-keepers, were long confined to separate 
quarters; and the old names have survived, as in the musicians', 
furriers', and money-changers' quarters. Continuous with the 
Calea Victoriel, on the north, is the Kisilev Park, traversed by 
the Chausee, a favourite drive, leading to the pretty Baneasa 
race-course, where spring and autumn meetings are held. The 
Cismegiu or Cismigiu Park, which has a circumference of about 
1 m., is laid out between the Plevna road and the Calea 
Victoriel; and there are botanical and zoological gardens. 

The Orthodox Greek churches are generally small, with very 
narrow windows, and are built of brick in a modified Byzantine 
style. They are usually surmounted by two or three towers, 
but the bells are hung in a kind of wooden porch, resembling a 



7 i8 



BUCHELER— BUCHER 



lych-gate, and standing about twenty paces from the church. 
The cathedral, or metropolitan church, where the metropolitan 
primate of Rumania officiates, was built between 1656 and 1665. 
It has the shape of a Greek cross, surrounded by a broad cloister, 
with four main entrances, each surmounted by a turret. The 
whole culminates in three brick towers. Standing on high 
ground, the cathedral overlooks all Bucharest, and commands 
a view of the Carpathians. Other interesting churches are St 
Spiridion the New (1768), the loftiest and most beautiful of all; 
the Doamna Balasa (1751), noteworthy for its rich carved work 
without, and frescoes within; and the ancient Biserica Bucur, 
said, in local traditions, to derive its name from Bucur, a shepherd 
whom legend makes the founder of Bucharest. The real founder 
and date of this church, and of many others, are unknown, 
thanks to the frequent obliteration of Slavonic inscriptions by 
the Greek clergy. The Protestants, Armenians and Lipovans 
worship in their own churches, and the Jews have several 
synagogues. Bucharest is also the seat of a Roman Catholic 
archbishop; but the Roman Catholics, though numbering 
nearly 37,000 in 1899, possess only three churches, including 
the cathedral of St Joseph. 

Bucharest is a great educational centre. Besides the ordinary 
ecclesiastical seminaries, lyceums, gymnasia and elementary 
schools, it possesses schools of commerce, science and art 
institutes, and training colleges, for engineers and veterinary 
surgeons; while the university, founded in 1864, has faculties 
of theology, philosophy, literature, law, science, medicine and 
pharmacy. Students pay no fees except for board. The national 
library, containing many precious Oriental documents, and the 
meeting-hall of the Rumanian senate, are both included in the 
university buildings, which, with the Athenaeum (used for 
literary conferences and for music), and the central girls' 
school, are regarded as the best example of modern Rumanian 
architecture. Other libraries are those of the Nifon seminary, 
of the Charles University Foundation (Funda{iunea universitara 
Carol), which endows research, and rewards literary or scientific 
merit; the central library, and the library of the Academy, 
which also contains a museum of natural history and antiquities. 
Among philanthropic institutions may be mentioned the Coltei, 
BrancoVan, Maternitate, Philantropia and Pantelimon hospitals; 
the Marcutza lunatic asylum; and the Princess Elena refuge 
(Asilul Elena Doamna), founded by Princess Elena Couza in 
1862, to provide for 230 orphan girls. The summer home of 
these girls is a convent in the Transylvanian Alps. Hotels and 
restaurants are numerous. There are two theatres, the National 
and the Lyric, which is mainly patronized by foreign players; 
but minor places of amusement abound; as also do clubs — 
political, social and sporting. Socially, indeed, the progress 
of Bucharest is remarkable, its political, literary and scientific 
circles being on a level with those of most European capitals. 

Bucharest is the winter residence of the royal family, the 
meeting-place of parliament, and the seat of an appeal court 
(Curtea de A pel), of the supreme court {Curtea de Casatie), 
of the ministries, the national bank, the bank of Rumania, many 
lesser credit establishments, and a chamber of commerce. The 
railway lines which meet on the western limit of the city give 
access to all parts, and the telephone system, besides being 
internally complete, communicates with Braila, Galatz, Jassy and 
Sinaia. Bucharest has a very large transit trade in petroleum, 
timber and agricultural produce; above all, in wheat and maize. 
Its industries include petroleum-refining, extraction of vegetable 
oils, cabinet-making, brandy-distilling, tanning, and the manu- 
facture of machinery, wire, nails, metal-ware, cement, soap, 
candles, paste, starch, paper, cardboard, pearl buttons, textiles, 
leather goods, ropes, glucose, army supplies, preserved meat and 
vegetables, and confectionery. An important fair is held for 
seven days in each year. The mercantile community is largely 
composed of Austrians, Frenchmen, Germans, Greeks and Swiss, 
who form exclusive colonies. Bucharest is the headquarters of 
the II. army corps, and a fortress of the first rank. The 
fortifications were constructed in 1885-1896 on a project drafted 
by the Belgian engineer, Genewl Brialmont, in 1883. The mean 



distance of the forts from the city is 4 m., and the perimeter of 
the defences (which are technically of special importance as em- 
bodying the system of Brialmont) is about 48 m., this perimeter 
being defended by 36 armoured forts and batteries. There are 
barracks for over 30,000 cavalry and infantry, ah arsenal, a 
military hospital and three military academies. 

The legend of Bucur is plainly unhistorical, and the meaning of 
Bucharest has been much disputed. One account derives it from 
an Albanian word Bukur, meaning joy, in memory of a victory 
won by Prince Mircea of Walachia (c. 1383-1419) over the Turks. 
For this reason Bucharest is often called " The City of Joy." 
Like most ancient cities of Rumania, its foundation has also 
been ascribed to the first Walachian prince, the half-mythical 
Radu Negru (c. 1290-1314). More modern historians declare 
that it was originally a fortress, erected on the site of the Daco- 
Roman Thyanus, to command the approaches to Tirgovishtea, 
formerly the capital of Walachia. It soon became the summer 
residence of the court. In 1595 it was burned by the Turks; 
but, after its restoration, continued to grow in size and prosperity, 
until, in 1698, Prince Constantine Brancovan chose it for his 
capital. During the 18th century the possession of Bucharest 
was frequently disputed by the Turks, Austrians and Russians. 
In 181 2 it gave its name to the treaty by which Bessarabia and a 
third of Moldavia were ceded to Russia. In the war of 1828 it 
was occupied by the Russians, who made it over to the prince of 
Walachia in the following year. A rebellion against Prince 
Bibescu in 1848 brought both Turkish and Russian interference, 
and the city was again held by Russian troops in 1853-1854. 
On their departure an Austrian garrison took possession and 
remained till March 1857. In 1858 the international congress 
for the organization of the Danubian principalities was held in 
the city; and when, in 1861, the union of Walachia and Moldavia 
was proclaimed, Bucharest became the Rumanian capital. 
Prince Cuza, the first ruler of the united provinces, was driven 
from his throne by an insurrection in Bucharest in 1866. For 
the subsequent history of the city see Rumania: History. 

BUCHELER, FRANZ (183 7-1 908), German classical scholar, 
was born in Rheinberg on the 3rd of June 1837, and edu- 
cated at Bonn. He held professorships successively at Freiburg 
(1858), Greifswald (1866), and Bonn (1870), and in 1878 became 
joint-editor of the Rheinisches Museum fiir Philologie. Both 
as a teacher and as a commentator he was extremely successful. 
Among his editions are: Frontini de aquis urbis Romae (Leipzig, 
1858); Pervigilium Veneris (Leipzig, 1859); Petronii satirarum 
reliquiae (Berlin, 1862; 3rd ed., 1882); Hymnus Cereris 
Homericus (Leipzig, 1869); Q. Ciceronis reliquiae (1869); 
Herondae mimiambi (Bonn, 1892). He wrote also Grundriss der 
lateinischen Deklination (1866); Das RechtvonGortyn (Frankfort, 
1885, with Zitelmann); and supervised the third edition (1893) 
of O. Jahn's Persii, Juvenalis, Sulpiciae saturae. 

BUCHER, LOTHAR (1817-1892), German publicist, was born 
on the 25th of October 1817 at Neu Stettin, in Pomerania, his 
father being master at a gymnasium. After studying at the 
university of Berlin he adopted the legal profession. Elected a 
member of the National Assembly in Berlin in 1848, he was an 
active leader of the extreme democratic party. With others of 
his colleagues he was in 1850 brought to trial for having taken 
part in organizing a movement for refusal to pay taxes; he was 
condemned to fifteen months' imprisonment in a fortress, but left 
the country before the sentence was executed. For ten years he 
lived in exile, chiefly in London; he acted as special corre- 
spondent of the National Zeitung, and gained a great knowledge 
of English life; and he published a work, Der Parliamentarisms 
wie er ist, a criticism of parliamentary government, which shows 
a marked change in his political*opinions. In i860 he returned 
to Germany, and became intimate with Lassalle, who made him 
his literary executor. In 1864 he was offered by Bismarck, and 
accepted, a high position in the Prussian foreign office. The 
reasons that led him to a step which involved so complete a 
break with his earlier friends and associations are not clearly 
known. From this time till his death he acted as Bismarck's 
secretary, and was the man who probably enjoyed the greatest 



BUCHEZ— BUCHON 



719 



amount of his confidence. It was he who drew up the text of the 
constitution of the North German Confederation; in 1870 he was 
sent on a very confidential mission to Spain in connexion with 
the Hohenzollern candidature for the Spanish crown; he assisted 
Bismarck at the final negotiations for the treaty of Frankfort, 
and was one of the secretaries to the congress of Berlin; he also 
assisted Bismarck in the composition of his memoirs. Bucher, 
who was a man of great ability, had considerable influence, 
which was especially directed against the economic doctrines of 
the Liberals; in 1881 he published a pamphlet criticizing the 
influence and principles of the Cobden Club. He identified him- 
self completely with Bismarck's later commercial and colonial 
policy, and probably had much to do with introducing it, and 
he did much to encourage anti-British feeling in Germany. He 
died at Glion, in Switzerland, on the 12th of October 1892. 

See Heinrich v. Poschinger, Ein 48er: Loikar Buchers Leben und 
Werke (3 vols., Berlin, 1890); Busch, Bismarck: some Secret Pages 
of his History (London, 1898). (J. W. He.) 

BUCHEZ, PHILIPPE JOSEPH BENJAMIN (1796-1865), 
French author and politician, was born on the 31st of March 1796 
at Matagne-la-Petite, now in Belgium, then in the French depart- 
ment of the Ardennes. He finished his general education in 
Paris, and afterwards applied himself to the study of natural 
science and medicine. In 1821 he co-operated with Saint- Amand 
Bazard and others in founding a secret association, modelled on 
that of the Italian Carbonari, with the object of organizing a 
general armed rising against the government. The organization 
spread rapidly and widely, and displayed itself in repeated 
attempts at revolution. In one of these attempts, the affair at 
Belfort, Buchez was gravely compromised, although the jury 
which tried him did not find the evidence sufficient to warrant 
his condemnation. In 1825 he graduated in medicine, and soon 
after he published with Uiisse Trelat a Precis Sttmentaire 
d'hygiene. About the same time he became a member of the 
Saint-Simonian Society, presided over by Bazard, Barthelemy 
Prosper Enfantin, and Olinde Rodrigues, and contributed to its 
organ, the Producteur. He left it in consequence of aversion to 
the strange religious ideas developed by its " Supreme Father," 
Enfantin, and began to elaborate what he regarded as a Christian 
socialism. For the exposition and advocacy of his principles he 
founded a periodical called L' Europeen. In 1833 he published an 
Introduction a la science de I'histoire, which was received with 
considerable favour (2nd ed., improved and enlarged, 2 vols., 
1842). Notwithstanding its prolixity, this is an interesting 
work. The part which treats of the aim, foundation and methods 
of the science of history is valuable; but what is most distinctive 
in Buchez's theory — the division of historical development into 
four great epochs originated by four universal revelations, of 
each epoch into three periods corresponding to desire, reasoning 
and performance, and of each of these periods into a theoretical 
and practical age — is merely ingenious (see Flint's Philosophy 
of History in Europe,!. 242-252). Buchez next edited, along with 
M. Roux-Lavergne (1802-1874), the Histoire parlementaire de 
la Revolution francaise (1833-1838; 40 vols.). This vast and 
conscientious publication is a valuable store of material for the 
early periods of the first French Revolution. There is a review 
of it by Carlyle (Miscellanies), the first two parts of whose own 
history of the French Revolution are mainly drawn from it. The 
editors worked under the inspiration of a strong admiration of the 
principles of Robespierre and the Jacobins, and in the belief that 
the French Revolution was an attempt to realize Christianity. 
In the Essai d'un traite complet de philosophie au point de vue 
du Catholicisme et du progres (1839-1840) Buchez endeavoured to 
co-ordinate in a single system the political, moral, religious and 
natural phenomena of existence. Denying the possibility of 
innate ideas, he asserted that morality comes by revelation, and 
is therefore not only certain, but the only real certainty. 

It was partly owing to the reputation which he had acquired 
by these publications, but still more owing to his connexion 
with the National newspaper, and with the secret societies hostile 
to the government of Louis Philippe, that he was raised, by 
the Revolution of 1848, to the presidency of the Constituent 



Assembly. He speedily showed that he was not possessed of 
the qualities needed in a situation so difficult and in days so 
tempestuous. He retained the position only for a very short time. 
After the dissolution of the assembly he was not re-elected. 
Thrown back into private life, he resumed his studies, and added 
several works to those which have been already mentioned. A 
Traiti de, politique (published 1866), which may be considered as 
the completion of his Traite de philosophie, was the most im- 
portant of the productions of the last period of his life. His 
brochures are very numerous and on a great variety of subjects, 
medical, historical, political, philosophical, &c. He died on the 
1 2th of August 1865. He found a disciple of considerable ability 
in M. A. Ott, who advocated and applied his principles in various 
writings. 

See also A. Ott, " P. B. J. Buchez," in Journal des economistes 
for 1865. 

BUCHHOLZ, a town of Germany, in the kingdom of Saxony, 
1700 ft. above the sea, on the Sehma, 18 m. S. by E. of Chemnitz 
by rail. Pop. (1905) 9307. It has a Gothic Evangelical church 
and monuments of Frederick the Wise of Saxony, and Bismarck. 
There is a school for instruction in lace-making, an industry 
dating from 1 589, which still forms the chief employment of the 
inhabitants. 

BUCHNER, FRIEDRICH KARL CHRISTIAN LUDWIG (1824- 
1899), German philosopher and physician, was born at Darm- 
stadt. He studied at Giessen, Strassburg, Wiirzburg and Vienna. 
In 1852 he became lecturer in medicine at the university of 
Tubingen, where he published his great work Kraft und StoJ 
(1855). In this work, the product, according to Lange, of a 
fanatical enthusiasm for humanity, he sought to demonstrate 
the indestructibility of matter and force, and the finality of 
physical force. The extreme materialism of this work excited 
so much opposition that he was compelled to give up his post 
at Tubingen. He retired to Darmstadt, where he practised as 
a physician and contributed regularly to pathological and 
physiological magazines. He continued his philosophical work 
in defence of materialism, and published Natur und Geist (1857), 
Aus Natur und Wissenschaft (vol. i., 1862; vol. ii., 1884), 
Fremdes und Eigenes aus dem geisligen Leben der Gegenwart 
(1890), Darwinismus und Socialismus (1894), Im Dienste der 
Wahrheit (1899). He died at Darmstadt on the 1st of May 1899. 
In estimating Biichner's philosophy it must be remembered 
that he was primarily a physiologist, not a metaphysician. 
Matter and force (or energy) are infinite; the conservation of 
force follows from the imperishability of matter, the ultimate 
basis of all science. Biichner is not always clear in his theory 
of the relation between matter and force. At one time he refuses 
to explain it, but generally he assumes that all natural and 
spiritual forces are indwelling in matter. " Just as a steam- 
engine," he says in Kraft und Stojf (7th ed., p. 130), " produces 
motion, so the intricate organic complex of force-bearing sub- 
stance in an animal organism produces a total sum of certain 
effects, which, when bound together in a unity, are called by 
us mind, soul, thought." Here he postulates force and mind 
as emanating from original matter — a materialistic monism. 
But in other parts of his works he suggests that mind and matter 
are two different aspects of that which is the basis of all things— 
a monism which is not necessarily materialistic, and which, in 
the absence of further explanation, constitutes a confession of 
failure. Biichner was much less concerned to establish a scien- 
tific metaphysic than to protest against the romantic idealism 
of his predecessors and the theological interpretations of the 
universe. Nature according to him is purely physical; it has no 
purpose, no will, no laws imposed by extraneous authority, no 
supernatural ethical sanction. 

See Frauenstadt, Der Materialismus (Leipzig, 1856); Janet, The 
Materialism of the Present Day: A Criticism of Dr Biichner' s System, 
trans. Masson (London, 1867). 

BUCHON, JEAN ALEXANDRE (1 791-1849), French scholar, 
was born on the 21st of May 1791 at Menetou-Salon (Cher), 
and died on the 29th of August 1849. An ardent Liberal, he took 
an active part in party struggles under the Restoration, while 



720 



BUCHU— BUCKETSHOP 



throwing himself with equal vigour into the great work of his- 
torical regeneration which was going on at that period. During 
1822 and the succeeding years he travelled about Europe on the 
search for materials for his Collection des chroniques nationales fran- 
caises icrites en langue vulgaire du XIII s au XV I e Steele (47 
vols., 1824-1829). After the revolution of 1830 he founded the 
Panthion litteraire, in which he published a Choix d'ouvrages 
mystiques (1843), a Choix de monuments primitifs de I'eglise 
chrMenne (1837), a Choix des historiens grecs (1837), a collection 
of Chroniques Urangeres relatives aux expeditions francaises 
pendant le XIII s siecle (1840), and, most important of all, a 
Choix de chroniques et memoires sur I'histoire de France (1836- 
1841). His travels in southern Italy and in the East had put 
him upon the track of the medieval French settlements in those 
regions, and to this subject he devoted several important works: 
Recherches et materiaux pour servir a une histoire de la domination 
francaise dans les provinces dimembr&es de V empire grec (1840); 
Nouvelles recherches historiques sur la principauU francaise de 
Morie et ses hautes baronnies (2 vols., 1843-1844) ; Histoire des 
conqutles et de V Uablissement des Francais dans les Stats de 
I'ancienne Grece sous es Villehardouin (1846, unfinished). None 
of the numerous publications which we owe to Buchon can be 
described as thoroughly scholarly; but they have been of great 
service to history, and those concerning the East have in especial 
the value of original research. 

BUCHU, or Buka Leaves, the produce of several shrubby 
plants belonging to the genus Barosma (nat. order Rutaceae), 
natives of the Cape of Good Hope. The principal species, 
B. crenulata, has leaves of a smooth leathery texture, oblong- 
ovate in shape, from an inch to an inch and a half in length, 
with serrulate or crenulate margins, on which as well as on the 
under side are conspicuous oil-glands. The other species which 
yield buchu are B. serratifolia, having linear-lanceolate sharply 
serrulate leaves, and B. betulina, the leaves of which are cuneate- 
obovate, with denticulate margins. They are all, as found in 
commerce, of a pale yellow-green colour; they emit a peculiar 
aromatic odour, and have a slightly astringent bitter taste. 
Buchu leaves contain a volatile oil, which is of a dark yellow 
colour, and deposits a form of camphor on exposure to air, a 
liquid hydro-carbon being the solvent of the camphor within 
the oil-glands. There is also present a minute quantity of a 
bitter principle. The leaves of a closely allied plant, Empleurum 
serratulum, are employed as a substitute or adulterant for buchu. 
As these possess no glands they are a worthless substitute. The 
British Pharmacopoeia contains an infusion and tincture of 
buchu. The former may be given in doses of an ounce and the 
latter in doses of a drachm. The drug has the properties common 
to all substances that contain a volatile oil. The infusion con- 
tains very little of the oil and is of very slight value. Until 
the advent of the modern synthetic products buchu was valued 
in diseases of the urinary tract, but its use is now practically 
obsolete. 

BUCK, CARL DARLING (1866- ), American philologist, 
was born on the 2nd of October 1866, at Bucksport, Maine. He 
graduated at Yale in 1886, was a graduate student there for 
three years, and studied at the American School of Classical 
Studies in Athens (1887-1889) and in Leipzig (1880-1892). In 
1892 he became professor of Sanskrit and Indo-European com- 
parative philology in the University of Chicago; but it is in the 
narrower field of the Italic dialects that his important work lies, 
including Der Vocalismus der oskischen Sprache (1892), The 
Oscan-U mbrian Verb-System (1895), and Grammar of scan and 
Umbrian (1904), as well as an excellent prScis of the Italic 
languages in Johnson's Universal Cyclopaedia. He collaborated 
with W. G. Hale (q.v.) in the preparation of A Latin Grammar 
(1903). Of his contributions to reviews on phonological topics, 
perhaps the most important is his discussion of " Brugmann's 
Law." 

BUCK, DUDLEY (1839-1909), American musical composer, 
was born in Hartford, Connecticut, on the 10th of March 1839, 
the son of a merchant who gave him every opportunity for culti- 
vating his musical talents; and for four years (1858-1862) he 



studied at Leipzig, Dresden and Paris. On returning to America 
he held the position of organist at Hartford, Chicago (1869), and 
Boston (1871). In 1875 he went to New York to assist Theodore 
Thomas as conductor of the orchestral concerts, and from 1877 to 
1903 was organist at Holy Trinity church! Meanwhile he had 
become well known as a composer of church music, a number of 
cantatas {Columbus, 1876; Golden Legend,.! 880; Light of Asia, 
1885, &c), a grand opera, Serapis, a comic opera, Deseret (1880), 
a symphonic overture, Marmion, a symphony in E flat, and other 
orchestral and vocal works. He died on the 6th of October 1909. 

BUCK. (1) (From the O. Eng. buc, a he-goat, and bucca, a 
male deer), the male of several animals, of goats, hares and 
rabbits, and particularly of the fallow-deer. During the 18th 
century the word was used of a spirited, reckless young man of 
fashion, and later, with particular reference to extravagance in 
dress, of a dandy. (2) (From a root common to Teutonic and 
Romance languages, cf. the Ger. Bauch, Fr. buee, and Ital. bucata), 
the bleaching of clothes in lye, also the lye itself, and the clothes 
to be bleached, so a " buck-basket " means a basket of clothes 
ready for the wash. (3) Either from an obsolete word meaning 
" body," or from the sense of bouncing or jumping, derived from 
(1), a word now only found in compound words, as " buck- 
board," a light four-wheeled vehicle, the primitive form of which 
has one or more seats on a springy board, joining the front and 
rear axles and serving both as springs and body; a " buck- 
wagon " (Dutch, bok-wagen) is a South African cart with a frame 
projecting over the wheels, used for the transport of heavy loads. 
(4) (Either from " buck " a he-goat, or from a common Teutonic 
root, to bend, as seen in the Ger. bilcken, and Eng. " bow "), a 
verb meaning "to leap"; seen especially in the compound 
" buck-jumper," a horse which leaps clear off the ground, with 
feet tucked together and arched back, descending with fore-feet 
rigid and head down and drawn inwards. 

BUCK-BEAN, or Bog-Bean (Menyanthes trifoliata, a member 
of the Gentian family), a bog-plant with a creeping stem, 
alternately arranged large leaves each with three leaflets, and 
spikes of white or pink flowers. The stout stem is bitter and has 
tonic and febrifuge properties. The plant is widely distributed 
through the north temperate zone. 

BUCKEBURG, a town of Germany, capital of the principality 
of Schaumburg-Lippe, pleasantly situated at the foot of the 
Harrelberg on the river Aue, 6 m. from Minden, on the main 
railway from Cologne to Berlin. Pop. 6000. It has a palace 
standing in extensive grounds, a gymnasium, a normal seminary, 
a library, a synagogue, and three churches, one of which has 
the appropriate inscription, Religionis non structurae exemplum. 
The first houses of Biickeburg began to gather round the castle 
about 1365; and it was not till the 17th century that the town 
was surrounded with walls, which have given place to a ring of 
pretty promenades. The poet J. G. von Herder was court 
preacher here from 1771 to 1776. 

BUCKERIDGE, JOHN (c. 1562-1631), English divine, was a 
son of William Buckeridge, and was educated at the Merchant 
Taylors school and at St John's College, Oxford. He became a 
fellow of his college, and acted as tutor to William Laud, whose 
opinions were perhaps shaped by him. Leaving Oxford, Bucke- 
ridge held several livings, and was highly esteemed by King 
James I., whose chaplain he became. In 1605 he was elected 
president of St John's College, a position which he vacated on 
being made bishop of Rochester in 161 1. He was transferred 
to the bishopric of Ely in 1628, and died on the 23rd of May 1631. 
The bishop won some fame as a theologian and a controversialist. 
Among his intimate friends was Bishop Lancelot Andrewes, 
whose " Ninety-one Sermons " were published by Laud and 
Buckeridge in 1629. 

BUCKETSHOP, a slang financial term for the office or business 
of an inferior class of stockbroker, who is not a member of an 
official exchange and conducts speculative operations for his 
clients, who deposit a margin or cover. The operations consist, 
as a rule, of a simple bet or wager between the broker and client, 
no pretence of an actual purchase or sale being attempted. The 
term is sometimes, though loosely and wrongfully, applied to 



BUCKHOLDT— BUCKINGHAM, EARLS, &c. 



721 



all stockbrokers who are not members of the recognized local 
exchange. The origin of the word is American. According to 
the New English Dictionary it is supposed to have arisen in 
Chicago. The Board of Trade there forbade dealings in 
" options " in grain of less than 5000 bushels. An " Open Board 
of Trade " or unauthorized exchange was opened, for the purpose 
of small gamblers, in a neighbouring street below the rooms of 
the Board of Trade. The lift used by members of the Board of 
Trade would be sent down to bring up from the open Board 
what was known as a " bucketful " of the smaller speculators, 
when business was slack. 

BUCKHOLDT [properly BeukElsz, or Bockelszoon], JOHANN 
(c. 1 508-1 535), Dutch Anabaptist fanatic, better known as 
John of Leiden, from his place of birth, was the illegitimate 
son of Bockel, burgomaster of Soevenhagen, who afterwards 
married his mother. He was born about 1508, apprenticed 
to a tailor, became infected with the opinions of Thomas Miinzer, 
travelled in pursuit of his trade (being four years in London), 
married a widow, became bankrupt, and in September 1533 
joined the Anabaptist movement under Johann Matthysz 
(Matthyszoon), baker of Haarlem. He had little education, but 
some literary faculty, and had written plays. On the 13th of 
January 1534 he appeared in Munster as an apostle of Matthysz. 
Good-looking and fluent, he fascinated women, and won the 
confidence of Bernard Knipperdollinck, a revolutionary cloth 
merchant, who gave him his daughter in marriage. The Munster 
Anabaptists took up arms on the 9th of February 1534 (see 
Anabaptists). On the death of Matthysz (1534), Buckholdt 
succeeded him as prophet, added his widow to the number of 
his wives, and organized a new constitution for Munster, with 
twelve elders (suggested by the tribes of Israel) and other officers 
of a theocracy, but soon superseded these, making himself king 
of the new Zion. His arbitrary rule was marked by pomp and 
severity. Munster was retaken (June 25, 1535) by its prince- 
bishop, Franz von Waldeck. Buckholdt, after many indignities, 
was cruelly executed on the 22nd of January 1536; his body, 
and those of his companions, were hung in cages to the tower 
of the Lamberti church. His portrait is in Grouwelen der Hooft- 
ketieren (Leiden, 1607; an English edition is appended to 
Alexander Ross's Pansebeia, 2nd ed., 1655) ; a better example of 
the same is given by Arend. 

See Arend, Algemeene Geschiedenis desVaderlands (1846), ii.,iii., 629; 
Van der Aa, Biographisch Woordenboek der Nederlanden (1853); E. 
Belfort Bax, Rise and Fall of the Anabaptists (1903). (A. Go.*) 

BUCKIE, a fishing town and police burgh of Banffshire, 
Scotland, on the Moray Firth, at the mouth of Buckie burn, 
about 17 m. W. of Banff, with a station on the Great North of 
Scotland railway. Pop. (1891) 5849; (1901) 6549. Its public 
buildings include a hall and literary institute with library and 
recreation rooms. It attracts one of the largest Scottish fleets 
in the herring season, and is also the chief seat of line fishing in 
Scotland. The harbour, with an outer and an inner basin, covers 
an area of 9 acres and has half a mile of quayage. Besides the 
fisheries, there are engineering works, distilleries, and works for 
the making of ropes, sails and oil. The burn, which divides the 
town into Nether Buckie and Eastern Buckie, rises near the 
Hill of Clashmadin, about 5 m. to the south-west. Portgordon, 
1 J m. west of Buckie, is a thriving fishing village, and Rathven, 
some 2 m. east, lies in a fertile district, where there are several 
interesting Danish cairns and other relics of the remote 
past. 

BUCKINGHAM, EARLS, MARQUESSES AND DUKES OF. 
The origin of the earldom of Buckingham (to be distinguished 
from that of Buckinghamshire, q.v.) is obscure. According to 
Mr J. H. Round (in G. E. C.'s Peerage, s.v.) there is some charter 
evidence for its existence under William Rufus; but the main 
evidence for reckoning Walter Giffard, lord of Longueville in 
Normandy, who held forty-eight lordships in the county, as 
the first earl, is that of Odericus Vitalis, who twice describes 
Walter as " Comes Bucchingehamensis," once in 1097, and 
again at his death in 1102. After the death of Walter Giffard, 



2nd earl in 1164, the title was assumed by Richard de Clare, earl 
of Pembroke (" Strongbow "), in right of his wife, Rohais, 
sister of Walter Giffard I.; and it died with him in 11 76. In 
1377 Thomas of " Woodstock " (duke of Gloucester) was 
created earl of Buckingham at the coronation of Richard II. 
(15th of July), and the title of Gloucester having after his death 
been given to Thomas le Despenser, his son Humphrey bore that 
of earl of Buckingham only. On Humphrey's death, his sister 
Anne became countess of Buckingham in her own right. She 
married Edmund Stafford, earl of Stafford, and on her death 
(1438) the title of Buckingham passed to her son Humphrey 
Stafford, earl of Stafford, who in 1444 was created duke of 
Buckingham. This title remained in the Stafford family until 
the attainder and execution of Edward, 3rd duke, in 1521 (see 
Buckingham, Henry Stafford, 2nd duke of). 

In 1617 King James I. created George Villiers earl, in 1618 
marquess, and in 1623 duke of Buckingham (see Buckingham, 
George Villiers, 1st duke of) . The marquessate and dukedom 
became extinct with the death of the 2nd (Villiers) duke (q.v.) 
in 1687; but the earldom was claimed, under the special 
remainder in the patent of 16 17, by a collateral line of doubtful 
legitimacy claiming descent from John Villiers, 1st Viscount 
Purbeck. The title was not actually borne after the death of 
John Villiers, styling himself earl of Buckingham, in 1723. The 
claim was extinguished by the death of George Villiers, a clergy- 
man, in 1774. 

In 1703 John Sheffield, marquess of Normanby, was created 
" duke of the county of Buckingham and of Normanby " (see 
below). He was succeeded by his son Edmund who died in 
October 1735 when the titles became extinct, 

The title of marquess and duke of Buckingham in the Grenville 
family (to the holders of which the remainder of this article 
applies) was derived, not from the county, but from the town of 
Buckingham. It originated in 1784, when the 2nd Earl Temple 
was created marquess of Buckingham " in the county of Bucking- 
ham," this title being elevated into the dukedom of Buckingham 
and Chandos for his son in 1822. 

George Nugent Temple Grenville, 1st marquess of Buck- 
ingham (i753"i 8l 3)) w as the second son of George Grenville, 
and was born on the 17th of June 1753. Educated at Eton and 
Christ Church, Oxford, he was appointed a teller of the ex- 
chequer in 1764, and ten years later was returned to parliament 
as one of the members for Buckinghamshire. In the House of 
Commons he was a sharp critic of the American policy of Lord 
North. In September 1779 he succeeded his uncle as 2nd Earl 
Temple; in 1782 was appointed lord-lieutenant of Buckingham- 
shire; and in July of the same year became a member of the 
privy council and lord-lieutenant of Ireland in the ministry of 
the earl of Shelburne. On his advice the Renunciation Act of 
1783 was passed, which supplemented the legislative independ- 
ence granted to Ireland in 1782. By royal warrant he created 
the order of St Patrick in February 1783, with himself as the 
first grand master. Temple left Ireland in 1 7 83 , and again turned 
his attention to English politics. He enjoyed the confidence of 
George III., and having opposed Fox's East India Bill, he was 
authorized by the king to say that " whoever voted for the India 
Bill was not only not his friend, but would be considered by 
him as an enemy," a message which ensured the defeat of the 
bill. He was appointed a secretary of state when the younger 
Pitt formed his ministry in December 1783, but resigned two 
days later. In December 1784 he was created marquess of 
Buckingham " in the county of Buckingham." In November 
1787 he was appointed lord-lieutenant of Ireland under Pitt, but 
his second tenure of this office was hardly as successful as the first. 
He was denounced by Grattan for extravagance; was censured 
by the Irish Houses of parliament for refusing to transmit to 
England in address calling upon the prince of Wales to assume 
the regency; and he could only maintain his position by resort- 
ing to bribery on a large scale. Having become very unpopular 
he resigned his office in September 1789, and subsequently took 
very little part in politics, although he spoke in favour of the 
union with Ireland. He died at his residence, Stowe House, 



*]22 



BUCKINGHAM, ist DUKE OF 



Buckingham, on the nth of February 1813, and was buried at 
Wotton. In 1775 he had married Mary Elizabeth (d. 181 2), 
daughter of Robert, Earl Nugent. 

His elder son, Richard Grenville, ist duke of Buckingham 
and Chandos (1 776-1839), was one of the members of parliament 
for Buckinghamshire from 1797 to 1813, and, as Earl Temple, 
took an active part in politics. In February 1813 he succeeded 
his father as marquess of Buckingham; and having married the 
only child of the 3rd duke of Chandos, he was created duke of 
Buckingham and Chandos in 1822. He died in 1839. Owing 
to financial embarrassments, the duke lived out of England for 
some time, and in 1862 an account of his travels was published, 
as The Private Diary of Richard, Duke of Buckingham and 
Chandos. 

He was succeeded by his only child, Richard Grenville, 
2nd duke of Buckingham and Chandos (1797-1861). Educated 
at Eton and Oriel College, Oxford, he was known as Earl Temple 
and subsequently as marquess of Chandos. He was member of 
parliament for Buckinghamshire from 1818 to 1839, and was 
responsible for the " Chandos clause " in the Reform Bill of 
1832. He was lord privy seal from September 1841 to January 
1842, and partly owing to his opposition to the repeal of the corn 
laws was known as the "Farmers' Friend." He found the 
estates heavily encumbered when he succeeded to the dukedom 
in 1839, and his own generous and luxurious tastes brought 
matters to a climax. In 1847 his residences were seized by his 
creditors, and the duke left England. His personal property 
and many of his landed estates were sold, and returning to 
England he devoted himself to literature. He died in London, 
on the 29th of July 1861. His wife, whom he married in 1819, 
was Mary (d. 1862), daughter of John, ist marquess of Breadal- 
bane, and she obtained a divorce from him in 1850. Bucking- 
ham's chief publications are, Memoirs of the Court and Cabinets 
of George III. (London, 1853-1853); Memoirs of the Court of 
England, 1811-1820 (London, 1856); Memoirs of the Court of 
George IV. (London, 1859); and Memoirs of the Court and 
Cabinets of William IV. and Victoria (London, 1861). 

Richard Grenville, 3rd duke of Buckingham and Chandos 
(1823-1889), the only son of the 2nd duke, was educated at Eton 
and Christ Church, Oxford, and, as marquess of Chandos, 
represented the borough of Buckingham in parliament from 
1 846 to 1 8 5 7 . He was chairman of the London & North-Western 
railway from 1853 to 1861. After succeeding to the dukedom 
he became lord president of the council, and subsequently 
secretary for the colonies in the Conservative government of 
1866-1868. From 1875 to 1880 he was governor of Madras, and 
in 1886 was chosen chairman of committees in the House of 
Lords. He was twice married and left three daughters. As he 
left no son the dukedom became extinct on his death; but the 
Scottish barony of Kinloss (to which he established his title in 
1868) passed to his eldest daughter, Mary, the wife of Captain 
L. F. H. C. Morgan; the earldom of Temple to his nephew, 
William Stephen Gore-Langton; and the viscounty of Cobham 
to his kinsman, Charles George, 5th Baron Lyttelton. His 
widow married the ist Earl Egerton of Tatton in 1894. 

BUCKINGHAM, GEORGE VILLIERS, ist Duke of 1 (1592- 
1628), English statesman, born in August 1592, 2 was a_ younger 
son of Sir George Villiers of Brooksby. His mother, Mary, 
daughter of Anthony Beaumont of Glenfield, Leicestershire, 
who was left a widow early, educated him for a courtier's life, 
sending him to France with Sir John Eliot; and the lad, being 
" by nature contemplative," took kindly to the training. He 
could dance well, fence well, and talk a little French, when in 
August 1614 he was brought before the king's notice, in the hope 
that he would take a fancy to him. 

The moment was favourable. Since Salisbury's death James 
had taken the business of government upon himself. But he 

1 i.e. in the Villiers line; see above. 

2 The Life, by Sir Henry Wotton, gives August 28th as the date 
of his birth, but, when relating his death on August 23rd, adds, 
" thus died the great peer in the 36th year of his age compleat and 
three days over." August 28th was therefore probably a misprint 
for August 20th. 



wanted some one who would chat with him, and amuse him, and 
would also fill the office of private secretary, and save him from 
the trouble of saying no to importunate suitors. It would be an 
additional satisfaction if he could train the youth whom he might 
select in those arts of statesmanship of which he believed himself 
to be a perfect master. His first choice had not proved a happy 
one. Robert Carr, who had lately become earl of Somerset, 
had had his head turned by his elevation. He had grown peevish 
toward his master, and had placed himself at the head of the 
party which was working for a close alliance with Spain. 

The appearance of Villiers, beaming with animal spirits and 
good humour, was therefore welcomed by all who had an interest 
in opposing the designs of Spain, and he was appointed cup- 
bearer the same year. For some little time still Somerset's 
pre-eminence was maintained. But on the 23rd of April 1615, 
Villiers, in spite of Somerset, was promoted to be gentleman 
of the bedchamber, and was knighted on the 24th; the charge 
of murdering Overbury, brought against Somerset in September, 
completed his downfall, and Villiers at once stepped into the 
place which he had vacated. On the 3rd of January 1616 he 
became master of the horse, on the 24th of April he received the 
order of the Garter, and on the 27th o-f August 1616 was created 
Viscount Villiers and Baron Waddon, receiving a grant of land 
valued at £80,000, while on the 5th of January 16 17 he was 
made earl, and on the ist of January 1618 marquess of Bucking- 
ham. With the exception of the earl of Pembroke he was the 
richest nobleman in England. 

Those who expected him to give his support to the anti- 
Spanish party were at first doomed to disappointment. As yet 
he was no politician, and he contented himself with carrying out 
his, master's orders, whatever they were. In his personal re- 
lations he was kindly and jovial towards all who did not thwart 
his wishes. But James had taught him to consider that the 
patronage of England was in his hands, and he took good care 
that no man should receive promotion of any kind who did not 
in one way or another pay court to him. As far as can be as- 
certained, he cared less for money than for the gratification of 
his vanity. But he had not merely himself to consider. His 
numerous kinsfolk were to be enriched by marriage, if in no other 
way, and Bacon, the great philosopher and statesman, was all 
but thrust from office because he had opposed a marriage 
suggested for one of Buckingham's brothers, while Cranfield, 
the first financier of the day, was kept from the treasury till 
he would forsake the woman whom he loved, to marry a penniless 
cousin of the favourite. On the 19th of January 16 19 James 
made him lord high admiral of England, hoping that the ardent, 
energetic youth would impart something of his own fire to those 
who were entrusted with the oversight of that fleet which had 
been almost ruined by the peculation and carelessness of the 
officials. Something of this, no doubt, was realized under 
Buckingham's eye. But he himself never pretended to the 
virtues of an administrator, and he was too ready to fill up 
appointments with men who flattered him, and too reluctant 
to dismiss them, if they served their country ill, to effect any 
permanent change for the better. 

It was about this time that he first took an independent part 
in politics. All England was talking of the revolution in Bohemia 
in the year before, and men's sympathy with the continental 
Protestants was increased when it was known that James's 
son-in-law had accepted the crown of Bohemia, and that in the 
summer of 1620 a Spanish force was preparing to invade the 
Palatinate. Buckingham at first had thrown himself into the 
popular movement. Before the summer of 1620 was at end, 
incensed by injuries inflicted on English sailors by the Dutch 
in the East Indies, he had swung round, and was in close agree- 
ment with Gondomar, the Spanish ambassador. He had now 
married Lady Katherine Manners, the daughter of the earl of 
Rutland, who was at heart a Roman Catholic, though she out- 
wardly conformed to the English Church, and this alliance may 
have had something to do with the change. 

Buckingham's mistakes were owing mainly to his levity. If 
he passed briskly from one camp to the other, an impartial 



BUCKINGHAM, ist DUKE OF 



723 



observer might usually detect some personal motive at the 
bottom. But it is hardly probable that he was himself conscious 
of anything of the sort. When he was in reality acting under the 
influence of vanity or passion it was easy for him to persuade 
himself that he was doing his duty to his country. 

The parliament which met in 162 1, angry at discovering that 
no help was to be sent to the Palatinate, broke out into a loud 
outcry against the system of monopolies, from which Buck- 
ingham's brothers and dependants had drawn a profit, which 
was believed to be greater than it really was. At first he pleaded 
for a dissolution. But he was persuaded by Bishop Williams 
that it would be a wiser course to put himself at the head of the 
movement, and at a conference of the Commons with the Lords 
acknowledged that his two brothers had been implicated, but 
declared that his father had begotten a third who would aid 
in punishing them. In the impeachment of Bacon which soon 
followed, Buckingham, who owed much to his wise counsels, 
gave him that assistance which was possible without imperilling 
his own position and influence. He at first demanded the 
immediate dissolution of parliament, but afterwards, when the 
cry roee louder against the chancellor, joined in the attack, making 
however some attempt to mitigate the severity of the charges 
against him during the hearing of his case before the House of 
Lords. Notwithstanding, he took advantage of Bacon's need 
of assistance to wring from him the possession of York House. 

In the winter of 1621, and the succeeding year, Buckingham 
was entirely in Gondomar's hands; and it was only with some 
difficulty that in May 1622 Laud argued him out of a resolution 
to declare himself a Roman Catholic. In December 162 1 he 
actively supported the dissolution of parliament, and there can 
be little doubt that when the Spanish ambassador left England 
the following May, he had come to an understanding with 
Buckingham that the prince of Wales should visit Madrid the 
next year, on which occasion the Spanish court hoped to effect 
his conversion to the Roman Catholic Church before giving him 
the hand of the infanta Maria. They set out on their adventurous 
expedition on the 17th of February 1623, arriving at Madrid, 
after passing through Paris on the 7th of March. Each party 
had been the dupe of the other. Charles and Buckingham were 
sanguine in hoping for the restitution of the Palatinate to James's 
son-in-law, as a marriage gift to Charles; while the Spaniards 
counted on the conversion of Charles to Roman Catholicism and 
other extreme concessions (see Charles I.). The political 
differences were soon accentuated by personal disputes between 
Buckingham and Olivares and the grandees, and when the two 
young men sailed together from Santander in September, it was 
with the final resolution to break entirely with Spain. 

James had gratified his favourite in his absence by raising 
him to a dukedom. But the splendour which now gathered 
round Buckingham was owing to another source than James's 
f avo ur. He had put himself at the head of the popular movement 
against Spain, and when James, acknowledging sorely against 
his will that the Palatinate could only be recovered by force, 
summoned the parliament which met in February 1624, Buck- 
ingham, with the help of the heir apparent, took up an independent 
political position. James was half driven, half persuaded to 
declare all negotiations with Spain at an end. For the 
moment Buckingham was the most popular man in England. 

It was easier to overthrow one policy than to construct another. 
The Commons would have been content with sending some 
assistance to the Dutch, and with entering upon a privateering 
war with Spain. James, whose object was to regain the Palatinate, 
believed this could only be accomplished by a continental alliance, 
in which France took part. As soon as parliament was prorogued, 
negotiations were opened for a marriage between Charles and 
the sister of Louis XIII. , Henrietta Maria. But a difficulty arose. 
James and Charles had engaged to the Commons that there 
should be no concessions to the English Roman Catholics, and 
Louis would not hear of the marriage unless very large conces- 
sions were made. Buckingham, impatient to begin the war as 
soon as possible, persuaded Charles, and the two together 
persuaded James to throw over the promises to the Commons, 



and to accept the French terms. It was no longer possible to 
summon parliament to vote supplies for the war till the marriage 
had been completed, when remonstrances to its conditions would 
be useless. 

Buckingham, for Buckingham was now virtually the ruler 
of England, had thus to commence war without money. He 
prepared to throw 12,000 Englishmen, under a German 
adventurer, Count Mansf eld, through France into the Palatinate. 
The French insisted that he should marah through Holland. 
It mattered little which way he took. Without provisions, 
and without money to buy them, the wretched troops sickened 
and died in the winter frosts. Buckingham's first military 
enterprise ended in disastrous failure. 

Buckingham had many other schemes in his teeming brain. 
He had offered to send aid to Christian IV., king of Denmark, 
who was proposing to make war in Germany, and had also a 
plan for sending an English fleet to attack Genoa, the ally of 
Spain, and a plan for sending an English fleet to attack Spain 
itself. 

Before these schemes could be carried into operation James 
died on the 27th of March 1625. The new king and Buckingham 
were at one in their aims and objects. Both were anxious to 
distinguish themselves by the chastisement of Spain, and the 
recovery of the Palatinate. Both were young and inexperienced. 
But Charles, obstinate when his mind was made up, was sluggish 
in action and without fertility in ideas, and he had long submitted 
his mind to the versatile and brilliant favourite, who was never 
at a loss what to do next, and who unrolled before his eyes 
visions of endless possibilities in the future. Buckingham was 
sent over to Paris to urge upon the French court the importance 
of converting its alliance into active co-operation. ' 

There was a difficulty in the way. The Huguenots of La 
Rochelle were in rebellion, and James had promised the aid of 
English ships to suppress that rebellion. Buckingham, who 
seems at first to have consented to the scheme, was anxious 
to mediate peace between the king of France and his subjects, 
and to save Charles from compromising himself with his parlia- 
ment by the appearance of English ships in an attack upon 
Protestants. When he returned his main demands were refused, 
but hopes were given him that peace would be made with the 
Huguenots. On his way through France he had the insolence 
to make love to the queen of France. 

Soon after his return parliament was opened. It would have 
been hard for Charles to pass through the session with credit. 
Under Buckingham's guidance he had entered into engagements 
involving an enormous expenditure, and these engagements 
involved a war on the continent, which had never been popular 
in the House of Commons. The Commons, too, suspected the 
marriage treaty contained engagements of which they dis- 
approved. They asked for the full execution of the laws against 
the Roman Catholics, and voted but little money in return. 
Before they reassembled at Oxford on the ist of August, the 
English ships had found their way into the hands of the French, 
to be used against La Rochelle. The Commons met in an ill- 
humour. They had no confidence in Buckingham, and they asked 
that persons" whom they could trust should be admitted to the 
king's council before they would vote a penny. Charles stood 
by his minister, and on the 12th of August he dissolved his first 
parliament. 

Buckingham and his master set themselves to work to conquer 
public opinion. On the one hand, they threw over their engage- 
ments to France on behalf of the English Roman Catholics. 
On the other hand they sent out a large fleet to attack Cadiz, 
and to seize the Spanish treasure-ships. Buckingham went to 
the Hague to raise an immediate supply by pawning the crown 
jewels, to place England at the head of a great Protestant 
alliance, and to enter into fresh obligations to furnish money to 
the king of Denmark. It all ended in failure. The fleet returned 
from Cadiz, having effected nothing. The crown jewels produced 
but a small sum, and the money for the king of Denmark could 
only be raised by an appeal to parliament. In the meanwhile 
the king of France was deeply offended by the treatment of 



1M 



BUCKINGHAM, 2nd DUKE OF 



the Roman Catholics, and by the seizure of French vessels on 
the ground that they were engaged in carrying goods for 
Spain. 

When Charles's second parliament met on the 6th of February 
1626, it was not long before, under Eliot's guidance, it asked 
for Buckingham's punishment. He was impeached before the 
House of Lords on a long string of charges. Many of these 
charges were exaggerated, and some were untrue. His real 
crime was his complete failure as the leader of the administration. 
But as long as Charles refused to listen to the complaints of his 
minister's incompetency, the only way in which the Commons 
could reach him was by bringing criminal charges against him. 
Charles dissolved his second parliament as he had dissolved 
his first. Subsequently the Star Chamber declared the duke 
innocent of the charges, and on the 1st of June Buckingham was 
elected chancellor of Cambridge University. 

To find money was the great difficulty. Recourse was had to 
a forced loan, and men were thrown into prison for refusing to 
pay it. Disasters had occurred to Charles's allies in Germany. 
The fleet sent out under Lord Willoughby (earl of Lindsey) 
against the Spaniards returned home shattered by a storm, and 
a French war was impending in addition to the Spanish one. 
The French were roused to reprisals by Charles's persistence in 
seizing French vessels. Unwilling to leave La Rochelle open to 
the entrance of an English fleet, Richelieu laid siege to that 
stronghold of the French Huguenots. On the 27th of June 1627 
Buckingham sailed from Portsmouth at the head of a numerous 
fleet, and a considerable land force, to relieve the besieged city. 

His first enterprise was the siege of the fort of St Martin's, 
on the Isle of Re. The ground was hard, and the siege operations 
were converted into a blockade. On the 27 th of September 
the defenders of the fort announced their readiness to surrender 
the next morning. In the night a fresh gale brought over a 
flotilla of French provision boats, which dashed through the 
English blockading squadron. The fort was provisioned for 
two months more. Buckingham resolved to struggle on, and 
sent for reinforcements from England. Charles would gladly 
have answered to his call. But England had long since ceased 
to care for the war. There was no money in the exchequer, no 
enthusiasm in the nation to supply the want. Before the rein- 
forcements could arrive the French had thrown a superior force 
upon the island, and Buckingham was driven to retreat on the 
29th of October with heavy loss, only 2989 troops out of nearly 
7000 returning to England. 

His spirits were as buoyant as ever. Ill luck, or the misconduct 
of others, was the cause of his failure. He had new plans for 
carrying on the war. But the parliament which met on the 
17th of March 1628 was resolved to exact from the king an 
obligation to refrain from encroaching for the future on the 
liberties of his subjects. 

In the parliamentary battle, which ended in the concession 
of the Petition of Right, Buckingham took an active share as a 
member of the House of Lords. He resisted as long as it was 
possible to resist the demand of the Commons, that the king 
should abandon his claim to imprison without showing cause. 
When the first unsatisfactory answer to the petition was made 
by the king on the 2nd of June, the Commons suspected, probably 
with truth, that it had been dictated by Buckingham. They 
prepared a remonstrance on the state of the nation, and Coke 
at last named the duke as the cause of all the misfortunes that 
had occurred. " The duke of Bucks is the cause of all our 
miseries . . . that man is the grievance of grievances." Though 
on the 7th of June the king granted a satisfactory answer to 
the petition, the Commons proceeded with their remonstrance, 
and on the nth demanded that he might no longer continue in 
office. 

Once more Charles refused to surrender Buckingham, and a 
few days later he prorogued parliament in anger. The popular 
feeling was greatly excited. Lampoons circulated freely from 
hand to hand, and Dr Lambe. a quack doctor, who dabbled in 
astrology, and was believed to exercise influence over Bucking- 
ham, was murdered in the streets of London. Rude doggerel 



lines announced that the duke should share the doctor's 
fate. 

With the clouds gathering round him, Buckingham went 
down to Portsmouth to take the command of one final expedition 
for the relief of La Rochelle. For the first time even he was 
beginning to acknowledge that he had undertaken a task beyond 
his powers. There was a force of inertia in the officials which 
resisted his efforts to spur them on to an enterprise which they 
believed to be doomed to failure. He entered gladly into a 
scheme of pacification proposed by the Venetian ambassador. 
But before he could know whether there was to be peace or war, 
the knife of an assassin put an end to his career. John Felton, 
who had served at Re, had been disappointed of promotion, and 
had not been paid that which was due to him for his services, 
read the declaration of the Commons that Buckingham was a 
public enemy, and eagerly caught at the excuse for revenging 
his private wrongs under cover of those of his country. Waiting, 
on the morning of the 23rd of August, beside the door of the room 
in which Buckingham was breakfasting, he stabbed him to the 
heart as he came out. 

Buckingham married Lady Katherine Manners, daughter of 
Francis, 6th earl of Rutland, by whom he left three sons and one 
daughter, of whom George, the second son (1628-1687), succeeded 
to the dukedom. 

Bibliography. — Article in the Diet, of Nat. Biography, by S. R. 
Gardiner; Life of Buckingham, by Sir Henry Wotton (1642), re- 
printed in Harleian Miscellany, viii. 613; A Parallel between Rober' 
Earl of Essex and George late Duke of Buckingham, by the same 
writer (1641), in the Thomason Tracts, 164 (20); Characters of the 
same by Edward, Earl of Clarendon (1706); Life of George Villiers, 
Duke of Buckingham, &c. (London, 1740); Historical and Bio- 
graphical Memoirs of George Villiers, "Duke of Buckingham (London, 
1 8 19); Letters of the Duke and Duchess of Buckingham (Edinburgh, 
1834); Historia Vitae . . . Ricardi II., &c, by Thos. Hearne 
(1729); Documents illustrating the Impeachment of Buckingham* 
published by the Camden Society and edited by S. R. Gardiner 
(1889); Epistolae Hoelianae (James Howell), 187, 189, 203; Poems 
and Songs relating to George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, ed. by 
R. W. Fairholt for the Percy Society (1850) ; Rous's Diary (Camden 
Soc, 1856), p. 27; Gent. Mag. (1845), ii. 137-144 (portrait of 
Buckingham dead) ; Cal. of State Papers, and MSS. in the British 
Museum (various collections). Hist. MSS. Comm. Series. See also 
P. Gibbs, The Romance of George Villiers, 1st Duke of Buckingham 
(1908). (S. R. G.; P. C. Y.) 

BUCKINGHAM, GEORGE VILLIERS, 2nd Duke or 1 (1628- 
1687), English statesman, son of the 1st duke, was born on the 
30th of January 1628. He was brought up, together with his 
younger brother Francis, by King Charles I. with his own 
children, and was educated at Trinity College, Cambridge, 
where he obtained the degree of M.A. in 1642. He fought for 
the king in the Civil War, and took part in the attack on Lichfield 
Close in April 1643. Subsequently, under the care of the earl 
of Northumberland, the two brothers travelled abroad and lived 
at Florence and Rome. When the Second Civil War broke out 
they joined the earl of Holland in Surrey, in July 1648. Lord 
Francis was killed near Kingston, and Buckingham and Holland 
were surprised at St Neots on the 10th, the duke succeeding in 
escaping to Holland. In consequence of his participation in 
the rebellion, his lands, which had been restored to him in 1647 
on account of his youth, were now again confiscated, a consider- 
able portion passing into the possession of Fairfax; and he 
refused to compound. Charles II. conferred on him the Garter 
on the 19th of September 1649, and admitted him to the privy, 
council on the 6th of April 1650. In opposition to Hyde he 
supported the alliance with the Scottish presbyterians, accom- 
panied Charles to Scotland in June, and allied himself with 
Argyll, dissuading Charles from joining the royalist plot of 
October 1650, and being suspected of betraying the plan to the 
convenanting leaders. In May he had been appointed general 
of the eastern association in England, and was commissioned 
to raise forces abroad; and in the following year he was chosen 
to lead the projected movement in Lancashire and to command 
the Scottish royalists. He was present with Charles at the battle 
of Worcester on the 3rd of September 1651, and escaped safely 

1 i.e. in the Villiers line ; see above. 



BUCKINGHAM, 2nd DUKE OF 



72b 



alone to Rotterdam in October. His subsequent negotiations 
with Cromwell's government, and his readiness to sacrifice the 
interests of the church, separated him from the rest of Charles's 
advisers and diminished his influence; while his estrangement 
from the royal family was completed by his audacious courtship 
of the king's sister, the widowed princess of Orange, and by a 
money dispute with Charles. In 1657 he returned to England, 
and on the 15th of September married Mary, daughter of Lord 
Fairfax, who had fallen in love with him although the banns of 
her intended marriage with the earl of Chesterfield had been 
twice called in church. Buckingham was soon suspected of 
organizing a presbyterian plot against the government, and in 
spite of Fairfax's interest with Cromwell an order was issued for 
his arrest on the gth of October. He was confined at York House 
about April 1658, and having broken bounds was rearrested 
on the 18th of August and imprisoned in the Tower, where he 
remained till the 23rd of February 1659, being then liberated 
on his promise not to abet the enemies of the government, and 
on Fairfax's security of £20,000. He joined the latter in his 
march against Lambert in January 1660, and afterwards claimed 
to have gained Fairfax to the cause of the Restoration. 

On the king's return Buckingham, who met him at his landing 
at Dover, was at first received coldly; but he was soon again 
in favour, was appointed a gentleman of the bedchamber, carried 
the orb. at the coronation on the 23rd of April 1661, and was 
made lord-lieutenant of the West Riding of Yorkshire on the 
2 1 st of September. The same year he accompanied the princess 
Henrietta to Paris on her marriage with the duke of Orleans, but 
made love to her himself with such imprudence that he was 
recalled. On the 28th of April 1662 he was admitted to the 
privy council. His confiscated estates amounting to £26,000 a 
year were restored to him, and he was reputed the king's richest 
subject. He took part in the suppression of the projected 
insurrection in Yorkshire in 1663, went to sea in the first 
Dutch war in 1665, and was employed in taking measures 
to resist the Dutch or French invasion in June 1666. 

He was, however, debarred from high office by Clarendon's 
influence. Accordingly Buckingham's intrigues were now 
directed to effect the chancellor's ruin. He organized parties 
in both houses of parliament in support of the bill of 1666 
prohibiting the import of Irish cattle, partly to oppose Clarendon 
and partly to thwart the duke of Ormonde. Having asserted 
during the debates that " whoever was against the bill had 
either an Irish interest or an Irish understanding," he was 
challenged by Lord Ossory. Buckingham avoided the encounter, 
and Ossory was sent to the Tower. A short time afterwards, 
during a conference between the two houses on the 19th of 
December, he came to blows with the marquess of Dorchester, 
pulling off the latter's periwig, while Dorchester at the close of 
the scuffle " had much of the duke's hair in his hand." l Accord- 
ing to Clarendon no misdemeanour so flagrant had ever before 
offended the dignity of the House of Lords. The offending 
peers were both sent to the Tower, but were released after 
apologizing; and Buckingham vented his spite by raising a 
claim to the title of Lord Roos held by Dorchester's son-in-law. 
His opposition to the government had forfeited the king's 
favour, and he was now accused of treasonable intrigues, and 
of having cast the king's horoscope. His arrest was ordered 
on the 25th of February 1667, and he was dismissed from all his 
offices. He avoided capture till the 27th of June, when he gave 
himself up and was imprisoned in the Tower. He was released, 
however, by July 17th, was restored to favour and to his appoint- 
ments on the 15th of September, and took an active part in the 
prosecution of Clarendon. On the latter's fall he became the 
chief minister, though holding no high office except that of 
master of the horse, bought from the duke of Albermarle in 1668. 
In 1671 he was elected chancellor of Cambridge, and in 1672 
high steward of Oxford university. He favoured religious 
toleration, and earned the praise of Richard Baxter; he supported 
a scheme of comprehension in 1668, and advised the declaration 
of indulgence in 1672. He upheld the original jurisdiction of the 
1 Clarendon, Life and Continuation, 979. 



Lords in Skinner's case. With these exceptions Buckingham's 
tenure of office was chiefly marked by scandals and intrigues. 
His illicit connexion with the countess of Shrewsbury led to a 
duel with her husband at Barn Elms on the 16th of January 
1668, in which Shrewsbury was fatally wounded. The tale that 
the countess, disguised as a page, witnessed the encounter, 
appears to have no foundation; but Buckingham, by installing 
the "widow of his own creation" in his own and his wife's 
house, outraged even the lax opinion of that day. He was thought 
to have originated the project of obtaining the divorce of the 
childless queen. He intrigued against James, against Sir 
William Coventry — one of the ablest statesmen of the time, 
whose fall he procured by provoking him to send him a challenge 
— and against the great duke of Ormonde, who was dismissed 
in 1669. He was even suspected of having instigated Thomas 
Blood's attempt to kidnap and murder Ormonde, and was 
charged with the crime in the king's presence by Ormonde's son, 
Lord Ossory, who threatened to shoot him dead in the event 
of his father's meeting with a violent end. Arlington, next to 
Buckingham himself the most powerful member of the cabal 
and a favourite of the king, was a rival less easy to overcome; 
and he derived considerable influence from the control of foreign 
affairs entrusted to him. Buckingham had from the first been 
an adherent of the French alliance, while Arlington concluded 
through Sir William Temple in 1668 the Triple Alliance. But 
on the complete volte-face and surrender made by Charles to 
France in 1670, Arlington as a Roman Catholic was entrusted 
with the first treaty of Dover of the 20th of May — which besides 
providing for the united attack on Holland, included Charles's 
undertaking to proclaim himself a Romanist and to reintroduce 
the Roman Catholic faith into England, — While Buckingham 
was sent to France to carry on the sham negotiations which led 
to the public treaties of the 31st of December 1670 and the 2nd 
of February 1672. He was much pleased with his reception by 
Louis XIV., declared that he had " more honours done him than 
ever were given to any subject," and was presented with a 
pension of 10,000 livres a year for Lady Shrewsbury. In June 
1672 he accompanied Arlington to the Hague to impose terms 
on the prince of Orange, and with Arlington arranged the new 
treaty with Louis. After all this activity he suffered a keen 
disappointment in being passed over for the command of the 
English forces in favour of Schomberg. He now knew of the 
secret treaty of Dover, and towards the end of 1673 his jealousy 
of Arlington became open hostility. He threatened to impeach 
him, and endeavoured with the help of Louis to stir up a faction 
against him in parliament. This, however, was unsuccess- 
ful, and in January 1674 an attack was made upon Buckingham 
himself simultaneously in both houses. In the Lords the 
trustees of the young earl of Shrewsbury complained that 
Buckingham continued publicly his intimacy with the countess, 
and that a son of theirs had been buried in Westminster Abbey 
with the title of earl of Coventry; and Buckingham, after 
presenting an apology, was required, as was the countess, to 
give security for £10,000 not to cohabit together again. In 
the Commons he was attacked as the promoter of the French 
alliance, of " popery " and arbitrary government. He defended 
himself chiefly by endeavouring to throw the blame upon 
Arlington; but an address was voted petitioning the king to 
remove him from his councils, presence and from employment 
for ever. Charles, who had only been waiting for a favourable 
opportunity, and who was enraged at Buckingham's disclosures, 
consented with alacrity. Buckingham retired into private life, 
reformed his ways, attended church with his wife, began to pay 
his debts, became a " patriot," and was claimed by the country 
or opposition party as one of their leaders. In the spring of 
1675 he was conspicuous for his opposition to the Test oath and 
for his abuse of the bishops, and on the 16th of November he 
introduced a bill for the relief of the nonconformists. On the 
15th of February 1677 he was one of the four lords who en- 
deavoured to embarrass the government by raising the question 
whether the parliament, not having assembled according to the 
act of Edward III. once in the year, had not been dissolved by 



726 



BUCKINGHAM, 2nd DUKE OF 



the recent prorogation. The motion was rejected and the four 
lords were ordered to apologize. On their refusing, they were 
sent to the Tower, Buckingham in particular exasperating the 
House by ridiculing its censure. He was released in July, and 
immediately entered into intrigues with Barillon, the French 
ambassador, with the object of hindering the grant of supplies 
to the king; and in 1678 he visited Paris to get the assistance 
of Louis XIV. for the cause of the opposition. He took an 
active part in the prosecution of those implicated in the supposed 
Popish Plot, and accused the lord chief justice (Sir William 
Scroggs) in his own court while on circuit of favouring the Roman 
Catholics. In consequence of his conduct a writ was issued 
for his apprehension, but it was never served. He promoted 
the return of Whig candidates to parliament, constituted himself 
the champion of the dissenters, and was admitted a freeman of 
the city of London. He, however, separated himself from the 
Whigs on the exclusion question, probably on account of his 
dislike of Monmouth and Shaftesbury, was absent from the 
great debate in the Lords on the 15th of November 1680, and 
was restored to the king's favour in 1684. 

He took no part in public life after James's accession, but 
returned to his manor of Helmsley in Yorkshire, the cause of his 
withdrawal being probably exhausted health and exhausted 
finances. In 1685 he published a pamphlet, entitled A short 
Discourse on the Reasonableness of Man's having a Religion (re- 
printed in Somers Tracts (1813, ix. 13), in which after discussing 
the main subject he returned to his favourite topic, religious 
toleration. The tract provoked some rejoinders and was de- 
fended, amongst others, by William Penn, and by the author 
himself in The Duke of Buckingham's Letter to the unknown 
author of a short answer to the Duke of Buckingham's Paper (1685). 
In hopes of converting him to Roman Catholicism James sent 
him a priest, but Buckingham turned his arguments into ridicule. 
He died on the 16th of April 1687, from a chill caught while 
hunting, in the house of a tenant at Kirkby Moorside in York- 
shire, expressing great repentance and feeling himself "despised 
by my country and I fear forsaken by my God." 1 The miserable 
picture of his end drawn by Pope, however, is greatly exaggerated. 
He was buried on the 7th of June 1687 in Henry VII. 's chapel 
in Westminster Abbey, in greater state, it was said, than the 
late king, and with greater splendour. With his death the 
family founded by the extraordinary rise to power and influence 
of the first duke ended. As he left no legitimate children the 
title became extinct, and his great estate had been completely 
dissipated; of the enormous mansion constructed by him at 
Cliveden in Buckinghamshire not a stone remains. 

The ostentatious licence and the unscrupulous conduct of the 
Alcibiades of the 17 th century have been deservedly censured. 
But even his critics agree that he was good-humoured, good- 
natured, generous, an unsurpassed mimic and the leader of 
fashion; and with his good looks, in spite of his moral faults 
and even crimes, he was irresistible to his contemporaries. 
Many examples of his amusing wit have survived. His portrait 
has been drawn by Burnet, Count Hamilton in the M&moires 
de Grammont, Dryden, Pope in the Epistle to Lord Balhurst, and 
Sir Walter Scott in Peveril of the Peak. He is described by 
Reresby as " the first gentleman of person and wit I think I 
ever saw," and Burnet bears the same testimony. Dean Lockier, 
after alluding to his unrivalled skill in riding, dancing and 
fencing, adds, " When he came into the presence-chamber it 
was impossible for you not to follow him with your eye as he 
went along, he moved so gracefully." Racing and hunting were 
his favourite sports, and his name long survived in the hunting 
songs of Yorkshire. He was the patron of Cowley, Sprat, 
Matthew Clifford and Wycherley. He dabbled in chemistry, 
and for some years, according to Burnet, " he thought he was 
very near the finding of the philosopher's stone." He set up 
glass works at Lambeth the productions of which were praised 
by Evelyn; and he spent much money, according to his bio- 
grapher Brian Fairfax, in building insanae substructions. 
Dryden described him under the character of Zimri in the 
1 Quarterly Review, January 1898, p. no. 



celebrated lines in Absalom and Achilophel (to which Buckingham 
replied in Poetical Reflections on a late Poem . . . by a Person of 
Honour, 1682): — 

" A man so various, that he seemed to be 
Not one, but all mankind's epitome; 
Stiff in opinions, always in the wrong, 
Was everything by starts and nothing long ; 
But in the course of one revolving moon, 
Was chymist, fiddler, statesman and buffoon. .... 
Beggar'd by fools, whom still he found too late, 
He had his jest, but they had his estate." 

Buckingham, however, cannot with any truth be called the 
" epitome of mankind." On the contrary, the distinguishing 
features of his life are its incompleteness, aimlessness, imper- 
fection, insignificance, neglect of talents and waste of oppor- 
tunities. " He saw and approved the best," says Brian Fairfax, 
" but did too often dcteriora sequi." He is more severely but 
more justly judged by himself. In gay moments indeed he had 
written — 

" Methinks, I see the wanton houres flee, 
And as they passe, turne back and laugh at me," 2 — 

but his last recorded words on the approach of death, " O! what a 
prodigal have I been of that most valuable of all possessions — 
Time! " express with exact truth the fundamental flaw of his 
character and career, of which he had at last become conscious. 

Buckingham wrote occasional verses and satires showing 
undoubted but undeveloped poetical gifts, a collection of which, 
containing however many pieces not from his pen, was first 
published by Tom Brown in 1704; while a few extracts from 
a commonplace book of Buckingham of some interest are given 
in an article in the Quarterly Review of January 1898. He was 
the author of The Rehearsal, an amusing and clever satire on 
the heroic drama and especially on Dryden (first performed on 
the 7th of December 1671, at the Theatre Royal, and first pub- 
lished in 1672), a deservedly popular play which was imitated 
by Fielding in Tom Thumb the Great, and by Sheridan in the 
Critic. Buckingham also published two adapted plays, The 
Chances, altered from Fletcher's play of the same name (1682) 
and The Restoration or Right will take place, from Beaumont and 
Fletcher's Philaster (publ. 17 14); and also The Battle of Sedg- 
moor and The Militant Couple (publ. 1704). The latest edition 
of his works is that by T. Evans (2 vols. 8vo, 1775). Another 
work is named by Wood A Demonstration of the Deity, of which 
there is now no trace. 

Bibliography. — The life of Buckingham has been well and 
accurately traced and the chief authorities collected in the article in 
the Diet, of Nat. Biography (1899) by C.H. Firth, and in GeorgeVilliers, 
2ndDukeofBuckingham,byha.dyBurghc\ere(igo^). Otherbiographies 
are in Wood's Athenae Oxon. (Bliss), iv. 207 ; in Biographia Britannica ; 
by Brian Fairfax, printedinH.Walpole's Catalogue of Pictures of George 
Duke of Buckingham (1758); in Arber's edition of the Rehearsal 
( 1 868) ; and by the author of Hudibras in The Genuine Remains of Mr 
Samuel Butler, by R. Thyer (1759), ii. 72. The following may also 
be mentioned : — -Quarterly Review, Jan. i8q8 (commonplace book) ; 
A Conference on the Doctrine of Transubstantiation between . . . the 
Duke of Buckingham and Father FitzGerald (17 14); A Narrative of 
the Cause and Manner of the Imprisonment ef the Lords (1677) ; The 
Declaration of the . . . Duke of Buckingham and the Earls of Holland 
and Peterborough . . . associated for the King(i6^8) ; S.R.Gardiner's 
Hist, of the Commonwealth (1 894-1901); Hist, of Eng. Poetry, by 
W. J. Courthope (1903), iii. 460; Horace Walpole's Royal and Noble 
Authors, iii. 304; Miscellania Aulica, by T. Brown (1702); and the 
Fairfax Correspondence (1848-1849). For the correspondence see 
Charles II. and Scotland in 1650 (Scottish History Soc, vol. xvii., 
1894); Calendars of St. Pap. Dom.; Hist. MSS. Comm. Series, MSS. 
of Duke of Buccleuch at Montagu House, of Mrs Frankland-Russell- 
Astley, of Marq. of Ormonde, and Various Collections; and English 
Hist. Rev. (April 1905), xx. 373. (P. C. Y.) 

BUCKINGHAM, HENRY STAFFORD, 2ND Duke of 3 (1454- 
1483), was the son of Humphrey Stafford, killed at the first 
battle of St Albans in 1455, an d grandson of Humphrey the 
1st duke (cr. 1444), killed at Northampton in 1460, both fighting 
for Lancaster. The 1st duke, who bore the title of earl of 
Buckingham in right of his mother, was the son of Edmund, 
5th earl of Stafford, and of Anne, daughter of Thomas, duke 

2 From his Common place Book {Quarterly Rev. vol. 187, p. 87). 

3 i.e. in the Stafford line; see above. 



BUCKINGHAM, J. S.— BUCKINGHAM & NORMANBY 727 



of Gloucester, youngest son of Edward III.; Henry's mother 
was Margaret, daughter of Edmund Beaufort, 2nd duke of 
Somerset, grandson of John of Gaunt. Thus he came on both 
sides of the blood royal, and this, coupled with the vastness 
of his inheritance, made the young duke's future of importance 
to Edward IV. He was recognized as duke in 1465, and next 
year was married to Catherine Woodville, the queen's sister. 
On reaching manhood he was made a knight of the Garter in 
1474, and in 1478 was high steward at the trial of George, duke 
of Clarence. He had not otherwise filled any position of import- 
ance, but his fidelity might seem to have been secured by his 
marriage. However, after Edward's death, Buckingham was 
one of the first persons worked upon by Richard, duke of Glou- 
cester. It was through his help that Richard obtained possession 
of the young king, and he was at once rewarded with the offices 
of justiciar and chamberlain of North and South Wales, and 
constable of all the royal castles in the principality and Welsh 
Marches. In the proceedings which led to the deposition of 
Edward V. he took a prominent part, and on the 24th of June 
1483 he urged the citizens at the Guildhall to take Richard as 
king, in a speech of much eloquence, " for he was neither 
unlearned and of nature marvellously well spoken " (More). 
At Richard's coronation he served as chamberlain, and immedi- 
ately afterwards was made constable of England and confirmed 
in his powers in Wales. Richard might well have believed that 
the duke's support was secured. But early in August Bucking- 
ham withdrew from the court to Brecon. He may have thought 
that he deserved an even greater reward, or possibly had dreams 
of establishing his own claims to the crown. At all events, at 
Brecon he fell somewhat easily under the influence of his prisoner, 
John Morton (q.v.), who induced him to give his support to his 
cousin Henry Tudor, earl of Richmond. A widespread plot 
was soon formed, but Richard had early warning, and on the 
15th of October, issued a proclamation against Buckingham. 
Buckingham, as arranged, prepared to enter England with a 
large force of Welshmen. His advance was stopped by an 
extraordinary flood on the Severn, his army melted away without 
striking a blow, and he himself took refuge with a follower, 
Ralph Bannister, at Lacon Hall, near Wem. The man betrayed 
him for a large reward, and on the 1st of November, Buckingham 
was brought to the king at Salisbury. Richard refused to see 
him, and after a summary trial had him executed next day 
(2nd of November 1483), though it was a Sunday. 

Buckingham's eldest son, Edward (1478-1521), eventually 
succeeded him as 3rd duke, the attainder being removed in 1485; 
the second son, Henry, was afterwards earl of Wiltshire. The 
3rd duke played an important part as lord high constable at 
the opening of the reign of Henry VIII., and is introduced into 
Shakespeare's play of that king, but he fell through his opposition 
to Wolsey, and in 1 5 2 1 was condemned for treason and executed 
(17th of May); the title was then forfeited with his attainder, 
his only son Henry (1 501-1563), who in his father's lifetime was 
styled earl of Stafford, being, however, given back his estates in 
1522, and in 1547 restored in blood by parliament with the title 
of Baron Stafford, which became extinct in this line with Roger, 
5th Baron in 1640. In that year the barony of Stafford was 
granted to William Howard (1614-1680), who after two months 
was created Viscount Stafford; he was beheaded in 1680, and 
his son was created earl of Stafford in 1688, a title which became 
extinct in 1762; but in 1825 the descent to the barony of 1640 was 
established, to the satisfaction of the House of Lords, in the person 
of Sir G. W. Jerningham, in whose family it then continued. 

The chief original authorities for the life of the 2nd duke of Buck- 
ingham are the Continuation of the Croyland Chronicle ; Sir Thomas 
More's Richard III.; and Fabyan's Chronicle. Amongst modern 
authorities consult J. Gairdner's Richard III. ; and Sir. J. Ramsay's 
Lancaster and York. (C. L. K.) 

BUCKINGHAM, JAMES SILK (1786-1855), English author 
and traveller, was born near Falmouth on the 25th of August 
1786, the son of a farmer. His youth was spent at sea. After 
years of wandering he established in 181 8 the Calcutta Journal. 
This venture at first proved highly successful, but in 1823 the 



paper's outspoken criticisms of the East India Company led 
to the expulsion of Buckingham from India and to the suppres- 
sion of the paper by John Adam, the acting governor-general. 
His case was brought before parliament, and a pension of £200 
a year was subsequently awarded him by the East India Com- 
pany as compensation. Buckingham continued his journalistic 
ventures on his return to England, and started the Oriental 
Herald (1824) and the Athenaeum (1828) which was not a success 
in his hands. In parliament, where he sat as member for Shef- 
field from 1 83 2-1 83 7, he was a strong advocate of social reform. 
He was a most voluminous writer. He had travelled much in 
Europe, America and the East, and wrote a great number of 
useful books of travel. In 1851 the value of these and of his 
other literary work was recognized by the grant of a civil list 
pension of £200 a year. At the time of his death in London, 
on the 30th of June 1855, Buckingham was at work on his 
autobiography, two volumes of the intended four being completed 
and published (1855). 

His youngest son, Leicester Silk Buckingham (1825-1867), 
achieved no little popularity as a playwright, several of his 
free adaptations of French comedies being produced in London 
between i860 and 1867.. 

BUCKINGHAM, a market town and municipal borough and 
the county town of Buckinghamshire, England, in the Bucking- 
ham parliamentary division, 61 m. N.W. of London by a branch 
of the London & North-Western railway. Pop. (1901) 3152. 
It lies in an open valley on the upper part of the river Ouse, 
which encircles the main portion of the town on three sides. 
The church of St Peter and St Paul, which was extensively, 
restored by Sir Gilbert Scott, a native of this neighbourhood, 
is of the 18th century, and stands on the site of the old castle; 
the town hall dates from the close of the previous century; and 
the grammar school was founded by Edward VI., in part occupy- 
ing buildings of earlier date, which retain Perpendicular and 
Decorated windows, and a Norman door. A chantry, founded 
in 1268 by Matthew Stratton, archdeacon of Buckingham, 
previously occupied the site; the Norman work may be a 
remnant of the chapel of a gild of the Holy Trinity. The manor 
house is of the early part of the 17th century, and other old 
houses remain. The adjacent mansion of Stowe, approached from 
the town by a magnificent avenue of elms, and surrounded by 
gardens very beautifully laid out, was the seat of the dukes of 
Buckingham until the extinction of the title in 1889. Bucking- 
ham is served by a branch of- the Grand Junction Canal, and has 
agricultural trade, manufactures of condensed milk and artificial 
manure, mal tings and flour-mills; while an old industry survives 
to a modified extent in the manufacture of pillow-lace. The 
borough is under a mayor, 4 aldermen and 12 councillors. 
Area, 5006 acres. 

Buckingham (Bochingeham, Bukyngham) was an important 
stronghold in pre-Conquest times, and in 918 Edward the Elder 
encamped there with his army for four weeks, and threw up two 
forts on either side of the water. At the time of the Domesday 
survey there were twenty-six burgesses in Buckingham, which, 
together with the hamlet of Bourton, was assessed at one hide. 
Although it appears as a borough thus early, the town received no 
charter until 1554, when Queen Mary created it a free borough 
corporate with a bailiff, twelve principal burgesses and a steward, 
and defined the boundaries as extending in width from Dudley bridge 
to Thornborowe bridge and in length from Chackmore bridge to 
Padbury Mill bridge. A charter from Charles II. in 1684 was very 
shortly abandoned in favour of the original grant, which held force 
until the Municipal Corporations Act of 1835. In 1529 and from 
1545 onwards Buckingham returned two members to parliament, 
until deprived by the Representation of the People Act of 1867 of one 
member, and by the Redistribution of Seats Act of 1885 of the other. 
Early mentions occur of markets and fairs, and from 1522, when 
Henry VIII, granted to Sir Henry Marney the borough of Bucking- 
ham with a Saturday market and two annual fairs, grants of fairs 
by various sovereigns were numerous. Buckingham was formerly an 
important agricultural centre, and Edward III. fixed here one of 
the staples for wool, but after the removal of these to Calais the trade 
suffered such decay that in an act of 32 Henry VIII. Buckingham is 
mentioned among thirty-six impoverished towns. 

BUCKINGHAM AND NORMANBY, JOHN SHEFFIELD, ist 

Duke cm? (1648-1721), English statesman and poet, was born on 



728 BUCKINGHAMSHIRE, EARLS OF— BUCKINGHAMSHIRE 



the 7th of April 1648. He was the son of Edmund, 2nd earl of 
Mulgrave, and succeeded to that title on his father's death in 1658. 
At the age of eighteen he joined the fleet, to serve in the first 
Dutch war; on the renewal of hostilities in 1672 he was present 
at the battle of Southwold Bay, and in the next year received the 
command of a ship. He was also made a colonel of infantry, and 
served for some time under Turenne. In 1680 he was put in 
charge of an expedition sent to relieve the town of Tangier. It 
was said that he was provided with a rotten ship in the hope that 
he would not return, but the reason of this abortive plot, if plot 
there was, is not exactly ascertained. At court he took the side 
of the duke of York, and helped to bring about Monmouth's 
disgrace. . In 1682 he was dismissed from the court, apparently 
for putting himself forward as a suitor for the princess Anne, but 
on the accession of King James he received a seat in the privy 
council, and was made lord chamberlain. He supported James i n 
his most unpopular measures, and stayed with him in London 
during the time of his flight. He also protected the Spanish 
ambassador from the dangerous anger of the mob. He acquiesced, 
however, in the Revolution, and in 1694 was made marquess of 
Normanby. In 1696 he refused in company with other Tory 
peers to sign an agreement to support William as their " rightful 
and lawful king " against Jacobite attempts, and was conse- 
quently dismissed from the privy council. On the accession of 
Anne, with whom he was a personal favourite, he became lord 
privy seal and lord-lieutenant of the North Riding of Yorkshire, 
and in 1703 duke of Buckingham and Normanby. During the 
predominance of the Whigs between 1705 and 17 10, Buckingham 
was deprived of his office as lord privy seal, but in 17 10 he was 
made lord steward, and in 1711 lord president of the council. 
After the death of Anne he held no state appointment. He died 
on the 24th of February 1721 at his house in St James's Park, 
which stood on the site of the present Buckingham Palace. 
Buckingham was succeeded by his son, Edmund (1 716-1735) on 
whose death the titles became extinct. 

Buckingham, who is better known by his inherited titles as Lord 
Mulgrave, was the author of " An Account of the Revolution " 
and some other essays, and of numerous poems, among them the 
Essay on Poetry and the Essay on Satire. It is probable that the 
Essay on Satire, which attacked many notable persons, " saunter- 
ing Charles " amongst others, was circulated in MS. It was often 
attributed at the time to Dryden, who accordingly suffered a 
thrashing at the hands of Rochester's bravoes for the reflections 
it contained upon the earl. Mulgrave was a patron of Dryden, 
who may possibly have revised it, but was certainly not 
responsible, although it is commonly printed with his works. 
Mulgrave adapted Shakespeare's Julius Caesar, breaking it up 
into two plays, Julius Caesar and Marcus Brutus. He introduced 
choruses between the acts, two of these being written by Pope, 
and an incongruous love scene between Brutus and Portia. He 
was a constant friend and patron of Pope, who expressed a 
flattering opinion of his Essay on Poetry. This, although 
smoothly enough written, deals chiefly with commonplaces. 

In 1721 Edmund Curll published a pirated edition of his works, 
and was brought before the bar of the House of Lords for breach of 
privilege accordingly. An authorized edition under the super- 
intendence of Pope appeared in 1723, but the authorities cut out the 
" Account of the Revolution " and " The Feast of the Gods " on 
account of their alleged Jacobite tendencies. These were printed at 
the Hague in 1727. Pope disingenuously repudiated any knowledge 
of the contents. Other editions reappeared in 1723, 1726, 1729, 
1740 and 1753. His Poems were included in Johnson's and other 
editions of the British poets. 

BUCKINGHAMSHIRE, EARLS OF. The first earl of Bucking- 
hamshire (to be distinguished from the earls of Buckingham, q.v.) 
was John Hobart (c. 1694-17 56), a descendant of Sir Henry 
Hobart (d. 1625), attorney-general and chief justice of the 
common pleas under James I., who was made a baronet in 1611, 
and who was the great-grandson of Sir James Hobart (d. 1507), 
attorney-general to Henry VII. The Hobarts had been settled in 
Norfolk and Suffolk for many years, when in 1728 John Hobart, 
who was a son of Sir Henry Hobart, the 4th baronet (d. 1698) , was 
created Baron Hobart of Blickling. In 1 740 Hobart became lord- 
lieutenant of Norfolk and in 1746 earl of Buckinghamshire, his 



sister, Henrietta Howard, countess of Suffolk, being the mistress 
of George II. He died on the 22nd of September 1756, and was 
succeeded as 2nd earl 1 by his eldest son John (1723-1793), who 
was member of parliament for Norwich and comptroller of the 
royal household before his accession to the title. From 1762 to 
1766 he was ambassador to Russia, and from 1776 to 1780 lord- 
lieutenant of Ireland, but he was hardly equal to the exceptional 
difficulties with which he had to deal in the latter position. He 
died without sons at Blickling Hall, Norfolk, on the 3rd of August 
1793, when his half-brother George (c. 1730-1804), became 3rd 
earl. Blickling Hall and his Norfolk estates, however, passed to 
his daughter, Henrietta (1762-1805), the wife of William Kerr, 
afterwards 6th marquess of Lothian. 

Robert Hobart, 4th earl of Buckinghamshire (1760-1816), the 
eldest son of the 3rd earl, was born on the 6th of May 1 760. He 
was a soldier, and then a member of both the English and the 
Irish Houses of Commons; from 1789 to 1793 he was chief secre- 
tary to the lord-lieutenant of Ireland, exerting his influence in 
this country to prevent any concessions to the Roman Catholics. 
In 1793, being known by the courtesy title of Lord Hobart, be 
was sent to Madras as governor, but in 1798, after serious 1 differ- 
ences between himself and the governor-general of India, Sir 
John Shore, afterwards Lord Teignmouth, he was recalled. 
Returning to British politics, Hobart was called up to the House 
of Lords in 1798 (succeeding to the earldom of Buckinghamshire 
in 1804); he favoured the union between England and Ireland; 
from March 1801 to May 1804 he was secretary for war and the 
colonies (his family name being taken for Hobart Town in 
Tasmania), and in 1805 he became chancellor of the duchy of 
Lancaster under Pitt. For a short time he was joint postmaster- 
general, and from 181 2 until his death on the 4th of February 
1816 he was president of the Board of Control, a post for which 
his Indian experience had fitted him. 

The 4th earl left no sons, and his titles passed to his nephew, 
George Robert Hobart (1 789-1849), a son of George Vere Hobart 
(1761-1802), lieutenant-governor of Grenada. In 1824 the 5th 
earl inherited the Buckinghamshire estates of the Hampden 
family and took the name of Hampden, his ancestor, Sir John 
Hobart, 3rd baronet, having married Mary Hampden about 1655. 
On his death in February 1849 hi s brother, Augustus Edward 
Hobart (1 793-1 884), who took the name of Hobart-Hampden in 
1878, became 6th earl. His two sons, Vere Henry, Lord Hobart 
(1818-1875), governor of Madras from 1872, and Frederick John 
Hobart (1821-1875), predeceased him, and when the 6th earl died 
he was succeeded by his grandson, Sidney Carr Hobart-Hampden 
(b. i860), who became 7th earl of Buckinghamshire, and who 
added to his name that of Mercer-Henderson. Another of the 
6th earl's sons was Augustus Charles Hobart-Hampden, generally 
known as Hobart Pasha (q.v.). 

See Lord Hobart's Essays and Miscellaneous Writings, edited with 
biography by Lady Hobart (1885). 

BUCKINGHAMSHIRE (abbreviated Bucks) a south midland 
county of England, bounded N. by Northamptonshire, E. by 
Bedfordshire, Hertfordshire and Middlesex, SL for a short dis- 
tance by Surrey, and by Berkshire, and W. by Oxfordshire. Its 
area is 743^2 sq. m. The county is divided between the basins of 
the rivers Ouse and Thames. The first in its uppermost course 
forms part of the north-western boundary, passes the towns of 
Buckingham, Stony Stratford, Wolverton, Newport Pagnell and 
Olney, and before quitting the county forms a short stretch of the 
north-eastern boundary. The principal tributary it receives 
within the county is the Ouzel. The Thames forms the entire 
southern boundary; and of its tributaries Buckinghamshire 
includes the upper part of the Thames. To the north-west of 
Buckingham, and both east and west of the Ouzel, the land rises 
in gentle undulations to a height of nearly 500 ft., and north of 
the Thames valley a few nearly isolated hills stand boldly, such 
as Brill Hill and Muswell Hill, each over 600 ft., but the hilliest 

1 Until 1784, when George Grenville, Earl Temple, was created 
marquess of Buckingham, the 2nd earl of Buckinghamshire always 
signed himself " Buckingham " ; his contemporaries knew him by 
this name, and hence a certain amount of confusion has arisen. 



BUCKINGHAMSHIRE 



729 



part of the county is the south, which is occupied by part of the 
Chiltern system, the general direction of which is from south- 
west to north-east. The crest-line of these hills crosses the 
county at its narrowest point, along a line, above the towns of 
Prince's Risborough and Wendover, not exceeding n m. in 
length. This line divides the county into two parts of quite 
different physical character; for to the south almost the whole 
land is hilly (the longer slope of the Chiltern system lying in this 
direction), well wooded, and pleasantly diversified with narrow 
vales. The chief of these are watered by the Wye, Misbourne 
and Chess streams. The beech tree is predominant in the woods, 
in so much that William Camden, writing c. 1585, supposed the 
county to take name from this feature (A.S. hoc, beech). In the 
south a remnant of ancient forest is preserved as public ground 
under the name of Burnham Beeches. The Chilterns reach a 
height of nearly 900 ft. within the county. 

Geology. — The northern half of the county is occupied by Jurassic 
strata, in the southern half Cretaceous rocks predominate except 
in the south-eastern corner, where they are covered by Tertiary beds. 
Thus the oldest rocks are in the north, succeeded continuously by 
younger strata to the south ; the general dip of all the rocks is 
south-easterly. A few patches of Upper Lias Clay appear near the 
northern boundary near Grafton Regis and Castle Thorpe, and 
again in the valley of the Ouse near Stoke Goldington and Weston 
Underwood. The Oolitic series is represented by the Great Oolite, 
with limestones in the upper part, much quarried for building stones 
at Westbury, Thornborough, Brock, Whittlewood Forest, &c. ; the 
lower portions are more argillaceous. The Forest Marble is seen 
about Thornton as a thin bed of clay with an oyster-bearing limestone 
at the base. Next above is the Cornbrash, a series of rubbly and 
occasionally hard limestones and thin clays. The outcrop runs by 
Tingwick, Buckingham, Berehampton and Newport Pagnell, it is 
quarried at Wolverton and elsewhere for road metal, lnliers of 
these rocks occur at Marsh Gibbon and Stan Hill. The Oxford Clay 
and Kimmeridge Clay, with the Gault, lie in the vale of Aylesbury. 
The clay is covered by numerous outliers of Portland, Purbeck and 
Lower Greensand beds. The Portland beds are sandy below, 
calcareous above; the outcrop follows the normal direction in the 
county, from south-west to north-east, from Thame through Ayles- 
bury; they are quarried at several places for building stone and 
fossils are abundant. The Hartwell Clay is in the Lower Portland. 
Freshwater Purbeck beds lie below the Portland and Lower Green- 
sand beds; they cap the ridge between Oving and Whitchurch. 
Glass-making sands have been worked from the Lower Greensand at 
Hartwell, and phosphatic nodules from the same beds at Brickhill 
as well as from the Gault at Towersey. A broad band of Gault, 
a bluish clay, extends from Towersey across the county in a north- 
easterly direction. Resting upon the Gault is the Upper Greensand; 
at the junction of the two formations numerous springs arise, a 
circumstance which has no doubt determined the site of several 
villages. The Chalk rises abruptly from the low lying argillaceous 
plain to form the Chiltern Hills. The form of the whole of the hilly 
district round Chesham, High Wycombe and the Chalfonts is 
determined by the Chalk. Reading beds, mottled clays and sands, 
repose upon the Chalk at Woburn, Barnham, Fulmer and Denham, 
and these are in turn covered by the London Clay, which is exposed 
on the slopes about Stoke Common and Iver. Between the Tertiary- 
capped Chalk plateau and the Thames, a gentler slope, covered with 
alluvial gravel and brick earth, reaches down to the river. Thick 
deposits of plateau gravel cover most of the high ground in the 
southern corner of the county, while much of the northern part is 
obscured by glacial clays and gravels. 

Industries. — The agricultural capacities of the soil vary greatly 
in different localities. On the lower lands, especially in the Vale 
of Aylesbury, about the headwaters of the Thame, it is extremely 
fertile ; while on the hills it is usually poor and thin. The pro- 
portion of cultivated land is high, being about 83 % of the whole. 
Of this a large and growing portion is in permanent pasture; 
cattle and sheep being reared in great numbers for the London 
markets, to which also are sent quantities of ducks, for which 
the district round Aylesbury is famous. Wheat and oats are the 
principal grain crops, though both decrease in importance. 
Turnips and swedes for the cattle are the chief green crops; 
and dairy-farming is largely practised. There is no general 
manufacturing industry, but a considerable amount of lace- 
making and straw-plaiting is carried on locally; and at High 
Wycombe and in its neighbourhood there is a thriving trade in 
various articles of turnery, such as chairs and bowls, from beech 
and other hard woods. The introduction of lace-making in this 
and neighbouring counties is attributed to Flemish, and later to 



French immigrants, but alsoto Catharine of Aragon during her 
residence (c. 1532) at Ampthill. Down to the later part of the 
19th century a general holiday celebrated by lace-makers on the 
25th of November was known as " Cattarn's Day." 

Communications. — The main line of the London & North- 
western railway crosses the north-east part of the county. 
Bletchley is an important junction on this system, branches 
diverging east to Fenny Stratford, Bedford and Cambridge, and 
west to Oxford and Banbury, Buckingham being served by the 
western branch. There is also a branch from Cheddington to 
Aylesbury. The Metropolitan-Great Central joint line serves 
Amersham, Chesham (by a branch), and Aylesbury, joining the 
North- Western Oxford branch at Verney Junction; this line is 
used by the Great Central railway, the main line of which con- 
tinues north-westward from Quainton Road. A light railway 
connects this station with the large village of Brill to the south- 
west. The Great Central and the Great Western companies 
jointly own a line passing through Beaconsfield, High Wycombe, 
and Prince's Risborough, which is connected northward with 
the Great Central system. Before the opening of this line in 
1906 the Great Western branch from Maidenhead to Oxford 
was the only line serving High Wycombe and Prince's Ris- 
borough, from which there are branches to Watlington and 
Aylesbury. The main line of this company crosses the extreme 
south of the county by Slough and Taplow. The Grand Junction 
Canal, reaching the valley of the Ouse by way of the Ouzel valley 
from the south, has branches to Aylesbury and to Buckingham. 
Except the Thames none of the rivers in the county is con- 
tinuously navigable. 

Population and Administration. — The area of the ancient 
county is 475,682 acres, with a population in 1891 of 185,284, 
and in 1901 of 195,764. The area of the administrative county 
is 479,358 acres. The county contains eight hundreds, of which- 
three, namely Stoke, Burnham and Desborough, form the 
" Chiltern Hundreds " (g.v.) . The hundred of Aylesbury retains 
its ancient designation of the " three hundreds of Aylesbury." 
The municipal boroughs are Buckingham, the county town 
(pop. 3152), and Wycombe, officially Chepping Wycombe, also 
Chipping or High Wycombe (1 5,542) . The other urban districts 
are Aylesbury (9243), Beaconsfield (1570), Chesham (7245), 
Eton (3301), Fenny Stratford (4799), Linslade, on the Ouzel 
opposite to Leighton Buzzard in Bedfordshire (2157), Marlow 
(4526), Newport Pagnell (4028), Slough (11,453). Among the 
lesser market towns may be mentioned Amersham (2674), 
Ivinghoe (808), Olney (2684), Prince's Risborough (2189), Stony 
Stratford (2353), Wendover (2009) and Winslow (1703). At 
Wolverton (5323) are the carriage works of the London & North- 
Western railway. Several of the villages on and near the banks 
of the Thames have become centres of residence, such as Taplow, 
Cookham and Bourne End, Burnham and Wooburn. Bucking- 
hamshire is in the midland circuit, and assizes are held at Ayles- 
bury. It has one court of quarter sessions, and is divided into 
thirteen petty sessional divisions. The boroughs of Bucking- 
ham and Wycombe have separate commissions of the peace. 
The administrative county contains 230 civil parishes. Buck- 
inghamshire is almost entirely within the diocese of Oxford, 
and 215 ecclesiastical parishes are situated wholly or in part 
within it. There are three parliamentary divisions, Northern 
or Buckingham, Mid or Aylesbury, and Southern or Wycombe, 
each returning one member; and the county contains a small 
part of the parliamentary borough of Windsor (chiefly in Berk- 
shire). The most notable institution within the county is Eton 
College, the famous public school founded by Henry VI. 

History. — The district which was to become Buckinghamshire 
was reached by the West Saxons in 571, as by a series of victories 
they pushed their way north along the Thames valley. With 
the grouping of the settlements into kingdoms and the con- 
solidation of Mercia under Offa, Buckinghamshire was included 
in Mercia until, with the submission of that kingdom to the 
Northmen, it became part of the Danelaw. In the 10th century 
Buckinghamshire suffered frequently from the ravages of the 
Danes, and numerous barrows and earthworks mark the scenes 



73o 



BUCKINGHAMSHIRE 



of struggles against the invaders.. These relics are especially- 
abundant in the vale of Aylesbury, probably at this time one of 
the richest and best protected of the Saxon settlements. The 
Chiltern district, on the other hand, is said to have been an 
impassable forest infested by hordes of robbers and wild beasts. 
In the reign of Edward the Confessor, Lcofstan, 12th abbot of 
St Albans, cut down large tracts of wood in this district and 
granted the manor of Hamstcad (Herts) to a valiant knight and 
two fellow-soldiers on condition that they should check the 
depredations of the robbers. The same reason led at an early 
period to the appointment of a steward of the Chiltern Hundreds, 
and this office being continued long after the necessity for it had 
ceased to exist, gradually became the sinecure it is to-day. 
The district was not finally disforested until the reign of 
James I. 

At the time of the Norman invasion Buckinghamshire was 
probably included in the earldom of Leofwine, son of Godwin, 
and the support which it lent him at the battle of Hastings was 
punished by sweeping confiscations after the Conquest. The 
proximity of Buckinghamshire to London caused it to be involved 
in most of the great national events of the ensuing centuries. 
During the war between King John and his barons William 
Mauduit held Hanslape Castle against the king, until in 1216 it 
was captured and demolished by Falkes de Breaute. The county 
was visited severely by the Black Death, and Winslow was one of 
many districts which were almost entirely depopulated. In the 
civil war Buckinghamshire was one of the first counties to join 
in an association for mutual defence on the side of the parlia- 
ment, which had important garrisons at Aylesbury, Brill and 
elsewhere. Newport Pagnell was for a short time garrisoned by 
the royalist troops, and in 1644 the king fixed his headquarters 
at Buckingham. 

The shire of Buckingham originated with the division of 
Mercia in the reign of Edward the Elder, and was probably 
formed by the aggregation of pre-existing hundreds round the 
county town, a fact which explains the curious irregularities 
of the boundary line. The eighteen hundreds of the Domesday 
survey have now been reduced to eight, of which the three 
Chiltern hundreds, Desborough, Burnham and Stoke, are un- 
altered in extent as well as in name. The remainder have been 
formed each by the union of three of the ancient hundreds, and 
Aylesbury is still designated " the three hundreds of Aylesbury." 
All, except Newport and Buckingham, retain the names of 
Domesday hundreds, and the shire has altered little on its outer 
lines since the survey. Until the time of Queen Elizabeth 
Buckinghamshire and Bedfordshire had a common sheriff. The 
shire court of the former county was held at Aylesbury. 

The ecclesiastical history of Buckinghamshire is not easy to 
trace, as there is no local chronicler, but the earliest churches 
were probably subject to the West Saxon see of Dorchester, 
and when after the Conquest the bishop's stool was transferred 
to Lincoln no change of jurisdiction ensued. After the dissolu- 
tion of the monasteries it was proposed to form a new diocese 
to include Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire, but the project 
was abandoned, and both remained in the Lincoln diocese until 
1837, when the latter was transferred to Oxford. The arch- 
deaconry was probably founded towards the close of the nth 
century by Bishop Remy, and the subdivision into rural deaneries 
followed shortly after. A dean of Thornborough is mentioned 
in the 12th century, and in the taxation of Nicholas IV. eight 
deaneries are given, comprising 186 parishes. In 1855 the 
deaneries were reconstructed and made eighteen in number. 

On the redistribution of estates after the Conquest only two 
Englishmen continued to retain estates of any importance, and 
the chief landowners at this date were Walter Giffard, first earl 
of Buckingham, and Odo, bishop of Bayeux. Few of the great 
Buckinghamshire estates, however, remained with the same 
proprietors for any length of time. Many became annexed by 
religious establishments, while others reverted to the crown and 
were disposed of by various grants. The family of Hampden 
alone claim to have held the estate from which the name is 
derived in an unbroken line from Saxon times. 



Buckinghamshire has always ranked as an agricultural rather 
than a manufacturing county, and has long been famed for its 
corn and cattle. Fuller mentions the vale of Aylesbury as pro- 
ducing the biggest bodied sheep in England, and " Buckingham- 
shire bread and beef " is an old proverb. Lace-making, first 
introduced into this county by the Fleming refugees from the 
Alva persecution, became a very profitable industry. The 
monopolies of James I. considerably injured this trade, and in 
1623 a petition was addressed to the high sheriff of Buckingham- 
shire representing the distress of the people owing to the decay 
of bone lace-making. Newport Pagnell and Olney were especi- 
ally famous for their lace, and the parish of Hanslape is said to 
have made an annual profit of £8000 to £9000 from lace manu- 
facture. The straw-plait industry was introduced in the reign 
of George L, and formerly gave employment to a large number 
of the population. 

The county was first represented in parliament by two members 
in 1290. The representation increased as the towns acquired 
representative rights, until in 1603 the county with its boroughs 
made a total return of fourteen members. By the Reform 
Act of 1832 this was reduced to eleven, and by the Redis- 
tribution of Seats Act of 1885 the boroughs were deprived of 
representation and the county returned three members for three 
divisions. 

Antiquities. — Buckinghamshire contains no ecclesiastical 
buildings of the first rank. Monastic remains are scanty, but 
two former abbeys may be noted. At Medmenham, on the 
Thames above Marlow, there are fragments, incorporated into 
a residence, of a Cistercian abbey founded in 1201; which 
became notorious in the middle of the 18th century as the 
meeting-place of a convivial club called the " Franciscans " 
after its founder, Sir Francis Dashwood, afterwards Lord le 
Despencer (1 708-1 781), and also known as the " Hell-Fire Club," 
of which John Wilkes, Bubb Dodington and other political 
notorieties were members. The motto of the club, fay ce que 
voudras (do what you will), inscribed on a doorway at the abbey, 
was borrowed from Rabelais' description of the abbey of Thelema 
in Gargantua. The remains of the Augustinian Notley Abbey 
(1162), incorporated with a farm-house, deserve mention rather 
for their picturesque situation by the river Thame than for their 
architectural value. Turning to churches, there is workmanship 
considered to be of pre-Norman date in Wing church, in the 
neighbourhood of Leighton Buzzard, including a polygonal apse 
and crypt. Stewkley church, in the same locality, shows the 
finest Norman work in the county; the building is almost wholly 
of the later part of this period, and the ornamentation is very 
rich. The Early English work of Chetwode and Haddenham 
churches, both in the west of the county, is noteworthy; especi- 
ally in the first, which, as it stands, is the eastern part of a 
priory church of Augustinians (1244). Good specimens of the 
Decorated style are not wanting, though none is of special note; 
but the county contains three fine examples of Perpendicular 
architecture in Eton College chapel and the churches of Maids 
More ton to the north, and Hillesden to the south, of Buckingham. 
Ancient domestic architecture is chiefly confined to a few country 
houses, of which Chequers Court, dating from the close of the 
16th century, is of interest not only from the architectural stand- 
point but from its beautiful situation high among the Chiltern 
Hills between Prince's Risborough and Wendover, and from 
a remarkable collection of relics of Oliver Cromwell, preserved 
here as a consequence of the marriage, in 1664, of John Russell, 
a grandson of the Protector, into the family to which the house 
then belonged. The manor-house of Hampden, among the hills 
east of Prince's Risborough, was for many generations the abode 
of the family of that name, and is still in the possession of 
descendants of John Hampden, who fell at the battle of Chalgrove 
in 1643, and is buried in Hampden church. Fine county seats 
are numerous — there may be mentioned Stowe (Buckingham), 
formerly the seat of the dukes of Buckingham; Cliveden and 
Hedsor, two among the many beautifully situated mansions by 
the bank of the Thames; and Claydon House in the west of 
the county. Among the Chiltern Hills, also, there are several 



BUCKLAND, F. T.— BUCKLAND, W. 



73* 



splendid domains. Associations with eminent men have given 
a high fame to several towns or villages of Buckinghamshire. 
Such are the connexion of Beaconsfield with Edmund Waller 
and Edmund Burke, that of Hughenden near Wycombe with 
Benjamin Disraeli, Lord Beaconsfield, whose father's residence 
was at Bradenham; of Olney and Stoke Pogis with the poets 
Cowper and Gray respectively. At Chalfont St Giles a cottage 
still stands in which Milton completed Paradise Lost and began 
Paradise Regained. In earlier life he had lived and worked at 
Horton, near the Thames below Windsor. 

Authorities. — The original standard history is the laborious work 
of G. Lipscomb, History and Antiquities of the County of Buckingham 
(London, 1831-1847). Other works are: Browne Willis, History 
and Antiquities of the Town, Hundred, and Deanery of Buckingham 
(London, 1755); D. and S. Lysons, Magna Britannia, vol. i. ; R. 
Gibbs, Buckingham (Aylesbury, 1878-1882); Worthies of Bucking- 
ham (Aylesbury, 1886); and Buckingham Miscellany (Aylesbury, 
1891); G. S. Roscoe, Bu&kingham Sketches (London, 1891); P. H. 
Ditchfield, Memorials of Old Buckinghamshire (London, 1901); 
Victoria County History, " Buckinghamshire." 

BUCKLAND, FRANCIS TREVELYAN (1826-1880), English 
zoolpgist, son of Dean William Buckland the geologist, was born 
at Oxford on the 17th of December 1826. He was educated at 
Winchester and Christ Church, taking his degree in 1848, and 
then adopted the medical profession, studying at St George's 
hospital, London, where he became house-surgeon in 1852. 
The pursuit of anatomy led him to a good deal of out-of-the-way 
research in zoology, and in 1856 he became a regular writer on 
natural history for the newly established Field, particularly on 
the subject of fish. In 1866 he started Land and Water on similar 
lines. In 1867 he was appointed government inspector of 
fisheries, and in the course of his work travelled constantly about 
the country, being largely responsible for the increased attention 
paid to the scientific side of pisciculture. Among his publications, 
besides articles and official reports, were Fish Hatching (1863), 
Curiosities of Natural History (4 vols., 1857-1872), Logbook of a 
Fisherman (1875), Natural History of British Fishes (1881). 
He died on the 19th of December 1880. 

See Life by G. C. Bompas (1885). 

BUCKLAND, WILLIAM (1784-1856), English divine and 
geologist, eldest son of the Rev. Charles Buckland, rector of 
Templeton and Trusham, in Devon, was born at Axminster on 
the 1 2th of March 1 784. He was educated at the grammar school 
of Tiverton, and at Winchester, and in 1801 was elected a scholar 
of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, becoming B. A. in 1804. In 
1809 he was elected a fellow of his college, and was admitted into 
holy orders. From early boyhood he had exhibited a strong 
taste for natural science, which was subsequently stimulated 
by the lectures of Dr John Kidd on mineralogy and chemistry; 
and his attention was especially drawn to the then infant science 
of geology. He also attended the lectures of Sir Christopher 
Pegge (1765-1822) on anatomy. He now devoted himself 
systematically to an examination of the geological structure of. 
Great Britain, making excursions, and investigating the order 
of superposition of the strata and the characters of the organic 
remains which they contained. In 1813, on the resignation of 
Dr Kidd, he was appointed reader in mineralogy in Oxford; and 
the interest excited by his lectures was so great that in 1819 a 
readership in geology was founded and especially endowed by 
the treasury, Dr Buckland being the first holder of the new 
appointment. In 1818 Dr Buckland was elected a fellow of the 
Royal Society, and in 1824 and again in 1840 he was chosen 
president of the Geological Society of London. In 1825 he was 
presented by his college to the living of Stoke Charity, near 
Whitchurch, Hants, and in the same year he was appointed 
by Lord Liverpool to a canonry of the cathedral of Christ Church, 
Oxford, when the degree of D.D. was conferred upon him. In 
1825, also, he married Mary, the eldest daughter of Mr Benjamin 
Morland of Sheepstead House, near Abingdon, Berks, by whose 
abilities and excellent judgment he was materially assisted in his 
literary labours. In 1832 he presided over the second meeting 
of the British Association, which was then held at Oxford. In 
1845 he was appointed by Sir Robert Peel to the vacant deanery 



of Westminster, and was soon after inducted to the living of Islip, 
near Oxford, a preferment attached to the deanery. In 1847 
he was appointed a trustee in the British Museum; and in 1848 
he was awarded the Wollaston medal by the Geological Society 
of London. In 1849 his health began to give way under the 
increasing pressure of his multifarious duties ; and the later 
years of his life were overshadowed by a serious illness, which 
compelled him to live in retirement. He died on the 24th of 
August 1856, and was buried in a spot which he had himself 
chosen, in Islip churchyard. 

Buckland was a man many-sided in his abilities, and of a 
singularly wide range of attainments. Apart from his published 
works and memoirs in connexion with the special department 
of geology, and in addition to the work entailed upon him by 
the positions which he at different times held in the Church of 
England, he entered with great enthusiasm into many practical 
questions connected with agricultural and sanitary science, and 
various social and even medical problems. As a teacher he 
possessed powers of the highest order ; and the university of 
Oxford is enriched by the large and valuable private collections, 
illustrative of geology and mineralogy, which he amassed in the 
course of his active life. It is, however, upon his published scien- 
tific works that Dr Buckland's great reputation is mainly based. 
His first great work was the well-known Reliquiae Diluvianae, or 
Observations on the Organic Remains contained in caves, fissures, 
and diluvial gravel attesting the Action of a Universal Deluge, 
published in 1823 (2nd cd. 1824), in which he supplemented his 
former observations on the remains of extinct animals discovered 
in the cavern of Kirkdale in Yorkshire, and expounded his views 
as to the bearing of these and similar cases on the Biblical account 
of the Deluge. Thirteen years after the publication of the 
Reliquiae, Dr Buckland was called upon, in accordance with the 
will of the earl of Bridgewater, to write one of the series of works 
known as the Bridgewater Treatises. The design of these 
treatises was to exhibit the " power, wisdom, and goodness of 
God, as manifested in the Creation," and none of them was of 
greater value, as evinced by its vitality, than that on " Geology 
and Mineralogy." Originally published in 1836, it has gone 
through three editions, and though not a " manual " of geo- 
logical science, it still possesses high value as a storehouse of 
geological and palaeontological facts bearing upon the particular 
argument which it was designed to illustrate. The third edition, 
issued in 1858, was edited by his son Francis T. Buckland, and 
is accompanied by a memoir of the author and a list of his 
publications. 

Of Dr Buckland's numerous original contributions to the 
sciences of Geology and Palaeontology, the following may be 
mentioned: — (1) " On the Structure of the Alps and adjoining 
parts of the Continent, and their relation to the Secondary and 
Transition Rocks of England" {Annals of Phil., 1821); (2) 
" Account of an Assemblage of Fossil Teeth and Bones of 
Elephant, Rhinoceros, Hippopotamus, &c, discovered in a cave 
at Kirkdale in Yorkshire in the year 1821 " (Phil. Trans.); (3) 
" On the Quartz Rock of the Lickey Hill in Worcestershire " 
(Trans. Geol. Soc); (4) " On the Megalosaurus or Great Fossil 
Lizard of Stonesfield " (Ibid.); (5) "On the Cycadeoideae, a 
Family of Plants found in the Oolite Quarries of the Isle of 
Portland" (Ibid.); (6) "On the Discovery of a New Species 
of Pterodactyle in the Lias of Lyme Regis " (Ibid.); (7) " On 
the Discovery of Coprolites or Fossil Faeces in the Lias of Lyme 
Regis, and in other Formations " (Ibid.) ; (8) " On the Evidences 
of Glaciers in Scotland and the North of England " (Proc. Geol. 
Soc. Lond.); (9) " On the South- Western Coal District of Eng- 
land " (joint paper with the Rev. W. D. Conybeare, Trans. Geol. 
Soc. Lond.); (10) "On the Geology of the neighbourhood of 
Weymouth, and the adjacent parts of the Coast of Dorset " 
(joint paper with Sir H. De la Beche, Trans. Geol. Soc. Lond.). 

With regard to the Glacial theory propounded by Agassiz, 
no one welcomed it with greater ardour than Buckland, and he 
zealously sought to trace out evidences of former glaciation in 
Britain. A record of the interesting discussion which took place 
at the Geological Society's meeting in London in November 1840, 



732 



BUCKLE— BUCKNER 



after the reading of a paper by Buckland, was printed in the 
Midland Naturalist, October 1883. 

BUCKLE, HENRY THOMAS (1821-1862), English historian, 
author of the History of Civilization, the son of Thomas Henry 
Buckle, a wealthy London merchant, was born at Lee, in Kent, 
on the 24th of November 1821. Owing to his delicate health 
he was only a very short time at school, and never at college, 
but the love of reading having been early awakened in him, he 
was allowed ample means of gratifying it. He gained his first 
distinctions not in literature but in chess, being reputed, before 
he was twenty, one of the first players in the world. After his 
father's death in January 1840 he spent some time with his 
mother on the continent (1840-1844). He had by that time 
formed the resolution to direct all his reading and to devote all 
his energies to the preparation of some great historical work, and 
during the next seventeen years he bestowed ten hours each day 
in working out his purpose. At first he contemplated a history 
of the middle ages, but by 185 1 he had decided in favour of a 
history of civilization. The six years which followed were 
occupied in writing and rewriting, altering and revising the first 
volume, which appeared in June 1857. It at once made its 
author a literary and even social celebrity, — the lion of a London 
season. On the 19th of March 1858 he delivered at the Royal 
Institution a public lecture (the only one he ever gave) on the 
Influence of Women on the Progress of Knowledge, which was 
published in Fraser's Magazine for April 1858, and reprinted 
in the first volume of the Miscellaneous and Posthumous Works. 
On the 1st of April 1859 a crushing and desolating affliction fell 
upon him in the death of his mother. It was under the immedi- 
ate impression of his loss that he concluded a review he was 
writing of J. S. Mill's Essay on Liberty with an argument for 
immortality, based on the yearning of the affections to regain 
communion with the beloved dead, — on the impossibility of 
standing up and living, if we believed the separation were final. 
The argument is a strange one to have been used by a man who 
had maintained so strongly that " we have the testimony of all 
history to prove the extreme fallibility of consciousness." The 
review appeared in Fraser's Magazine, May 1859, and is to be 
found also in the Miscellaneous and Posthumous Works (1872). 
The second volume of his history was published in May 1861. 
Soon after he left England for the East, in order to recruit his 
spirits and restore his health. From the end of October 1861 
to the beginning of March 1862 was spent by him in Egypt, from 
which he went over the desert of Sinai and of Edom to Syria, 
reaching Jerusalem on the 19th of April 1862. After staying 
there eleven days, he set out for Europe by Beyrout, but at 
Nazareth he was attacked by fever; and he died at Damascus 
on the 29th of May 1862. 

Buckle's fame, which must rest wholly on his History of 
Civilization in England, is no longer what it was in the decade 
following his death. His History is a gigantic unfinished 
introduction, of which the plan was, first to state the general 
principles of the author's method and the general laws which 
govern the course of human progress; and secondly, to exemplify 
these principles and laws through the histories of certain nations 
characterized by prominent and peculiar features, — Spain and 
Scotland, the United States and Germany. Its chief ideas are — 
(1) That, owing partly to the want of ability in historians, and 
partly to the complexity of social phenomena, extremely little 
had as yet been done towards discovering the principles which 
govern the character and destiny of nations, or, in other words, 
towards establishing a science of history; (2) That, while the 
theological dogma of predestination is a barren hypothesis 
beyond the province of knowledge, and the metaphysical dogma 
of free will rests on an erroneous belief in the infallibility of 
consciousness, it is proved by science, and especially by statistics, 
that human actions are governed by laws as fixed and regular 
as those which rule in the physical world; (3) That climate, soil, 
food, and the aspects of nature are the primary causes of intel- 
lectual progress, — the first three indirectly, through determining 
the accumulation and distribution of wealth, and the last by 
directly influencing the accumulation and distribution of thought, 



the imagination being stimulated and the understanding sub- 
dued when the phenomena of the external world are sublime 
and terrible, the understanding being emboldened and the 
imagination curbed when they are small and feeble; (4) That 
the great division between European and non-European civiliza- 
tion turns on the fact that in Europe man is stronger than 
nature, and that elsewhere nature is stronger than man, the 
consequence of which is that in Europe alone has man subdued 
nature to his service; (5) That the advance of European civiliza- 
tion is characterized by a continually diminishing influence 
of physical laws, and a continually increasing influence of 
mental laws; (6) That the mental laws which regulate the 
progress of society cannot be discovered by the metaphysical 
method, that is, by the introspective study of the individual 
mind, but only by such a comprehensive survey of facts as will 
enable us to eliminate disturbances, that is, by the method of 
averages; (7) That human progress has been due, not to moral 
agencies, which are stationary, and which balance one another 
in such a manner that their influence is unfelt over any long 
period, but to intellectual activity, which has been constantly 
varying and advancing: — " The actions of individuals are greatly 
affected by their moral feelings and passions; but these being 
antagonistic to the passions and feelings of other individuals, are 
balanced by them, so that their effect is, in the great average of 
human affairs, nowhere to be seen, and the total actions of man- 
kind, considered as a whole, are left to be regulated by the total 
knowledge of which mankind is possessed "; (8) That individual 
efforts are insignificant in the great mass of human affairs, and 
that great men, although they exist, and must " at present " be 
looked upon as disturbing forces, are merely the creatures of the 
age to which they belong; (9) That religion, literature and 
government are, at the best, the products arid not the causes of 
civilization; (10) That the progress of civilization varies directly 
as " scepticism," the disposition to doubt and to investigate, and 
inversely as " credulity " or " the protective spirit," a disposi- 
tion to maintain, without examination, established beliefs and 
practices. 

Unfortunately Buckle either could not define, or cared not to 
define, the general conceptions with which he worked, such as 
those denoted by the terms " civilization," " history," " science," 
" law," " scepticism," and " protective spirit"; the consequence 
is that his arguments are often fallacies. Moreover, the looseness 
of his statements and the rashness of his inferences regarding 
statistical averages make him, as a great authority has remarked, 
the enfant terrible of moral statisticians. He brought a vast 
amount of information from the most varied and distant sources 
to confirm his opinions, and the abundance of his materials never 
perplexed or burdened him in his argumentation, but examples 
of well-conducted historical argument are rare in his pages. He 
sometimes altered and contorted the facts; he very often unduly 
simplified his problems; he was very apt when he had proved 
a favourite opinion true to infer it to be the whole truth. On 
the other hand, many of his ideas have passed into the common 
literary stock, and have been more precisely elaborated by later 
writers on sociology and history; and though his own work is 
now somewhat neglected, its influence was immensely valuable 
in provoking further research and speculation. 

See his Life by A. W. Huth (1880). 

BUCKNER, SIMON BOLIVAR (1823- ), American soldier 
and political leader, Was born in Hart county, Kentucky, on the 
1st of April 1823. He graduated at West Point in 1844, and 
was assistant professor of geography, history and ethics there in 
1845-1846. He fought in several battles of the Mexican War, 
received the brevet of first lieutenant for gallantry at Churubusco, 
where he was wounded, and later, after the storming of Chapul- 
tepec, received the brevet of captain. In 1848-1850 he was 
assistant instructor of infantry tactics at West Point. During 
the succeeding five years he was in the recruiting service, on 
frontier duty, and finally in the subsistence department. He 
resigned from the army in March 1855. During the futile 
attempt of Governor Beriah Magoffin to maintain Kentucky 
in a position of neutrality, he was commander of the state 



BUCKRAM— BUCYRUS 



733 



guard; but in September 1861, after the entry of Union forces 
into the state, he openly espoused the Confederate cause and 
was commissioned brigadier-general, later becoming lieutenant- 
general. He was third in command of Fort Donelson at the time 
of General Grant's attack (February 1862), and it fell to him, 
after the escape of Generals Floyd and Pillow, to surrender the 
post with its large garrison and valuable supplies. General 
Buckner was exchanged in August of the same year, and subse- 
quently served under General Bragg in the invasion of Kentucky 
and the campaign of Chickamauga. He was governor of Ken- 
tucky in 1 88 7- 1 89 1, was a member of the Kentucky consti- 
tutional convention of 1890, and in 1896 was the candidate of 
the National or " Gold " Democrats for vice-president of the 
United States. 

BUCKRAM (a word common, in various early forms, to many 
European languages, as in the Fr. bouqueran or Ital. bucherame, 
the derivation of which is unknown), in early usage the name 
of a fine linen or cotton cloth, but now only of a coarse fabric 
of linen or cotton stiffened with glue or other substances, used 
for linings of clothes and in bookbinding. Falstaff's " men 
in buckram " (Shakespeare, Henry I V., pt. i. II. 4) has become 
a proverbial phrase for any imaginary persons. 

BUCKSTONE, JOHN BALDWIN (1802-1879), English actor 
and dramatic writer, was born at Hoxton on the 14th of 
September 1802. He was articled to a solicitor, but soon ex- 
changed the law for the stage. After some years as a provincial 
actor he made his first London appearance, on the 30th of 
January 1823, at the Surrey theatre, as Ramsay in the Fortunes 
of Nigel. His success led to his engagement in 1827 at the 
Adelphi, where he remained as leading low comedian until 1833. 
At the Haymarket, which he joined for summer seasons in 1833, 
and of which he was lessee from 1853 to *&78, ne appeared as 
Bobby Trot in his own Luke the Labourer; and here were pro- 
duced a number of his plays and farces, Ellen Wareham, Uncle 
Tom and others. After his return from a visit to the United 
States in 1840 he played at several London theatres, among 
them the Lyceum, where he was Box at the first representation 
of Box and Cox. As manager of the Haymarket he surrounded 
himself with an admirable company, including Sothern and the 
Kendals. He produced the plays of Gilbert, Planche, Tom 
Taylor and Robertson, as well as his own, and in most of these 
he acted. He died on the 31st of October 1879. He was the 
author of 150 plays, some of which have been very popular. 
His daughter, Lucy Isabella Buckstone (1858-1893), was an 
actress, who made her first London appearance at the Haymarket 
theatre as Ada Ingot in David Garrick in 1875. 

BUCKTHORN, known botanically as Rhamnus cathartica 
(natural order Rhamnaceae), a much-branched shrub reach- 
ing 10 ft. in height, with a blackish bark, spinous branchlets, 
and ovate, sharply-serrated leaves, 1 to 2 in. long, arranged 
several together at the ends of the shoots. The small green 
flowers are regular and have the parts in fours; male and female 
flowers are borne on different plants. The fruit is succulent, 
black and globose, and contains four stones. The plant is a 
native of England, occurring in woods and thickets chiefly on 
the chalk; it is rare in Ireland and not wild in Scotland. It is 
native in Europe, north Africa and north Asia, and naturalized 
in some parts of eastern North America. The fruit has strong 
purgative properties, and the bark yields a yellow dye. 

An allied species, Rhamnus Frangula, is also common in 
England, and is known as berry-bearing or black alder. It is 
distinguished from buckthorn by the absence of spiny branchlets, 
its non-serrated leaves, and bisexual flowers with parts in fives. 
The fruits are purgative and yield a green dye when unripe. 
The soft porous wood, called black dogwood, is used for gun- 
powder. Dyes are obtained from fruits and bark of other 
species of Rhamnus, such as R. infecloria, R. tinctoria and R. 
davurica — the two latter yielding the China green of commerce. 
Several varieties of R. Alaternus, a Mediterranean species, are 
grown in shrubberies. 

Sea-buckthorn is Hippophae rhamnoides, a willow-like shrub, 
r to 8 ft. in height, with narrow leaves silvery on the under- 



side, and globose orange-yellow fruits one-third of an inch in 
diameter. It occurs on sandy seashores from York to Kent and 
Sussex, but is not common. 

American buckthorns are: Rhamnus purshiana or Cascara 
sagrada, of the Pacific coast, producing cascara bark, and R. 
Caroliniana, the alder-buckthorn. Bumelia lycioides (or lanu- 
ginosa) is popularly called " southern buckthorn." 

BUCKWHEAT, the fruit (so-called seeds) of Fagopyrum escu- 
lentum (natural order Polygonaceae), a herbaceous plant, native 
of central Asia, but cultivated in Europe and North America; 
also extensively cultivated in the Himalaya, as well as an allied 
species F. tataricum. The fruit has a dark brown tough rind 
enclosing the kernel or seed, and is three-sided in form, with 
sharp angles, similar in shape to beech-mast, whence the name 
from the Ger. Buchweizen, beechwheat. Buckwheat is grown in 
Great Britain only to supply food for pheasants and to feed 
poultry, which devour the seeds with avidity. In the northern 
countries of Europe, however, the seeds are employed as human 
food, chiefly in the form of cakes, which when baked thin have 
an agreeable taste, with a darkish somewhat violet colour. The 
meal of buckwheat is also baked into crumpets, as a favourite 
dainty among Dutch children, and in the Russian army buck- 
wheat groats are served out as part of the soldiers' rations, which 
they cook with butter, tallow or hemp-seed oil. Buckwheat is 
also used as food in the United States, where " buckwheat cakes " 
are a national dish; and by the Hindus it is eaten on " bart " 
or fast days, being one of the phalahas or lawful foods for such 
occasions. When it is used as food for cattle the hard sharp 
angular rind must first be removed. As compared with the 
principal cereal grains, buckwheat is poor in nitrogenous sub- 
stances and fat; but the rapidity and ease with which it can 
be grown render it a fit crop for very poor, badly tilled land. 
An immense quantity of buckwheat honey is collected in Russia, 
bees showing a marked preference for the flowers of the plant. 
The plant is also used as a green fodder. 

In the United States buckwheat is sown at the end of June 
or beginning of July, the amount of seed varying from 3 to 5 
pecks to the acre. The crop matures rapidly and continues 
blooming till frosts set in, so that at harvest, which is usually set 
to occur just before this period, the grain is in various stages 
of ripeness. It is cut by hand or with the self-delivery reaper, 
and allowed to lie in the swath for a few days and then set up in 
shocks. The stalks are not tied into bundles as in the case of 
other grain crops, the tops of the shocks being bound round and 
held together by twisting stems round them. The threshing is 
done on the field in most cases. 

BUCOLICS (from the Gr. fiovnoXucos, " pertaining to a herds- 
man "), a term occasionally used for rural or pastoral poetry. 
The expression has been traced back in English to the beginning 
of the 14th century, being used to describe the " Eclogues " of 
Virgil. The most celebrated collection of bucolics in antiquity 
is that of Theocritus, of which about thirty, in the Doric dialect, 
and mainly written in hexameter verse, have been preserved. 
This was the name, as is believed, originally given by Virgil to 
his pastoral poems, with the direct object of challenging com- 
parison with the writings of Theocritus. In modern times the 
term " bucolics " has not often been specifically given by the 
poets to their pastorals; the main exception being that of 
Ronsard, who collected his eclogues under the title of " Les 
Bucoliques." In general practice the word is almost a synonym 
for pastoral poetry, but has come to bear a slightly more agri- 
cultural than shepherd signification, so that the " Georgics " 
of Virgil has grown to seem almost more " bucolic " than his 
" Eclogues." (See also Pastoral.) (E. G.) 

BUCYRUS, a city and the county-seat of Crawford county, 
Ohio, U.S.A., on the Sandusky river, 62 m. N. of Columbus. 
Pop. (1890) 5974; (1900) 6560 (756 foreign-born); (1910) 8122. 
It is served by the Pennsylvania, the Toledo, Walhonding Valley 
& Ohio (Pennsylvania system), and the Ohio Central railways, 
and by interurban electric lines. The Ohio Central, of which 
Bucyrus is a division terminal, has shops here. The city lies at 
an elevation of about 1000 ft. above sea-level, and is surrounded 



734 



BUDAPEST 



by a country well adapted to agriculture and stock-raising. 
Among its manufactures are machinery, structural steel, ven- 
tilating and heating apparatus, furniture, interior woodwork, 
ploughs, wagons, carriages, copper products and clay-working 
machines. Bucyrus was first settled in 1817; it was laid out 
as a town in 1822, was incorporated as a village in 1830, and 
became a city in 1885. The county-seat was permanently 
established here in 1830. 

BUDAPEST, the capital and largest town of the kingdom of 
Hungary, and the second town of the Austro-Hungarian mon- 
archy, 163 m. S.E. of Vienna by rail. Budapest is situated on 
both banks of the Danube, and is formed of the former towns 
of Buda (Ger. Of en) together with O-Buda (Ger. Alt-Ofen) on 
the right bank, and of Pest together with Kobanya (Ger. Stein- 
bruch) on the left bank, which were all incorporated into one 
municipality in 1872. It lies at a point where the Danube has 
definitely taken its southward course, and just where the out- 
lying spurs of the outer ramifications of the Alps, namely, the 
Bakony Mountains, meet the Carpathians. Budapest is situated 
nearly in the centre of Hungary, and dominates by its strategical 
position the approach from the west to the great Hungarian 
plain. The imposing size of the Danube, 300 to 650 yds. broad, 
and the sharp contrast of the two banks, place Budapest among 
the most finely situated of the larger towns of Europe. On the 
one side is a flat sandy plain, in which lies Pest, modern of aspect, 
regularly laid out, and presenting a long frontage of handsome 
buildings to the river. On the other the ancient town of Buda 
straggles capriciously over a series of small and steep hills, 
commanded by the fortress and the Blocksberg (770 ft. high, 
390 ft. above the Danube), and backed beyond by spurs of 
mountains, which rise in the form of terraces one above the other. 
The hills are generally devoid of forests, while those near the 
towns were formerly covered with vineyards, which produced 
a good red wine. The vineyards have been almost completely 
destroyed by the phylloxera. 

Budapest covers an area of 78 sq. m., and is divided into ten 
municipal districts, namely Var (Festung), Vizivaros (Wasser- 
stadt), O-Buda (Alt-Ofen), all on the right bank, belonging to 
Buda, and Belvaros (Inner City), Lipotvaros (Leopoldstadt), 
Terezvaros (Theresienstadt), Erzsebetvaros (Elisabethstadt), 
Jozsefvaros (Josephstadt), Ferenczvaros (Franzstadt), and 
Kobanya (Steinbruch), all on the left bank, belonging to Pest. 
Buda, with its royal palace, the various ministries, and other 
government offices, is the official centre, while Pest is the com- 
mercial and industrial part, as well as the centre of the national- 
istic and intellectual life of the town. The two banks of the 
Danube are united by six bridges, including two fine suspension 
bridges; the first of them, generally known as the Ketten-Briicke, 
constructed by the brothers Tiernay and Adam Clark in 1842- 
1849, is one of the largest in Europe. It is 410 yds. long, 39 ft. 
broad, 36 ft. high above the mean level of the water, and its chains 
rest on two pillars 160 ft. high; its ends are ornamented with 
four colossal stone lions. At one end is a tunnel, 383 yds. long, 
constructed by Adam Clark in 1854, which pierces the castle hill 
and connects the quarter known as the Christinenstadt with 
the Danube. The other suspension bridge is the Schwurplatz 
bridge, completed in 1903, 56 ft. broad, with a span of 317 yds. 
The other bridges are the Margaret bridge, with a junction 
bridge towards the Margaret island, the Franz Joseph bridge, 
and two railway bridges. 

Perhaps the most attractive part of Budapest is the line of 
broad quays on the left bank of the Danube, which extend for 
a distance of i\ m. from the Margaret bridge to the custom-house, 
and are lined with imposing buildings. The most important 
of these is the Franz Joseph Quai, 1 m. long, which contains 
the most fashionable cafes and hotels, and is the favourite 
promenade. The inner town is surrounded by the Innere Ring- 
Strasse, a circle of wide boulevards on the site of the old wall. 
Wide tree-shaded streets, like the Kiraly Utcza, the Kerrepesi 
Ut, and the Ulloi Ut, also form the lines of demarcation between 
the different districts. The inner ring is connected by the Vaczi 
Korut (Waitzner-Ring) with the Grosse Ring-Strasse, a succession 



of boulevards, describing a semicircle beginning at the Margaret 
bridge and ending at the Boraros Platz, near the custom-house 
quay, through about the middle of the town. One of the 
most beautiful streets in the town is the Andrassy Ut, 1 \ m. long, 
connecting Vaczi Korut with Varosliget (Stadtwaldchen), the 
favourite public park of Budapest. It is a busy thoroughfare, 
lined in its first half with magnificent new buildings, and in 
its second half, where it attains a width of 150 ft., with handsome 
villas standing in their own gardens, which give the impression 
rather of a fashionable summer resort than the centre of a great 
city. Budapest possesses numerous squares, generally orna- 
mented with monuments of prominent Hungarians, usually the 
work of Hungarian artists. 

Buildings. — Though of ancient origin, neither Buda nor Pest 
has much to show in the way of venerable buildings. • The oldest 
church is the Matthias church in Buda, begun by King Bela IV. 
in the 13th century, completed in the 15th century, and restored 
in 1 890-1 896. It was used as a mosque during the Turkish 
occupation, and here took place the coronation of Franz Joseph 
as king of Hungary in 1867. The garrison church, a Gothic 
building of the 13th century, and the Reformed church, finished 
in 1898, are the other ecclesiastical buildings in Buda worth 
mentioning. The oldest church in Pest is the parish church 
situated in the Esku-Ter (Schwur- Platz) in the inner town; it 
was built in 1500, in the Gothic style, and restored in 1890. 
The most magnificent church in Pest is the Leopoldstadt Basilica, 
a Romanesque building with a dome 315 ft. in height, begun in 
1851; next comes the Franzstadt church, also a Romanesque 
building, erected in 1874. Besides several modern churches, 
Budapest possesses a beautiful synagogue, in the Moorish style, 
erected in 1861, and another, in the Moorish-Byzantine style, 
built in 1872, while in 1901 the construction of a much larger 
synagogue was begun. In Buda, near the Kaiserbad, and not far 
from the Margaret bridge, is a small octagonal Turkish mosque, 
with a dome 25 ft. high, beneath which is the grave of a Turkish 
monk. By a special article in the treaty of Karlowitz of 1699 
the emperor of Austria undertook to preserve this monument. 

Among the secular buildings the first place is taken by the 
royal palace in Buda, which, together with the old fortress, 
crowns the summit of a hill, and forms the nucleus of the town. 
The palace erected by Maria Theresa in 1748-1771 was partly 
burned in 1849, but has been restored and largely extended since 
1894. In the court chapel are preserved the regalia of Hungary, 
namely, the crown of St Stephen, the sceptre, orb, sword and 
the coronation robes. It is surrounded by a magnificent garden, 
which descends in steep terraces to the Danube, and which offers 
a splendid view of the town lying on the opposite bank. New 
and palatial buildings of the various ministries, several high and 
middle schools, a few big hospitals, and the residences of several 
Hungarian magnates, are among the principal edifices in this 
part of the town. 

The long range of substantial buildings fronting the left bank 
of the Danube includes the Houses of Parliament (see Archi- 
tecture, Plate IX. fig. 115), a huge limestone edifice in the late 
Gothic style, covering an area of 3 J acres, erected in 1883-1902; 
the Academy, in Renaissance style, erected in 1862-1864, con- 
taining a lofty reception room, a library, a historic picture gallery, 
and a botanic collection; the Redoute buildings, a large structure 
in a mixed Romanesque and Moorish style, erected for balls and 
other social purposes; the extensive custom-house at the lower 
end of the quays, and several fine hotels and insurance offices. 
In the beautiful Andrassy Ut are the opera-house (1875-1884), 
in the Italian Renaissance .style; the academy of music; the old 
and new exhibition building; the national drawing school; and 
the museum of fine arts (1900-1905), in which was installed in 
1905 the national gallery, formed by Prince Esterhazy, bought 
by the government in 1865 for £130,000, and formerly housed in 
the academy, and the collection of modern pictures from the 
national museum. At the end of the street is one of the numerous 
monuments erected in various parts of the country to com- 
memorate the thousandth anniversary of the foundation of the 
kingdom of Hungary. Other buildings remarkable for their 



BUDAPEST 



735 



size and interest are: the national museum (1836-1844); the 
town-hall (1869-1875), in the early Renaissance style; the uni- 
versity, with a baroque facade (rebuilt 1900), and the university 
library (opened in 1875), a handsome Renaissance building; the 
palace of justice (1896), a magnificent edifice situated not far 
from the Houses of Parliament. In its neighbourhood also are 
the palatial buildings of the ministries of justice and of agri- 
culture. There are also the exchange (1905); the Austro- 
Hungarian bank (1904); the central post and telegraph office; 
the art-industrial museum (1893-1897), in oriental style, with 
some characteristically Hungarian ornamentations; several 
handsome theatres; large barracks; technical and secondary 
schools; two great railway termini and a central market (1897) 
to be mentioned. To the south-east of the town lies the vast 
slaughter-house (1870-1872), which, with the adjacent cattle- 
market, covers nearly 30 acres of ground. The building activity 
of Budapest since 1867 has been extraordinary, and the town has 
undergone a thorough transformation. The removal of slums 
and the regulation of the older parts of the town, in connexion 
with the construction of the two new bridges across the Danube 
and of the railway termini, went hand-in-hand with the extension 
of the town, new quarters springing up on both banks of the 
Danube. This process is still going on, and Budapest has become 
one of the handsomest capitals of Europe. 

Education. — Budapest is the intellectual capital of Hungary. 
At the head of its educational institutions stands the university, 
which was attended in 1900 by 4983 students — only about 2000 
in 1880 — and has a staff of nearly 200 professors and lecturers. 
It has been completely transformed into a national Hungarian 
seat of learning since 1867, and great efforts have been made to 
keep at home the Hungarian students, who before then fre- 
quented other universities and specially that of Vienna. It is 
well provided with scientific laboratories, botanic garden, and 
various collections, and possesses a library with nearly a quarter 
of a million volumes. The university of Budapest, the only one in 
Hungary proper, was established at Tyrnau in 163s, removed to 
Buda in 1777, and transferred to Pest in 1783. Next to it comes 
the polytechnic, attended by 1816 students in 1900, which is 
also thoroughly equipped for a scientific training. Other high 
schools are a veterinary academy, a Roman Catholic seminary, 
a Protestant theological college, a rabbinical institute, a com- 
mercial academy, to which has been added in 1899 an academy 
for the study of oriental languages, and military academies for 
the training of Hungarian officers. Budapest possesses an 
adequate number of elementary and secondary schools, as well 
as a great number of special and technical schools. At the 
head of the scientific societies stands the academy of sciences, 
founded in 1825, for the encouragement of the study of the 
Hungarian language and the various sciences except theology. 
Next to it comes the national museum, founded in 1807 through 
the donations of Count Stephan Szechenyi, which contains ex- 
tensive collections of antiquities, natural history and ethnology, 
and a rich library which, in its manuscript department of over 
20,000 MSS., contains the oldest specimens of the Hungarian 
language. Another society which has done great service for the 
cultivation of the Hungarian language is the Kisfaludy society, 
founded in 1836. It began by distributing prizes for the best 
literary productions of the year, then it started the collection and 
publication of the Hungarian folklore, and lastly undertook the 
translation into the Hungarian language of the masterpieces of 
foreign literatures. The influence exercised by this society is 
very great, and it has attracted within its circle the best writers 
of Hungary. Another society similar in aim with this one is the 
Petofi society, founded in 1875. Amongst the numerous scien- 
tific associations are the central statistical department, and the 
Budapest communal bureau of statistics, which under the 
directorship of Dr Joseph de Korosy has gained a European 
reputation. 

The artistic life in Budapest is fostered by the academy of 
music, which once had Franz Liszt as its director, a conservatoire 
of music, a dramatic school, and a school for painting and for 
drawing, all maintained by the government. Budapest possesses, 



besides an opera house, eight theatres, of which two are sub- 
sidized by the government and one by the municipality. The 
performances are almost exclusively in Hungarian, the exceptions 
being the occasional appearance of French, Italian and other 
foreign artists. Performances in German are under a popular 
taboo, and they are never given in a theatre at Budapest. 

Trade.- — In commerce and industry Budapest is by far the most 
important town in Hungary, and in the former, if not also in the 
latter, it is second to Vienna alone in the Austro-Hungarian 
monarchy. The principal industries are steam flour-milling, 
distilling, and the manufacture of machinery, railway plant, 
carriages, cutlery, gold and silver wares, chemicals, bricks, jute, 
and the usual articles produced in large towns for home con- 
sumption. The trade of Budapest is mainly in corn, flour, cattle, 
horses, pigs, wines, spirits, wool, wood, hides, and in the articles 
manufactured in the town. The efforts of the Hungarian govern- 
ment to establish a great home industry, and the measures taken 
to that effect, have benefited Budapest to a greater degree than 
any other Hungarian town, and the progress made is remarkable 
The increase in the number of joint-stock companies, and the 
capital thus invested in industrial undertakings, furnish a valuable 
indication. In 1873 there were 28 such companies with a total 
capital of £2,224,900; in 1890, 75 with a capital of £9,352,000; 
and in 1899 no fewer than 242 with a total capital of £31,378,655, 
Budapest owes its great commercial importance to its situation 
on the Danube, on which the greater part of its trade is carried. 
The introduction of steamboats on the Danube in 1830 was one 
of the earliest material causes of the progress of Budapest, and 
gave a great stimulus to its corn trade. This still continues to 
operate, having been promoted by the flour-milling industry,' 
which was revolutionized by certain local inventions. Budapest 
is actually one of the greatest milling centres in the world, pos- 
sessing a number of magnificent establishments, fitted with 
machinery invented and manufactured in the city. Budapest is, 
besides, connected with all the principal places in Austria and 
Hungary by a well-developed net of railways, which all radiate 
from here. 

Population. — Few European towns grew so rapidly as Buda- 
pest generally, and Pest particularly, during the 19th century, 
and probably none has witnessed such a thorough transformation 
since 1867. In 1799 the joint population of Buda and Pest was 
54,179, of which 24,306 belonged to Buda, and 29,870 belonged 
to Pest, being the first time that the population of Pest exceeded 
that of Buda. By 1840, however, Buda had added but 14,000 to 
its population, while that of Pest had more than doubled; and of 
the joint population of 270,685 in 1869, fully 200,000 fell to the 
share of Pest. In 1880 the civil population of Budapest was 
360,551, an increase since 1869 of 32 %; and in 1890 it was 
491,938, an increase of 36-57 % in the decade. In the matter of 
the increase of its population alone, Budapest has only been 
slightly surpassed by one European town, namely, Berlin. Both 
capitals multiplied their population by nine in the first nine 
decades of the century. According to an interesting and in- 
structive comparison of the growth of twenty-eight European 
cities made by Dr Joseph de Korosy, Berlin in 1890 showed an 
increase, as compared with the beginning of the century, of 818 % 
and Budapest of 809 %. Within the same period the increase of 
Paris was 343 %, and of London 340 %. In 1900 the civil popu- 
lation of Budapest was 716,476 inhabitants, showing an increase 
of 44-82 % in the decade. To this must be added a garrison of 
15,846 men, making a total population of 732,322. Of the total 
population, civil and military, 578,458 were Magyars, 104,520 
Were Germans, 25,168 were Slovaks, and the remainder was 
composed of Croatians, Servians, Rumanians, Russians, Greeks, 
Armenians, Gypsies, &c. According to religion, there were 
445,023 Roman Catholics, 5806 Greek Catholics, 4422 Greek 
Orthodox; 67,319 were Protestants of the Helvetic, and 38,811 
were Protestants of the Augsburg Confessions; 168,985 were 
Jews, and the remainder belonged to various other creeds. 
A striking feature in the progress of Budapest is the decline in 
the death-rate, which sank from 43-4 per thousand in 1874 to 
ao-6 per thousand in 1900. In addition to the increased influx of 



73 6 



BUDAPEST 



persons in the prime of b'fe, this is due largely to the improved 
water-supply and better sanitary conditions generally, including 
increased hospital accommodation. 

Social Position. — Budapest is the seat of the government 
of Hungary, of the parliament, and of all the highest official 
authorities — civil, military, judicial and financial. It is the 
meeting-place, alternately with Vienna, of the Austro-Hungarian 
delegations, and it was elected to an equality with Vienna as 
a royal residence in 1892. It is the see of a Roman Catholic 
archbishop. The town is administered by an elected municipal 
council, which consists of 400 members. As Paris is sometimes 
said to be France, so may Budapest with almost greater truth 
be said to be Hungary. Its composite population is a faithful 
reflection of the heterogeneous elements in the dominions of the 
Habsburgs, while the trade and industry of Hungary are central- 
ized at Budapest in a way that can scarcely be affirmed of any 
other European capital. In virtue of its cultural institutions, 
it is also the intellectual and artistic centre of Hungary. The 
movement in favour of Magyarizing all institutions has found its 
strongest development in Budapest, where the German names 
have all been removed from the buildings and streets. The 
wonderful progress of Budapest is undoubtedly due to the revival 
of the Hungarian national spirit in the first half of the 19th cen- 
tury, and to the energetic and systematic efforts of thegovernment 
and people of Hungary since the restoration of the constitution. 
So far as Hungary was concerned, Budapest in 1867 at once 
became the favoured rival of Vienna, with the important addi- 
tional advantage that it had no such competitors within its own 
sphere as Vienna had in the Austrian provincial capitals. The 
political, intellectual, and social life of Hungary was centred 
in Budapest, and had largely been so since 1848, when it became 
the seat of the legislature, as it was that of the Austrian central 
administration which followed the revolution. The ideal of a 
prosperous, brilliant and attractive Magyar capital, which would 
keep the nobles and the intellectual flower of the country at home, 
uniting them in the service of the Fatherland, had received a 
powerful impetus from Count Stephan Szechenyi, the great 
Hungarian reformer of the pre-Revolutionary period. His work, 
continued by patriotic and able successors, was now taken up 
as the common task of the government and the nation. Thus the 
promotion of the interests of the capital and the centralization 
of the public and commercial life of the country have formed 
an integral part of the policy of the state since the restoration 
of the constitution. Budapest has profited largely by the 
encouragement of agriculture, trade and industry, by the 
nationalization of the railways, by the development of inland 
navigation, and also by the neglect of similar measures in favour 
of Vienna. 

From that time to the present day the record of the Hungarian 
capital has been one of uninterrupted advance, not merely in 
externals, such as the removal of slums, the reconstruction of 
the town, the development of communications, industry and 
trade, and the erection of important public buildings, but also 
in the mental, moral and physical elevation of the inhabitants; 
besides another important gain from the point of view of the 
Hungarian statesman, namely, the progressive increase and 
improvement of status of the Magyar element of the population. 
When it is remembered that the ideal of both the authorities 
and the people is the ultimate monopoly of the home market 
by Hungarian industry and trade, and the strengthening of the 
Magyar influence by centralization, it is easy to understand the 
progress of Budapest. 

Politically, this ambitious and progressive capital is the 
creation of the Magyar upper classes. Commercially and indus- 
trially, it may be said to be the work of the Jews. The sound 
judgment of the former led them to welcome and appreciate 
the co-operation of the latter. Indeed, a readiness to assimilate 
foreign elements is characteristic of Magyar patriotism, which 
has, particularly within the last generation, made numerous 
converts among the other nationalities of Hungary, and — for 
•uational purposes — may be considered to have quite absorbed 
ther Hungarian Jews. It has thus come tb'pass that there is no 



anti-Semitism in Budapest, although the Hebrew element is. 
proportionately much larger (21 % as compared with 9 %) 
than it is in Vienna, the Mecca of the Jew-baiter. 

Budapest has long been celebrated for its mineral springs 
and baths, some of them having been already used during the 
Roman period. They rise at the foot of the Blocksberg, and are 
powerful chalybeate and sulphureous hot springs, with a tempera- 
ture of 8o°-i5o° Fahr. The principal baths are the Bruckbad 
and the Kaiserbad, both dating from the Turkish period; the 
St Lucasbad; and the Raitzenbad, rebuilt in i860, one of the 
most magnificent establishments of its kind, which was connected 
through a gallery with the royal palace in the time of Matthias 
Corvin. There is an artesian well of sulphureous water with a 
temperature of 153° Fahr. in the Stadtwaldchen; and another, 
yielding sulphureous water with a temperature of no° Fahr., 
which is used for both drinking and bathing, in the Margaret 
island. The mineral springs, which yield bitter alkaline waters, 
are situated in the plain south of the Blocksberg, and are over 
40 in number. The principal are the Hunyadi-Janos spring, of 
which about 1,000,000 bottles are exported annually, the Arpad 
spring, and the Apenta spring. 

The largest and most popular of the parks in Budapest is 
the Varosliget, on the north-east side of the town. It has an 
area of 286 acres, and contains the zoological garden. On an 
island in its large pond are situated the agricultural (1902-1904) 
and the ethnographical museums. It was in this park that the 
millennium exhibition of 1 896 .took place. A still more delightful 
resort is the Margaret island, a long narrow island in the Danube, 
the property of the archduke Joseph, which has been laid out 
in the style of an English park, with fine trees, velvety turf and 
a group of villas and bath-houses. The name of the island is 
derived from St Margaret, the daughter of King Bela IV. (13th 
century), who built here a convent, the ruins of which are still 
in existence. To the west of Buda extends the hill (1463 ft.) 
of Svab-Hegy (Schwabenberg) , with extensive view and numerous 
villas; it is ascended by a rack-and-pinion railway. A favourite 
spot is the Zugliget (Auwinkel), a wooded dale on the northern 
slope of the hill. To the north of O-Buda, about 4 m. from the 
Margaret island, on the right bank of the Danube, are the remains 
of the Roman colony of Aquincum. They include the founda- 
tions of an amphitheatre, of a temple, of an aqueduct, of baths 
and of a castrum. The objects found here are preserved in a 
small museum. To the north of Pest lies the historic Rakos 
field, where the Hungarian diets were held in the open air from 
the 10th to the 14th century; and 23 m. to the north lies the 
royal castle of Godollo, with its beautiful park. 

History. — The history of Budapest consists of the separate 
history of the two sister towns, Buda and Pest. The Romans 
founded, in the 2nd century a.d., on the right bank of the 
Danube, on the site of the actual O-Buda, a colony, on the place 
of a former Celtic settlement. This colony was named Aquincum, 
a transformation from the former Celtic name of Ak-ink, meaning 
" rich waters." The Roman occupation lasted till a.d. 376, and 
then the place was invaded by Huns, Ostrogoths, and later by 
Avars and Slavs. When the Magyars came into the country, 
at the end of the 10th century, they preserved the names of Buda 
and Pest, which they found for these two places. The origin of 
Pest proper is obscure, but the name, apparently derived from 
the old Slavonic pestj, a stove (like Ofen, the German name of 
Buda), seems to point to an early Slavonic settlement. The 
Romans never gained a foothold on this side of the river. 

When it first appears in history Pest was essentially a German 
settlement, and a chronicler of the 13th century describes it as 
" Villa Teutonica ditissima." Christianity was introduced early 
in the nth century. In 1241 Pest was destroyed by the Tatars^ 
after whose departure in 1 244 it was created a royal free city by 
Bela IV., and repeopled with colonists of various nationalities. 
The succeeding period seems to have been one of considerable 
prosperity, though Pest was completely eclipsed by the sister 
town of Buda with its fortress and palace. This fortress and 
palace were built by King Bela IV. in 1247, and were the nucleus 
round which the town of Buda was burlt, which soon gained 



BUDAUN— BUDDHA 



737 



great importance, and became in 1361 the capital of Hungary. 
In 1526 Pest was taken and pillaged by the Turks, and from 1541 
to 1686 Buda was the seat of a Turkish pasha. Pest in the mean- 
time entirely lost its importance, and on the departure of the 
Turks was left little more than a heap of ruins. Its favourable 
situation and the renewal of former privileges helped it to 
revive, and in 1723 it became the seat of the highest Hungarian 
officials. Maria Theresa and Joseph II. did much to increase its 
importance, but the rapid growth which enabled it completely to 
outstrip Buda belongs entirely to the 19th century. A signal 
proof of its vitality was given in 1838 by the speed and ease with 
which it recovered from a disastrous inundation that destroyed 
3000 houses. In 1848 Pest became the seat of the revolutionary 
diet, but in the following year the insurgents had to retire before 
the Austrians under Windischgratz. A little later the Austrians 
had to retire in their turn, leaving a garrison in the fortress of 
Buda, and, while the Hungarians endeavoured to capture this 
position, General Hentzi retaliated by bombarding Pest, doing 
great damage to the town. In 1872 both towns were united into' 
one municipality. In 1896 took place here the millennium 
exhibition, in celebration of the thousandth anniversary of the 
foundation of the kingdom of Hungary. 

Bibliography. — The official publications of the Budapest 
Communal Bureau of Statistics have acquired a European repute 
for their completeness, and their fearless exposure of shortcomings 
has been an element in the progress of the town. Reference should 
also be made to separate works of the director of that institution, 
Dr Joseph de Korosy, known in England for his discovery of the 
law of marital fertility, published by the Royal Society, and by his 
labours in the development of comparative international statistics. 
His Statistique Internationale des grandes villes and Bulletin annuel des 
finances des grandes villes give valuable comparative data. See also 
Die Osterreichisch-Ungarische Monarchie in Wort und Bild (Wien, 
1886-1902, 24 vols.); volume xii., published in 1893, is devoted to 
Budapest. (O. Br.) 

BUDAUN, a town and district of British India, in the Rohil- 
khand division of the United Provinces. The town is near the left 
bank of the river Sot. Pop. (1901) 39,031. There are ruins of an 
immense fort and a very handsome mosque of imposing size, 
crowned with a dome, and built in 1223 in great part from the 
materials of an ancient Hindu temple. The American Methodist 
mission maintains several girls' schools, and there is a high school 
for boys. According to tradition Budaun was founded about 
a.d. 905, and an inscription, probably of the 12th century, gives a 
list of twelve Rathor kings reigning at Budaun (called Vodama- 
yuta). The first authentic historical event connected with it, 
however, is its capture by Kutb-ud-din in 1196, after which it 
became a very important post on the northern frontier of the 
Delhi empire. In the 13th century two of its governors, Shams- 
ud-din Altamsh, the builder of the great mosque referred to above, 
and his son Rukn-ud-din Firoz, attained the imperial throne. 
In 1 57 1 the town was burnt, and about a hundred years later, 
under Shah Jahan, the seat of the governorship was transferred to 
Bareilly; after which the importance of Budaun declined. It 
ultimately came into the power of the Rohillas, and in 1838 
was made the headquarters of a British district. In 1857 the 
people of Budaun sided with the mutineers, and a native 
government was set up, which lasted until General Penny's 
victory at Kakrala (April 1858) led to the restoration of British 
authority. 

The District of Budaun has an area of 1987 sq. m. Pop. 
(1901) 1,025,753. The country is low, level, and is generally 
fertile, and watered by the Ganges, the Ramganga, the Sot or 
Yarwafadar, and the Mahawa. Budaun district was ceded to 
the British government in 1801 by the nawab of Oudh. There 
are several indigo factories. The district is crossed by two lines 
of the Oudh & Rohilkhand railway, and by a narrow-gauge 
line from Bareilly. The chief centre of trade is Bilsi. 

BUDDEUS, JOHANN FRANZ (1667-17 29), German Lutheran 
divine, was born at Anklam, a town of Pomerania, where his 
father was pastor. He studied with great distinction at Greifs- 
wald and at Wittenberg, and having made a special study of 
languages, theology and history, was appointed professor of 
Greek and Latin at Coburg in 1692, professor of moral philosophy 
iv. 24 



in the university of Halle in 1693, and in 1705 professor of theology 
at Jena. Here he was held in high esteem, and in 17 15 became 
Primarius of his faculty and member of the Consistory. His 
principal works are: Leipzig, ailgemeines historisches Lexikon 
(Leipzig, 1709 ff.); Historia Ecclesiastica Veteris Testamenti (4 
vols., Halle, 1709); Elementa PhUosophiae Practical, Inslrumenl- 
alis, et Theoreticae (3 vols., 1697); Selecla Juris Naturae el 
Gentium (Halle, 1704); Miscellanea Sacra (3 vols., Jena, 1727); 
and Isagoge Historico-Theologica ad Theologiam Universam, 
singulasque ejus partes (2 vols., 1727). 

BUDDHA. According to the Buddhist theory (see Buddhism), 
a " Buddha " appears from time to time in the world and preaches 
the true doctrine. After a certain lapse of time this teaching is 
corrupted and lost, and is not restored till a new Buddha appears. 
In Europe, Buddha is used to designate the last historical Buddha, 
whose family name was Gotama, and who was the son of Sudd- 
hodana, one of the chiefs of the tribe of the Sakiyas, one of the 
republican clans then still existent in India. 

We are accustomed to find the legendary and the miraculous 
gathering, like a halo, around the early history of religious leaders, 
until the sober truth runs the risk of being altogether neglected 
for the glittering and edifying falsehood. The Buddha has not 
escaped the fate which has befallen the founders of other religions; 
and as late as the year 1854 Professor Wilson of Oxford read a 
paper before the Royal Asiatic Society of London in which he 
maintained that the supposed life of Buddha was a myth, and 
" Buddha himself merely an imaginary being." No one, however, 
would now support this view; and it is admitted that, under the 
mass of miraculous tales which have been handed down regarding 
him, there is a basis of truth already sufficiently clear to render 
possible an intelligent history. 

The circumstances under which the future Buddha was_ born 
were somewhat as follows. 1 In the 6th century B.C. the Aryan 
tribes had long been settled far down the valley of the Ganges. 
The old child-like joy in life so manifest in the Vedas had died 
away; the worship of nature had developed or degenerated into 
the worship of new and less pure divinities; and the Vedic songs 
themselves, whose freedom was little compatible with the spirit 
of the age, had faded into an obscurity which did not lessen their 
value to the priests. The country was politically split up into 
little principalities, most of them governed by some petty despot, 
whose interests were not often the same as those of the com- 
munity. There were still, however, about a dozen free republics, 
most of them with aristocratic government, and it was in these 
that reforming movements met with most approval and support. 
A convenient belief in the doctrine of the transmigration of souls 
satisfied the unfortunate that their woes were the natural result of 
their own deeds in a former birth, and, though unavoidable now, 
might be escaped in a future state of existence by present good 
conduct. While hoping for a better fate in their next birth, the 
poor turned for succour and advice in this to the aid of astrology, 
witchcraft and animism — -a belief in which seems to underlie all 

1 Note on the Date of the Buddha. — The now generally accepted 
date of the Buddha is arrived at by adding together two numbers, 
one being the date of the accession of Asoka to the throne, the 
second being the length of the interval between that date and that 
of the death of the Buddha. The first figure, that of the date of 
Asoka, is arrived at by the mention in one of his edicts of certain 
Greek kings, as then living. The dates of these last are approxi- 
mately known; and arguing from these dates the date of Asoka's 
accession has been fixed by various scholars (at dates varying only 
by a difference of five years more or less) at about 270 B.C. The 
second figure, the total interval between Asoka's accession and the 
Buddha's death, is given in the Ceylon Chronicles as 218 years. 
Adding these two together, the date of the Buddha's death would be 
488 B.C., and, as he was eighty years old at the time of his death, 
the date of his birth would be 568 B.C. The dates for his death and 
birth accepted in Burma, Siam and Ceylon are about half a century 
earlier, namely, 543 and 623 B.C., the difference being in the date of 
Asoka's accession. It will be seen that the dates as adopted in 
Europe are approximate only, and liable to correction if better data 
are obtainable. The details of this chronological question ara 
discussed at length in Professor Rhys Davids' Ancient Coins and 
Measures of Ceylon (London, 1877), where the previous discussions 
are referred to. 

11 



73* 



BUDDHA 



religions, and still survives even in England. 1 The inspiriting 
wars against the enemies of the Aryan people, the infidel deniers 
of the Aryan gods, had given place to a succession of internecine 
feuds between the chiefs of neighbouring clans. In literature an 
age of poets had long since made way for an age of commentators 
and grammarians, who thought that the old poems must have 
been the work of gods. But the darkest period was succeeded by 
the dawn of a reformation; travelling logicians were willing to 
maintain these against all the world; whilst here and there 
ascetics strove to raise themselves above the gods, and hermits 
earnestly sought for some satisfactory solution of the mysteries 
of life. These were the teachers whom the people chiefly delighted 
to honour. Though the ranks of the priesthood were for ever 
firmly closed against intruders, a man of lay birth, a Kshatriya 
or Vaisya, whose mind revolted against the orthodox creed, and 
whose heart was stirred by mingled zeal and ambition, might find 
through these irregular orders an entrance to the career of a 
religious teacher and reformer. 

The Sakiya clan was then seated in a tract of country probably 
two or three thousand square miles in extent, the chief town of 
which was Kapilavastu, situate about 27 37' N. by 83° n' E., 
some days' journey north of Benares. Their territory stretched 
up into the lower slopes of the mountains, and was mostly in what 
is now Nepal, but it included territory now on the British side of 
the frontier. It is in this part of the Sakiya country that the 
interesting discovery was made of the monument they erected to 
their famous clansman. From their well-watered rice-fields, 
the main source of their wealth, they could see the giant 
Himalayas looming up against the clear blue of the Indian sky. 
Their supplies of water were drawn from the river Rohini, the 
modern Kohana; and though the use of the river was in times of 
drought the cause of disputes between the Sakiyas and the 
neighbouring Koliyans, the two clans were then at peace; and 
two daughters of a chieftain of Koli, which was only n m. east of 
Kapilavastu, were the principal wives of Suddhodana. Both 
were childless, and great was the rejoicing when, in about the 
forty-fifth year of her age, the elder sister, Maha Maya, promised 
her husband a son. In due time she started with the intention of 
being confined at her parents' home, but the party halting on the 
way under the shade of some lofty satin-trees, in a pleasant garden 
called Lumbini on the river-side, her son, the future Buddha, was 
there unexpectedly born. The exact site of this garden has been 
recently rediscovered, marked by an inscribed pillar put up by 
Asoka (see J.R.A.S., 1898). 

He was in after years more generally known by his family name 
of Gotama, but bis individual name was Siddhattha. When he 
was nineteen years old he was married to his cousin Yasodhara, 
daughter of a Koliyan chief, and gave himself up to a life of luxury. 
This is the solitary record of his youth; we hear nothing more 
till, in his twenty-ninth year, it is related that, driving to his 
pleasure-grounds one day, he was struck by the sight of a man 
utterly broken down by age, on another occasion by the sight of a 
man suffering from a loathsome disease, and some months after 
by the horrible sight of a decomposing corpse. Each time his 
charioteer, whose name was Channa, told him that such was the 
fate of all living beings. Soon after he saw an ascetic walking in 
a calm and dignified manner, and asking who that was, was told 
by his charioteer the character and aims of the Wanderers, the 
travelling teachers, who played so great a part in the intellectual 
life of the time. The different accounts of these visions vary so 
much as to cast great doubts on their accuracy; and the oldest 
one of all (Anguttara, i. 145) speaks of ideas only, not of actual 
visions. It is, however, clear from what follows, that about this 
time the mind of the young Rajput must, from some cause or 
other, have been deeply stirred. Many an earnest heart full of dis- 
appointment or enthusiasm has gone through a similar struggle, 
has learnt to look upon all earthly gains and hopes as worse than 
vanity, has envied the calm life of the cloister, troubled by none 
of these things, and has longed for an opportunity of entire self- 
surrender to abstinence and meditation. 

1 See report of Rex. v. Neuhaus, Clerkenwell Sessions, September 15, 
1906. 



Subjectively, though not objectively, these visions may be 
supposed to have appeared to Gotama. After seeing the last of 
them, he is said, in the later accounts , to have spent the afternoon 
in his pleasure-grounds by the river-side; and having bathed, to 
have entered his chariot in order to return home. Just then a 
messenger arrived with the news that his wife Yasodhara had 
given birth to a son, his only child. " This/' said Gotama quietly, 
" is a new and strong tie I shall have to break." But the people 
of Kapilavastu were greatly delighted at the birth of the young 
heir, the raja's only grandson. Gotama's return became an 
ovation; musicians preceded and followed his chariot, while 
shouts of joy and triumph fell on his ear. Among these sounds 
one especially attracted his attention. It was the voice of a 
young girl, his cousin, who sang a stanza, saying, " Happy the 
father, happy the mother, happy the wife of such a son and 
husband." In the word " happy " lay a double meaning; it 
meant also freed from the chains of rebirth, delivered, saved. 
Grateful to one who, at such a time, reminded him of his highest 
hopes, Gotama, to whom such things had no longer any value, 
took off his collar of pearls and sent it to her. She imagined that 
this was the beginning of a courtship, and began to build day- 
dreams about becoming his principal wife, but he took no further 
notice of her and passed on. That evening the dancing-girls 
came to go through the Natch dances, then as now so common on 
festive occasions in many parts of India; but he paid them no 
attention, and gradually fell into an uneasy slumber. At mid- 
night he awoke; the dancing-girls were lying in the ante-room; 
an overpowering loathing filled his soul. He arose instantly with 
a mind fully made up — " roused into activity," says the Sinhalese 
chronicle, " like a man who is told that his house is on fire." He 
called out to know who was on guard, and finding it was his 
charioteer Channa, he told him to saddle his horse. While 
Channa was gone Siddhattha gently opened the door of the room 
where Yasodhara was sleeping, surrounded by flowers, with one 
hand on the head of their child. He had hoped to take the babe 
in his arms for the last time before he went, but now he stood for 
a few moments irresolute on the threshold looking at them. At 
last the fear of awakening Yasodhara prevailed; he tore himself 
away, promising himself to return to them as soon as his mind 
had become clear, as soon as he had become a Buddha, — i.e. 
Enlightened, — and then he could return to them not only as 
husband and father, but as teacher and saviour. It is said to 
have been broad moonlight on the full moon of the month of 
July, when the young chief, with Channa as his sole companion, 
leaving his father's home, his wealth and social position, his wife 
and child behind him, went out into the wilderness to become 
a penniless and despised student, and a homeless wanderer. 
This is the circumstance which has given its name to a Sanskrit 
work, the Mahabhinishkramana Sutra, or Sutra of the Great 
Renunciation. 

Next is related an event in which we may again see a sub- 
jective experience given under the form of an objective reality. 
Mara, the great tempter, appears in the sky, and urges Gotama 
to stop, promising him, in seven days, a universal kingdom over 
the four great continents if he will but give up his enterprise. 2 
When his words fail to have any effect, the tempter consoles 
himself by the confident hope that he will still overcome his 
enemy, saying, " Sooner or later some lustful or malicious or 
angry thought must arise in his mind; in that moment I shall 
be his master"; and from that hour, adds the legend, "as a 
shadow always follows the body, so he too from that day always 
followed the Blessed One, striving to throw every obstacle in 
his way towards the Buddhahood." Gotama rides a long 
distance that night, only stopping at the banks of the Anoma 
beyond the Koliyan territory. There, on the sandy bank of 
the river, at a spot where later piety erected a dagaba (a solid 
dome-shaped relic shrine), he cuts off with his sword his long 
flowing locks, and, taking off his ornaments, sends them and the 
horse back in charge of the unwilling Channa to Kapilavastu. 
The next seven days were spent alone in a grove of mango trees 

- The various legends of Mara are the subject of an exhaustive 
critical analysis in Windisch's Mara und Buddha (Leipzig, 1895). 



BUDDHA 



739 



near by, whence the recluse walks on to Rajagriha, the capital 
of Magadha, and residence of Bimbisara, one of the then most 
powerful rulers in the valley of the Ganges. He was favourably 
received by the raja; but though asked to do so, he would not 
as yet assume the responsibilities of a teacher. He attached 
himself first to a brahmin sophist named Alara, and afterwards 
to another named Udraka, from whom he learnt all that Indian 
philosophy had then to teach. Still unsatisfied, he next retired 
to the jungle of Uruvela, on the most northerly spur of the 
Vindhya range of mountains, and there for six years, attended 
by five faithful disciples, he gave himself up to the severest 
penance and self-torture, till his fame as an ascetic spread in all 
the country round about " like the sound," says the Burmese 
chronicle, " of a great bell hung in the canopy of the skies." l 
At last one day, when he was walking in a much enfeebled state, 
he felt on a sudden an extreme weakness, like that caused by 
dire starvation, and unable to stand any longer he fell to the 
ground. Some thought he was dead, but he recovered, and from 
that time took regular food and gave up his severe penance, 
so much so that his five disciples soon ceased to respect him, 
and leaving him went to Benares. 

There now ensued a second struggle in Gotama's mind, 
described with all the wealth of poetry and imagination of which 
the Indian mind is master. The crisis culminated on a day, 
each event of which is surrounded in the Buddhist accounts with 
the wildest legends, on which the very thoughts passing through 
the mind of Buddha appear in gorgeous descriptions as angels of 
darkness or of light. To us, now taught by the experiences of 
centuries how weak such exaggerations are compared with the 
effect of a plain unvarnished tale, these legends may appear 
childish or absurd, but they have a depth of meaning to those 
who strive to read between the lines of such rude and inarticulate 
attempts to describe the indescribable. That which (the previous 
and subsequent career of the teacher being borne in mind) 
seems to be possible and even probable, appears to be somewhat 
as follows. 

Disenchanted and dissatisfied, Gotama had given up all that 
most men value, to seek peace in secluded study and self-denial. 
Failing to attain his object by learning the wisdom of others, 
and living the simple life of a student, he had devoted himself 
to that intense meditation and penance which all philosophers 
then said would raise men above the gods. Still unsatisfied, 
longing always for a certainty that seemed ever just beyond his 
grasp, he had added vigil to vigil, and penance to penance, until 
at last, when to the wondering view of others he had become 
more than a saint, his bodily strength and his indomitable resolu- 
tion and faith had together suddenly and completely broken 
down. Then, when the sympathy of others would have been 
most welcome, he found his friends falling away from him, and 
his disciples leaving him for other teachers. Soon after, if not 
on the very day when his followers had left him, he wandered 
out towards the banks of the Neranjara, receiving his morning 
meal from the hands of Sujata, the daughter of a neighbouring 
villager, and set himself down to eat it under the shade of a large 
tree (a Ficus religiosa), to be known from that time as the 
sacred Bo tree or tree of wisdom There he remained through the 
long hours of that day debating with himself what next to do. 
All his old temptations came back upon him with renewed force. 
For years he had looked at all earthly good through the medium 
of a philosophy which taught htm that it, without exception, 
contained within itself the seeds of bitterness, and was altogether 
worthless and impermanent; but now to his wavering faith the 
sweet delights of home and love, the charms of wealth and power, 
began to show themselves in a different light, and glow again with 
attractive colours. He doubted, and agonized in his doubt; but 
as the sun set, the religious side of his nature had won the victory, 
and seems to have come out even purified from the struggle. 
He had attained to Nirvana, had become clear in his mind, 
a Buddha, an Enlightened One. From that night he not only 
did not claim any merit on account of his self-mortification, but 
took every opportunity of declaring that from such penances 
1 Bigandet, p. 49 ; and compare JSlaka, p. 67, line 27. 



no advantage at all would be derived. All that night he is said 
to have remained in deep meditation under the Bo tree; and the 
orthodox Buddhists believe that for seven times seven nights 
and days he continued fasting near the spot, when the archangel 
Brahma came and ministered to him. As for himself, his heart 
was now fixed, — his mind was made up, — but he realized more 
than he had ever done before the power of temptation, and 
the difficulty, the almost impossibility, of understanding and 
holding to the truth. For others subject to the same tempta- 
tions, but without that earnestness and insight which he felt 
himself to possess, faith might be quite impossible, and it would 
only be waste of time and trouble to try to show to them " the 
only path of peace." To one in his position this thought would 
be so very natural, that we need not hesitate to accept the 
fact of its occurrence as related in the oldest records. It is 
quite consistent with his whole career that it was love and pity 
for others — otherwise, as it seemed to him, helplessly doomed 
and lost — -which at last overcame every other consideration, 
and made Gotama resolve to announce his doctrine to the 
world. 

The teacher, now 35 years of age, intended to proclaim 
his new gospel first to his old teachers Alara and Udraka, but 
finding that they were dead, he determined to address himself 
to his former five disciples, and accordingly went to the Deer- 
forest near Benares where they were then living. An old gdlha, 
or hymn (translated in Vinaya Texts, i. 90) tells us how the 
Buddha, rapt with the idea of his great mission, meets an 
acquaintance, one Upaka, a wandering sophist, on the way. 
The latter, struck with his expression, asks him whose religion 
it is that makes him so glad, and yet so calm. The reply is 
striking. " I am now on my way," says the Buddha, " to the 
city of Benares, to beat the drum of the Ambrosia (to set up the 
light of the doctrine of Nirvana) in the darkness of the world! " 
and he proclaims himself the Buddha who alone knows, and 
knows no teacher. Upaka says: "You profess yourself, then, 
friend, to be an Arahat and a conqueror?" The Buddha says: 
" Those indeed are conquerors who, as I have now, have con- 
quered the intoxications (the mental intoxication arising from 
ignorance, sensuality or craving after future life). Evil dis- 
positions have ceased in me; therefore is it that I am con- 
queror ! " His acquaintance rejoins: " In that case, venerable 
Gotama, your way lies yonder ! " and he himself, shaking his 
head, turns in the opposite direction. 

Nothing daunted, the new prophet walked on to Benares, 
and in the cool of the evening went on to the Deer-forest where 
the five ascetics were living. Seeing him coming, they resolved 
not to recognize as a superior one who had broken his vows; to 
address him by his name, and not as " master " or " teacher "; 
only, he being a Kshatriya, to offer him a seat. He understands 
their change of manner, calmly tells them not to mock him by 
calling him " the venerable Gotama "; that he has found the 
ambrosia of truth and can lead them to it. They object, natur- 
ally enough, from the ascetic point of view, that he had failed 
before while he was keeping his body under, and how can his 
mind have won the victory now, when he serves and yields to 
his body. Buddha replies by explaining to them the principles 
of his new gospel, in the form of noble truths, and the Noble 
Eightfold Path (see Buddhism). 

It is nearly certain that Buddha had a commanding presence, 
and one of those deep, rich, thrilling voices which so many of the 
successful leaders of men have possessed. We know his deep 
earnestness, and his thorough conviction of the truth of his new 
gospel. When we further remember the relation which the five 
students mentioned above had long borne to him, and that they 
had passed through a similar culture, it is not difficult to under- 
stand that his persuasions were successful, and that his. old 
disciples were the first to acknowledge him in his new character. 
The later books say that they were all converted at once; but, 
according to the most ancient Pali record — though their old 
love and reverence had been so rekindled when the Buddha 
came near that their cold resolutions quite broke down, and they 
vied with each other in such acts of personal attention as an 



74° 



BUDDHA 



Indian disciple loves to pay to his teacher,^yet it was only after 
the Buddha had for five days talked to them, sometimes separ- 
ately, sometimes together, that they accepted in its entirety his 
plan of salvation. 1 

The Buddha then remained at the Deer-forest near Benares 
until the number of his personal followers was about threescore, 
and that of the outside believers somewhat greater. The prin- 
cipal among the former was a rich young man named Yasa, 
who had first come to him at night out of fear of his relations, 
and afterwards shaved his head, put on the yellow robe, and 
succeeded in bringing many of his former friends and companions 
to the teacher, his mother and his wife being the first female 
disciples, and his father the first lay devotee. It should be noticed 
in passing that the idea of a priesthood with mystical powers is 
altogether repugnant to Buddhism; every one's salvation is 
entirely dependent on the modification or growth of his own 
inner nature, resulting from his own exertions. The life of a 
recluse is held to be the most conducive to that state of sweet 
serenity at which the moTe ardent disciples aim; but that of a 
layman, of a believing householder, is held in high honour; 
and a believer who does not as yet feel himself able or willing 
to cast off the ties of home or of business, may yet " enter the 
paths," and by a life of rectitude and kindness ensure for himself 
a rebirth under more favourable conditions for his growth in 
holiness. 

After the rainy season Gotama called together those of his 
disciples who had devoted themselves to the higher life, and 
said to them: " I am free from the five hindrances which, like 
an immense net, hold men and angels in their power; you too 
(owing to my teaching) are set free. Go ye now, brethren, and 
wander for the gain and welfare of the many, out of compassion 
for the world, to the benefit of gods and men. Preach the doctrine, 
beauteous in inception, beauteous in continuation, beauteous in 
its end. Proclaim the pure and perfect life. Let no two go to- 
gether. I also go, brethren, to the General's village in the 
wilds of Uruvela." 2 Throughout his career, Gotama yearly 
adopted the same plan, collecting his disciples round him in the 
rainy season, and after it was over travelling about as an itinerant 
preacher; but in subsequent years he was always accompanied 
by some of his most attached disciples. 

In the solitudes of Uruvela there were at this time three 
brothers, fire-worshippers and hermit philosophers, who had 
gathered round them a number of scholars, and enjoyed a con- 
siderable reputation as teachers. Gotama settled among them, 
and after a time they became believers in his system,— the elder 
brother, Kassapa, taking henceforth a principal place among 
his followers. His first set sermon to his new disciples is called 
by Bishop Bigandet the Sermon on the Mount. Its subject was 
a jungle-fire which broke out on the opposite hillside. He warned 
his hearers against the fires of concupiscence, anger, ignorance, 
birth, death, decay and anxiety; and taking each of the senses 
in order he compared all human sensations to a burning 
flame which seems to be something it is not, which produces 
pleasure and pain, but passes rapidly away, and ends only 
in destruction. 3 

Accompanied by his new disciples, the Buddha walked on to 
Rajagaha, the capital of King Bimbisara, who, not unmindful 
of their former interview, came out to welcome him. Seeing 
Kassapa, who as the chronicle puts it, was as well known to them 
as the banner of *the city, the people at first doubted who was 
the teacher and who the disciple, but Kassapa put an end to 
their hesitation by stating that he had now given up his belief 
in the efficacy of sacrifices either great or small; that Nirvana 
was a state of rest to be attained only by a change of heart; 
and that he had become a disciple of the Buddha. Gotama 
then spoke to the king on the miseries of the world which arise 
from passion, and on the possibility of release by following the 

1 Vinaya Texts, i. 97-99; cf. Jataka, vol. i. p. 82, lines 11-19. 

2 Samyutta, i. 105. 

3 Cf . Big. p. 99, with Hardy, M.B, p. 191. The Pali name is 
aditta-pariyaya : the sermon on the lessons to be drawn from burning. 
The text is Vinaya, i. 34 = Samyutta, iv. 19. A literal translation 
will be found in Vinaya Texts, i. 134, 135. 



way of salvation. The raja invited him and his disciples to eat 
their simple mid-day meal at his house on the following morning; 
and then presented the Buddha with a garden called Veluvana 
or Bamboo-grove, afterwards celebrated as the place where the 
Buddha spent many rainy seasons, and preached many of his 
most complete discourses. There he taught for some time, 
attracting large numbers of hearers, among whom two, Sariputta 
and Moggallana, who afterwards became conspicuous leaders 
in the new crusade, then joined the Sangha or Society, as the 
Buddha's order of mendicants was called. 

Meanwhile the prophet's father, Suddhodana, who had 
anxiously watched his son's career, heard that he had given 
up his asceticism, and had appeared as a Wanderer, an itinerant 
preacher and teacher. He sent therefore to him, urging him 
to come home, that he might see him once more before he died. 
The Buddha accordingly started for Kapilavastu, and stopped 
according to his custom in a grove outside the town. His fathei 
and uncles and others came to see him there, but the latter were 
angry, and would pay him no reverence. It was the custom to 
invite such teachers and their disciples for the next day's meal, 
but they all left without doing so. The next day, therefore, 
Gotama set out at the usual hour, carrying his bowl to beg for 
a meal. As he entered the city, he hesitated whether he should 
not go straight to his father's house, but determined to adhere 
to his custom. It soon reached his father's ears that his son was 
walking through the streets begging. Startled at such news 
he rose up, seizing the end of his outer robe, and hastened to 
the place where Gotama was, exclaiming, " Illustrious Buddha, 
why do you expose us all to such shame ? Is it necessary to go 
from door to door begging your food? Do you imagine that I am 
not able to supply the wants of so many mendicants? " " My 
noble father," was the reply, " this is the custom of all our race." 
" How so ? " said his father. " Are you not descended from 
an illustrious line ? no single person of our race has ever acted 
so indecorously." " My noble father," said Gotama, " you and 
your family may claim the privileges of Kshatriya descent; 
my descent is from the prophets (Buddhas) of old, and they 
have always acted so; the customs of the law (Dharma) are gooa 
both for this world and the world that is to come. But, my father, 
when a man has found a treasure, it is his duty to offer the 
most precious of the jewels to his father first. Do not delay, 
let me share with you the treasure I have found." Suddhodana, 
abashed, took his son's bowl and led him to his house. 

Eighteen months had now elapsed since the turning-point 
of Gotama's career — his great struggle under the Bo tree. Thus 
far all the accounts follow chronological order. From this time 
they simply narrate disconnected stories about the Buddha, 
or the persons with whom he was brought into contact, — the 
same story being usually found in more than one account, but 
not often in the same order. It is not as yet possible, except very 
partially, to arrange chronologically the snatches of biography 
to be gleaned from these stories. They are mostly told to show 
the Occasion on which some memorable act of the Buddha 
took place, or some memorable saying was uttered, and are as 
exact as to place as they are indistinct as to time. It would be 
impossible within the limits of this article to give any large 
number of them, but space may be found for one or two. 

A merchant from Sunaparanta having joined the Society 
was desirous of preaching to his relations, and is said to have 
asked Gotama's permission to do so. " The people of Suna- 
paranta," said the teacher, " are exceedingly violent. If they 
revile you what will you do ?" "I will make no reply," said the 
mendicant. " And if they strike you?" " I will not strike in 
return," was the reply. " And if they try to kill you ?" " Death 
is no evil in itself; many even desire it, to escape from the 
vanities of life, but I shall take no steps either, to hasten or to 
delay the time of my departure." These answers were held 
satisfactory, and the monk started on his mission. 

At another time a rich farmer held a harvest home, and the 
Buddha, wishing to preach to him, is said to have taken his alms- 
bowl and stood by the side of the field and begged. The farmer, 
a wealthy brahmin, said to him, "Why do you come and beg? 



BUDDHA 



74i 



I plough and sow and earn my food; you should do the same." 
" I too, brahmin," said the beggar, " plough and sow; and 
having ploughed and sown I eat." " You profess only to be a 
farmer; no one sees your ploughing, what do you mean?" said 
the brahmin. " For my cultivation," said the beggar, " faith is the 
seed, self-combat is the fertilizing rain, the weeds I destroy are 
the cleaving to existence, wisdom is my plough, and its guiding- 
shaft is modesty; perseverance draws my plough, and I guide it 
with the rein of my mind; the field I work is in the law, and the 
harvest that I reap is the never-dying nectar of Nirvana, Those 
who reap this harvest destroy all the weeds of sorrow." 

On another occasion he is said to have brought back to her 
right mind a young mother whom sorrow had for a time deprived 
of reason. Her name was Kisagotaml. She had been married 
early, as is the custom in the East, and had a child when she was 
still a girl. When the beautiful boy could run alone he died. 
Tne young girl in her love for it carried the dead child clasped to 
her bosom, and went from house to house of her pitying friends 
asking them to give her medicine for it. But a Buddhist convert 
thinking " she does not understand," said to her, " My good girl, 
I myself have no such medicine as you ask for, but I think I know 
of one who has." " Oh, tell me who that is?" said Kisagotaml. 
" The Buddha can give you medicine; go to him," was the 
answer. She went to Gotama; and doing homage to him said, 
" Lord and master, do you know any medicine that will be good 
for my child?" "Yes, I know of some," said the teacher. 
Now it was the custom for patients or their friends to provide the 
herbs which the doctors required; so she asked what herbs he 
would want. " I want some mustard-seed," he said; and when 
the poor girl eagerly promised to bring some of so common a drug, 
he added, " you must get it from some house where no son, or 
husband, or parent or slave has died." " Very good," she said; 
and went to ask for it, still carrying her dead child with her. 
The people said, " Here is mustard-seed, take it "; but when she 
asked, " In my friend's house has any son died, or a husband, or a 
parent or slave?" They answered, " Lady! what is this that 
you say? the living are few, but the dead are many." Then she 
went to other houses, but one said " I have lost a son," another 
" We have lost our parents," another " I have lost my slave." 
At last, not being able to find a single house where no one had 
died, her mind began to clear, and summoning up resolution she 
left the dead body of her child in a forest, and returning to the 
Buddha paid him homage. He said to her, " Have you the 
mustard-seed?" " My lord," she replied, " I have not; the 
people tell me that the living are few, but the dead are many." 
Then he talked to her on that essential part of his system, the 
impermanency of all things, till her doubts were cleared away, 
she accepted her lot, became a disciple, and entered the " first 
path." 

For forty-five years after entering on his mission Gotama 
itinerated in the valley of the Ganges, not going farther than 
about 2 50 m. from Benares, and always spending the rainy months 
at one spot — usually at one of the viharas, 1 or homes, which had 
been given to the society. In the twentieth year his cousin 
Ananda became a mendicant, and from that time seems to have 
attended on the Buddha, being constantly near him, and delight- 
ing to render him all the personal service which love and reverence 
could suggest. Another cousin, Devadatta, the son of the raja of 
Koli, also joined the society, but became envious of the teacher, 
and stirred up Ajatasattu (who, having killed his fatherBimbisara, 
had become king of Rajagaha) to persecute Gotama. The ac- 
count of the manner in which the Buddha is said to have over- 
come the wicked devices of this apostate cousin and his parricide 
protector is quite legendary; but the general fact of Ajatasattu's 
opposition to the new sect and of his subsequent conversion may 
be accepted. 

The confused and legendary notices of the journeyings of 

1 These were at first simple huts, built for the mendicants in some 
grove of palm-trees as a retreat during the rainy season; but they 
gradually increased in splendour and magnificence till the decay of 
Buddhism set in. See the authorities quoted in Buddhist India, pp. 
J41, 142. 



Gotama are succeeded by tolerably clear accounts of the last few 
days of his life. 2 On a journey towards Kusinara, a town about 
1 20 m. north-north-east of Benares, and about 80 m. due east of 
Kapilavastu, the teacher, being then eighty years of age, had 
rested for a short time in a grove at Pawa, presented to the society 
by a goldsmith of that place named Chunda. Chunda prepared 
for the mendicants a mid-day meal, and after the meal the Buddha 
started for Kusinara. He had not gone far when he was obliged 
to rest, and soon afterwards he said, " Ananda, I am thirsty," 
and they gave him water to drink. Half-way between the two 
towns flows the river Kukushta. There Gotama rested again, 
and bathed for the last time. Feeling that he was dying, and 
careful lest Chunda should be reproached by himself or others, he 
said to Ananda, " After I am gone tell Chunda that he will receive 
in a future birth very great reward; for, having eaten of the food 
he gave me, I am about to die ; and if he should still doubt, say 
that it was from my own mouth that you heard this. There are 
two gifts which will be blest above all others, namely, Sujata's 
gift before I attained wisdom under the Bo tree, and this gift of 
Chunda's before I pass away." After halting again and again 
the party at length reached the river Hiranyavati, close by 
Kusinara, and there for the last time the teacher rested. Lying 
down under some Sal trees, with his face towards the south, he 
talked long and earnestly with Ananda about his burial, and 
about certain rules which were to be observed by the society 
after his death. Towards the end of this conversation, when it 
was evening, Ananda broke down and went aside to weep, but 
the Buddha missed him, and sending for him comforted him 
with the promise of Nirvana, and repeated what he had so often 
said before about the impermanence of all things, ; — " O Ananda! 
do not weep; do not let yourself be troubled. You known what I 
have said; sooner or later we must part from all we hold most 
dear. This body of ours contains within itself the power which 
renews its strength for a time, but also the causes which lead to 
its destruction. Is there anything put together which shall not 
dissolve? But you, too, shall be free from this delusion, this 
world of sense, this law of change. Beloved," added he, speaking 
to the rest of the disciples, " Ananda for long years has served me 
with devoted affection." And he spoke to them at some length on 
the kindness of Ananda. 

About midnight Subhadra, a brahmin philosopher of Kusinara, 
came to ask some questions of the Buddha, but Ananda, fearing 
that this might lead to a longer discussion than the sick teacher 
could bear, would not admit him. Gotama heard the sound of 
their talk, and asking what it was, told them to let Subhadra come. 
The latter began by asking whether the six great teachers knew 
all laws, or whether there were some that they did not know, or 
knew only partially. " This is not the time," was the answer, 
" for such discussions. To true wisdom there is only one way, 
the path that is laid down in my system. Many have already 
followed it, and conquering the lust and pride and anger of their 
own hearts, have become free from ignorance and doubt and 
wrong belief, have entered the calm state of universal kindliness, 
and have reached Nirvana even in this life. O Subhadra! I do 
not speak to you of things I have not experienced. Since I was 
twenty-nine years old till now I have striven after pure and 
perfect wisdom, and following the good path, have found 
Nirvana." A rule had been made that no follower of a rival 
system should be admitted to the society without four months' 
probation. So deeply did the words or the impressive manner of 
the dying teacher work upon Subhadra that he asked to be ad- 
mitted at once, and Gotama granted his request. Then turning 
to his disciples he said, " When I have passed away and am no 
longer with you, do not think that the Buddha has left you, and 
is not still in your midst. You have my words, my explanations 
of the deep things of truth, the laws I have laid down for the 
society; let them be your guide; the Buddha has not left you." 
Soon afterwards he again spoke to them, urging them to rever- 
ence one another, and rebuked one of the disciples who spoke 

8 The text of the account of this last journey is the Mahaparinib- 
bana Suttanta, vol. ii. of the Digha (ed. Rhys Davids and Carpenter), 
The translation is in? Rhys Davids' Buddhist Suttas. 



>4-2 



BUDDHAGHOSA— BUDDHISM 



indiscriminately all that occurred to him. Towards the morning he 
asked whether any one had any doubt about the Buddha, the law 
or the society; if so, he would clear them up. No one answered, 
and Ananda expressed his surprise that amongst so many none 
should doubt, and all be firmly attached to the law. But the 
Buddha laid stress on the final perseverance of the saints, saying 
that even the least among the disciples who had entered the first 
path only, still had his heart fixed on the way to perfection, and 
constantly strove after the three higher paths. " No doubt," he 
said, " can be found in the mind of a true disciple." After 
another pause he said: " Behold now, brethren, this is my 
exhortation to you. Decay is inherent in all component things. 
Work out, therefore, your emancipation with diligence ! " These 
were the last words the Buddha spoke; shortly afterwards he 
became unconscious, and in that state passed away. 

Authorities on the Life of the Buddha. — Canonical Pali 
(reached their present shape before the 4th century B.C.) ; episodes 
only, three of them long: (1) Birth; text in Majjhima Nikaya, ed. 
Trenckner and Chalmers (London, Pali Text Society, 1888-1899), 
vol. iii. pp. 118-124; also in Anguttara Nikaya, ed. Morris and Hardy 
(Pali Text Society, 1888-1900), vol. ii. pp. 130-132. (2) Adoration 
of the babe; old ballad; text in Sutta Nipata, ed. Fausboll (Pali 
Text Society, 1884), pp. 128-131 ; translation by the same in Sacred 
Books of the East (Oxford, 1881), vol. x. pp. 124-131. (3) Youth at 



home; text in Anguttara Nikaya, i. 145. (4) The going forth; old 
ballad; text in Sutta Nipata, pp. 70-74 (London, 1896), pp. 99-101 ; 
prose account in Dlgha Nikaya, ed. Rhys Davids and Carpenter 



(Pali Text Society, 1890-1893), vol. i. p. 115, translated by Rhys 
Davids in Dialogues of the Buddha (Oxford, 1899), pp. 147-149. (5) 
First long episode; the going forth, years of study and penance, 
attainment of Nirvana and Buddhahood, and conversion of first five 
converts; text in Majjhima, all together at ii. 93; parts repeated 
at i. 163-175, 240-249; ii. 212; Vinaya, ed. Oldenberg (London, 
1879-1883), vol. i. pp. 1-13. (6) Second long episode; from the 
conversation of the five down to the end of the first year of the 
teaching; text in Vinaya, i. 13-44, translated by Oldenberg in 
Vinaya Texts, i. 73-151. (7) Visit to Kapilavastu; text in Vinaya, 
i. 82; translation by Oldenberg in Vinaya Texts (Oxford, 1881- 
1885), vol. i. pp. 207-210. (8) Third long episode; the last days; 
text in Dlgha Nikaya (the Mahdparinibbana Sutlanta), vol. ii. pp. 
72-168, translated by Rhys Davids in Buddhist Suttas (Oxford, 1881), 
pp. 1-136. Buddhist Sanskrit Texts: (1) Mahavastu (probably 
2nd century B.C.); edited by Senart (3 vols., Paris, 1882-1897), 
summary in French prefixed to each volume; down to the end of 
first year of the teaching. (2) Lalita Vistara (probably 1st century 
B.C.); edited by Mitra (Calcutta, 1877); translated into French by 
Foucaux (Paris, 1884); down to the first sermon. (3) Buddha 
Carita, by Asvaghosha, probably 2nd century A.D. edited by Cowell 
(Oxford, 1892); translated by Cowell (Oxford, 1894, S.B.E. vol. 
xlix.) ; an elegant poem; stops just before the attainment of 
Buddhahood. (These three works reproduce and amplify the above 
episodes Nos. 1-6; they retain here and there a very old tradition 
as to arrangement of clauses or turns of expression.) Later Pali: 
The commentary on the Jalaka, written probably in the 5th century 
A.D., gives a consecutive narrative, from the birth to the end of the 
second year of the teaching, based on the canonical texts, but much 
altered and amplified; edited by Fausboll in Jataka, vol. i. (London, 
1877), pp. 1-94; translated by Rhys Davids in Buddhist Birth 
Stories (London, 1880), pp. 1-133. Modern Works: (1) Tibetan; 
Life of the Buddha ; episodes collected and translated by W. Wood- 
ville Rockhill (London, 1884), from Tibetan texts of the 9th and 
10th centuries A.D. (2) Sinhalese ; episodes collected and translated 
by Spence Hardy from Sinhalese texts of the 12th and later centuries, 
in Manual of Buddhism (London, 1897, 2n d edition), pp. 138-359. 
(3) Burmese: The Life or Legend of Caudama (3rd edition, London, 
1880), by the Right Rev. P. Bigandet, translated from a Burmese 
work of A.D. 1773. (The Burmese is, in its turn, a translation from 
a Pali work of unknown date; it gives the whole life, and is the 
only consecutive biography we have.) (4) Kambojian: Pathama 
Sambodhian; translated into French by A. Leclere in Livres sacres 
du Cambodge (Paris, 1906). (T. W. R. D.) 

BUDDHAGHOSA, p, celebrated Buddhist writer. He was a 
Brahmin by birth and was born near the great Bodhi tree at 
Budh Gaya in north India about A.D. 390, his father's name 
being Kesl. His teacher, Revata, induced him to go to Ceylon, 
where the commentaries on the scriptures had been preserved in 
the Sinhalese language, with the object of translating them into 
Pali. He went accordingly to Anuradhapura, studied there under 
Sanghapala, and asked leave of the fraternity there to translate 
the commentaries. With their consent he then did so, having 
first shown his ability by writing the work Visuddhi Magga 
(the Path of Purity, a kind of summary of Buddhist doctrine). 
When he had completed his many years' labours he returned to 



the neighbourhood of the Bodhi tree in north India. Before he 
came to Ceylon he had already written a book entitled Ndnodaya 
(the Rise of Knowledge), and had commenced a commentary on 
the principal psychological manual contained in the Pitakas. 
This latter work he afterwards rewrote in Ceylon, as the present 
text (now published by the Pah Text Society) shows. One 
volume of the Sumangala Vildsini (a portion of the commentaries 
mentioned above) has been edited, and extracts from his comment 
on the Buddhist canon law. This last work has been discovered 
in a nearly comtemporaneous Chinese translation (an edition in 
Pali is based on a comparison with that translation). The works 
here mentioned form, however, only a small portion of what 
Buddhaghosa wrote. His industry must have been prodigious. 
He is known to have written books that would fill about 20 octavo 
volumes of about 400 pages each; and there are other writings 
ascribed to him which may or may not be really his work. It is 
too early therefore to attempt a criticism of it. But it is already 
clear that, when made acceptable, it will be of the greatest value 
for the history of Indian literature and of Indian ideas. So much 
is uncertain at present in that history for want of definite dates 
that the voluminous writings of an author whose date is approxi- 
mately certain will afford a standard by which the age of other 
writings can be tested. And as the original commentaries in 
Sinhalese are now lost his works are the only evidence we have of 
the traditions then handed down in the Buddhist community. 
The main source of our information about Buddhaghosa is the 
Mahavamsa, written in Anuradhapura about fifty years after he 
was working there. But there are numerous references to him 
in Pali books on Pali literature; and a Burmese author of un- 
known date, but possibly of the 15th century, has compiled a 
biography of him, the Buddhaghos' Uppatti, of little value and no 
critical judgment. 

See Mahavamsa, ch. xxxvii. (ed. Tumour, Colombo, 1837); 
" Gandhavamsa," p. 59, in Journal of the Pali Text Society (1886) ; 
Buddhghosuppatti (text and translation, ed. by E. Gray, London, 
1893) ; Sumangala Vildsini, edited by T. W. Rhys Davids and J. E. 
Carpenter, vol. i. (London, Pali Text Society, 1886). (T. W. R. D.) 

BUDDHISM, the religion held by the followers of the Buddha 
(q.v.), and covering a large area in India and east and central Asia. 

Essential Doctrines. — We are fortunate in having preserved for 
us the official report of the Buddha's discourse, in which he ex- 
pounded what he considered the main features of his system to 
the five men he first tried to win over to his new-found faith. 
There is no reason to doubt its substantial accuracy, not as to 
words, but as to purport. In any case it is what the compilers 
of, the oldest extant documents believed their teacher to have 
regarded as the most important points in his teaching. Such a 
summary must be better than any that could now be made. It is 
incorporated into two divisions of their sacred books, first among 
the suttas containing the doctrine, and again in the rules of the 
society or order he founded (Samyutta, v. 421= Vinaya, i. 10) 
The gist of it, omitting a few repetitions, is as follows: — 

" There are two aims which he who has given up the world ought 
not to follow after — devotion, on the one hand, to those things whose 
attractions depend upon the passions, a low and pagan ideal, fit 
only for the worldly-minded, ignoble, unprofitable, and the practice 
on the other hand of asceticism, which is painful, ignoble, unprofit- 
able. There is a Middle Path discovered by the Tathagata 1 — a 
path which opens the eyes, and bestows understanding, which leads 
to peace, to insight, to the higher wisdom, to Nirvana. Verily! 
it is this Noble Eightfold Path; that is to say, Right Views, Right 
Aspirations, Right Speech, Right Conduct, Right Mode of Livelihood, 
Right Effort, Right Mindfulness, and Right Rapture. 

" Now this is the Noble Truth as to suffering. Birth is attended 
with pain, decay is painful, disease is painful, death is painful. 
Union with the unpleasant is painful, painful is separation from the 
pleasant; and any craving unsatisfied, that too is painful. In 
brief, the five aggregates of clinging (that is, the conditions of 
individuality) are painful. 

" Now this is the Noble Truth as to the origin of suffering. Verily! 
it is the craving thirst that causes the renewal of becomings, that is 
accompanied by sensual delights, and seeks satisfaction now here, 
now there — that is to say, the craving for the gratification of the 
senses, or the craving for a future life, or the craving for prosperity. 



1 That is by the Arahat, the title the Buddha always uses of 
himself. He does not call himself the Buddha, and his followers 
never address him as such. 



BUDDHISM 



743 



" Now this is the Noble Truth as to the passing away of pain. 
Verily! it is the passing away so that no passion remains, the 
giving up, the getting rid of, the being emancipated from, the 
harbouring no longer of this craving thirst. 

" Now this is the Noble Truth as to the way that leads to the 
passing away of pain. Verily ! it is this Noble Eightfold Path, 
that is to say, Right Views, Right Aspirations, Right speech, conduct 
and mode of livelihood, Right Effort, Right Mindfulness and Right 
Rapture." 

A few words follow as to the threefold way in which the speaker 
claimed to have grasped each of these Four Truths. That is all. 
There is not a word about God or the soul, not a word about the 
Buddha or Buddhism. It seems simple, almost jejune; so thin 
and weak that one wonders how it can have formed the foundation 
for a system so mighty in its historical results. But the simple 
words are pregnant with meaning. Their implications were clear 
enough to the hearers to whom they were addressed. They Were 
not intended, however, to answer the questionings of a 20th- 
century European questioner, and are liable now to be misunder- 
stood. Fortunatefy each word, each clause, each idea in the 
discourse is repeated, commented on, enlarged upon, almost 
ad nauseam, in the suttas, and a short comment in the light of 
those explanations may bring out the meaning that was 
meant. 1 

The passing away of pain or suffering is said to depend on an 
emancipation. And the Buddha is elsewhere (Vinaya ii. 239) 
made to declare: " Just as the great ocean has one taste only, 
the taste of salt, just so have this doctrine and discipline but one 
flavour only, the flavour of emancipation "; and again, " When 
a brother has, by himself, known and realized, and continues to 
abide, here in this visible world, in that emancipation of mind, 
in that emancipation of heart, which is Arahatship; that is a 
condition higher still and sweeter still, for the sake of which the 
brethren lead the religious life under me." 2 The emancipation is 
found in a habit of mind, in the being free from a specified sort 
of craving that is said to be the origin of certain specified sorts of 
pain. In some European books this is completely spoiled by 
being represented as the doctrine that existence is misery, and 
that desire is to be suppressed. Nothing of the kind is said in the 
text. The description of suffering or pain is, in fact, a string of 
truisms, quite plain and indisputable until the last clause. That 
clause declares that the Upddana Skandhas, the five groups of 
the constituent parts of every individual, involve pain. Put into 
modern language this is that the conditions necessary to make an 
individual are also the conditions that necessarily give rise to 
sorrow. No sooner has an individual become separate, become an 
individual, than disease and decay begin to act upon it. In- 
dividuality involves limitation, limitation in its turn involves 
ignorance, and ignorance is the source of sorrow. Union with the 
unpleasant, separation from the pleasant, unsatisfied craving, are 
each a result of individuality. This is a deeper generalization 
than that which says, " A man is born to trouble as the sparks fly 
upward." But it is put forward as a mere statement of fact. 
And the previous history of religious belief in India would tend 
to show that emphasis was laid on the fact, less as an explanation 
of the origin of evil, than as a protest against a then current 
pessimistic idea that salvation could not be reached on earth, and 
must therefore be sought for in a rebirth in heaven, in the Brahma- 
loka. For if the fact— the fact that the conditions of individu- 
ality are the conditions, also, of pain — were admitted, then the 
individual there would still not have escaped from sorrow. If the 
five ascetics to whom the words were addressed once admitted 
this implication, logic would drive them also to admit all that 
followed. 

The threefold division of craving at the end of the second 
truth might be rendered " the lust of the flesh, the lust of life 
and the love of this present world." The two last are said else- 
where to be directed against two sets of thinkers called the 
Eternalists and the Annihilationists, who held respectively 

1 One very ancient commentary on the Path has been preserved 
in three places in the canon: Dlgha, ii. 305-307 and 311-313. 
Majjhima, iii. 251, and Samyutta, v. 8. 

2 Mahali Suttanta; translated in Rhys Davids' Dialogues of the 
Buddha, vol. i. p. 201 (cf. p. 204). 



the everlasting-life-heresy and the let-us-eat-and-drink-for-to- 
morrow-we-die-heresy. 3 This may be so, but in any case the 
division of craving would have appealed to the five hearers as 
correct. 

The word translated " noble " in Noble Path, Noble Truth, 
is ariya, which also means Aryan. 4 The negative, un-Aryan, is 
used of each of the two low aims. It is possible that this render- 
ing should have been introduced into the translation; but the 
ethical meaning, though still associated with the tribal meaning, 
had probably already become predominant in the language of 
the time. 

The details of the Path include several terms whose meaning 
and implication are by no means apparent at first sight. Right 
Views, for instance, means mainly right views as to the Four 
Truths and the Three Signs. Of the latter, one is identical, or 
nearly so, with the First Truth. The others are Impermanence 
and Non-soul (the absence of a soul) — both declared to be 
" signs " of every individual, whether god, animal or man. Of 
these two again the Impermanence has become an Indian rather 
than a Buddhist idea, and we are to a certain extent familiar 
with it also in the West. There is no Being, there is only a 
Becoming. The state of every individual is unstable, temporary, 
sure to pass away. Even in the lowest class of things, we find, 
in each individual, form and material qualities. In the higher 
classes there is a continually rising series of mental qualities 
also. It is the union of these that makes the individual. Every 
person, or thing, or god, is therefore a putting together, a com- 
pound ; and in each individual, without any exception, the relation 
of its component parts is ever changing, is never the same for two 
consecutive moments. It follows that no sooner has separateness, 
individuality, begun, than dissolution, disintegration, also begins. 
There can be no individuality without a putting together: there 
can be no putting together without a becoming: there can be 
no becoming without a becoming different: and there can be 
no becoming different without a dissolution, a passing away, 
which sooner or later will inevitably be complete. 

Heracleitus, who was a generation or two later than the 
Buddha, had very similar ideas; 5 and similar ideas arefound 
in post-Buddhistic Indian works. 6 But in neither case are they 
worked out in the same uncompromising way. Both in Europe, 
and in all Indian thought except the Buddhist, souls, and the 
gods who are made in imitation of souls, are considered as 
exceptions. To these spirits is attributed a Being without 
Becoming, an individuality without change, a beginning with- 
out an end. To hold any such view would, according to the 
doctrine of the Noble (or Aryan) Path, be erroneous, and 
the error would block the way against the very entrance on 
the Path. 

So important is this position in Buddhism that it is put in the 
forefront of Buddhist expositions of Buddhism. The Buddha 
himself is stated in the books to have devoted to it the very 
first discourse he addressed to the first converts. 7 The first in 
the collection of the Dialogues of Gotama discusses, and com- 
pletely, categorically, and systematically rejects, all the current 
theories about " souls." Later books follow these precedents. 
Thus the Katha Vatihu, the latest book included in the canon, 
discusses points of disagreement that had arisen in the community. 
It places this question of " soul " at the head of all the points it 
deals with, and devotes to it an amount of space quite over- 
shadowing all the rest. 8 So also in the earliest Buddhist book 
later than the canon — the very interesting and suggestive series 
of conversations between the Greek king Menander and the 
Buddhist teacher Nagasena. It is precisely this question of the 
" soul " that the unknown author takes up first, describing how 
Nagasena convinces the king that there is no such thing as the 

3 See Iti-vuttaka, p. 44 ; Samyutta, iii. 57. 

4 See Digha, ii. 28 ; Jat. v. 48, ii. 80. 

5 Burnett, Early Greek Philosophy, p. 149. 

6 Katha Up. 2, 10; Bhag. Gita, 2, 14; 9, 33. 

' The Anatta-lakkhana Sutta {Vinaya, i. 13 = Samyutta, iii. 66 
and iv. 34), translated in Vinaya Texts, i. 100-102. 
I 8 See article on " Buddhist Schools of Thought," by Rhys Davids, 
I in the J.R.A.S. for 1892. 



744 



BUDDHISM 



" soul " in the ordinary sense, and he returns to the subject again 
and again. 1 

After Right Views come Right Aspirations. It is evil desires, 
low ideals, useless cravings, idle excitements, that are to be sup- 
pressed by the cultivation of the opposite — of right desires, 
lofty aspirations. In one of the Dialogues 2 instances are given — 
the desire for emancipation from sensuality, aspirations towards 
the attainment of love to others, the wish not to injure any living 
thing, the desire for the eradication of wrong and for the pro- 
motion of right dispositions in one's own heart, and so on. This 
portion of the Path is indeed quite simple, and would require no 
commentary were it not for the still constantly repeated blunder 
that Buddhism teaches the suppression of all desire. 

Of the remaining stages of the Path it is only necessary to 
mention two. The one is Right Effort. A constant intellectual 
alertness is required. This is not only insisted upon elsewhere 
in countless passages, but of the three cardinal sins in Buddhism 
{raga, dosa, moha) the last and worst is stupidity or dullness, the 
others being sensuality and ill-will. Right Effort is closely 
connected with the seventh stage, Right Mindfulness. Two of 
the dialogues are devoted to this subject, and it is constantly 
referred to elsewhere. 3 The disciple, whatsoever he does — 
whether going forth or coming back, standing or walking, 
speaking or silent, eating or drinking— is to keep clearly in mind 
all that it means, the temporary character of the act, its ethical 
significance, and above all that behind the act there is no actor 
(goer, seer, eater, speaker) that is an eternally persistent unity. 
It is the Buddhist analogue to the Christian precept : " Whether 
therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory 
of God." 

Under the head of Right Conduct the two most important 
points are Love and Joy. Love is in Pali Mettd, and the Metta 
Sutta 1 says (no doubt with reference to the Right Mindfulness just 
described) : " As a mother, even at the risk of her own life, 
protects her son, her only son, so let him cultivate love without 
measure towards all beings. Let him cultivate towards the whole 
world — above, below, around — a heart of love unstinted, un- 
mixed with the sense of differing or opposing interests. Let a 
man maintain this mindfulness all the while he is awake, whether 
he be standing, walking, sitting or lying down. This state of 
heart is the best in the world." 

Often elsewhere four such states are described, the Brahma 
Viharas or Sublime Conditions. They are Love, Sorrow at the 
sorrows of others, Joy in the joys of others, and Equanimity as 
regards one's own joys and sorrows. 6 Each of these feelings 
was to be deliberately practised, beginning with a single object, 
and gradually increasing till the whole world was suffused with 
the feeling. " Our mind shall not waver. No evil speech will 
we utter. Tender and compassionate will we abide, loving in 
heart, void of malice within. And we will be ever suffusing such 
a one with the rays of our loving thought. And with that feeling 
as a basis we will ever be suffusing the whole wide world with 
thought of love far-reaching, grown great, beyond measure, 
void of anger or ill-will." 6 

The relative importance of love, as compared with other 
habits, is thus described. " All the means that can be used as 
bases for doing right are not worth the sixteenth part of the 
emancipation of the heart through love. That takes all those up 
into itself, outshining them in radiance and glory. Just as what- 
soever stars there be, their radiance avails not the sixteenth part 
of the radiance of the moon. That takes all those up into itself, 
outshining them in radiance and glory — just as in the last month 
of the rains, at harvest time, the sun, mounting up on high into 
the clear and cloudless sky, overwhelms all darkness in the realms 

1 Questions of King Milinda, translated by Rhys Davids (Oxford, 
1890-1894), vol. i. pp. 40, 41. 85-87; vol. ii. pp. 21-25, 86-89. 

2 Majjhima, iii. 251, cf. Samyutta, v. 8. 

3 Dlgha, ii. 290-315. Majjhima, i. 55 et seq. Cf. Rhys Davids' 
Dialogues of the Buddha, i. 81. . 

4 No. 8 in the Sutta Nipata (p. 26 of Fausboll's edition). It is 
translated by Fausboll in vol. x. of the S.B.E.. and bv Rhys Davids, 
Buddhism, p. 109. 

6 Dlgha, ii. 186-187. ' Majjhima, i. 129. 



of space, and shines forth in radiance and glory — just as in the 
night, when the dawn is breaking, the morning star shines out in 
radiance and glory — just so all the means that can be used as 
helps towards doing right avail not the sixteenth part of the 
emancipation of the heart through love." 7 

The above is the positive side; the qualities (dkamma) that 
have to be acquired. The negative side, the qualities that have 
to be suppressed by the cultivation of the opposite virtues, are the 
Ten Bonds (S amy oj anas), the Four Intoxications (Asava) and the 
Five Hindrances (Nivarayas). 

The Ten Bonds are: (1) Delusion about the soul; (2) Doubt; 
(3) Dependence on good works; (4) Sensuality; (5) Hatred, ill- 
feeling; (6) Love of life on earth; (7) Desire for life in heaven; 
(8) Pride; (9) Self -righteousness; (10) Ignorance. The Four 
Intoxications are the mental intoxication arising respectively 
from (1) Bodily passions, (2) Becoming, (3) Delusion, (4) 
Ignorance. The Five Hindrances are (1) Hankering after worldly 
advantages, (2) The corruption arising out of the wish to injure, 
(3) Torpor of mind, (4) Fretfulness and worry, (5) Wavering of 
mind. ? " When these five hindrances have been cut away from 
within him, he looks upon himself as freed from debt, rid of 
disease, out of jail, a free man and secure. And gladness springs 
up within him on his realizing that, and joy arises to him thus 
gladdened, and so rejoicing all his frame becomes at ease, and 
being thus at ease he is filled with a sense of peace, and in that 
peace his heart is stayed." 9 

To have realized the Truths, and traversed the Path; to have 
broken the Bonds, put an end to the Intoxications, and got rid of 
the Hindrances, is to have attained the ideal, the Fruit, as it is 
called, of Arahatship. One might fill columns with the praises, 
many of them among the most beautiful passages in Pali poetry 
and prose, lavished on this condition of mind, the state of the 
man made perfect according to the Buddhist faith. Many are 
the pet names, the poetic epithets bestowed upon it — the harbour 
of refuge, the cool cave, the island amidst the floods, the place of 
bliss, emancipation, liberation, safety, the supreme, the trans- 
cendent, the uncreated, the tranquil, the home of peace, the calm, 
the end of suffering, the medicine for all evil, the unshaken, the 
ambrosia, the immaterial, the imperishable, the abiding, the 
farther shore, the unending, the bliss of effort, the supreme joy, 
the ineffable, the detachment, the holy city, and many others. 
Perhaps the most frequent in the Buddhist text is Arahatship, 
" the state of him who is worthy "; and the one exclusively 
used in Europe is Nirvana, the " dying out "; that is, the dying 
out in the heart of the fell fire of the three cardinal sins — sensu- 
ality, ill-will and stupidity. 10 

The choice of this term by European writers, a choice made 
long before anyof the Buddhist canonical texts had been published 
or translated, has had a most unfortunate result. Those writers 
did not share, could not be expected to share, the exuberant 
optimism of the early Buddhists. Themselves giving up this 
world as hopeless, and looking for salvation in the next, they 
naturally thought the Buddhists must do the same, and in the 
absence of any authentic scriptures, to correct the mistake, they 
interpreted Nirvana, in terms of their own belief, as a state to be 
reached after death. As such they supposed the " dying out " 
must mean the dying out of a " soul "; and endless were the 
discussions as to whether this meant eternal trance, or absolute 
annihilation, of the " soul." It is now thirty years since the right 
interpretation, founded on the canonical texts, has been given, 
but outside the ranks of Pali scholars the old blunder is still often 
repeated. It should be added that the belief in salvation in this 
world, in this life, has appealed so strongly to Indian sympathies 
that from the time of the rise of Buddhism down to the present 
day it has been adopted as a part of general Indian belief, and 
Jivanmukti, salvation during this life, has become a commonplace 
in the religious language of India. 

Adopted Doctrines. — The above are the essential doctrines of 

7 Iti-vultaka, pp. 19-21. 

8 On the details of these see Dlgha, i. 71-73, translated by Rhys 
Davids in Dialogues of the Buddha, i. 82-84. 

9 Dlgha, i. 74. 10 Samyutta, iv. 251, 261. 



BUDDHISM 



745 



the original Buddhism. They are at the same time its distinctive 
doctrines; that is to say, the doctrines that distinguish it from 
all previous teaching in India. But the Buddha, while rejecting 
the sacrifices and the ritualistic magic of the brahmin schools, the 
animistic superstitions of the people, the asceticism and soul- 
theory of the Jains, and the pantheistic speculations of the poets 
of the pre-Buddhistic Upanishads, still retained the belief in 
transmigration. This belief— the transmigration of the soul, 
after the death of the body, into other bodies, either of men, 
beasts or gods — is part of the animistic creed so widely found 
throughout the world that it was probably universal. In India 
it had already, before the rise of Buddhism, been raised into an 
ethical conception by theassociated doctrine of Karma, according 
to which a man's socialpositioninlife and hisphysicaladvantages, 
or the reverse, were the result of his actions in a previous birth. 
The doctrine thus afforded an explanation, quite complete to 
those who believed it, of the apparent anomalies and wrongs in 
the distribution here of happiness or woe. A mail, for instance, is 
blind. This is owing to his lust of the eye in a previous birth. 
But he has also unusual powers of hearing. This is because he 
loved, in a previous birth, to listen to the preaching of the law. 
The explanation could always be exact, for it was scarcely more 
than a repetition of the point to be explained. It fits the facts 
because it is derived from them. And it cannot be disproved, for 
it lies in a sphere beyond the reach of human inquiry. 

It was because it thus provided a moral cause that it was 
retained in Buddhism. But as the Buddha did not acknowledge 
a soul, the link of connexion between one life and the next had to 
be found somewhere else. The Buddha found it (as Plato also 
found it) 1 in the influence exercised upon one life by a desire felt 
in the previous life. When two thinkers of such eminence (pro- 
bably the two greatest ethical thinkers of antiquity) have arrived 
independently at this strange conclusion, have agreed in ascribing 
to cravings, felt in this life, so great, and to us so inconceivable, 
a power over the future life, we may well hesitate before we con- 
demn the idea as intrinsically absurd, and we may take note of 
the important fact that, given similar conditions, similar stages 
in the development of religious belief, men's thoughts, even in 
spite of the most unquestioned individual originality, tend 
though they may never produce exactly the same results, to work 
in similar ways. 

In India, before Buddhism, conflicting and contradictory 
views prevailed as to the precise mode of action of Karma; and 
we find this confusion reflected in Buddhist theory. The pre- 
vailing views are tacked on, as it were, to the essential doctrines 
of Buddhism, without being thoroughly assimilated to them, 
or logically incorporated with them. Thus in the story of the 
good layman Citta, it is an aspiration expressed on the death- 
bed; 2 in the dialogue on the subject, it is a thought dwelt on 
during life, 3 in the numerous stories in the Peta and Vimana 
Vatthus it is usually some isolated act, in the discussions in the 
Dhamma Sangani it is some mental disposition, which is the 
Karma (doing or action) in the one life determining the position 
of the individual in the next. These are really conflicting pro- 
positions. They are only alike in the fact that in each case a 
moral cause is given for the position in which the individual finds 
himself now; and the moral cause is his own act. 

In the popular belief, followed also in the brahmin theology, 
the bridge between the two lives was a minute and subtle entity 
called the soul, which left the one body at death, through a hole 
at the top of the head, and entered into the new body. The 
new body happened to be there, ready, with no soul in it. The 
soul did not make the body. In the Buddhist adaptation of this 
theory no soul, no consciousness, no memory, goes over from one 
body to the other. It is the grasping, the craving, still existing 
at the death of the one body that causes the new set of Skandhas, 
that is, the new body with its mental tendencies and capacities, to 
arise. How this takes place is nowhere explained. 

The Indian theory of Karma has been worked out with many 

1 Phaedo, 69 et seq. The idea is there also put forward in con- 
nexion with a belief in transmigration. 
* Samyutta, iv. 302. 3 Majjhima, iii. 99 et seq. 



points of great beauty and ethical value. And the Buddhist 
adaptation of it, avoiding some of the difficulties common to it 
and to the allied European theories of fate and predestination, 
tries to explain the weight of the universe in its action on the 
individual, the heavy hand of the immeasurable past we cannot 
escape, the close connexion between all forms of life, and the 
mysteries of inherited character. Incidentally it held out the 
hope, to those who believed in it, of a mode of escape from the 
miseries of transmigration. For as the Arahat had conquered 
the cravings that were supposed to produce the new body, his 
actions were no longer Karma, but only Kiriya, that led to no 
rebirth. 4 

Another point of Buddhist teaching adopted from previous 
belief was the practice of ecstatic meditation. In the very 
earliest times of the most remote animism we find the belief 
that a person, rapt from all sense of the outside world, possessed 
by a spirit, acquired from that state a degree of sanctity, was 
supposed to have a degree of insight, denied to ordinary mortals. 
In India from the soma frenzy in the Vedas, through the mystic 
reveries of the Upanishads, and the hypnotic trances of the 
ancient Yoga, allied beliefs and practices had never lost their 
importance and their charm. It is clear from the Dialogues, 
and other of the most ancient Buddhist records, 5 that the belief 
was in full force when Buddhism arose, and that the practice was 
followed by the Buddha's teachers. It was quite impossible 
for him to ignore the question; and the practice was admitted 
as a part of the training of the Buddhist Bhikshu. But it was 
not the highest or the most important part, and might be omitted 
altogether. The states of Rapture are called Conditions of Bliss, 
and they are regarded as useful for the help they give towards the 
removal of the mental obstacles to the attainment of Arahatship. 6 
Of the thirty-seven constituent parts of Arahatship they enter 
into one group of four. To seek for Arahatship in the practice 
of the ecstasy alone is considered a deadly heresy. 7 So these 
practices are both pleasant in themselves, and useful as one of 
the means to the end proposed. But they are not the end, and 
the end can be reached without them. The most ancient form 
these exercises took is recorded in the often recurring paragraphs 
translated in Rhys Davids' Dialogues of the Buddha (i. 84-92). 
More modern, and much more elaborate, forms are given in 
the Y ogdvacaras Manual of Indian Mysticism as practised by 
Buddhists, edited by Rhys Davids from a unique MS. for the 
Pali Text Society in 1896. In the Introduction to this last work 
the various phases of the question are discussed at length. 

Buddhist Texts. The Canonical Books.- — It is necessary to re- 
member that the Buddha, like other Indian teachersof hisperiod, 
taught by conversation only. A highly-educated man (according 
to the education current at the time), speaking constantly to 
men of similar education, he followed the literary habit of his 
day by embodying his doctrines in set phrases (sutras), on which 
he enlarged, on different occasions, in different ways. Writing 
was then widely known. But the lack of suitable writing 
materials made any lengthy books impossible. Such sutras 
were therefore the recognized form of preserving and com- 
municating opinion. They were catchwords, as it were, memoria 
technica, which could easily be remembered, and would recall 
the fuller expositions that had been based upon them. Shortly 
after the Buddha's time the Brahmins had their sutras in 
Sanskrit, already a dead language. He purposely put his into 
the ordinary conversational idiom of the day, that is to say, 
into Pali. When the Buddha died these sayings were collected 
together by his disciples into what they call the Four Nikayas, 
or " collections." These cannot have reached their final form till 
about fifty or sixty years afterwards. Other sayings and verses, 
most of them ascribed, not to the Buddha, but to the disciples 
themselves, were put into a supplementary Nikaya. We know 

4 The history of the Indian doctrine of Karma has yet to be 
written. On the Buddhist side see Rhys Davids' Hibbert Lectures, 
PP- 73- I2 o, and Dahlke, Aufsdtze zum Verstandnis des Buddhismus 
(Berlin, 1903), i. 92-106, and ii. 1-11. 

6 For instance, Majjhima, i. 163-166 
■ w 6 Angvtlara, iii. 1 19. ' Digha, i. 38. 



746 



BUDDHISM 



of slight additions made to this Nikaya as late as the time of 
Asoka, 3rd century B.C. And the developed doctrine, found 
in certain portions of it, shows that these are later than the four 
old Nikayas. For a generation or two the books so put together 
were handed down by memory, though probably written 
memoranda were also used. And they were doubtless accom- 
panied from the first, as they were being taught, by a running 
commentary. About one hundred years after the Buddha's 
death there was a schism in the community. Each of the two 
schools kept an arrangement of the canon — still in Pali, or some 
allied dialect. Sanskrit was not used for any Buddhist works 
till long afterwards, and never used at all, so far as is known, 
for the canonical books. Each of these two schools broke up 
in the following centuries, into others. Several of them had 
their different arrangements of the canonical books, differing 
also in minor details. These books remained the only authorities 
for about five centuries, but they all, except only our extant 
Pali Nikayas, have been lost in India. These then are our 
authorities for the earliest period of Buddhism. Now what are 
these books ? 

We talk necessarily of Pali books. They are not books in the 
modern sense. They are memorial sentences or verses intended 
to be learnt by heart. And the whole style and method of arrange- 
ment is entirely subordinated to this primary necessity. Each 
sutra (Pali, sutla) is very short; usually occupying only a page, 
or perhaps two, and containing a single proposition. When 
several of these, almost always those that contain propositions 
of a similar kind, are collected together in the framework of one 
dialogue, it is called a suttanta. The usual length of such a 
suttanta is about a dozen pages; only a few of them are longer, 
and a collection of such suttantas might be called a book. But it 
is as yet neither narrative nor essay. It is at most a string of 
passages, drawn up in similar form to assist the memory, and 
intended, not to be read, but to be learnt by heart. The first 
of the four Nikayas is a collection of the longest of these suttantas, 
and it is called accordingly the Digha Nikaya, that is " the 
Collection of Long Ones " {sci. Suttantas). The next is the 
Majjhima Nikaya, the " Collection of the suttantas of Medium 
Length " — medium, that is, as being shorter than the suttantas in 
the Digha, and longer than the ordinary suttas preserved in the 
two following collections. Between them these first two collec- 
tions contain 186 dialogues, in which the Buddha, or in a few 
cases one of his leading disciples, is represented as engaged in con- 
versation on some one of the religious, or philosophic, or ethical 
points in that system which we now call Buddhism. In depth 
of philosophic insight, in the method of Socratic questioning 
often adopted, in the earnest and elevated tone of the whole, 
in the evidence they afford of the most cultured thought of the 
day, these dialogues constantly remind the reader of the dialogues 
of Plato. But not in style. They have indeed a style of their 
own; always dignified, and occasionally rising into eloquence. 
But for the reasons already given, it is entirely different from 
the style of Western writings which are always intended to be 
read. Historical scholars will, however, revere this collection 
of dialogues as one of the most priceless of the treasures of 
antiquity still preserved to us. It is to it, above all, that we shall 
always have to go for our knowledge of the most ancient 
Buddhism. Of the 186, 175 had by 1907 been edited for the 
Pali Text Society, and the remainder were either in the press or 
in preparation. 

A disadvantage of the arrangement in dialogues, more especi- 
ally as they follow one another according to length and not 
according to subject, is that it is not easy to find the statement 
of doctrine on any particular point which is interesting one at the 
moment. It is very likely just this consideration which led to 
the compilation of the two following Nikayas. In the first of 
these, called the Anguttara Nikaya, all those points of Buddhist 
doctrine capable of expression in classes are set out in order. 
This practically includes most of the psychology and ethics of 
Buddhism. For it is a distinguishing mark of the dialogues 
themselves that the results arrived at are arranged in carefully 
systematized groups. We are familiar enough in the West with 



similar classifications, summed up in such expressions as the 
Seven Deadly Sins, the Ten Commandments, the Thirty-nine 
Articles, the Four Cardinal Virtues, the Seven Sacraments and a 
host of others. These numbered lists (it is true) are going out of 
fashion. The aid which they afford to memory is no longer 
required in an age in which books of reference abound. It was 
precisely as a help to memory that they were found so useful in 
the early Buddhist times, when the books were all learnt by heart, 
and had never as yet been written. And in the Anguttara we 
find set out in order first of all the units, then all the pairs, then 
all the trios, and so on. It is the longest book in the Buddhist 
Bible, and fills 1840 pages 8vo. The whole of the Pali text has 
been published by the Pali Text Society, but only portions have 
been translated into English. The next, and last, of these four 
collections contains again the whole, or nearly the whole, of the 
Buddhist doctrine; but arranged this time in order of subjects. 
It consists of 55 Samyuttas or groups. In each of these the 
suttas on the same subject, or in one or two cases the suttas 
addressed to the same sort of people, are grouped together. 
The whole of it has been published in five volumes by the Pali 
Text Society. Only a few fragments have been translated. 

Many hundreds of the short suttas and verses in these two 
collections are found, word for word, in the dialogues. And 
there are numerous instances of the introductory story stating 
how, and when, and to whom the sutta was enunciated — a sort 
of narrative framework in which the sutta is set — recurring also. 
This is very suggestive as to the way in which the earliest Buddhist 
records were gradually built up. The suttas came first embody- 
ing, in set phrases, the doctrine that had to be handed down. 
Those episodes, found in two or three different places, and 
always embodying several suttas, came next. Then several of 
these were woven together to form a suttanta. And finally the 
suttantas were grouped together into the two Nikayas, and the 
suttas and episodes separately into the two others. Parallel 
with this evolution, so to say, of the suttas, the short statements 
of doctrine, in prose, ran the treatment of the verses. There was 
a great love of poetry in the communities in which Buddhism 
arose. Verses were helpful to the memory. And they were 
adopted not only for this reason. The adherents of the new view 
of life found pleasure in putting into appropriate verse the feelings 
of enthusiasm and of ecstasy which the reforming doctrines 
inspired. When particularly happy in literary finish, or 
peculiarly rich in religious feeling, such verses were not lost. 
These were handed on, from mouth to mouth, in the small 
companies of the brethren or sisters. The oldest verses are all 
lyrics, expressions either of emotion, or of some deep saying, 
some pregnant thought. Very few of them have been preserved 
alone. And even then they are so difficult to understand, so 
much like puzzles, that they were probably accompanied from 
the first by a sort of comment in prose, stating when, and why, 
and by whom they were supposed to have been uttered. As a 
general rule such a framework in prose is actually preserved in 
the old Buddhist literature. It is only in the very latest books 
included in the canon that the narrative part is also regularly in 
verse, so that a whole work consists of a collection of ballads. The 
last step, that of combining such ballads into one long epic poem, 
was not taken till after the canon was closed. The whole process, 
from the simple anecdote in mixed prose and verse, the so-called 
akhyana, to the complete epic, comes out with striking clearness 
in the history of the Buddhist canon. It is typical, one may notice 
in passing, of the evolution of the epic elsewhere; in Iceland, for 
instance, in Persia and in Greece. And we may safely draw the 
conclusion that if the great Indian epics, the Maha-bharata and 
the Ramayana, had been in existence when the formation of the 
Buddhist canon began, the course of its development would have 
been very different from what it was. 

As will easily be understood, the same reasons which led to 
literary activity of this kind, in the earliest period, continued to 
hold good afterwards. A number of such efforts, after the 
Nikayas had been closed, were included in a supplementary 
Nikaya called the Khuddaka Nikaya. It will throw very useful 
light upon the intellectual level in the Buddhist community just 



BUDDHISM 



747 



after the earliest period, and upon literary life in the valley of the 
Ganges in the 4th or 5th century B.C., if we briefly explain what 
the tractates in this collection contain. The first, the Khuddaka 
Pdtha, is a little tract of only a few pages. After a profession of 
faith in the Buddha, the doctrine and the order, there follows a 
paragraph setting out the thirty-four constituents of the human 
body — bones, blood, nerves and so on— strangely incongruous 
with what follows. For that is simply a few of the most beautiful 
poems to be found in the Buddhist scriptures. , There is no 
apparent reason, except their exquisite versification, why these 
particular pieces should have been here brought together. It is 
most probable that this tiny volume was simply a sort of first 
lesson book for young neophytes when they joined the order. 
In any case that is one of the uses to which it is put at present. 
The text book is the Dhammapada. Here are brought together 
from ten to twenty stanzas on each of twenty-six selected points 
of Buddhist self-training or ethics. There are altogether 423 
verses, gathered from various older sources, and strung together 
without any other internal connexion than that they relate more 
or less to the same subject. And the collector has not thought it 
necessary to choose stanzas written in the same metre, or in the 
same number of lines. We know that the early Christians were 
accustomed to sing hymns, both in their homes and on the 
occasions of their meeting together. These . hymns are now 
irretrievably lost. Had some one made a collection of about 
twenty isolated stanzas, chosen from these hymns, on each of 
about twenty subjects — such as Faith, Hope, Love, the Converted 
Man, Times of Trouble, Quiet Days, the Saviour, the Tree of Life, 
the Sweet Name, the Dove, the King, the Land of Peace, the Joy 
Unspeakable — we should have a Christian Dhammapada, and very 
precious such a collection would be. The Buddhist Dhammapada 
has been edited by Professor Fausboll (2nd ed., 1900), and has 
been frequently translated. Where the verses deal with thoseideas 
that are common to Christians and Buddhists, the versions are 
easily intelligible, and some of the stanzas appeal very strongly 
to the Western sense of religious beauty. Where the stanzas are 
full of the technical terms of the Buddhist system of self-culture 
and self-control, it is often impossible, without expansions that 
spoil the poetry, or learned notes that distract the attention, to 
convey the full sense of the original. In all these distinctively 
Buddhist verses the existing translations (of which Professor Max 
Miiller's is the best known, and Dr Karl Neumann's the best) are 
inadequate and sometimes quite erroneous. The connexion in 
which they were spoken is often apparent in the more ancient 
books from which these verses have been taken, and has been 
preserved in the commentary on the work itself. 

In the next little work the framework, the whole paraphernalia 
of the ancient akhyana, is included in the work itself, which is 
called Uddna, or " ecstatic utterances." The Buddha is repre- 
sented, on various occasions during his long career, to have been 
so much moved by some event, or speech, or action, that he gave 
vent, as it were, to his pent-up feelings in a short, ecstatic utter- 
ance, couched, for the most part, in one or two lines of poetry. 
These outbursts, very terse and enigmatic, are charged with 
religious emotion, and turn often on some subtle point of Arahat- 
ship, that is, of the Buddhist ideal of life. The original text has 
been published by the Pali Text Society. The little book, a 
garland of fifty of these gems, has been translated by General 
Strong. The next work is called the Iti Vuttaka. This contains 
1 20 short passages, each of them leading up to a terse deep saying 
of the Buddha's, and introduced, in each case, with the words 
Iti vuttam Bhagavald — " thus was it spoken by the Exalted One." 
These anecdotes may or may not be historically accurate. It 
is quite possible that the memory of the early disciples, highly 
trained as it was, enabled them to preserve a substantially true 
record of some of these speeches, and of the circumstances in 
which they were uttered. Some or all of them may also have been 
invented. In either case they are excellent evidence of the sort 
of questions on which discussions among the earliest Buddhists 
must have turned. These ecstatic utterances and deep sayings 
are attributed to the Buddha himself, and accompanied by the 
prose framework. There has also been preserved a collection of 



stanzasascribedtohisleadingfollowers. Of these 107 are brethren, 
and 73 sisters, in the order. The prose framework is in this case 
preserved only in the commentary, which also gives biographies 
of the authors. This work is called the Thera-theri-gdthd. 

Another interesting collection is the Jdtaka book, a set of 
verses supposed to have been uttered by the Buddha in some of 
his previous births. These are really 550 of the folk-tales current 
in India when the canon was being formed, the only thing Budd- 
hist about them being that the Buddha, in a previous birth, is 
identified in each case with the hero in the little story. Here 
again the prose is preserved only in the commentary. And it is a 
most fortunate chance that this — the oldest, the most complete, 
and the most authentic collection of folklore extant — has thus 
been preserved intact to the present day. Many of these stories 
and fables have wandered to Europe, and are found in medieval 
homilies, poems and story-books. A full account of this curious 
migration will be found in the introduction to the present writer's 
Buddhist Birth Stories. A translation of the whole book is now 
published, under the editorship of Professor Cowell, at the 
Cambridge University Press. The last of these poetical works 
which it is necessary to mention is the Sutta Nipdta, containing 
fifty-five poems, all except the last merely short lyrics,' many of 
great beauty. A very ancient commentary on the bulk of these 
poems has been included in the canon as a separate work. The 
poems themselves have been translated by Professor Fausboll in 
the Sacred Books of the, East. The above works are our authority 
for the philosophy and ethics of the earliest Buddhists. We have 
also a complete statement of the rules of the order in the Vinaya, 
edited, in five volumes, by Professor Oldenberg. Three volumes 
of translations of these rules, by him and by the present writer, 
have also appeared in the Sacred Books of the East. 

There have also been added to the canonical books seven works 
on Abhidhamma,*. more elaborate and more classified exposition 
of the Dhamma or doctrine as set out in the Nikdyas. All these 
works are later. Only one of them has been translated, the so- 
called Dhamma Sangani. The introduction to this translation, 
published under the title of Buddhist Psychology, contains the 
fullest account that has yet appeared of the psychological con- 
ceptions on which Buddhist ethics are throughout based. The 
translator, Mrs Caroline Rhys Davids, estimates the date of this 
ancient manual for Buddhist students as the 4th century B.C. 

Later Works. — So far the canon, almost all of which is now 
accessible to readers of Pali. But a good deal of work is still 
required before the harvest of historical data contained in these 
texts shall have been made acceptable to students of philosophy 
and sociology. These works of the oldest period, the two 
centuries and a half, between the Buddha's time and that of 
Asoka, were followed by a voluminous literature in the following 
periods — from Asoka to Kanishka, and from Kanishka to 
Buddhaghosa, — each of about three centuries. Many of these 
works are extant in MS.; but only five or six of the more im- 
portant have so far been published. Of these the most interesting 
is the Milinda, one of the earliest historical novels preserved to us. 
It is mainly religious and philosophical, and purports to give the 
discussion, extending over several days, in which a Buddhist 
elder named Nagasena succeeds in converting Milinda, that is 
Menander, the famous Greek king of Bactria, to Buddhism. 
The Pali text has been edited and the work translated into 
English. More important historically, though greatly inferior in 
style and ability, is the Mahavastu or Sublime Story, in Sanskrit. 
The story is the one of chief importance to the Buddhists — the 
story, namely, of how the Buddha won, under the Bo Tree, the 
victory over ignorance, and attained to the Sambodhi, " the higher 
wisdom," of Nirvana. The story begins with his previous births, 
in which also he was accumulating the Buddha qualities. And 
as the Mahavastu was a standard work of a particular sect, or 
rather school, called the Maha-sanghikas, it has thus preserved 
for us the theory of the Buddha as held outside the followers of 
the canon, by those whose views developed, in after centuries, 
into the Mahayana or modern form of Buddhism in India. But 
this book, like all the ancient books, was composed, not in the 
north, in Nepal, but in the valley of the Ganges, and it is partly 



74 8 



BUDDHISM 



in prose, partly in verse. Two other works, the Lalita Vistara 
and the Buddha Carita, give us — but this, of course, is later- 
Sanskrit poems, epics, on the same subject. Of these, the former 
may be as old as the Christian era; the latter belongs to the 
2nd century after Christ. Both of them have been edited and 
translated. The older one contains still a good deal of prose, the 
gist of it being often repeated in the verses. The later one is 
entirely in verse, and shows off the author's mastery of the 
artificial rules of prosody and poetics, according to which a poem, 
a maha-kavya, ought, according to the later writers on the Ars 
poetica, to be composed. 

These three works deal only quite briefly and incidentally 
with any point of Buddhism outside of the Buddha legend. Of 
greater importance for the history of Buddhism are two later 
works, the Netti Pakarana and the Saddharma Pundarika. The 
former, in Pali, discusses a number of questions then of importance 
in the Buddhist community; and it relies throughout, as does the 
Milinda, on the canonical works, which it quotes largely. The 
latter, in Sanskrit, is the earliest exposition we have of the later 
Mahayana doctrine. Both these books may be dated in the 2nd 
or 3rd century of our era. The latter has been translated into 
English. We have now also the text of the Prajna Pqramita, a 
later treatise on the Mahayana system, which in time entirely 
replaced in India the original doctrines. To about the same age 
belongs also the Divyavadana, a collection of legends about the 
leading disciples of the Buddha, and important members of the 
order, through the subsequent three centuries. These legends 
are, however, of different dates, and in spite of the comparatively 
late period at which it was put into its present form, it contains 
some very ancient fragments. 

The whole of the above works were composed in the north of 
India; that is to say, either north or a few miles south of the 
Ganges. The record is at present full of gaps. ^ But we can even 
now obtain a full and accurate idea of the earliest Buddhism, and 
are able to trace the main lines of its development through the 
first eight or nine centuries of its career. The Pali Text Society 
is still publishing two volumes a year; and the Russian Academy 
has inaugurated a series to contain the most important of the 
Sanskrit works still buried in MS. We have also now accessible 
in Pali fourteen volumes of the commentaries of the great 5th- 
century scholars in south India and Ceylon, most of them the 
works either of Buddhaghosa of Budh Gaya, or of Dhammapala 
of Kancipura (the ancient name of Conjeeveram) . These are full 
of important historical data on the social, as well as the religious, 
life of India during the periods of which they treat. 

Modern Research. — The striking archaeological discoveries of 
recent years have both confirmed and added to our knowledge 
of the earliest period. Pre-eminent among these is the discovery, 
by Mr William Peppe, on the Birdpur estate, adjoining the 
boundary between English and Nepalese territory, of the stupa, 
or cairn, erected by the Sakiya clan over their share of the ashes 
from the cremation pyre of the Buddha. About 12 m. to the 
north-east of this spot has been found an inscribed pillar, put up 
by Asoka as a record of his visit to the Lumbini Garden, as the 
place where the future Buddha had been born. Although more 
than two centuries later than the event to which it refers, this 
inscription is good evidence of the site of the garden. There had 
been no interruption of the tradition; and it is probable that the 
place was then still occupied by the descendants of the possessors 
in the Buddha's time. North-west of this another Asoka pillar 
has been discovered, recording his visit to the cairn erected by 
the Sakyas over the remains of Konagamana, one of the previous 
Puddhas or teachers, whose follower Gotama the Buddha had 
claimed to be. These discoveries definitely determine the district 
occupied by the Sakiya republic in the 6th and 7th centuries B.C. 
The boundaries, of course, are not known; but the clan must 
have spread 30 m. or more along the lower slopes of the Himalayas 
and 30 m. or more southwards over the plains. It has been 
abandoned jungle since the 3rd century a.d., or perhaps earlier, 
so that the ruined sites, numerous through the whole district, 
have remained undisturbed, and further discoveries may be 
confidently expected. 



The principal points on which this large number of older 
and better authorities has modified our knowledge are as 
follows : — 

1. We have learnt that the division of Buddhism, originating 
with Burnouf, into northern and southern, is misleading. He 
found that the Buddhism in his Pali MSS., which came frorr, 
Ceylon, differed from that in his Sanskrit MSS., which came front 
Nepal. Now that the works he used have been made accessible 
in printed editions, we find that, wherever the existing MSS. cam* 
from, the original works themselves were all composed in tht 
same stretch of country, that is, in the valley of the Ganges. 
The difference of the opinions expressed in the MSS. is due, not 
to the place where they are now found, but to the difference 0} time 
at which they were originally composed. Not one of the boot.s 
mentioned above is either northern or southern. They all claim, 
and rightly claim, to belong, so far as their place of origin is 
concerned, to the Majjhima Desa, the middle country. It is 
undesirable to base the main division of our subject on an ad- 
ventitious circumstance, and especially so when the nomenclature 
thus introduced (it is not found in the books themselves) cuts 
right across the true line of division. The use of the terms 
northern and southern as applied, not to the existing MSS., but 
to the original books, or to the Buddhism they teach, not only 
does not help us, it is the source of serious misunderstanding. 
It inevitably leads careless writers to take for granted that we 
have, historically, two Buddhisms — one manufactured in Ceylon, 
the other in Nepal. Now this is admittedly wrong. What we 
have to consider is Buddhism varying through slight degrees, as 
the centuries pass by, in almost every book. We may call it one, 
or we may call it many. What is quite certain is that it is not two. 
And the most useful distinction to emphasize is, not the 
ambiguous and misleading geographical one — derived from the 
places where the modern copies of the MSS. are found; nor even, 
though that would be better, the linguistic one — but the chrono- 
logical one. The use, therefore, of the inaccurate and misleading 
terms northern and southern ought no longer to be followed in 
scholarly works on Buddhism. 

2. Our ideas as to the social conditions that prevailed, during 
the Buddha's lifetime, in the eastern valley of the Ganges have 
been modified. The people were divided into clans, many of 
them governed as republics, more or less aristocratic. In a few 
cases several of such republics had formed confederations, and in 
four cases such confederations had already become hereditary 
monarchies. The right historical analogy is not the state of 
Germany in the middle ages, but the state of Greece in the time of 
Socrates. The Sakiyas were still a republic. They had republics 
for their neighbours on the east and south, but on the western 
boundary was the kingdom of Kosala, the modern Oudh, which 
they acknowledged as a suzerain power. The Buddha's father 
was not a king. There were rajas in the clan, but the word meant 
at most something like consul or archon. All the four real kings 
were called Maha-raja. And Suddhodana, the teacher's father, 
was not even raja. One of his cousins, named Bhaddiya, is 
styled a raja; but Suddhodana is spoken of, like other citizens, 
as Suddhodana the Sakiyan. As the ancient books are very 
particular on this question of titles, this is decisive. 

3. There was no caste — no caste, that is, in the modern sense 
of the term. We have long known that the connubium was the 
cause of a long and determined struggle between the patricians 
and the plebeians in Rome. Evidence has been yearly accumulat- 
ing on the existence of restrictions as to intermarriage, and as to 
the right of eating together (commensality) among other Aryan 
tribes, Greeks, Germans, Russians and so on. Even without the 
fact of the existence now of such restrictions among the modern 
successors of the ancient Aryans in India, it would have been 
probable that they also were addicted to similar customs. It is 
certain that the notion of such usages was familiar enough to 
some at least of the tribes that preceded the Aryans in India. 
Rules of endogamy and exogamy; privileges, restricted to certain 
classes, of eating together, are not only Indian or Aryan, but 
world-wide phenomena. Both the spirit, and to a large degree 
the actual details, of modern Indian caste-usages are identical 



BUDE 



749 



with these ancient, and no doubt universal, customs. It is in 
them that we have the key to the origin of caste. 

At any moment in the history of a nation such customs seem, 
to a superficial observer, to be fixed and immutable. As a matter 
of fact they are never quite the same in successive centuries, or 
even generations. The numerous and complicated details which 
we sum up under the convenient, but often misleading, single 
name of caste, are solely dependent for their sanction on public 
opinion. That opinion seems stable. But it is always tending to 
vary as to the degree of importance attached to some particular 
one of the details, as to the size and complexity of the particular 
groups in which each detail ought to be observed. 

Owing to the fact that the particular group that in India 
worked its way to the top, based its claims on religious grounds, 
not on political power, nor on wealth, the system has, no doubt, 
lasted longer in India than in Europe. But public opinion still 
insists, in considerable circles even in Europe, on restrictions of a 
more or less defined kind, both as to marriage and as to eating 
together. And in India the problem still remains to trace, in the 
literature, the gradual growth of the system — the gradual forma- 
tion of new sections among the people, the gradual extension of 
the institution to the families of people engaged in certain trades, 
belonging to the same group, or sect, or tribe, tracing their 
ancestry, whether rightly or wrongly, to the same source. All 
these factors, and others besides, are real factors. But they are 
phases of the extension and growth, not explanations of the origin 
of the system. 

There is no evidence to show that at the time of the rise of 
Buddhism there was any substantial difference, as regards the 
barriers in question, between the peoples dwelling in the valley 
of the Ganges and their contemporaries, Greek orRoman, dwelling 
on the shores of the Mediterranean Sea. The point of greatest 
weight in the establishment of the subsequent development, the 
supremacy in India of the priests, was still being hotly debated. 
All the new evidence tends to show that the struggle was being 
decided rather against than for the Brahmins. What we find in 
the Buddha's time is caste in the making. The great mass of the 
people were distinguished quite roughly into four classes, social 
strata, of which the boundary lines were vague and uncertain. 
At one end of the scale were certain outlying tribes and certain 
hereditary crafts of a dirty or despised kind. At the other end 
the nobles claimed the superiority. But Brahmins by birth (not 
necessarily sacrificial priests, for they followed all sorts of occupa- 
tions) were trying to oust the nobles from the highest grade. 
They only succeeded, long afterwards, when the power of 
Buddhism had declined. 

4. It had been supposed on the authority of late priestly 
texts, where boasts of persecution are put forth, that the cause of 
the decline of Buddhism in India had been Brahmin persecution. 
The now accessible older authorities, with one doubtful excep- 
tion, 1 make no mention of persecution. On the other hand, the 
comparison we are now able to make between the canonical books 
of the older Buddhism and the later texts of the following 
centuries, shows a continual decline from the old standpoint, a 
continual approximation of the Buddhist views to those of the 
other philosophies and religions of India. We can see now that 
the very event which seemed, in the eyes of the world, to be the 
most striking proof of the success of the new movement, the con- 
version and strenuous support, in the 3rd century B.C., of Asoka, 
the most powerful ruler India had had, only hastened the decline. 
The adhesion of large numbers of nominal converts, more especi- 
ally from the newly incorporated and less advanced provinces, 
produced weakness rather than strength in the movement for 
reform. The day of compromise had come. Every relaxation of 
the old thoroughgoing position was welcomed and supported by 
converts only half converted. And so the margin of difference 
between the Buddhists and their opponents gradually faded 
almost entirely away. The soul theory, step by step, gained 
again the upper hand. The popular gods and the popular super- 
stitions are once more favoured by Buddhists themselves. The 
philosophical basis of the old ethics is overshadowed by new 
1 See Journal of the Pali Text Society, 1896, pp. 87-92. 



speculations. And even the old ideal of life, the salvation of the 
Arahat to be won in this world and in this world only, by self- 
culture and self-mastery, is forgotten, or mentioned only to be 
condemned. The end was inevitable. The need of a separate 
organization became less and less apparent. The whole pantheon 
of the Vedic gods, with the ceremonies and the sacrifices associated 
with them, passed indeed away. But the ancient Buddhism, the 
party of reform, was overwhelmed also in its fall; and modern 
Hinduism arose on the ruins of both. 

Authorities. — The attention of the few scholars at work on the 
subject being directed to the necessary first step of publishing the 
ancient authorities, the work of exploring them, of analysing and 
classifying the data they contain, has as yet been very imperfectly 
done. The annexed list contains only the most important works. 

Texts. — Pali Text Society, 57 vols.; Jataka, 7 vols., ed. Fausboll, 
1877-1897; Vinaya, 5 vols., ed. Oldenberg, 1879-1883; Dham- 
mapada, ed. Fausboll, 2nd ed., 1900; Divyavadana, ed. Cowell and 
Neil, 1882; Mahavastu, ed. Senart, 3 vols., 1882-1897; Buddha 
Carita, ed. Cowell, 1892; Milinda-panho, ed. Trenckner, 1880. 

Translations. — Vinaya Texts, by Rhys Davids and Oldenberg, 
3 vols., 1881-1885 ; Dhammapada, by Max Miiller, and Sutta Nipata, 
by Fausboll, 1881; Questions of King Milinda, by Rhys Davids, 
2 vols., 1890- 1894; Buddhist Suttas, by Rhys Davids, 1881 ; 
Saddharma Pundarlka, by Kern, 1884; Buddhist Mahayana Texts, 
by Cowell and Max Miiller, 1894 — all the above in the " Sacred 
Books of the East " ; Jataka, vol. i., by Rhys Davids, under the 
title Buddhist Birth Stories, 1880; vols, i.-vi., by Chalmers, Neil, 
Francis, and Rouse, 1895-1897; Buddhism in Translations, by 
Warren, 1896; Buddhistische Anthologie, by Neumann, 1892. 
Lieder der Monche und Nonnen, 1899, by the same; Dialogues of 
the Buddha, by Rhys Davids, 1899; Die Reden Gotamo Buddhas, 
by Neumann, 3 vols., 1899-1903; Buddhist Psychology, by Mrs 
Rhys Davids, 1900. 

Manuals, Monographs, &c. — Buddhism, by Rhys Davids, i2mo, 
20th thousand, 1903; Buddha, sein Leben, seine Lehre und seine 
Gemeinde, by Oldenberg, 5th edition, 1906; Der Buddhismus und 
seine Geschichte in Indien, by Kern, 1882; Der Buddhismus, by 
Edmund Hardy, 1890; American Lectures, Buddhism, by Rhy9 
Davids, 1896; Inscriptions de Piyadasi, by Senart, 2 vols., 1881- 
1886; Mara und Buddha, by Windisch, 1895; Buddhist India, by 
Rhys Davids, 1963. (T. W. R. D.) 

BUDE [Budaeus], GUILLAUME (1467-1540), French scholar, 
was born at Paris. He went to the university of Orleans to study 
law, but for several years, being possessed of ample means, he 
led an idle and dissipated life. When about twenty-four years 
of age he was seized with a sudden passion for study, and made 
rapid progress, particularly in the Latin and Greek languages. 
The work which gained him greatest reputation was his De Asse 
et Partibus (1514), a treatise on ancient coins and measures. He 
was held in high esteem by Francis I., who was persuaded by him, 
and by Jean du Bellay, bishop of Narbonne, to found the Col- 
legium Trilingue, afterwards the College de France, and the, 
library at Fontainebleau, which was removed to Paris and was 
the origin of the Bibliotheque Nationale. He also induced 
Francis to refrain from prohibiting printing in France, which had 
been advised by the Sorbonne in 1533. He was sent by Louis 
XII. to Rome as ambassador to Leo X., and in 1522 was 
appointed matlre des requites and was several times prevdt 
des marchands. He died in Paris on the 23rd of August 
1540. 

Bude was also the author of Annolationes in XXIV. libros 
Pandectarum (1508), which, by the application of philology and 
history, had a great influence on the study of Roman law, and of 
Commentarii linguae Graecae (1529), an extensive collection of 
lexicographical notes, which contributed greatly to the study of 
Greek literature in France. Bude corresponded with the most 
learned men of his time, amongst them Erasmus, who called him 
the marvel of France, and Thomas More. He wrote with equal 
facility in Greek and Latin, although his Latin is inferior to his 
Greek, being somewhat harsh and full of Greek constructions. 
His request that he should be buried at night, and his widow's 
open profession of Protestantism at Geneva (where she retired 
after his death), caused him to be suspected of leanings towards 
Calvinism. At the time of the massacre of St Bartholomew, the 
members of his family were obliged to flee from France. Some 
took refuge in Switzerland, where they worthily upheld the 
traditions of their house, while others settled in Pomerania , under 
the name Budde or Buddeus. 



75° 



BUDE— BUDGET 



See Le Roy, Vita G. Budaei (1540) ; Rebitte, G. Bude, restaurateur 
4es etudes grecques en France (1846) ; E. de Bude, Vie de G. BudS 
(1884), who refutes the idea of his ancestor's Protestant views; 
D'Hozier, La Maison de Bude; L. Delaruelle, Etudes sur I'humanisme 
francais (1907). 

BUDE, a small seaport and watering-place in the Launceston 
parliamentary division of Cornwall,.England,on the north coast at 
the mouth of the river Bude. With the market town of Stratton, 
ii m. inland to the east, it forms the urban district of Stratton 
and Bude, with a population (1901) of 2308. Bude is served by a 
branch of the London & South-Western railway. Its only 
notable building is the Early English parish church of St Michael 
and All Angels. The climate is healthy and the coast scenery in 
the neighbourhood fine, especially towards the south. There the 
gigantic cliffs, with their banded strata, have been broken into 
fantastic forms by the waves. Many ships have been wrecked 
on the jagged reefs which fringe their base. The figure-head of 
one of these, the " Bencellon," lost in 1862, is preserved in the 
churchyard. The harbour, sheltered by a breakwater, will 
admit vessels of 300 tons at high water; and the river has been 
dammed to form a basin for the canal which runs to Launceston. 
Some fishing is carried on : but the staple trade is the export of 
sand, which, being highly charged with carbonate of lime, is much 
used for manure. There are golf links near the town. The 
currents in the bay make bathing dangerous. 

BUDGELL, EUSTACE (1686-1737), English man of letters, 
the son of Dr. Gilbert Budgell, was born on the 19th of August 
1686 at St Thomas, near Exeter. He matriculated in 1705 at 
Trinity College, Oxford, and afterwards joined the Inner Temple, 
London; but instead of studying law he devoted his whole 
attention to literature. Addison, who was first cousin to his 
mother, befriended him, and, on being appointed secretary to 
Lord Wharton, lord-lieutenant of Ireland in 17 10, took Budgell 
with him as one of the clerks of his office. Budgell took part with 
Steele and Addison in writing the Taller. He was also a con- 
tributor to the Spectator and the Guardian, — his papers being 
marked with an X in the former, and with an asterisk in the latter. 
He was subsequently made under-secretary to Addison, chief 
secretary to the lords justices of Ireland, and deputy-clerk of the 
council, and became a member of the Irish parliament. In 1 7 1 7 , 
when Addison became principal secretary of state in England, 
he procured for Budgell the place of accountant and comptroller- 
general of the revenue in Ireland. But the next year, the duke 
of Bolton being appointed lord-lieutenant, Budgell wrote a 
lampoon against E. Webster, his secretary. This led to his being 
removed from his post of accountant-general, upon which he 
returned to England, and, contrary to the advice of Addison, 
published his case in a pamphlet. In the year 1720 he lost 
£20,000 by the South Sea scheme, and afterwards spent £5000 
more in unsuccessful attempts to get into parliament. He began 
to write pamphlets against the ministry, and published many 
papers in the Craftsman. In 1733 he started a weekly periodical 
called the Bee, which he continued for more than a hundred 
numbers. By the will of Matthew Tindal, the deist, who died in 
1733, a legacy of 2000 guineas was left to Budgell; but the 
bequest (which had, it was alleged, been inserted in the will by 
Budgell himself) was successfully disputed by Tindal's nephew 
and nearest heir, Nicholas Tindal, who translated and wrote a 
Continuation of the History of England of Paul de Rapin-Thoyras. 
Hence Pope's lines — 

" Let Budgell charge low Grub Street on his quill, 
And write whate'er he pleased — except his will." 1 

Budgell is said to have sold the second volume of Tindal's Christi- 
anity as Old as the Creation to Bishop Gibson, by whom it was 
destroyed. The scandal caused by these transactions ruined him. 
On the 4th of May 1737, after filling his pockets with stones, he 
took a boat at Somerset-stairs, and while the boat was passing 
under the bridge threw himself into the river. On his desk was 
found a slip of paper with the words — " What Cato did, and 
Addison approved, cannot be wrong." Besides the works 
mentioned above, he wrote a translation (17 14) of the Characters 
1 Epistle to Dr Arbuthnot, lines 378-379. 



of Theophrastus. He never married, but left a natural daughter, 
Anne Eustace, who became an actress at Drury Lane. 

See Cibber's Lives of the Poets, vol. v. 

BUDGET (originally from a Gallic word meaning sack, latin- 
ized as bulga, leather wallet or bag, thence in O. Fr. bougette, 
from which the Eng. form is derived), the name applied to an 
account of the ways and means by which the income and ex- 
penditure for a definite period are to be balanced, generally by 
a finance minister for his state, or by analogy for smaller bodies. 2 
The term first came into use in England about 1760. In the 
United Kingdom the chancellor of the exchequer, usually in 
April, lays before the House of Commons a statement of the 
actual results of revenue and expenditure in the past finance 
year (now ending March 31), showing how far his estimates have 
been realized, and what surplus or deficit there has been in the 
income as compared with the expenditure. This is accompanied 
by another statement in which the chancellor gives an estimate 
of what the produce of the revenue may be in the year just 
entered upon, supposing the taxes and duties to remain as they 
were in the past year, and also an estimate of what the ex- 
penditure will be in the current year. If the estimated revenue, 
after allowing for normal increase of the principal sources of 
income, be less than the estimated expenditure, this is deemed 
a case for the imposition of some new, or the increase of some 
existing, tax or taxes. On the other hand, if the estimated 
revenue shows a large surplus over the estimated expenditure, 
there is room for remitting or reducing some tax or taxes, and 
the extent of this relief is generally limited to the amount of 
surplus realized in the previous year. The chancellor of the 
exchequer has to take parliament into confidence on his estimates, 
both as regards revenue and expenditure; and these estimates 
are prepared by the various departments of the administration. 
They are divided into two parts, the consolidated fund services 
and the supply services, the first comprising the civil list, debt 
charge, pensions and courts of justice, while the "supply" 
includes the remaining expenditure of the country, as the army, 
the navy, the civil service and revenue departments, the post- 
office and telegraph services. The consolidated fund services 
are an annual charge, fixed by statute, and alterable only by 
statute, but the supply services may be gone through in detail, 
item by item, by the House of Commons, which forms itself 
into a committee of supply for the purpose. These items can be 
criticized, and reduced (but not increased) by amendments 
proposed by private members. The committee of ways and 
means (also a committee of the whole House) votes the supplies 
when granted and originates all taxes. The resolutions of these 
committees are reported to the House, and when the taxation 
and expenditure obtain the assent of parliament, the results 
as thus adjusted become the final budget estimate for the year, 
and are passed as the Finance Act. This system of annual 
review and adjustment of the public finances obtains not only 
in the British colonies, but in British India. The Indian budget, 
giving the results of income and expenditure in the year ending 
31st of December, and the prospective estimates, is laid before 
the imperial parliament in the course of the ensuing session. 

The budget, though modified by different forms, has also long 
been practised in France, the United States, and other constitu- 
tional countries, and has in some cases been adopted by autocratic 
Powers. Russia began the publication of annual budgets in 
1866; Egypt has followed the example; so also has Turkey, 
by an imperial decree of 1875. All countries agree in taking a 
yearly period, but the actual date of commencement varies 
considerably. The German and Danish financial year, like that of 
the United Kingdom, begins on the 1st of April; in France, 
Belgium and Austria, it begins on the 1st of January; in Italy, 
Spain, the United States and Canada, on the 1st of July. 

2 It was a name applied also to a leather-covered case or small 
coffer. Cotgrave translates bougette " a little coffer or trunk . . . 
covered with leather." It became a common word for a despatch 
box in which official papers were kept. The chancellor of the 
exchequer thus was said to " open his budget " when he made his 
annual statement. 



BUDINI— BUENAVENTURA 



75i 



Previously to 1832, however, the English financial year ran from 
the 1st of January to the 3 1st of December. 

It may be mentioned that Disraeli introduced a budget 
(on which he was defeated) in the autumn of 1852; and in 
i860, owing to the ratification of the commercial treaty with 
France, the budget was introduced on the 10th of February. 
In 1859, through a change of administration, the budget was not 
introduced until the 18th of July, while in 1880 there were two 
budgets, one introduced in March under Disraeli's administration, 
and the other in June, under Gladstone's administration. 

National budgetsare to be discriminated (1) as budgets passing 
under parliamentary scrutiny and debate from year to year, 
and (2) budgets emitted on executive authority. In most con- 
stitutional countries the procedure is somewhat of a mean 
between the extremes of the United Kingdom and the United 
States. In the United Kingdom the budget is placed by the 
executive before the whole House, without any previous examina- 
tion except by the cabinet, and it is scrutinized by the House 
sitting as a committee; in the majority of countries, however, 
the budget undergoes a preliminary examination by a specially 
selected committee, which has the power to make drastic changes 
in the proposals of the executive. In the United States, on the 
other hand, the budget practically emanates from Congress, 
for there is no connexion between the executive and the legis- 
lative departments. The estimates prepared by the various 
executive departments are submitted to the House of Representa- 
tives by the secretary of the treasury. With these estimates 
two separate committees deal. The committee on ways and 
means deals with taxation, and the committee on appropriations 
with expenditure. The latter committee is divided into various 
sub-committees, each of which brings in an appropriation bill 
for the department or subject with which it is charged. 

There are also, in all the greater countries, local and municipal 
taxations and expenditures of only less account than the national. 
In federal governments such as the United States, the German 
empire, or the Argentine republic, the budgets of the several 
states of the federation have to be consulted, as well as the 
federal budgets, for a knowledge of the finances. 

Authorities. — Stourm, Le Budget, son histoire et son mecanisme 
(1889), which gives a comparative study of the budgets of different 
countries, is the best book upon the subject. See also Siedler, 
Budget und Budgetrecht (1885); Sendel, Uber Budgetrecht (1890); 
Besson, Le Controle des budgets en France et b. I'etranger (1899); 
Bastable, Public Finance (3rd ed., 1903); Eugene E. Agger, The 
Budget in American Commonwealths (New York, 1907). 

BUDINI, an ancient nation in the N.E. of the Scythia (q.v.) 
of Herodotus (iv. 21, 108, 109), probably on the middle course of 
the Volga about Samara. They^re described as light-eyed and 
red-haired, and lived by hunting in their thick forests. They 
were probably Finns of the branch now represented by the 
Votiaks and Permiaks, forced northwards by later immigrants. 
In their country was a wooden city inhabited by a distinct race, 
the Geloni, who seem to have spoken an Indo-European tongue. 
Later writers add nothing to our knowledge, and are chiefly 
interested in the tarandus, an animal which dwelt in the woods 
of the Budini and seems to have been the reindeer (Aristotle ap. 
Aelian, Hist. Anim. xv. 33). (E. H. M.) 

BUDWKIS (Czech Budfjovice), a town of Bohemia, Austria, 
80 m. S.S.W. of Prague by rail. Pop. (1900) 39,630. It is 
situated at the junction of the Maltsch with the Moldau, which 
here becomes navigable, and possesses a beautiful square, lined 
with fine arcaded buildings, the principal one being the town-hall, 
built in 1730 in Renaissance style. Other interesting buildings 
are the cathedral with its detached tower, dating from 1500, 
and the Marien-Kirche with fine cloisters. Budweis has a large, 
varied and growing industry, which comprises the manufacture 
of chemicals, matches, paper, machinery, bricks and tiles, corn 
and saw mills, boat-building, bell-founding and black-lead pencils. 
It is the principal commercial centre of South Bohemia, being an 
important lailway junction, as well as a river port, and carries on 
a large trade in corn, timber, lignite, salt, industrial products and 
beer, the latter mostly exported to America. It is the see of a 
bishop since 1 783, and is the centre of a German enclave in Czech 



Bohemia. But the Czech element is steadily increasing, and the 
population of the town was in 1908 60% Czech. The railway 
from Budweis to Linz, laid in 1827 for horse-cars, was the first 
line constructed in Austria. A little to the north, in the Moldau 
valley, stands the beautiful castle of Frauenberg, belonging to 
Prince Schwarzenberg. It stands on the site formerly occupied 
by a 13th-century castle, and was built in the middle of the 19th 
century, after the model of Windsor Castle. 

The old town of Budweis was founded in the 13th century by 
Budivoj Vitkovec, father of Zavis of Falkenstein. In 1265 
Ottokar II. founded the new town, which was soon afterwards 
created a royal city. Charles IV. and his son Wenceslaus granted 
the town many privileges. Although mainly Catholic, Budweis 
declared for King George Podebrad, and in 1468 was taken by 
the crusaders under Zdenko of Stenberg. From this time the 
town remained faithful to the royal cause, and in 1 547 was granted 
by the emperor Ferdinand the privilege of ranking at the diet 
next to Prague and Pilsen. After the outbreak of the Thirty 
Years' War Budweis was confirmed in all its privileges. 

BUELL, DON CARLOS (1818-1898), American soldier, was 
born near Marietta, Ohio, on the 23rd of March 1818. He gradu- 
ated at West Point in 1841, and as a company officer of infantry 
took part in the Seminole War of 1841-42 and the Mexican War, 
during which he was present at almost all the battles fought by 
Generals Taylor and Scott, winning the brevet of captain at 
Monterey, and that of major at Contreras-Churubusco, where he 
was wounded. From 1848 to 1861 he performed various staff 
duties, chiefly as assistant-adjutant-general. On the outbreak 
of the Civil War he was appointed lieutenant-colonel on the nth 
of May 1861, brigadier-general of volunteers a few days later, and 
major-general of volunteers in March 1862. He aided efficiently 
in organizing the Army of the Potomac, and, at the instance of 
General McClellan, was sent, in November 1861, to Kentucky to 
succeed General William T. Sherman in command. Here he 
employed himself in the organization and training of the Army 
of the Ohio (subsequently of the Cumberland), which to the end 
of its career retained a standard of discipline and efficiency only 
surpassed by that of the Army of the Potomac. In the spring 
of 1862 Buell followed the retiring Confederates under Sidney 
Johnston, and appeared on the field of Shiloh (q.v.) at the end of 
the first day's fighting. On the following day, aided by BuelPs 
fresh and well-trained army, Grant carried all before him. Buell 
subsequently served under Halleck in the advance on Corinth, 
and in the autumn commanded in the campaign in Kentucky 
against Bragg. After a period of manoeuvring in which Buell 
scarcely held his own, this virtually ended in the indecisive battle 
of Perryville. The alleged tardiness of his pursuit, and his 
objection to a plan of campaign ordered by the Washington 
authorities, brought about Buell's removal from command. 
With all his gifts as an organizer and disciplinarian, he was 
haughty in his dealings with the civil authorities, and, in high 
command, he showed, on the whole, unnecessary tardiness of 
movement and an utter disregard for the requirements of the 
political situation. Moreover, as McClellan's friend, holding 
similar views, adverse politically to the administration, he suffered 
by McClellan's displacement. The complaints made against him 
were investigated in 1862-1863, but the result of the investiga- 
tion was not published. Subsequently he was offered military 
employment, which he declined. He resigned his volunteer 
commission in May, and his regular commission in June 1864. 
He was president of Green River ironworks (1865-1870), and 
subsequently engaged in various mining enterprises; he served 
(1885-1889) as pension agent at Louisville. He died near Rock- 
port, Kentucky, on the 19th of November 1898. 

BUENAVENTURA, a Pacific port of Colombia, in the depart- 
ment of Cauca, about 210 m. W.S.W. of Bogota. Pop. about 
1200. The town is situated on a small island, called Cascajal, 
at the head of a broad estuary or bay projecting inland from the 
Bay of Choc6 and 10 m. from its mouth. Its geographical posi- 
tion is lat. 3° 48' N., long. 7 7 1 2' W. The estuary is deep enough 
for vessels of 24 ft. draught and affords an excellent harbour. 
Buenaventura is a port of call for two lines of steamers (English 



752 



BUENOS AIRES 



and German) , and is the Colombian landing-place -of the West 
Coast cable. The town is mean in appearance, and has a very 
unhealthy climate, oppressively hot and humid. It is the port 
for the upper basin of the Cauca, an elevated and fertile region, 
with two large commercial centres, Popayan and Cali. In 1907 
a railway was under construction to the latter, and an extension 
to Bogota was also projected. 

BUENOS AIRES, a maritime province of Argentina, South 
America, bounded N. by the province of Santa Fe and Entre 
Rios, E. by the latter, the La Plata estuary, and the Atlantic^ 
S. by the Atlantic, and W. by the territories (gobernaciones) of 
Rio Negro and Las Pampas, and the provinces of C6rdoba and 
Santa Fe. Its area is 117,812 sq. m., making it the largest 
province of the republic. It is also the most populous, even ex- 
cluding the federal district, an official estimate of 1903 giving it a 
population of 1 , 2 5 1 ,000. Although it has a frontage of over 900 m. 
on the La Plata and the Atlantic, the province has but few good 
natural ports, the best being Bahia Blanca, where the Argentine 
government has constructed a naval port, and Ensenada (La 
Plata), where extensive artificial basins have been constructed 
for the reception of ocean-going steamers. San Nicolas in the 
extreme north has a fairly good river port, while at Buenos Aires 
a costly artificial port has been constructed. 

In its general aspect the province forms a part of the great 
treeless plain extending from the Atlantic and La Plata estuary 
westward to the Andes. A fringe of small tangled wood covers 
the low river banks and delta region of the Parana between San 
Nicolas and Buenos Aires; thence southward to Bahia Blanca 
the sea-shore is low and sandy, with a zone of lagoons and partially 
submerged lands immediately behind. The south-eastern and 
central parts of the province are low and marshy, and their 
effective drainage has long been an urgent problem. Two ranges 
of low mountains extend partly across the southern part of the 
province — the first from Mar del Plata, on the coast, in a north- 
east direction, known at different points as the Sierra del Volcan 
(885 ft.), Sierra de Tandil (1476 ft.), and Sierra Baya, and the 
second and shorter range nearer Bahia Blanca, having the 
same general direction, known at different points as the Sierra 
Pillahuinco and Sierra de la Ventana (3543 ft.). The country is 
well watered with numerous lakes and small rivers, the largest 
river being the Rio Salado del Sud, which rises near the north- 
western boundary and flows entirely across the province in a 
south-easterly direction with a course of about 360 m. The Rio 
Colorado crosses the extreme southern extension of the province, 
a distance of about 80 m., but its mouth is obstructed, and its 
lower course is subject to occasional disastrous inundations. 

Cattle-raising naturally became the principal industry of this 
region soon after its settlement by the Spaniards, and sheep- 
raising on a profitable basis was developed about the middle of 
the 19th century. Toward the end of that century the exports 
of wool, live-stock and dressed meats reached enormous pro- 
portions. There is a large export of jerked beef (tasajo) to 
Brazil and Cuba, and of live-stock to Europe, South Africa and 
neighbouring South American republics. Much attention also 
has been given to raising horses, asses, mules, swine and goats, 
all of which thrive on these grassy plains. Butter and cheese- 
making have gained considerable prominence in the province 
since 1890, and butter has become an article of export. Little 
attention had been given to cereals up to 1875, but subsequently 
energetic efforts were made to increase the production of wheat, 
Indian corn, linseed, barley, oats and alfalfa, so that by the end 
of the century the exports of wheat and flour had reached a 
considerable value. In 1895 there were 3,400,000 acres under 
cultivation in the province, and in 1900 the area devoted to 
wheat alone aggregated 1,960,000 acres. Fruit-growing also 
has made good progress, especially on the islands of the Parana, 
delta, and Argentine peaches, pears, strawberries, grapes and 
figs are highly appreciated. 

The navigation of the Parana is at all times difficult, and is 
impossible for the larger ocean-going steamers. The greater part 
of the trade of the northern and western provinces, therefore, 
must pass through the ports of Buenos Aires and Ensenada, at 



which an immense volume of business is concentrated. All the 
great trunk railways of the republic pass through the province 
and converge at these ports, and from them a number of trans- 
atlantic steamship lines carry away the products of its fertile 
soil. The province is also liberally supplied with branch rail- 
ways. In the far south the new port of Bahia Blanca has become 
prominent in the export of wool and wheat. 

The principal cities and towns of the province (apart from 
Buenos Aires and its suburbs of Belgrano and Flores) are its 
capital La Plata; Bahia Blanca, San Nicolas, a river port on 
the Parana 150 m. by rail north-west of Buenos Aires, with a 
population (1901) of 13,000; Campana (pop. 5419 in 1895), 
the former river port of Buenos Aires on one of the channels of 
the Parana, 51 m. by rail north-west of that city, and the site 
of the first factory in Argentina (1883) for freezing mutton for 
export; Chivilcoy, an important interior town, with a population 
(1901) of t5,ooo; Pergamino (9540 in 1895), a northern inland 
railway centre; Mar del Plata, a popular seaside resort 250 m. 
by rail south of Buenos Aires; Azul (9494), Tandil (7088), 
Chascormis (5667), Mercedes (9269), and Barracasal Sud (10, 185), 
once the centre of the jerked beef industries. 

The early history of the province of Buenos Aires was a struggle 
for supremacy over the other provinces for a period of two 
generations. Its large extent of territory was secured through 
successive additions by conquest of adjoining Indian territories 
south and west, the last additions being as late as 1879. Buenos 
Aires became a province of the Confederation in 1820, and 
adopted a constitution in 1854, which provides for its administra- 
tion by a governor and legislature of two chambers, both chosen 
by popular vote. An unsuccessful revolt in 1880 against the 
national government led to the federalization of the city of 
Buenos Aires, and the selection of La Plata as the provincial 
capital, the republic assuming the public indebtedness of the 
provinces at that time as an indemnification. Before the new 
capital was finished, however, the province had incurred further 
liabilities of ten millions sterling, and has since then been greatly 
handicapped in its development in consequence. (A. J. L.) 

BUENOS AIRES, a city and port of Argentina, and capital of 
the republic, in 34 36' 21" S. lat. and 58° 21' 33" W. long., on the 
west shore of the La Plata estuary, about 1 55 m. above its mouth, 
and 127 m. W. by N. from Montevideo. The estuary at this 
point is 34 m. wide, and so shallow that vessels can enter the 
docks only through artificial channels kept open by constant 
dredging. Previously to the construction of the new port, ocean- 
going vessels of over 1 5 ft. draught were compelled to anchor in 
the outer roads some 12 m. from the city, and -communication 
with the shore was effected by rrfcans of steam tenders and small 
boats, connecting with long landing piers, or with carts driven 
out from the beach. The city is built upon an open grassy plain 
extending inland from the banks of the estuary, and north from 
the Riachuelo or Matanzas river where the " Boca " port is 
located. Its average elevation is about 65 ft. above sea-level. 
The federal district, which includes the city and its suburbs and 
covers an area of 72 sq. m., was detached from the province of 
Buenos Aires by an act of congress in 1880. With the construc- 
tion of the new port and reclamation of considerable areas of the 
shallow water frontage, the area of the city has been greatly 
extended below the line of the original estuary banks. The 
streets of the old city, which are narrow and laid out to enclose 
rectangular blocks of uniform size, run nearly parallel with the 
cardinal points of the compass, but this plan is not closely 
followed in the new additions and suburbs. This uniformity in 
plan, combined with the level ground and the style of buildings 
first erected, gave to the city an extremely monotonous and un- 
interesting appearance, but with its growth in wealth and popula- 
tion, greater diversity and better taste in architecture have 
resuPed. 

The prevailing style of domestic architecture is that introduced 
from Spain and used throughout all the Spanish colonies — the 
grouping of one-storey buildings round one or two patios, which 
open on the street through a wide doorway. These residences 
have heavily barred windows on the street, and flat roofs with 



BUENOS AIRES 



753 



parapets admirably adapted for defence. The domiciliation of 
wealthy foreigners, and the introduction of foreign customs 
and foreign culture, have gradually modified the style of archi- 
tecture, both public and domestic, and modern Buenos Aires is 
adorned with many costly and attractive public edifices and 
residences. French renaissance, lavishly decorated, has become 
the prevailing style. The Avenida Alvear is particularly noted 
for the elegance of its private residences, and the new Avenida 
de Mayo for its display of elaborately ornamented public and 
business edifices, while the suburban districts of Belgrano and 
Flores are distinguished for the attractiveness of their country- 
houses and gardens. A part of the population is greatly over- 
crowded, one-fifth living in conventillos, or tenement-houses. 

Among the city's many plazas, or squares, twelve are especially 
worthy of mention, viz.: 25 de Mayo (formerly Victoria) on 
which face the Government-House and Cathedral, San Martin 
(or Retiro), Lavalle, Libertad, Lorea, Belgrano, 6 de Junio, 
Once de Setiembre, Independencia (formerly Conception), 
Constitution, Caridad and 29 de Deciembre. These vary in size 
from one to three squares, or 4 to 1 2 acres each, and are hand- 
somely laid out with flowers, shrubbery, walks and shade trees. 
There are also two elaborately laid out alamedas, the Recoleta and 
the Paseo de Julio, the latter on the river front and partially 
absorbed by the new port works, and the great park at Palermo, 
officially called 3 de Febrero, which contains 840 acres, beauti- 
fully laid out in drives, footpaths, lawns, gardens and artificial 
lakes. In all, the plazas and parks of Buenos Aires cover an area 
of 960 acres. 

The cathedral, which is one of the largest in South America, 
dating from 1752, resembles the Madeleine of Paris in design, and 
its classical portico facing the Plaza 25 de Mayo has twelve 
stately Corinthian columns supporting an elaborately sculptured 
pediment. The archbishop's palace (Buenos Aires became an 
archiepiscopal see in 1866) adjoins the cathedral. There are 
about twenty-five Roman Catholic churches in the city, one of 
the richest and most popular of which is the Merced on Calle 
Reconquista, and four Protestant churches — English, Scottish 
Presbyterian, American Methodist and German Lutheran. 
Twenty asylums for orphans and indigent persons and one for 
lunatics are maintained at public expense and by private religious 
associations, while the demand for organized medical and 
surgical treatment is met by fifteen well-appointed hospitals, 
having an aggregate of 2600 beds, and treating 17,000 patients 
annually. Of these, five belong to foreign nationalities. The 
city has six cemeteries covering 230 acres. 

Among the more noteworthy public buirtiings are the Casa 
Rosada (government-house), facing the Plaza 25 de Mayo and 
occupying in part the site of the fort built by Garay in 1580; 
the new congress hall on Calle Callao and Avenida de Mayo, 
finished in 1906 at a cost of about £1,300,000; the new municipal 
hall on Avenida de Mayo; the bolsa or exchange, distributing 
reservoir, mint, and some of the more modern educational 
buildings. Higher education is represented by the university 
of Buenos Aires, with its several faculties, including law and 
medicine, and 3562 students (1901), four national colleges, three 
normal schools and various technical schools. There are, also, 
a national library, a national museum, a zoological garden 
and an aquarium. The people are fond of music, the drama 
and amusements, and devote much time and expense to diver- 
sions of a widely varied character, from Italian opera to horse- 
racing and pelota. They have two or three large public baths, 
and a large number of social, sporting and athletic clubs. The 
Portenos, as the residents of Buenos Aires are called, are 
accustomed to call their city the " Paris of America," and not 
without reason. Buenos Aires has become the principal manu- 
facturing centre of the republic, and its industrial establishments 
are numbered by thousands and their capital by hundreds of 
millions of dollars. 

The growth of Buenos Aires since settled conditions have 
prevailed, and especially since its federalization, has been very 
rapid, and the city has finally outstripped all rivals and become 
the largest city of South America. At the time of its first 



authentic census in 1869, it had a population of 177,767. In 
1887, when the suburbs of Belgrano and Flores with an aggregate 
population of 28,000 were annexed, its population without this 
increment was estimated at 404,000. In 1895 the national 
census gave the population as 663,854, and in 1904 a municipal 
census increased it to 950,891. At the close of 1905 the national 
statistical office estimated it at 1,025,653. The excess of births 
over deaths is unusually large (about 14 per thousand in 1905). 
The city has about one-fifth of the population of the whole 
republic. The government is vested in an intendente municipal 
(mayor) appointed by the national executive with the approval 
of the senate, and a concejo deliberante (legislative council) 
elected by the people and composed of two councillors from 
each parish. The police force is a military organization under 
the control of the national executive, and the higher municipal 
courts are subject to the same authority. Every ratepayer, 
whether foreigner or native, has the right to vote in municipal 
elections and to serve in the municipal council. 

The water-supply is drawn from the estuary at Belgrano and 
conducted 32 m. to the Recoleta, where three great settling 
basins, with an aggregate capacity of 12,000,000 gallons, and six 
acres of covered filters, are located. It is then pumped to the 
great distributing reservoir at Calles Cordoba and Viamonte, 
which covers four acres and has a capacity of 13,500,000 gallons. 
These works were begun in 1873. Up to 1873, when the water 
and drainage works were initiated by English engineers' and con- 
tractors, there were no public sewers, and the sanitary state of the 
city was indescribably bad. The cholera epidemic of 1867-1868, 
with 15,000 victims, and the yellow fever epidemic of 1871, with 
26,000 victims, were greatly intensified by these insanitary con- 
ditions. The construction of the sewers lasted about 19 years, 
when in 1892 the water and drainage works were taken over 
by the government, and are now administered at public expense 
and at a profit. The main sewer is 16 m. long and extends 
southward beyond Quilmes. The total cost of the two systems 
exceeded six millions sterling. Buenos Aires is now provided 
with a good water-supply, and its sanitary condition compares 
favourably with that of other great cities, the annual death- 
rate being about 18 per thousand, against 27 per thousand in 
1887. Its mean annual temperature is 64 Fahr., and its annual 
rainfall 34 in. 

The lighting includes both gas and electricity, the former 
dating from 1856. Previously to that time street lighting had 
been effected at first with lamps burning mares' grease, and 
then with tallow candles. The streets were at first paved with 
cobble-stones, then with dressed granite paving-stones (parallel- 
epipedons), and finally with wood and asphalt. The tram 
service is in the hands of nine private companies, operating 313 
m. of track (31st of December 1905), on almost five-sevenths of 
which electric traction is employed. The city is the principal 
terminus and port for nearly all the trunk railway lines of the 
republic, which have large passenger stations at the Retiro, 
Once de Setiembre, and Constituci6n plazas, and are connected 
with the central produce market and the new Madero port. 
The great central produce market at Barracas al Sud (M ercado 
Central de Frutos), whose lands, buildings, railway sidings, 
machinery and mole cost £750,000, is designed to handle the 
pastoral and agricultural products of the country on a large scale, 
while 20 markets in the city meet the needs of local consumers. 

The most important feature of the port of Buenos Aires is the 
" Madero docks," constructed to enlarge and improve its shipping 
facilities. Improvements had been begun in i872atthe" Boca," 
as the port on the Riachuelo is called, and nearly £1,500,000 was 
spent there in landing facilities and dredging a channel 12 m. 
in length, to deep water. These improvements were found in- 
sufficient, and in 1887 work was begun on plans executed by Sir 
John Hawkshaw for a series of four docks and two basins in front 
of the city, occupying 3 m. of reclaimed shore-line, and connected 
with deep water by two dredged channels. The north basin is 
provided with two dry docks, and the new quays are equipped 
with 24 warehouses, hydraulic cranes, and 28 m. of railway 
sidings and connexions. The total cost of the new port works 



754 



BUFF— BUFFALO 



up to 1908 was about £8,000,000 sterling ($40,000,000 gold). 
In September of that year it was decided by congress to borrow 
£5,000,000 for still further extensions which were found to be 
required. The channels to deep water require constant dredging 
because of the great quantity of silt deposited by the river, and on 
this and allied purposes an expenditure of £560,000 was voted in 
1908. In 1907 there were 29,178 shipping entries in the port, 
with an aggregate of 13,335,737 tons, the merchandise movement 
being 4,360,000 tons imports and 2,900,000 tons of produce 
exports. The revenues for 1907 were $5,452,000 gold, and 
working expenses, $2,213,000 gold, the profit ($3,229,000) being 
equal to about 8 % on the cost of construction. 

History. — Three attempts were made to establish a colony 
where the city of Buenos Aires stands. The first was in 1 535 by 
Don Pedro de Mendoza with a large and well-equipped expedition 
from Spain, which, through mismanagement and the hostility of 
the Indians, resulted in complete failure. An expedition sent up 
the river by Mendoza founded Asuncion, and thither went the 
colonists from his " Santa Maria de Buenos Ayres " when that 
settlement was abandoned. The second was in 1542 by a part 
of the expedition from Spain under Cabeza de Vaca, but with 
as little success. The third was in 1580 by Don Juan de Garay, 
governor of Paraguay, who had already established a half-way 
post at Santa Fe in 1 573, and from this attempt dates the founda- 
tion of the city. The need of a port near the sea, where sup- 
plies from Spain could be received and ships provisioned, was 
keenly felt by the Spanish colonists at Asuncion, and Garay's 
expedition down the Parana in 1580 had that special object in 
view. Garay built a fort and laid out a town in the prescribed 
Spanish style above Mendoza's abandoned settlement, giving it 
the name of " Ciudad de la Santissima Trinidad," but retaining 
Mendoza's descriptive name for the port in appreciation of the 
agreeable and invigorating atmosphere of that locality. Buenos 
Aires remained a dependency of Asuncion until 1620, when the 
Spanish settlements of the La Plata region were divided into 
three provinces, Paraguay, Tucuman and Buenos Aires, and 
Garay's " city " became the capital of the latter and also the seat 
of a new bishopric. The increasing population and trade of the 
La Plata settlements naturally contributed to the importance 
and prosperity of Buenos Aires, but Spain seems to have taken 
very little interest in the town at that time. Peru still dazzled 
the imagination with her stores of gold and silver, and the king 
and his councillors and merchants had no thought for the little 
trading station on the La Plata, for which one small shipment of 
supplies each year was at first thought sufficient. The proximity 
of the Portuguese settlements of Brazil and the unprotected state 
of the coast, however, made smuggling easy, and the colonists 
soon learned to supply their own needs in that way. The heavy 
seigniorage tax on gold and silver, and the costs of transportation 
by way of Panama, also sent a stream of contraband metal from 
Charcas to Buenos Aires, where it found eager buyers among the 
Portuguese traders from Brazil, who even founded the town of 
Colonia on the opposite bank of the estuary to facilitate their 
hazardous traffic. In time the magnitude of these operations 
attracted attention at Madrid and efforts were made to suppress 
them, but without complete success until more liberal provisions 
were made to promote trade between Spain and her colonies. 
In 1776 the Rio de la Plata provinces were erected into a vice- 
royalty, and Buenos Aires became its capital. Two years later 
the old commercial restrictions were abolished and a new code 
was promulgated, so liberal in character compared with the old 
that it was called the " free trade regulations." Under the old 
system all intercourse with foreign countries had been prohibited, 
with the exception of Great Britain and Portugal — the former 
having a contract (1715 to 1739) to introduce African slaves, and 
permission to send one shipload of merchandise each year to 
certain colonial ports, and the latter's Brazilian colonies having 
permission to import from Buenos Aires each year 2000 fanegas 
of wheat, 500 quintals of jerked beef and 500 of tallow. The 
African slaves introduced into Buenos Aires in this way were 
limited to 800 a year, and were the only slaves of that character 
ever received except some from Brazil after 1778, when greater 



commercial activity in the port created a sudden demand for 
labourers. Under the new regulations 9 ports in Spain and 24 
in the colonies were declared puertos habilitados, or ports of entry, 
and trade between them was permitted, though under many 
restrictions. The effect of this change may be seen in the ex- 
portation of hides to the mother country, which had been only 
150,000 a year before 1778, but rose to 700,000 and 800,000 
a year after that date. (For the later history of the city see 
Argentina.) (A. J. L.) 

BUFF (from Fr. buffle, a buffalo), a leather originally made 
from the skin of the buffalo, now also from the skins of other 
animals, of a dull pale yellow colour, used for making the buff- 
coat or jerkin, a leathern military coat. The old 3rd Foot 
regiment of the line in the British army (now ;he East Kent 
Regiment), and the old 78th Foot (now 2nd battalion Seaforth 
Highlanders) , are called the " Buffs "and the" Ross-shire Buffs " 
respectively, from the yellow or buff-colour of their facings. 
The term is commonly used now of the colour alont. 

BUFFALO, a city and port of entry, and the county-seat of 
Erie county, New York, U.S.A., the second city in population in 
the state, and the eighth in the United States, at the E. extremity 
of Lake Erie, and at the upper end of the Niagara river; distant 
by rail from New York City 423 m., from Boston 499 m., and 
from Chicago 540 m. 

The site of the city, which has an area of 42 sq. m., is a broad, 
undulating tract, rising gradually from the lake to an elevation 
of from 50 to 80 ft., its altitude averaging somewhac less than 
600 ft. above sea-level. The high land and temperate climate, 
and the excellent drainage and water-supply systems, make 
Buffalo one of the most healthy cities in the United States, 
its death-rate in 1900 being 14-8 per thousand, and in 1907 
15-58. As originally platted by Joseph Ellicott, the plan of 
Buffalo somewhat resembled that of Washington, but the plan 
was much altered and even then not adhered to. Buffalo to-day 
has broad and spacious streets, most of which are lined by trees, 
and many small parks and squares. The municipal park system 
is one of unusual beauty, consisting of a chain of parks with a 
total area of about 1030 acres, encircling the city and connected 
by boulevards and driveways. The largest is Delaware Park, 
about 365 acres, including a lake of 465 acres, in the north part 
of the city; the north part of the park was enclosed in the 
grounds of the Pan-American Exposition of 1901. Adjoining 
it is the Forest Lawn cemetery, in which are monuments to 
President Millard Fillmore, and to the famous Seneca chief Red 
Jacket (1751-1830), a friend of the whites, who was faithful 
when approached by Tecumseh and the Prophet, and warned the 
Americans of their danger; by many he has been considered 
the greatest orator of his race. Among the other parks are 
Cazenovia Park, Humboldt Park, South Park on the Lake 
Shore, and " The Front " on a bluff overlooking the source of 
the Niagara river; in the last is Fort Porter (named in honour 
of Peter B. Porter), where the United States government main- 
tains a garrison. 

Principal Buildings. — Buffalo is widely known for the beauty 
of its residential sections, the houses being for the most part de- 
tached, set well back from the street, and surrounded by attractive 
lawns. Among the principal buildings are the Federal building, 
erected at a cost of $2,000,000; the city and county hall, costing 
$1,500,000, with a clock tower 245 ft. high; the city convention 
hall, the chamber of commerce, the builders' exchange, the 
Masonic temple, two state armouries, the Prudential, Fidelity 
Trust, White and Mutual Life buildings, the Teck, Star and 
Shea's Park theatres, and the Ellicott Square building, one of 
the largest office structures in the world; and, in Delaware Park, 
the Albright art gallery, and the Buffalo Historical Society build- 
ing, which was originally the New York state building erected 
for the Pan-American Exposition held in 1901. Among the 
social clubs the Buffalo, the University, the Park, the Saturn 
and the Country clubs, and among the hotels the Iroquois, 
Lafayette, Niagara and Genesee, may be especially mentioned. 
There are many handsome churches, including St Joseph's 
(Roman Catholic) and St Paul's (Protestant Episcopal) cathedrals, 



BUFFALO 



755 



and Trinity (Protestant Episcopal), the Westminster Presby- 
terian, the Delaware Avenue Baptist, and the First Presbyterian 
churches. 

Education. — In addition to the usual high and grammar 
schools, the city itself supports a city training school for teachers, 
and a system of night schools and kindergartens. Here, too, is 
a state normal school. The university of Buffalo (organized in 
1845) comprises schools of medicine (1845), law ( l8 87), dentistry 
(1892), and pharmacy (1886). Canisius College is a Roman 
Catholic (Jesuit) institution for men (established in 1870 and 
chartered in 18S3), having in 1907 a college department and an 
academic (or high school) department, and a library of about 
26,000 volumes. Martin Luther Seminary, established in 1854, 
is a theological seminary of the Evangelical Lutheran Church. 
Among the best-known schools are the Academy of the Sacred 
Heart, Buffalo Seminary, the Franklin and the Heathcote schools, 
Holy Angels and St Mary's academies, St Joseph's Collegiate 
Institute, and St Margaret's school for girls. The Buffalo public 
library, founded in 1837, is housed in a fine building erected in 
1887 (valued at $1,000,000), and contains about 300,000 books 
and pamphlets. Other important libraries, with the approximate 
number of their books, are the Grosvenor (founded in 1859), 
for reference (75,000 volumes and 7000 pamphlets); the John 
C. Lord, housed in the building of the Historical Society (10,620) ; 
the Law (8th judicial district) (17,000); the Catholic Institute 
(12,000); and the library of the Buffalo Historical Society 
(founded 1862) (26,600), now in the handsome building in Dela- 
ware Park used as the New York state building during the Pan- 
American Exposition of 1901. The Buffalo Society of Natural 
Sciences has a museum in the public library building. 

Public Institutions. — The hospitals and the charitable and 
correctional institutions are numerous and are well administered. 
Many private institutions are richly endowed. Among the 
hospitals are a state hospital for the insane, the Erie county, 
the Buffalo general, the Children's, the United States marine 
(maintained by the Federal government), the German, the 
Homeopathic, the Women's, the German Deaconess and the 
Riverside hospitals, and the Buffalo hospital of the Sisters of 
Charity. Nurses' training schools are connected with most of 
these. Among the charitable institutions are the Home for the 
Friendless, the Buffalo, St Vincent's and St Joseph's orphan 
asylums, St John's orphan home, St Mary's asylum for widows 
and foundlings, and the Ingleside home for erring women. 
One of the most noteworthy institutions in the city is the 
Charity Organisation Society, with headquarters in Fitch 
Institute. Founded in 1877, it was the first in the United 
States, and its manifold activities have not only contributed 
much to the amelioration of social conditions in Buffalo, but 
have caused it to be looked to as a model upon which similar 
institutions have been founded elsewhere. 

The first newspaper, the Gazette (a weekly), was established 
in 181 1 and became the Commercial, a daily, in 1835. The first 
daily was the Courier, established in 1831. There were in 1908 
eleven daily papers published, three of which were in German 
and two in Polish. The weekly papers include several in German, 
three in Polish, and one in Italian. 

Government and Population. — Buffalo is governed under an 
amended city charter of 1896 by which the government is vested 
in a bicameral city council, and a mayor elected for a term of four 
years. The mayor appoints the heads of the principal executive 
departments (health, civil service, parks, police and fire). The 
city clerk is elected by the city council. The municipality 
maintains several well-equipped public baths, and owns its 
water-supply system, the water being obtained from Lake Erie. 
The city is lighted by electricity generated by the water power 
of Niagara Falls, and by manufactured gas. Gas, obtained by 
pipe lines from the Ohio-Pennsylvania and the Canadian 
(Welland) natural gas fields, is also used extensively for lighting 
and heating purposes. 

From the first census enumeration in 1820 the population has 
steadily and rapidly increased from about 2000 till it reached 
352,387 inhabitants in 1900, and 423,715 (20 % increase) in 1910. 



In 1900 there were 248,135 native-born and 104,252 foreign- 
born; 350,586 were white and only 1801 coloured, of whom 
1698 were negroes. Of the native-born whites, 155,716 had 
either one or both parents foreign-born; and of the total popula- 
tion 93,256 were of unmixed German parentage. Of the foreign- 
born population 36,720 were German, the other large elements 
in their order of importance being Polish, Canadian, Irish, the 
British (other than Irish). Various sections of the poorer part 
of the city are occupied almost exclusively by the immigrants 
from Poland, Hungary and Italy. 

Communications and Commerce. — Situated almost equidistant 
from Chicago, Boston and New York, Buffalo, by reason of its 
favourable location in respect to lake transportation and its 
position on the principal northern trade route between the East 
and West, has become one of the most important commercial 
and industrial centres in the Union. Some fourteen trunk lines 
have terminals at, or pass through, Buffalo. Tracks of a belt line 
transfer company encircle the city, and altogether there are more 
than 500 m. of track within the limits of Buffalo. Of great 
importance also is the lake commerce. Almost all the great 
steamship transportation lines of the Great Lakes have an eastern 
terminus at Buffalo, which thus has direct passenger and freight 
connexion with Cleveland, Detroit, Chicago, Milwaukee and 
the " Head of the Lakes " (Duluth-Superior). With the latter 
port it is connected by the Great Northern Steamship Company, 
a subsidiary line of the Great Northern railway, the passenger 
service of which is carried on by what are probably the largest 
and finest inland passenger steamships in existence. The tonnage 
of the port of Buffalo is considerably more than 5,000,000 tons 
annually. With a water front of approximately 20 rri. and with 
8 to 10 m. of wharfs, the shipping facilities have been greatly 
increased by the extensive harbour improvements undertaken 
by the Federal government. These improvements comprise a 
series of inner breakwaters and piers and an outer breakwater 
of stone and cement, 4 m. in length, constructed at a cost of more 
than $2,000,000. Another artery of trade of great importance 
is the Erie Canal, which here has its western terminus, and whose 
completion (1825) gave the first impetus to Buffalo's commercial 
growth. With the Canadian shore Buffalo is connected by 
ferry, and by the International bridge (from Squaw Island), 
which cost $1,500,000 and was completed in 1873. 

It is as a distributing centre for the manufactured products 
of the East to the West, and for the raw products of the West to 
the East, and for the trans-shipment from lake to rail and vice 
versa, that Buffalo occupies a position of greatest importance. 
It is one of the principal grain and flour markets in the world. 
Here in 1843 Joseph Dart erected the first grain elevator ever 
constructed. In 1906 the grain elevators had a capacity of 
between twenty and thirty millions of bushels, and annual 
receipts of more than 200,000,000 bushels. The receipts of flour 
approximate 10,000,000 barrels yearly. More than 10,000,000 
head of live stock are handled in a year in extensive stock-yards 
(75 acres) at East Buffalo; and the horse market is the largest 
in America. Other important articles of commerce are lumber, 
the receipts of which average 200,000,000 ft. per annum; fish 
(15,000,000 lb annually); and iron ore and coal, part of which, 
however, is handled at Tonawanda, really a part of the port of 
Buffalo. Buffalo is the port of entry of Buffalo Creek customs 
district; in 1908 its imports were valued at $6,708,919, and its 
exports at $26,192,563. 

Manufactures. — As a manufacturing centre Buffalo ranks next 
to New York among the cities of the state. The manufactures 
were valued in 1900 at $122,230,061 (of which $105,627,182 was 
the value of the factory product) , an increase of 2 2 • 2 % over 1 890 ; 
value of factory product in 1905, $147,377,873. The value of the 
principal products in 1900 was as follows: slaughtering and meat 
packing, $9,631,187 (in 1905 slaughtering and meat-packing 
$12,216,433, an d slaughtering, not including meat-packing, 
$3,919,940); foundry and machine shop products, $6,816,057 
(1905, $11,402,855); linseed oil, $6,271,170; cars and shop con- 
struction, $4,513,333(1905, $3,609,471); malt liquors, $4,269,973 
(1905, $5,187,216); soap and candles, $3,818,571 (in 1905, soap 



75 6 



BUFFALO 



$4,792,915); flour and grist mill products, $3,263,697 (1905, 
$9,807,906); lumber and planing mill products, $3,095,760 
(1905, $4,186,668); clothing, $3,246,723 (1905, $4,231,126); 
iron and steel products, $2,624,547. Other industrial establish- 
ments of importance include petroleum refineries, ship-yards, 
brick, stone and lime works, saddlery and harness factories, 
lithographing establishments, patent medicine works, chemical 
works, and copper smelters and refineries. Some of the plants 
are among the largest in existence, notably the Union and the 
Wagner Palace car works, the Union dry docks, the steel plants 
of the Lackawanna Iron and Steel Company, and the Larkin 
soap factory. 

History. — The first white men to visit the site of Buffalo 
were undoubtedly the adventurous French trappers and various 
Jesuit missionaries. Near here, on the east bank of the Niagara 
river at the mouth of Cayuga Creek, La Salle in 1679 built his 
ship the " Griffin," and at the mouth of the river built Fort Conti, 
which, however, was burned in the same year. In 1687 marquis 
de Denonville built at the mouth of the river a fort which was 
named in his honour and was the predecessor of the fortifications 
on or near the same site successively called Fort Niagara; and 
the neighbourhood was the scene of military operations up to 
the close of the War of Independence. As early as 1784 the 
present site of the city of Buffalo came to be known as " the 
Buffalo Creek region " either from the herds of buffalo or bison 
which, according to Indian tradition, had frequented the salt 
licks of the creek, or more probably from an Indian chief. A 
little later, possibly in 1 788-1 789, Cornelius Winney, an Indian 
trader, built a cabin near the mouth of the creek and thus be- 
came the first permanent white resident. Slowly other settlers 
gathered. The land was a part of the original Phelps-Gorham 
Purchase, and subsequently (about 1 793) came into the possession 
of the Holland Land Company, being part of the tract known 
as the Holland Purchase. Joseph Ellicott, the agent of the , 
company, who has been called the " Father of Buffalo," laid 
out a town in 1801-1802, calling it New Amsterdam, and by this 
name it was known on the company's books until about 1810. 
The name of Buffalo Creek or Buffalo, however, proved more 
popular; the village became the county-seat of Niagara county 
in 1808, and two years later the town of Buffalo was erected. 
Upon the outbreak of the second war with Great Britain, Buffalo 
and the region about Niagara Falls became a centre of active 
military operations; directly across the Niagara river was the 
British Fort Erie. It was from Buffalo that Lieutenant Jesse D. 
Elliott (1782-1845) made his brilliant capture of the " Detroit " 
and " Caledonia " in October 1812; and on the 30th and 31st 
of December 18 13 the settlement was attacked, captured, sacked, 
and almost completely destroyed by a force of British, Canadians 
and Indians under General Sir Phineas Riall (c. 1769-1851). After 
the cessation of hostilities, however, Buffalo, which had been 
incorporated as a village in 1813, was rapidly rebuilt. Its advan- 
tages as a commercial centre were early recognized, and its 
importance was enhanced on the opening up of the middle 
West to settlement, when Buffalo became the principal gateway 
for the lake routes. Here in 18 18 was rebuilt the " Walk-in- the- 
Water," the first steamboat upon the Great Lakes, named in 
honour of a famous Wyandot Indian chief. In 1825 the com- 
pletion of the Erie Canal with its western terminus at Buffalo 
greatly increased the importance of the place, which now rapidly 
outstripped and soon absorbed Black Rock, a village adjoining 
it on the N., which had at one time threatened to be a dangerous 
rival. In 1832 Buffalo obtained a city charter, and Dr Ebenezer 
Johnson (1786-1849) was chosen the first mayor. In that year, 
and again in 1834, a cholera epidemic caused considerable loss 
of life. At Buffalo in 1848 met the Free-Soil convention that 
nominated Martin van Buren for the presidency and Charles 
Francis Adams for the vice-presidency. Grover Cleveland lived 
in Buffalo from 1855 until 1884, when he was elected president, 
and was mayor of Buffalo in 1882, when he was elected governor 
of New York state. The Pan-American Exposition, in celebration 
of the progress of the Western hemisphere in the nineteenth 
century, was held there (May i-November 2, 1901). It was 



during a reception in the Temple of Music on the Exposition 
grounds that President McKinley was assassinated (September 
6th) ; he died at the home of John G. Milburn, the president of 
the Exposition. In the house of Ansley Wilcox here Vice- 
President Theodore Roosevelt took the oath of office as 
president. A marble shaft 80 ft. high, in memory of McKinley, 
has been erected in Niagara Square. 

See William Ketchum, History of Buffalo (2 vols., Buffalo, 1864- 
1865); H. P. Smith, History of Buffalo and Erie County (Syracuse, 
1884); Publications of the Buffalo Historical Society (Buffalo, 1879 
et seq.) ; O. Turner, History of the Holland Purchase (Buffalo, 1850) ; 
T. H. Hotchkin, History of Western New York (New York, 1845) ; 
and the sketch in Lyman P. Powell's Historic Towns of the Middle 
States (New York, 1901). 

BUFFALO, a name properly pertaining to an aberrant species 
of cattle which has been kept in a state of domestication in India 
and Egypt from time immemorial, and had been introduced 
from the latter country into southern Europe. It is now taken, 
however, to include not only this species, whose native home 
is India, but all more or less nearly related animals. 1 Buffaloes 
are heavily built oxen, with sparsely haired skin, large ears, long, 
tufted tails, broad muzzles and massive angulated horns. In 
having only 13 pairs of ribs they resemble the typical oxen. 
African buffaloes all have the hair of the back directed backwards. 

In the Cape buffalo, Bos {Bubalus) coffer, the horns do not 
attain an excessive length, but in old bulls are so expanded and 
thickened at the base as to form a helmet-like mass protecting 
the whole forehead. Several more or less nearly allied local 
races have been named; and in Eastern Africa the buffaloes 
(B. coffer aequinoctialis) have smaller horns, which do not meet 
in the middle line. From this animal, which is brown instead of 
black, there seems to be a transition towards the red dwarf 
buffalo (B. nanus) of West Africa, an animal scarcely more 
than two-thirds the size of its gigantic southern cousin, with 
relatively small, much flattened, upwardly curved horns. In 
South Africa buffaloes frequent reedy swamps, where they 
associate in herds of from fifty to a hundred or more individuals. 
Old bulls may be met with either alone or in small parties of 
from two or three to eight or ten. This buffalo formerly roamed 
in herds over the plains of Central and Southern Africa, always 
in the near vicinity of water, but the numbers are greatly 
diminished. In Cape Colony some herds are protected by the 
government in the eastern forest-districts. This species has 
never been domesticated, nor does there appear to have been any 
attempt to reduce it to service. Like its Indian ally it is fond of 
water, which it visits at regular intervals during the twenty-four 
hours; it also plasters itself with mud, which, when hardened 
by the sun, protects it from the bite of the gadflies which in spite 
of its thick hide seem to cause it considerable annoyance. It is 
relieved of a portion of the parasitic ticks, so common on the 
hides of thick-skinned animals, by means of the red-beaked 
rhinoceros birds, Buphaga erythrorhynca, a dozen or more of which 
may be seen partly perched on its horns and partly moving about 
on its back, and picking up the ticks on which they feed. The 
hunter is often guided by these birds in his search for the buffalo, 
but oftener still they give timely warning to their host of the 
dangerous proximity of the hunter, and have thus earned the 
title of " the buffalo's guardian birds." 

In a wild state the typical Indian buffalo, Bos {Bubalus) 
bubalis, seems to be restricted to India and Ceylon, although 
some of the buffaloes found in the Malay Peninsula and Islands 
probably represent local races. The species has been introduced 
into Asia Minor, Egypt, Italy and elsewhere. The large size and 
wide separation of the horns, as well as the less thickly fringed 
ears, and the more elongated and narrow head, form marked 
points of distinction between the Asiatic and South African 
species. Moreover, all Asiatic buffaloes are distinguished from 
the African forms by having the hair on the fore-part of the back 
directed forwards; and these go far to support the views of 
those who would make them the types of a distinct subgenus, 

1 In America, it is worth noting, the term " buffalo " is almost 
universally taken, at all events in popular parlance, to designate 
the American bison, for which see Bison. 



BUFFET— BUFFON 



757 



or genus, Buffelus. In Assam there formerly existed a local race, 
B. bubalis macrocercus, characterized by the horns, which are 
of immense size, being directed mainly outwards, instead of 
curving upwards in a circular form. Another Assam race 
(B. bubalis fulvus) is characterized by the tawny, in place of 
black, colour of its hair and hide. The haunts of the Indian 
buffalo are the grass-jungles near swamps, in which the grass 
exceeds 20 ft. in height. Here the buffaloes — like the Indian 
rhinoceros — form covered pathways, in which they are com- 
pletely concealed. The herds frequently include fifty or more 
individuals. These animals are fond of passing the day in 
marshes, where they love to wallow in the mud; they are by no 
means shy, and do much harm to the crops. The rutting-season 
occurs in autumn, when several females follow a single male, 
forming for the time a small herd. The period of gestation lasts 
for ten months, and the female produces one or two calves at a 
birth. The bull is capable, it is said, of overthrowing an elephant, 
and generally more than a match even for the tiger, which 
usually declines the combat when not impelled by hunger. 
The Indian driver of a herd of tame buffaloes does not shrink 
from entering a tiger-frequented jungle, his cattle, with their 
massive horns, making short work of any tiger that may come 
in their way. Buffalo fights and fights between buffaloes and 
tigers were recognized Indian sports in the old days. Domesti- 
cated buffaloes differ from their wild brethren merely by their 
inferior size and smaller horns; some of the latter being of the 
circular and others of the straight type. The milk is good and 
nourishing, but of a ropy consistency and a peculiar flavour. 

The tamarao, or Philippine buffalo, Bos (Bubalus) mindorensis , 
is a smaller animal, in many respects intermediate between 
the Indian buffalo and the dwarf anoa, or Celebes buffalo (B. 
depressicornis). (R. L.*) 

BUFFET, LOUIS JOSEPH (1818-1808), French statesman, was 
born at Mirecourt. After the revolution of February 1848 he 
was elected deputy for the department of the Vosges, and in 
the Assembly sat on the right, pronouncing for the" repression 
of the insurrection of June 1848 and for Louis Napoleon 
Bonaparte. He was minister of agriculture from August to 
December 1849 and from August to October 1851. Re-elected 
deputy in 1863, he was one of the supporters of the " Liberal 
Empire " of Emile Ollivier, being finance minister in Ollivier's 
cabinet from January to the 10th of April 1870. He was 
president of the National Assembly from the 4th of April 1872 
to the 10th of March 1875, and minister of the interior in 1875. 
Then, elected senator for life (1876), he pronounced himself in 
favour of the coup d'etat of the 16th of May 1877. Buffet had 
some oratorical talent, but shone most in opposition. 

BUFFET, a piece of furniture which may be open or closed, 
or partly open and partly closed, for the reception of dishes, 
china, glass and plate. The word may also signify a long counter 
at which one stands to eat and drink, as at a restaurant, or — 
which would appear to be the original meaning — the room in 
which the counter stands. The word, like the thing it represents, 
is French. The buffet is the descendant of the credence, and 
the ancestor of the sideboard, and consequently has a close 
affinity to the dresser. Few articles of furniture, while pre- 
serving their original purpose, have varied more widely in form. 
In the beginning the buffet was a tiny apartment, or recess, 
little larger than a cupboard, separated from the room which 
it served either by a breast-high balustrade or by pillars. It 
developed into a definite piece of furniture, varying from 
simplicity to splendour, but always provided with one or more' 
flat spaces, or broad shelves, for the reception of such necessaries 
of the dining-room as were not placed upon the table. The 
early buffets were sometimes carved with the utmost elabora- 
tion; the Renaissance did much to vary their form and refine 
their ornament. Often the lower part contained receptacles as 
in the characteristic English court-cupboard. The rage for 
collecting china in the middle of the 18th century was responsible 
for a new form — the high glazed back, fitted with shelves, for 
the display of fine pieces of crockery-ware. This, however, 
w#s hardly a true buffet, and was the very antithesis of the 



primary arrangement, in which the huge goblets and beakers 
and fantastic pieces of plate, of which so extremely few examples 
are left, were displayed upon the open " gradines." The tiers 
of shelves, with or without a glass front, which are still often 
found in Georgian houses, were sometimes called buffets — in 
short, any dining-room receptacle for articles that were not 
immediately wanted came at last to bear the name. In France 
the variations of type were even more numerous than in England, 
and it is sometimes difficult to distinguish a commode from a 
buffet. In the latter part of the 1 8th century the buffet occasion- 
ally took the form of a console table. 

BUFFIER, CLAUDE (1661-1737), French philosopher, his- 
torian and educationalist, was born in Poland, on the 25th of 
May 1661, of French parents, who returned to France, and 
settled at Rouen, soon after his birth. He was educated at the 
Jesuit college there, and was received into the order at the age 
of nineteen. A dispute with the archbishop compelled him to 
leave Rouen, and after a short stay in Rome he returned to 
Paris to the college of the Jesuits, where he spent the rest of his 
life. He seems to have been an admirable teacher, with a great 
power of lucid exposition. His object in the Traits des veritis 
premieres (1717), his best-known work, is to discover the ultimate 
principle of knowledge. This he finds in the sense we have of our 
own existence and of what we feel within ourselves. He thus 
takes substantially the same ground as Descartes, but he rejected 
the a priori method. In order to know what exists distinct 
from the self, " common sense " is necessary. Common sense 
he defined as " that disposition which nature has placed in all 
or most men, in order to enable them, when they have arrived 
at the age and use of reason, to form a common and uniform 
judgment with respect to objects different from the internal 
