geographical research since the first beginnings of investigation into 
the route connexion between Burma and China in 1874 Chinese 
(when the brave Augustus Margary lost his life), that a explora- 
gradually increasing tide of exploration, setting from tions. 
east to west and back again, has culminated in a flood 
of inquiring experts intent on economic and commercial develop- 
ment in China, essaying to unlock those doors to trade which are 
hereafter to be propped open for the benefit of humanity. Captain 
William Gill, of the Indian survey, first made his way across China 
to eastern Tibet and Burma, and subsequently delighted the world 
with his story of the River of Golden Sand. Then followed another 
charming writer, E. C. Baber, who, in 1 877-1 878, unravelled the 
geographic mysteries of the western provinces of the Celestial 
empire. Mark Bell crossed the continent in 1887 and illustrated 
its ancient trade routes, following the steps of Archibald Colquhoun, 
who wandered from Peking to Talifu in 1881. Meanwhile, the 
acquisition of Burma and the demarcation of boundaries had opened 
the way to the extension of geographical surveys in directions 
hitherto untraversed. Woodthorpe was followed into Burmese 
fields by many others; and amongst the earliest travellers to those 
mysterious mountains which hide the sources of the Irrawaddy, the 
Salween and the Mekong, was Prince Henri d'Orleans Burma 
was rapidly brought under survey; Siam was already in the -map- 
making hands of James M'Carthy, whilst Curzon and Warrington 
Smyth added much to our knowledge of its picturesque coast districts. 
No more valuable contribution to the illustration of western Chinese 
configuration has been given to the public than that of C. C. Manifold 
who explored and mapped the upper basin of the Yang-tsze river 
between the years 1900 and 1904, whilst our knowledge of the 
geography of the Russo-Chinese borderland on the north-east has 
been largely advanced by the queries attending the Russo-
Japanese war which terminated in 1905. 

Turning our attention westwards, no advance in the progress of 
scientific geography is more remarkable than that recorded on the 
northern and north-western frontiers of India. Here 
there is little matter of exploration. It has rather been a 



Indian 
frontiers — 



wide extension of scientific geographical mapping. The ... 
Afghan war of 1878-80; the Russo-Afghan Boundary y s f a * n * 
Commission of 1 884-1 885; the occupation of Gilgit and B a i u lh m 
Chitral ; the extension of boundaries east and north of j s t an 
Afghanistan, and again, between Baluchistan and Persia p ers i' a , 
— these, added to the opportunities afforded by the 
systematic survey of Baluchistan which has been steadily progress- 
ing since 1880 — combined to produce a series of geographical maps 
which extend from the Oxus to the Indus, and from the Indus 
to the Euphrates. 

In these professional labours the Indian surveyors have been 
assisted by such scientific geographers as General Sir A. Houtum 
Schindler, Captain H. B. Vaughan and Major Percy M. Sykes in 
Persia, and by Sir George Robertson and Cockerill in Kafiristan and 
the Hindu Kush. 

In still more western fields of research much additional light has 
been thrown since 1875 on the physiography of the great deserts and 
oases of Arabia. The labours of Charles Doughty and Arabia. 
Wilfrid S. Blunt in northern Arabia in 1877-1878 were 
followed by those of G. Schwcinf urth and E. Glaser in the south-west 
about ten years later. In 1 884-1 885 Colonel S. B. Miles made his 
adventurous journey through Oman, while Theodore Bent threw 
searchlights backwards into ancient Semitic history by his investi- 
gations in the Bahrein Islands in 1888 and in Hadramut in 1894- 
IS95- 

In northern Asia it is impossible to follow in detail the results 
of the organized Russian surveys. The vast steppes and forest-clad 
mountain regions of Siberia have assumed a new geo- Northern 
graphical aspect in the light of these revelations, and Asta 
already promise a new world of economic resources Siberia 
to Russian enterprise in the near future. A remarkable ,j c _ 
expedition by Baron Toll in 1892 through the regions 
watered by the Lena, resulted in the collection of material which 



740 



ASIA 



[EXPLORATION 



will greatly help to elucidate some of the problems which beset 
the geological history of the world, proving inter alia the primeval 
existence of a boreal zone of the J urassic sea round the North role. 

In no other period of the world's history, of equal length of time, 
has so much. scientific enterprise been directed towards the field of 

Asiatic inquiry. The first great result of recent geogra- 
Oeneral phical research has been to modify pre-existing ideas of 
J**" .. " _ the orography of the vast central region represented by 
nves ga- Tj^gj. an( j Mongolia. The great highland plateau which 

stretches from the Himalaya northwards to Chinese 
Turkestan, and from the frontier of Kashmir eastwards to China, 
has now been defined with comparative geographical exactness. 
The position of Sachu (or Saitu) in Mongolia may be taken as an 
obligatory point in modern map construction. The longitude value 
now adopted is 94 54' E. of Greenwich, which is the revised value 
given by Prjevalsky in the map accompanying the account of his 
fourth exploration into central Asia. Other values are as follows : — 

Prjevalsky, by his second and third explorations 94 26' 
Krishna ....... 94° 23' 

Carey and Dalgleish ..... 94 48' 

Littledale ....... 94 49' 

Kreitner (with Szecheny's expedition) . . 94° 58' 

The longitude of Darchendo, or Tachienlu, on the extreme east, 
may be accepted as another obligatory point. The adopted value 
by the Royal Geographical Society is 102 ° 12 ". Krishna gives 
102 15", Kreitner 102 5*, Baber 102 18". 

South and west the bounding territories are well fixed in geo- 
graphical position by the Indian survey determinations of the value 
of Himalayan peaks. On the north the Chinese Turkestan explora- 
tions are now brought into survey connexion with Kashmir and 
India. 

No longer do we regard the Kuen-lun mountains, which extend 
from the frontiers of Kashmir, north of Leh, almost due east to the 
Chinese province of Kansu, as the southern limit of the Gobi or 
Turkestan depression. This very remarkable longitudinal chain is 
undoubtedly the northern limit of the Chang Tang, the elevated 
highland steppes of Tibet; but from it there branches a minor 
system to the north-east from a point in about 83 ° E. longitude, 
which culminates in the Altyn Tagh, and extends eastwards in a 
continuous water-divide to the Nan Shan mountains, north of the 
Koko Nor basin. Thus between Tibet and the low-lying sands 
of Gobi we have, thrust in, a system of elevated valleys (Tsaidam), 
8000 to 9000 ft. above sea-level, forming an intermediate steppe 
between the highest regions and the lowest, east of Lop Nor. All 
this is comparatively new geography, and it goes far to explain why 
the great trade routes from Peking to the west were pushed so far 
to the north. 

On the western edge of the Kashgar plains, the political boundary 
between Russia and China is defined by the meridional range of 
Russo- Sarikol. This range (known to the ancients as Taurus 
Chinese anc ' m me dieval times as Bolor) like many others of the 
boundary. most important great natural mountain divisions of the 
world, consists of two parallel chains, of which the western 
is the water-divide of the Pamirs, and the eastern (which has been 
known as the Kashgar or Kandar range) is split at intervals by 
lateral gorges to allow of the passage of the main drainage from the 
eastern Pamir slopes. 

In western Asia we have learned the exact value of the mountain 

barrier which lies between Merv and Herat, and have mapped 

, „ its connexion with the Elburz of Persia. We can now 

Indian 

trontiers- 

ls%n"<Sc. represents which connects the water-divide north of 
' Herat with the southern abutment of the Hindu Kush, 

near Bamian. Every pass of importance is known and recorded; 
every route of significance has been explored and mapped ; Afghan- 
istan has assumed a new political entity by the demarcation of 
a boundary ; the value of Herat and of the Pamirs as bases of 
aggression has been assessed, and the whole intervening space of 
mountain and plain thoroughly examined. 

Although within the limits of western Asiatic states, still under 
Asiatic government and beyond the active influence of European 
_ , interests, the material progress of the Eastern world has 

appeared to remain stationary, yet large accessions to 
geographical knowledge have at least been made, ajnd in some in- 
stances a deeper knowledge of the surface of the country and modern 
conditions of life has led to the straightening of many crooked paths 
in history, and a better appreciation of the slow processes of ad- 
vancing civilization. The steady advance of scientific inquiry into 
every corner of Persia, backed by the unceasing efforts of a new 
school of geographical explorers, has left nothing unexamined that 
can be subjected to superficial observation. The geographical map 
of the country is fairly complete, and with it much detailed in- 
formation is now accessible regarding the coast and harbours of the 
Persian Gulf, the routes and passes of the interior, and the possi- 
bilities of commercial development by the construction of trade 
roads uniting the Caspian, the Karun, the Persian Gulf, and India, 
via Seistan. Persia has assumed a comprehensible position as a 
'actor in future Eastern politics. 



fully appreciate the factor in practical politics which 
that definite but somewhat irregular mountain system 



In Arabia progress has been slower, although the surveys carried 
out by Colonel Wahab in connexion with the boundary determined 
in the Aden hinterland added more exact geographical Arabia 
knowledge within a limited area. Little more is known 
of the wide spaces of interior desert than has already been given to 
the world in the works of Sir Richard F. Burton, Wm. Gifford 
Palgrave and Sir Lewis Pelly amongst Englishmen, and Karsten 
Niebuhr, John Lewis Burckhardt, Visconte, Joseph Halevy and 
others, amongst foreign travellers. Charles Doughty and Wilfrid 
S. Blunt have visited and illustrated the district of Nejd, and de- 
scribed the waning glories of the Wahabi empire. But extended 
geographical knowledge does not point to any great practical issue. 
Commercial relations with Arabia remain much as they were in 1875. 

In Asia Minor, Syria and Mesopotamia there is little to record 
of progress in material development beyond the promises held 
out by the Euphrates Valley railway concession to a . . 
German company. The exact information obtained by ^u nor &c 
the researches of English surveyors in Palestine and ' 

beyond Jordan, or by the efforts of explorers in the regions that lie 
between the Mediterranean and the Caspian, have so far led rather 
to the elucidation of history than to fresh commercial enterprise or 
the possible increase of material wealth. 

Asiatic Russia, especially eastern Siberia and Mongolia, have 
been brought within the sphere of Russian exploration, with results 
so surprising as to form an epoch in the. history of Asia. gasslaln 
Here there has been a development of the resources ~J . 
of the Old World which parallels the best records of the 
New. 

The great central depression of the continent which reaches from 
the foot of the Pamir plateau on the west through theTarim desert 
to Lop Nor and the Gobi has yielded up many interesting Cnlnese 
secrets. The remarkable phenomenon of the periodic Turkestan 
shifting of the Lop Nor system has been revealed by the and Oxos 
researches of Sven Hedin, and the former existence of 6as ; n- 
highly civilized centres of Buddhist art and industry in 
the now sand-strewn wastes of the Turkestan desert has been clearly 
demonstrated by the same great explorer and by Dr M. A. Stein. 
The depression westward of the Caspian and Aral basins, and the 
original connexion of these seas, have also come under the close 
investigation of Russian scientists, with the result that the theory 
of an ancient connexion between the Oxus and the Caspian has been 
displaced by the -more recent hypothesis of an extension of the 
Caspian Sea eastwards into Trans-Caspian territory within the post- 
Pleiocene age. The discovery of shells (now living in the Caspian) 
at a distance of about 100 m. inland, at an altitude of 140 to 280 ft. 
above the present level of the Caspian, gives support to this hypo- 
thesis, which is further advanced by the ascertained nature of the 
Kara-kum sands, which appear to be a purely marine formation 
exhibiting no traces of fluviatile deposits which might be considered 
as delta deposits of the Oxus. 

In the discussion of this problem we find the names of Baron A. 
Kaulbars, Annentkov, P. M. Lessar, and A. M. Konshin prominent. 
Further matter of interest in connexion with the Oxus basin was 
elucidated by the researches of L. Griesbach in connexion with the 
Russo-Afghan Boundary Commission. He reported the gradual 
formation of an anticlinal or ridge extending longitudinally through 
the great Balkh plain of Afghan Turkestan, which effectually shuts 
off the northern affluents of that basin from actual junction with the 
river. This evidence of a gradual process of upheaval still in action 
may throw some light on the physical (especially the climatic) changes 
which must have passed over that part of Asia since Balkh was the 
" mother of cities," the great trade centre of Asia, and the plains of 
Balkh were green with cultivation. In the restoration of the out- 
lines of ancient and medieval geography in Asia Sven Hedin' s dis- 
coveries of the actual remains of cities which have long been buried 
under the advancing waves of sand in the Takla Makan desert, 
cities which flourished in the comparatively recent period of Buddh- 
ist ascendancy in High Asia, is of the very highest interest, filling 
up a blank in the identification of sites mentioned by early geo- 
graphers and illustrating more fully the course of old pilgrim routes. 

With the completion of the surveys of Baluchistan and Makran 
much light has also been thrown on the ancient connexion between 
east and west; and the final settlement of the southern Baluch- 
boundaries of Afghanistan has led to the reopening of lstaB anrf 
one at least of the old trade routes between Seistan Makran. 
and India. 

Farther east no part of Asia has been brought under more care- 
ful investigation than the hydrography of the strange mountain 
wilderness that divides Tibet and Burma from China. Burma 
In this field the researches of travellers already men- ana china. 
tioned, combined with the more exact reconnaissance 
of native surveyors and of those exploring parties which have 
recently been working in the interests of commercial projects, have 
left little to future inquiry. We know now for certain that the great 
Tsanpo of Tibet and the Brahmaputra are one and the same river; 
that north of the point where the great countermarch of that river 
from east to west is effected are to be found the sources of the 
Salween, the Mekong, the Yang-tsze-kiang and the Hwang-ho, or 
Yellow river, in order, from west to east ; and that south of it, thrust 
in between the extreme eastern edge of the Brahmaputra basin 



EXPLORATION] 



ASIA 



741 



and the Salween, rise the dual sources of the Irrawaddy. From the 
water-divide which separates the most eastern affluent of the 
Brahmaputra, eastwards to the deep gorges which enclose the most 
westerly branch of the upper Yang-tsze-kiang (here running from 
north to south), is a short space of loom.; and within that space 
two mighty rivers, the Salween and the Mekong, send down their 
torrents to Burma and Siam. These three rivers flow parallel to each 
other for some 300 m., deep hidden in narrow and precipitous troughs, 
amidst some of the grandest scenery of Asia; spreading apart 
where the Yank-tsze takes its course eastwards, not far north of 
the parallel of 25°. 

The comparatively restricted area which still remains for close 
investigation includes the most easterly sources of the Brahmaputra, 
the most northerly sources of the Irrawaddy, and some 300 m. of 
the course of the upper Salween. 

Modern Boundary Demarcation. — The period from about 1880 
has been an era of boundary-making in Asia, of defining the politico- 
geographical limits of empire, and of determining the responsibilities 
of government. Russia, Persia, Afghanistan, Baluchistan, India 
and China have all revised their borders, and with the revision the 
political relations between these countries have acquired a new 
and more assured basis. See also the articles on the different 
countries. We are not here concerned with understandings as to 
"spheres of influence," or with arrangements such as the Anglo- 
Russian Convention of 1907 concerning Persia. 

The advance of Russia to the Turkoman deserts and the Oxus 
demanded a definite boundary between her trans-Caspian conquests 
. and the kingdom of Afghanistan. This was determined 

Southern Qn the nort h_ west by t ^ e Russo-Afghan Boundary Com- 
fBssUi m i 3S i° n °f 1 884-1 886. A boundary was then fixed 
fa Asia between the Hari Rud (the river of Herat) and the Oxus, 
which is almost entirely artificial in its construction. 
Zulfikar, where the boundary leaves the Hari Rud, is about 70 m. 
south of Sarakhs, and the most southerly point of the boundary 
(where it crosses the Kushk) is about 60 m. north of Herat. From 
the junction of the boundary with the Oxus at Khamiab about 
150 m. above the crossing-point of the Russian Trans-Caspian 
railway at Charjui, the main channel of the Oxus river becomes the 
northern boundary of Afghanistan, separating that country from 
Russia, and so continues to its source in Victoria Lake of the Great 
Pamir. Beyond this point the Anglo-Russian Commission of 1895 
demarcated a line to the snowfields and glaciers which overlook the 
Chinese border. Between the Russian Pamirs and Chinese Turkes- 
tan the rugged line of the Sarikol range intervenes, the actual 
dividing line being still indefinite. Beyond Kashgar the southern 
boundary of Siberia follows an irregular course to the north-east, 
partly defined by the Tian-shan and Alatau mountains, till it attains 
a northerly point in about 53° N. lat. marked by the Sayan range 
to the west of Irkutsk. It then deflects south-east till it touches 
the Kerulen affluent of the Amur river at a point which is shown 
in unofficial maps as about 117° 30' E. long, and 49° 20' N. lat. 
From here it follows this affluent to its junction with the Amur river, 
and the Amur river to its junction with the Usuri. It follows the 
Usuri to its head (its direction now being a little west of south), 
and finally strikes the Pacific coast on about 42 ° 30' N. lat. at the 
mouth of the Tumen river 100 m. south of the Amur bay, at the head 
of which lies the Russian port of Vladivostok. At two points the 
Russian boundary nearly approaches that of provinces which are 
directly under British suzerainty. Where the Oxus river takes its 
great bend to the north from Ishkashim, the breadth of the Afghan 
territory intervening between that river and the main water-divide 
of the Hindu Kush is not more than 10 or 12 m. ; and east of the 
Pamir extension of Afghanistan, where the Beyik Pass crosses 
the Sarikol range and drops into the Taghdumbash Pamir, there 
is but the narrow width of the Karachukar valley between the 
Sarikol and the Muztagh. Here, however, the boundary is again 
undefined. Eastwards of this the great Kashgar depression, which 
includes the Tarim desert, separates Russia from the vast sterile 
highlands of Tibet; and a continuous series of desert spaces of low 
elevation, marking the limits of a primeval inland sea from the 
Sarikol meridional watershed to the Khingan mountains on the 
western borders of Manchuria, divide her from the northern pro- 
vinces of China. From the Khingan ranges to the Pacific, south 
of the Amur, stretch the rich districts of Manchuria, a province 
which connects Russia with the Korea by a series of valleys formed 
by the Sungari and its affluents — a land of hill and plain, forest 
and swamp, possessing a delightful climate, and vast undeveloped 
agricultural resources. Throughout this land of promise Russian 
influence was destroyed by Japan in the war of 1904. The posses- 
sion of Port Arthur, and direct political control over Korea, place 
Japan in the dominant position as regards Manchuria. 

Coincident with the demarcation of Russian boundaries in Turkes- 
tan was that of northern Afghanistan. From the Hari Rud on the 
west to the Sarikol mountains on the east her northern 

IH f"l limits were set by the Boundary Commissions of 1884- 
60 nd- 1886 and of 1895 respectively. Her southern and eastern 

, " boundaries were further defined by a series of minor 
commissions, working on the basis of the Kabul agreement 
of 1893, which lasted for nearly four years, terminating with the 
Mohmand settlement at the close of an expedition in 1897. 



The Pamir extension of Afghan territory to the north-east reaches 
to a point a little short of 75 E., from whence it follows the water- 
divide to the head of the Taghdumbash Pamir, and is thenceforward 
defined by the water-parting of the Hindu Kush. It leaves the 
Hindu Kush near the Dorah Pass at the head of one of the minor 
Chitral affluents, and passing south-west divides Kafiristan from 
Chitral and Bajour, separates the sections of the Mohmands who 
are within the respective spheres of Afghan and British sovereignty, 
and crosses the Peshawar-Kabul route at Lundi-Khana. It thus 
places a broad width of independent territory between the bound- 
aries of British India (which have remained practically, though not 
absolutely, untouched) and Afghanistan; and this independent 
belt includes Swat, Bajour and a part of the Mohmand territory 
north of the Kabul river. The same principle of maintaining an 
intervening width of neutral territory between the two countries 
is definitely established throughout the eastern borders of Afghanis- 
tan, along the full length of which a definite boundary has been 
demarcated to the point where it touches the northern limits of 
Baluchistan on the Gomal river. From the Gomal Baluchistan 
itself becomes an intervening state between British India and 
Afghanistan, and the dividing line between Baluchistan and 
Afghanistan is laid down with all the precision employed on the more 
northerly sections of the demarcation. 

Baluchistan can no longer be regarded as a distinct entity amongst 
Asiatic nations, such as Afghanistan undoubtedly is. Baluchistan 
independence demands qualification. There is British Baluchi 
Baluchistan par excellence, and there is the rest of Baluch- istan 
istan which exists in various degrees of independence, but 
is everywhere subject to British control. British Baluchistan officially 
includes the districts of Peshin, Sibi and of Thal-Chotiali. As these 
districts had originally been Afghan, they were transferred to British 
authority by the treaty of Gandamak in 1879, although nominally 
they had been handed over to Kalat forty years previously. Now 
they form an official province of British Baluchistan within the 
Baluchistan Agency; and the agency extends from the Gomal to 
the Arabian Sea and the Persian frontier. Within this agency there 
are districts as independent as any in Afghanistan, but the political 
status of the province as a whole is almost precisely that of the native 
states of the Indian peninsula. The agent to the governor-general 
of India, with a staff of political assistants, practically exercises 
supreme control. 

The increase of Russian influence on the northern Persian border 
and its extension southwards towards Seistan led to the appoint- 
ment of a British consul at Kirman, the dominating mrman. 
town of southern Khorasan, directly connected with 
Meshed on the north; and the acquisition of rights of adminis- 
tration of the Nushki district secured to Great Britain the trade 
between Seistan and Quetta by the new Helmund desert route. 

While British India has so far avoided actual geographical contact 
with one great European power in Asia on the north and west, 
she has touched another on the east. The Mekong river 
which limits British interests in Burma limits also those ?°^ n ary 
of France in Tongking. The eastern boundaries of p^^" 
Burma are not yet fully demarcated on the Chinese <err # _, 
frontier. At a point level in latitude with Mogaung, an( j/ a ^ a 
near the northern termination of the Burmese railway 
system, this boundary is defined by the eastern watershed of the 
Nmaikha, the eastern of the two great northern affluents of the 
Irrawaddy. Then it follows an irregular course southwards to a 
position south-east of Bhamo in lat. 24 . It next defines the northern 
edge of the Shan States, and finally strikes the Mekong river in 
lat. 21° 45' (approximately). From that point southwards the river 
becomes the boundary between the Shan States and Tongking for 
some 200 m., the channel of the river defining the limits of occupation 
(though not entirely of interest) between French and British subjects. 
Approximately on the parallel of 20 N. lat. the Burmese boundary 
leaves the Mekong to run westwards towards the Salween, and there- 
after following the eastern watershed of the Salween basin it divides 
the Lower Burma provinces from Siam. 

The following table shows the areas of territories in Asia Area and 
(continental and insular) dependent on the various extra- political 
Asiatic powers, and of those which are independent or division. 
nominally so: — 



Territory. 
Russian 
British 
Dutch . 
French 
U.S.A. . 
German 
Turkish 
Chinese 
Japanese 
Other independent territories 



Sq. m. 

6,495.970 

1,998,220 
586,980 
247,580 
II4.370 
193 
681,980 

4,299,600 
161,110 

2,232,270 



The total area of Asia, continental and insular, is therefore some- 
what over 16,819,000 sq. m. (but various authorities differ consider- 
ably in their detailed estimates). The population may be set down 
roughly as 823,000,000, of which 330,000,000 inhabit Chinese terri- 
tory, 302,000,000 British, and 25,000,000 Russian. (T. H. H.*) 



742 



ASIA 



[GEOLOGY 




after rjor^liau; 



Geology 

The geology of Asia is so complex and over wide areas so little 
known that it is difficult to give a connected account of either the 
structure or the development of the continent, and only the broader 
features can be dealt with here. 

In the south, in Syria, Arabia and the peninsula of India, none 
but the oldest rocks are folded, and the Upper Palaeozoic, the Meso- 
zoic and the Tertiary beds lie almost horizontally upon them. It is 
a region of quiescence or of faulting, but not of folding. North of 
this lies a broad belt in which the Mesozoic deposits and even the 
lower divisions of the Tertiary system are thrown into folds which 
extend in a series of arcs from west to east and now form the principal 
mountain ranges of central Asia. This belt includes Asia Minor, 
Persia, Afghanistan, Baluchistan, the Himalayas, the Tian-shan, 
and, although they are very different in direction, the Burmese 
ranges. The Kuen-lun, Nan-shan and the mountain ranges of 
southern China are, perhaps, of earlier date, but nevertheless they 
lie in the same belt. It is not true that throughout the whole width 
of this zone the beds are folded. There are considerable tracts 
which are but little disturbed, but these tracts are enclosed within 
the arcs formed by the folds, and the zone taken as a whole is dis- 
tinctly one of crumpling. North of the folded belt, and including 



Emery Walker sc 



the greater part of Siberia, Mongolia and northern China, lies another 
area which is, in general, free from any important folding of Mesozoic 
or Tertiary age. There are, it is true, mountain ranges which are 
formed of folded beds ; but in many cases the direction of the chajns 
is different from that of the folds, so that the ranges must owe their 
elevation to other causes; and the folds, moreover, are of ancient 
date, for the most part Archaean or Palaeozoic. The configuration 
of the region is largely due to faulting, trough-like or tray-like 
depressions being formed, and the intervening strips, which have 
not been depressed, standing up as mountain ridges. Over a large 
part of Siberia and in the north of China, even the Cambrian beds 
still lie as horizontally as they were first laid down. In the extreme 
north, in the Verkhoyansk range and in the mountains of the Taimyr 
peninsula, there are indications of another zone of folding of Meso- 
zoic or later date, but our information concerning these ranges is 
very scanty. Besides the three chiet regions into which the mainland 
is thus seen to be divided, attention should be drawn to the festoons 
of islands 'which border the eastern side of the continent, and which 
are undoubtedly due to causes similar to those which produced the 
folds of the folded belt. 

Of all the Asiatic ranges the Himalayan is, geologically, the best 
known; and the evidence which it affords shows clearly that the 
folds to which it owes its elevation were produced by an overthrust 



GEOLOGY: CLIMATE] 



ASIA 



743 



from the north. It is, indeed, as if the high land of central Asia had 
been pushed southward against and over the unyielding mass formed 
by the old rocks of the Indian peninsula, and in the process the edges 
of the over-riding strata had been crumpled and folded. Overlooking 
all smaller details, we may consider Asia to consist of a northern 
mass and a southern mass, too rigid to crumple, but not too strong 
to fracture, and an intermediate belt of softer rock which was capable 
of folding. If then by the contraction of the earth's interior the outer 
crust were forced to accommodate itself to a smaller nucleus, the 
central softer belt would yield by crumpling; the more rigid masses 
to the north and south, if they gave way at all, would yield by 
faulting. It is interesting to observe, as will be shown later, that 
during the Mesozoic era there was a land-mass in the north of Asia 
and another in the south, and between them lay the sea in which 
ordinary marine sediments were deposited. The belt of folding 
does not precisely coincide with this central sea, but the correspond- 
ence is fairly close. 

The present outline of the eastern coast and the nearly enclosed 
seas which lie between the islands and the mainland, are attributed 
by Richthofen chiefly to simple faulting. 

Little is known of the early geological history of Asia beyond the 
fact that a large part of the continent was covered by the sea during 
the Cambrian and Ordovician periods. But there is positive evidence 
that much of the north and east of Asia has been land since the 
Palaeozoic era, and it has been conclusively proved that the peninsula 
of India has never been beneath the sea since the Carboniferous 
period at least. Between these ancient land masses lies an area in 
which marine deposits of Mesozoic age are well developed and which 
was evidently beneath the sea during the greater part of the Mesozoic 
era. The northern land-mass has been named Angaraland by 
E. Suess; the southern, of which the Indian peninsula is but a 
fragment, is called Gondwanaland by Neumayr, Suess and others; 
while the intervening sea is the central Mediterranean sea of 
Neumayr and the Tethys of Suess. The greater part of western 
Asia, including the basin of the Obi, the drainage area of the Aral 
Sea, together with Afghanistan, Baluchistan, Persia and Arabia, was 
covered by the sea during the later stages of the Cretaceous period; 
but a considerable part of this region was probably dry land in 
Jurassic times. • 

The northern land-mass begins in the north with the area which 
lies between the Yenisei and the Lena. Here the folded Archean 
rocks are overlaid by Cambrian and Ordovician beds, which still 
lie for the most part flat and undisturbed. Upon these rest patches 
of freshwater deposits containing numerous remains of plants. 
They consist chiefly of sandstone and conglomerate, but include 
workable seams of coal. Some of the deposits appear to be of 
Permian age, but others are probably Jurassic; and they are all 
included under the general name of the Angara series. Excepting 
in the extreme north, where marine Jurassic and Cretaceous fossils 
have been found, there is no evidence that this part of Siberia has 
been beneath the sea since the early part of the Palaeozoic era. 
Besides the plant beds extensive outflows of basic lava rest directly 
upon the Cambrian and Ordovician strata. The date of these 
eruptions is still .uncertain, but they probably continued to a very 
recent period. 

South and east of the Palaeozoic plateau is an extensive area 
consisting chiefly of Archean rocks, and including the greater part 
of Mongolia north of the Tian-shan. Here again there are no marine 
beds of Mesozoic of Tertiary age, while plant-bearing deposits 
belonging to the Angara series are known. Structurally, the folds 
o! this region are ol ancient date; but the area is crossed by a. series 
of depressions formed by faults, and the intervening strips, which 
have not been depressed to the same extent, now stand up as moun- 
tain ranges. Farther south, in the Chinese provinces of Shansi and 
Shensi, the geological succession is similar in some respects to that 
of the Siberian Palaeozoic plateau, but the sequence is more complete. 
There is again a floor of folded Archean rocks overlaid by nearly 
horizontal strata of Lower Palaeozoic age; but these are followed 
by marine beds belonging to the Carboniferous period. From the 
Upper Carboniferous onward, however, no marine deposits are 
known; and, as in Siberia, plant-bearing beds are met with. 
Southern China is very different in structure, consisting largely of 
folded mountain chains, but the geological succession is very similar, 
and excepting near the Tibetan and Burmese borders, there are no 
marine deposits of Mesozoic or Tertiary age. 

Thus it appears that from the Arctic Ocean there stretches a broad 
area as far as the south of China, in which no marine deposits of 
later date than Carboniferous have yet been found, except in the 
extreme north. Freshwater and terrestrial deposits of Mesozoic age 
occur in many places, and the conclusion is irresistible that the 
greater part of this area has been land since the close of the Palaeo- 
zoic era. The Triassic deposits of the Verkhoyansk Range show that 
this land did not extend to the Bering Sea ; while the marine Mesozoic 
deposits of Japan on the east, the western Tian-shan on the west and 
Tibet on the south give us some idea of its limits in other directions. 

In the same way the entire absence of any marine fossils in the 
peninsula of India, excepting near its borders, and the presence of 
the terrestrial and freshwater deposits of the Gondwana series, 
representing the whole of the geological scale from the top of the 
Carboniferous to the top of <the Jurassic, show that this region also 



has been land since the Carboniferous period. It was a portion 
of a great land-mass which probably extended across the Indian 
Ocean and was at one time united with the south of Africa. 

But these two land-masses were not connected. Between India 
and China there is a broad belt in which marine deposits of Mesozoic 
and Tertiary age are well developed. Marine Tertiary beds occur 
in Burma; in the Himalayas and in south Tibet there is a nearly 
complete series of marine deposits from the Carboniferous to the 
Eocene; in Afghanistan the Mesozoic beds are in part marine and 
in part fluviatile. The sea in which these strata were deposited 
seems to have attained its greatest extension in Upper Cretaceous 
times, when its waters spread over the whole of western Asia and 
even encroached slightly upon the Indian land. The Eocene sea, 
however, cannot have been much inferior in extent. 

It was after the Eocene period that the main part of the elevation 
of the Himalayas took place, as is shown by the occurrence of 
nummulitic limestone at a height of 20,000 ft. The formation of this 
and of the other great mountain chains of central Asia resulted in 
the isolation of portions of the former central sea ; and the same 
forces finally led to the elevation of the whole region and the union 
of the old continents of Angara and Gondwana. Gondwanaland, 
however, did not long survive, and the portion which lay between 
India and South Africa sank beneath the waves in Tertiary times. 

Leaving out of consideration all evidence of more ancient volcanic 
activity, each of the three regions, into which, as we have seen, the 
continent may be divided, has been, during or since the Cretaceous 
period, the seat of great volcanic eruptions. 'In the southern region 
of unfolded beds are found the lavas of the " harras " of Arabia, 
and in India the extensive flows of the Deccan Trap. In the central 
folded belt lie the great volcanoes, now mostly extinct, of Asia Minor, 
Armenia, Persia and Baluchistan. In Burma also there is at least 
one extinct volcano. In the northern unfolded region great flows 
of basic lava lie directly upon the Cambrian and Ordovician beds 
of Siberia, but are certainly in part of Tertiary age. Similar flows 
on a smaller scale occur in Manchuria, Korea and northern China. 

In all these cases, however, the eruptions have now almost ceased ; 
and the great volcanoes of the present day lie in the islands off the 
eastern and south-eastern coasts. 

References. — E. Suess, Das Antlitz der Erde (see, especially, 
vol. iii. part i.) ; F. V. Richthofen, " Ueber Gestalt und Gliederung 
einer Grundlinie in der Morphologic Ost-Asiens," Sitz. k. preuss. 
Akad. Wiss. (Berlin, 1900), pp. 888-925, and " Geomorphologische 
Studien aus Ostasien," ibid., 1901, pp. 782-808, 1902, pp. 944-975, 
1903, PP- 867-918. (P. La.) 

Climate 

Among the places on the globe where the temperature falls lowest 
are some in northern Asia, and among those where it rises highest 
are some in southern Asia. The mean temperature of Tempera- 
the north coast of eastern Siberia is but a few degrees ture 
above the zero of Fahrenheit ; the lowest mean tem- 
perature anywhere observed is about 4 Fahr., at Melville Island, 
north of the American continent. The isothermals of mean annual 
temperature lie over northern Asia on curves tolerably regular in 
their outline, having their western branches in a somewhat higher 
latitude than their eastern ; a reduction of I ° of latitude corresponds 
approximately — and irrespective of modifications due to elevation 
— to a rise of I ° Fahr., as far say as 30° N., where the mean tempera- 
ture is about 75° Fahr. Farther south the increase is slower, and 
the highest mean temperature anywhere attained in southern Asia 
is not much above 82 ° Fahr. 

The variations of temperature are very great in Siberia, amounting 
near the coast to more than 100 Fahr., between the mean of the 
hottest and coldest months, and to still more between the extreme 
temperatures of those months. In southern Asia, and particularly 
near the sea, the variation between the hottest and coldest monthly 
means is very much less, and under the equator'it is reduced to about 
5°. In Siberia the difference between the means of the hottest and 
coldest months is hardly anywhere less than 6o° Fahr. On the Sea 
of Aral it is 80° Fahr. ; and at Astrakhan, on the Caspian, more 
than 50 . At Tiflis it is 45 . In northern China, at Peking, it is 
55 , reduced to 30 at Canton, and to 20 at Manila. In northern 
India the greatest difference docs not exceed 40 ; and it Jails off to 
about I5°at Calcutta, and toabout io°or I2°at Bombayand Madras. 
The temperatures at the head of the Persian Gulf approximate 
to those of northern India, and those of Aden to Madras. At Singa- 
pore the range is less than 5 ; and at Batavia in Java, and Galle 
in Ceylon, it is about the same. The extreme temperatures in 
Siberia may be considered to lie between 80° and 90 Fahr. for 
maxima, and between— 40° and — 70° Fahr. for minima. The extreme 
of heat near the Caspian and Aral Seas rises to nearly ioo° Fahr., 
while that of cold falls to — 20° Fahr. or lower. Compared with these 
figures, we find in southern Asia 110° or 1 12° Fahr. as a maximum 
hardly ever exceeded. The absolute minimum in northern India, 
in lat. 30 , hardly goes below 32 ° ; at Calcutta it is about 40°, though 
the thermometer seldom falls to 50 . At Madras it rarely falls as 
low as 65 °, or at Bombay below 60°. At Singapore and Batavia the 
thermometer very rarely falls below 70 , or rises above 90 . At Aden 
the minimum is a few degrees below 70°, the maximum not much 
exceeding 90°. 



744 



ASIA 



[METEOROLOGY 



These figures sufficiently indicate the main characteristics of the 
air temperatures of Asia. Throughout its northern portion the 
winter is long and of extreme severity ; and even down to the circle 
of 35 N. lat., the minimum temperature is almost as low as zero of 
Fahrenheit. The summers are hot, though short in the northern 
latitudes, the maximum of summer heat being comparatively little 
less than that observed in the tropical countries farther south. The 
moderating effect of the proximity of the ocean is felt in an im- 
portant degree along the southern and eastern parts of Asia, where 
the land is broken up into islands or peninsulas. The great elevations 
above the sea-level of the central part of Asia, and of the table-lands 
of Afghanistan and Persia, tend to exaggerate the winter cold; 
while the sterility of the surface, due to the small rainfall over the 
same region, operates powerfully in the opposite direction in increas- 
ing the summer heat. In the summer a great accumulation of solar 
heat takes place on the dry surface soil, from which it cannot be 
released upwards by evaporation, as might be the case were the soil 
moist or covered with vegetation, nor can it be readily conveyed 
away downwards as happens on the ocean. In the winter similar 
consequences ensue, in a negative direction, from the prolonged loss 
of heat by radiation in the long and clear nights — an effect which is 
intensified wherever the surface is covered with snow, or the air little 
charged with vapour. In illustration of the very slow diffusion of 
heat in the solid crust of the earth, and as affording a further in- 
dication of the climate of northern Asia, reference may here be made 
to the frozen soil of Siberia, in the vicinity of Yakutsk. In this 
region the earth is frozen permanently to a depth of more than 380 ft. 
at which the temperature is still 5° or 6° Fahr. below the freezing 
point of water, the summer heat merely thawing the surface to a 
depth of about 3 ft. At a depth of 50 ft. the temperature is about 
15 Fahr. below the freezing point. Under such conditions of the 
soil, the land, nevertheless, produces crops of wheat and other 
grain from fifteen to forty fold. 

The very high summer temperatures of the area north of the 
tropic of Cancer are sufficiently accounted for, when compared with 
those observed south of the tropic, by the increased length of the 
day in the higher latitude, which more than compensates for the 
loss of heat due to the smaller mid-day altitude of the sun. The 
difference between the heating power of the sun's rays at noon on the 
2 1st of June, in latitude 20 and in latitude 45 , is only about 2%; 
while the accumulated heat received during the day, which is 
lengthened to 1 5 1 hours in the higher latitude, is greater by about 11% 
than in the lower latitude, where the day consists only of 13^ hours. 

Although the foregoing account of the temperatures of Asia 
supplies the main outline of the observed phenomena, a very im- 
portant modifying cause, of which more will be said hereafter, comes 
into operation over the whole of the tropical region, namely, the 
periodical summer rains. These tend very greatly to arrest the 
increase of the summer heat over the area where they prevail, and 
otherwise give it altogether peculiar characteristics. 

The great summer heat, by expanding the air upwards, disturbs 
the level of the planes of equal pressure, and causes an outflow 
_ of the upper strata from the heated area. The winter 

. cold produces an effect of just an opposite nature, and 

Winds. causes an accumulation of air over the cold area, The 
diminution of barometric pressure which takes place all 
over Asia during the summer months, and the increase in the winter, 
are hence, no doubt, the results of the alternate heating and cooling 
of the air over the continent. 

The necessary and immediate results of such periodical changes 
of pressure are winds, which, speaking generally, blow from the area 
of greatest to that of least pressure — subject, however, to certain 
modifications of direction, arising from the absolute motion of the 
whole body of the air due to the revolution of the earth on its axis 
from west to east. The south-westerly winds which prevail north 
of the equator during the hot half of the year, to which navigators 
have given the name of the south-west monsoon (the latter word 
being a corruption of the Indian name for season), arise from the 
great diminution of atmospheric pressure over Asia, which begins 
to be strongly marked with the great rise of temperature in April 
and May, and the simultaneous relatively higher pressure over the 
equator and the regions south of it. This diminution of pressure, 
which continues as the heat increases till it reaches its maximum in 
July soon after the solstice, is followed by the corresponding develop- 
ment of the south-west monsoon; and as the barometric pressure 
is gradually restored, and becomes equalized within the tropics soon 
after the equinox in October, with the general fall of temperature 
north of the equator, the south-west winds fall off, and are succeeded 
by a north-east monsoon, which is developed during the winter 
months by the relatively greater atmospheric pressure which then 
occurs over Asia, as compared with the equatorial region. 

Although the succession of the periodical winds follows the progress 
of the seasons as just described, the changes in the wind's direction 
everywhere take place under the operation of special local influences 
which often disguise the more general law, and make it difficult to 
trace. Thus the south-west monsoon begins in the Arabian Sea with 
west and north-westerly winds, which draw round as the year advances 
to south-west and fall back again in the autumn by north- 
west to north. In the Bay of Bengal the strength of the south- 
west monsoon is rather from the south and south-east, being 



succeeded by north-east winds after October, which give place to 
northerly and north-westerly winds as the year advances. Among 
the islands of the Malay Archipelago the force of the monsoons is 
much interrupted, and the position of this region on the equator 
otherwise modifies the directions of the prevailing winds. The 
southerly summer winds of the Asiatic seas between the equator 
and the tropic do not extend to the coasts of Java, and the south- 
easterly trade winds are there developed in the usual manner. The 
China Sea is fully exposed to both monsoons, the normal directions 
of which nearly coincide with the centre of the channel between the 
continent of Asia and the eastern islands. 

The south-west monsoon does not generally extend, in its charactei 
of a south-west wind, over the land. The current of air flowing in 
from over the sea is gradually diverted towards the area of least 
pressure, and at the same time is dissipated and loses much of its 
original force. The winds which pass northward over India blow a& 
south-easterly and easterly winds over the north-eastern part of 
the Gangetic plain, and as south winds up the Indus. They seem 
almost entirely to have exhausted their northward velocity by the 
time they have reached the northern extremity of the great Indian 
plain; they are not felt on the table-lands of Afghanistan, and 
hardly penetrate into the Indus basin or the ranges of the Himalaya, 
by which mountains, and those which branch off from them into the 
Malay peninsula, they are prevented from continuing their progress 
in the direction originally imparted to them. 

Among the more remarkable phenomena of the hotter seas of Asia 
must be noticed the revolving storms or cyclones, which are ol 
frequent occurrence in the hot months in the Indian Ocean and 
China Sea, in which last they are known under the name of typhoon 
The cyclones of the Bay of Bengal appear to originate over the 
Andaman and Nicobar islands, and are commonly propagated in 
a north-westward direction, striking the east coast of the Indian 
peninsula at various points, and then often advancing with an 
easterly tendency over the land, and passing with extreme violence 
across the delta of the Ganges. They occur in all the hot months, 
from June to October, and more rarely in November, and appear to 
be originated by adverse currents from the north meeting those of 
the south-west monsoon. The cyclones of the China Sea also occur 
in the hot months of the year, but they advance from north-east to 
south-west, though occasionally from east to west; they originate 
near the island of Formosa, and extend to about the 10th degree of 
N. lat. They are thus developed in nearly the same latitudes and in 
the same months as those of the Indian Sea, though their progress is in 
a different direction. In both cases, however, the storms appear to 
advance towards the area of greatest heat. In these storms the 
wind invariably circulates from north by west through south to east. 

The heated body of air carried from the Indian Ocean over 
southern Asia by the south-west monsoon comes up highly charged 
with watery vapour, and hence in a condition to release a large 
body of water as rain upon the land, whenever it is Rainfall. 
brought into circumstances which reduce its temperature 
in a notable degree. Such a reduction of temperature is brought 
about along the greater part of the coasts of India and of the Burmo- 
Siamese peninsula by the interruption of the wind, current by con- 
tinuous ranges of mountains, which force the mass of air to rise 
over them, whereby the air being rarefied, its specific capacity for 
heat is increased and its temperature falls, with a corresponding 
condensation of the vapour originally held in suspension. 

This explanation of the principal efficient Cause of the summer 
rains of south Asia is immediately based on an analysis of the com- 
plicated phenomena actually observed, and it serves to account 
for many apparent anomalies. The heaviest falls of rain occur along 
lines of mountain of some extent directly facing the vapour-bearing 
winds, as on the Western Ghats of India and the west coast of the 
Malay peninsula. The same results are found along the mountains 
at a distance from the sea, the heaviest rainfall known to occur any- 
where in the world (not less than 600 in. in the year) being recorded 
on the Khasi range about 100 m. north-east of Calcutta, which 
presents an abrupt front to the progress of the moist winds flowing 
up from the Bay of Bengal. The cessation of the rains on the 
southern border of Baluchistan, west of Karachi, obviously arises 
from the projection of the south-east coast of Arabia, which limits 
the breadth of. the south-west monsoon air current and the length 
of the coast-line directly exposed to it. The very small and irregular 
rainfall in Sind and along the Indus is to be accounted for by the 
want of any obstacle in the path of the vapour-bearing winds, 
which, therefore, carry the uncondensed rain up to the Punjab, 
where it falls on the outer ranges of the western Himalaya and 
of Afghanistan. 

The diurnal mountain winds are very strongly marked on the 
Himalaya, where they probably are the most active agents in deter- 
mining the precipitation of rain along the chain — the monsoon 
currents, as before stated, not penetrating among the mountains. 
The formation of dense banks of cloud in the afternoon, when the 
up wind is strongest, along the southern face of the snowy ranges 
of the Himalaya, is a regular daily phenomenon during the hotter 
months of the year, and .heavy rain, accompanied by electrical 
discharges, is the frequent result of such condensation. 

Too little is known of the greater part of Asia to admit of any 
more being said with reference to this part of the subject, than to 



FLORA] 



ASIA 



745 



mention a few facts bearing on the rainfall. In northern Asia there 
is a generally equal rainfall of 19 to 29 in. between the Volga and 
the Lena in Manchuria and northern China, rather more considerable 
increase in Korea, Siam and Japan. At Tiflis the yearly fall is 
22 in. ; on the Caspian about 7 or 8 in. ; on the Sea of Aral 5 or 6 in. 
In south-western Siberia it is 12 or 14 in., diminishing as we proceed 
eastward to 6 or 7 in. at Barnaul, and to 5 or 6 in. at Urga in northern 
Mongolia. In eastern Siberia it is about 15 to 20 in. In China we 
find about 23 in. to be the fall at Peking; while at Canton, which lies 
nearly on the northern tropic and the region of the south-west 
monsoon is entered, the quantity is increased to 78 in. At Batavia 
in Java the fall is about 78 in. ; at Singapore it is nearly 100 in. 
The quantity increases considerably on that part of the coast 
of the Malay peninsula which is not sheltered from the south-west 
by Sumatra. On the Tenasserim and Burmese coast falls of more 
than 200 in. are registered, and the quantity is here nowhere less 
than 75 or 80 in., which is about the average of the eastern part 
of the delta of the Ganges, Calcutta standing at about 64 in. On the 
hills that flank Bengal on the east the fall is very great. On the 
Khasi hills, at an elevation of about 4500 ft., the average of ten 
years is more than 550 in. As much as 150 in. has been measured 
in one month, and 610 in. in one year. On the west coast of the 
Indian peninsula the fall at the sea-level varies from about 75 to 
100 in., and at certain elevations on the mountains more than 
250 in. is commonly registered, with intermediate quantities at inter- 
vening localities. On the east coast the fall is far less, nowhere rising 
to 50 in., and towards the southern apex of the peninsula being 
reduced to 25 or 30 in. Ceylon shows from 60 to 80 in. As we 
recede from the coast the fall diminishes, till it is reduced to about 
25 or 30 in. at the head of the Gangetic plain. The tract along the 
Indus to within 60 or 80 m. of the Himalaya is almost rainless, 6 or 
8 in. being the fall in the southern portion of the Punjab. On the 
outer ranges of the Himalaya the yearly fall amounts to about 200 in. 
on the east in Sikkim, and gradually diminishes on the west, where 
north of the Punjab it is about 70 or 80 in. In the interior of the 
chain the rain is far less, and the quantity of precipitation is so small in 
Tibet that it can be hardly measured. It is to the greatly reduced 
fall of snow on the northern faces of the highest ranges of the Hima- 
laya that is to be attributed the higher level of the snow-line, a 
phenomenon which was long a cause of discussion. 

In Afghanistan, Persia, Asia Minor and Syria, winter and spring 
appear to be the chief seasons of condensation. In other parts of 
Asia the principal part of the rain falls between May and September, 
that is, in the hottest half of the year. In the islands under the 
equator the heaviest fall is between October and February. (R. S.) 

Flora and Fauna 

The general assemblage of animals and plants found over northern 
Asia resembles greatly that found in the parts of Europe which are 
adjacent and have a similar climate. Siberia, north of the 50th 
parallel, has a climate not much differing from a similarly situated 
portion of Europe, though the winters are more severe and the 
summers hotter. The rainfall, though moderate, is still sufficient 
to maintain the supply of water in the great rivers that traverse 
the country to the Arctic Sea, and to support an abundant vege- 
tation. A similar affinity exists between the life of the southern 
parts of Europe and that in the zone of Asia extending from the 
Mediterranean across to the Himalaya and northern China. This 
belt, which embraces Asia Minor, northern Persia, Afghanistan, and 
the southern slopes of the Himalaya, from its elevation has a tem- 
perate climate, and throughout it the rainfall is sufficient to main- 
tain a vigorous vegetation, while the summers, though hot, and the 
winters, though severe, are not extreme. The plants and animals 
along it are found to have a marked similarity of character to 
those of south Europe, with which region the zone is virtually 
continuous. 

The extremely dry and hot tracts which constitute an almost 
unbroken desert from Arabia, through south Persia and Baluchistan, 
to Sind, are characterized by considerable uniformity in the types 
of life, which closely approach to those of the neighbouring hot and 
dry regions of Africa. The region of the heavy periodical summer 
rains and high temperature, which comprises India, the Indo- 
Chinese peninsula, and southern China, as well as the western part 
of the Malay Archipelago, is also marked by much similarity in the 
plants and animals throughout' its extent. The area between the 
southern border of Siberia and the margin of the temperate alpine 
zone of the Himalaya and north China, comprising what are 
commonly called central Asia, Turkestan, Mongolia and western 
Manchuria, is an almost rainless region, having winters of extreme 
severity and summers of intense heat. Its animals and plants have 
a special character suited to the peculiar climatal conditions, more 
closely allied to those of the adjacent northern Siberian tract than 
of the other bordering regions. The south-eastern parts of the Malay 
Archipelago have much in common with the Australian continent, 
to which they adjoin, though their affinities are chiefly Indian. 
North China and Japan also have many forms of life in common. 
Much still remains to be done in the exploration of China and eastern 
Asia; but it is known that many of the special forms of this region 
extend to the Himalaya, while others clearly indicate a connexion 
with North America. 



The foregoing brief review of the principal territdrial divisions 
according to which the forms of life are distributed in Asia, indicates 
how close is the dependence of this distribution on climatic con- 
ditions, and this will be made more apparent by a somewhat fuller 
account of the main features of the flora and fauna. 

Flora. — The flora of the whole of northern Asia is in essentials 
the same as that of northern Europe, the differences being due rather 
to variations of species than of genera. The absence of Northern 
the oak and of all heaths east of the Ural may be noticed. Asia. 
Pines, larch, birch are the principal trees on the moun- 
tains; willow, alders and poplars on the lower ground. The 
northern limit of the pine in Siberia is about 70° N. 

Along the warm temperate zone, from the Mediterranean to the 
Himalaya, extends a flora essentially European in character. Many 
European species reach the central Himalaya, though few are known 
in its eastern parts. The genera common to the Himalaya and 
Europe are much more abundant, and extend throughout the chain, 
and to all elevations. There is also a corresponding diffusion of 
Japanese and Chinese forms along this zone, these being most numer- 
ous in the eastern Himalaya, and less frequent in the west. 

The truly tropical flora of the hotter and wetter regions of eastern 
India is continuous with that of the Malayan peninsula and islands, 
and extends along the lower ranges of the Himalaya, gradually 
becoming less marked and rising to lower elevations as we go 
westward, where the rainfall diminishes and the winter cold 
increases. 

The vegetation of the higher and therefore cooler and less rainy 
ranges of the Himalaya has greater uniformity of character along the 
whole chain, and a closer general approach to European forms is 
maintained; an increased number of species is actually identical, 
among these being found, at the greatest elevations, many alpine 
plants believed to be identical with species of the north Arctic regions. 
On reaching the Tibetan plateau, with the increased dryness the 
flora assumes many features of the Siberian type. Many true 
Siberian species are found, and more Siberian genera. Some of the 
Siberian forms, thus brought into proximity with the Indian flora, 
extend to the rainy parts of the mountains, and even to the plains of 
upper India. Assemblages of marine plants form another remark- 
able feature of Tibet, these being frequently met with growing at 
elevations of 14,000 to 15,000 ft. above the sea, more especially in 
the vicinity of the many salt lakes of those regions. 

The vegetation of the hot and dry region of the south-west of the 
continent consists largely of plants which are diffused over Africa, 
Baluchistan and Sind; many of these extend into the hotter parts 
of India, and not a few common Egyptian plants are to be met with 
in the Indian peninsula. 

The whole number of species of plants indigenous in the region of 
south-eastern Asia, which includes India and the Malayan peninsula 
and islands, from about the 65th to the 105th meridian, Indian 
was estimated by Sir J. D. Hooker at 12,000 to 15,000. region. 
The principal orders, arranged according to their numerical 
importance, are as follows: — Leguminosae.Rubiaceae, Orchidaceae, 
Compositae, Gramineae, Euphorbiaceae, Acanthaceae, Cyperaceae 
and Labiatae. But within this region there is a very great variation 
between the vegetation of the more humid and the more arid regions, 
while the characteristics of the flora on the higher mountain ranges 
differ wholly from those of the plains. In short, we have a somewhat 
heterogeneous assemblage of tropical, temperate and alpine plants, 
as has been already briefly indicated, of which, however, the tropical 
are so far dominant as to give their character to the flora viewed as a 
whole. The Indian flora contains a more general and complete 
illustration of almost all the chief natural families of all parts of the 
world than any other country. Compositae are comparatively rare; 
so also Gramineae and Cyperaceae are in some places deficient, and 
Labiatae, Leguminosae and ferns in others. Euphorbiaceae and 
Scrophulariaceae and Orchidaceae are universally present, the last 
in specially large proportions. 

The perennially humid regions of the Malayan peninsula and 
western portion of the archipelago are everywhere covered with 
dense forest, rendered difficult to traverse by the thorny cane, a 
palm of the genus Calamus, which has its greatest development in 
this part of Asia. The chief trees belong to the orders of Terebinth- 
aceae, Sapindaceae, Meliaceae, Clusiaceae, Dipterocarpaceae, Tern- 
stroemiaceae, Leguminosae, laurels, oaks and figs, with Dilleniaceae, 
Sapotaceae and nutmegs. Bamboos and palms, with Pandanus and 
Dracaena, are also abundant. A similar forest flora extends along 
the mountains of eastern India to the Himalaya, where it ascends to 
elevations varying from 6000 to 7000 ft. on the east to 3000 or 4000 
ft. on the west. 

The arboreous forms which least require the humid and equable 
heat of the more truly tropical and equatorial climates, and are best 
able to resist the high temperatures and excessive drought of the 
northern Indian hot months from April to June, are certain Legu- 
minosae,. Bauhinia, Acacia, Butea and Dalbergia, Bombax, Shorea, 
Nauclea, Lager stroemia, and Bignonia, a few bamboos and palms, 
with others which extend far beyond the tropic, and give a tropical 
aspect to the forest to the extreme northern border of the Indian 
plain. 

Of the herbaceous vegetation of the more rainy regions may be 
noted the Orchidaceae,;Orontiaceae, Scitamineae, with ferns and other 



746 



ASIA 



[FLORA 



Cryptogams, besides Gramineae and Cyperaceae. Among these 
some forms, as among the trees, extend much beyond the tropic and 
ascend into the temperate zones on the mountains, of which may be 
mentioned Begonia, Osbeckia, various Cyrtandraceae, Scitamineae, 
and a few epiphytical orchids. 

Of the orders most largely developed, in south India, and more 
sparingly elsewhere, may be named Aurantiaceae, Dipterocarpaceae, 
lialsaminaceae, Ebenaceae, Jasmineae, and Cyrtandraceae; but 
of these few contain as many as ioo peculiar Indian species. 
Nepenthes may be mentioned as a genus specially developed in the 
Malayan area, and extending from New Caledonia to Madagascar; 
it is found as far north as the Khasi hills, and in Ceylon, but does 
not appear on the Himalaya or in the peninsula of India. The 
Balsaminaceae may be named as being rare in the eastern region 
and very abundant in the peninsula. A distinct connexion between 
the flora of the peninsula and Ceylon and that of eastern tropical 
Africa is observable not only in the great similarity of many of the 
more truly tropical forms, and the identity of families and genera 
found in both regions, but in a more remarkable manner in the 
likeness of the mountain flora of this part of Africa to that of the 
peninsula, in which several species occur believed to be identical 
with Abyssinian forms. This connexion is further established by 
the absence from both areas of oaks, conifers and cycads, which, 
as regards the first two families, is a remarkable feature of the flora 
of the peninsula and Ceylon, as the mountains rise to elevations in 
which both of them are abundant to the north and east. With these 
facts it has to be noticed that many of the principal forms of the 
eastern flora are absent or comparatively rare in the peninsula and 
Ceylon. 

The general physiognomy of the Indian flora is mainly determined 
by the conditions of humidity of climate. The impenetrable shady 
forests of the Malay peninsula and eastern Bengal, of the west 
coast of the Indian peninsula, and of Ceylon, offer a strong con- 
trast to the more loosely-timbered districts of the drier regions of 
central India and the north-western Himalaya. The forest areas of 
India include the dense vegetation and luxuriant growth of the 
Tarai jungles at the foot of the eastern Himalaya, and wide stretches 
of loosely-timbered country which are a prevailing feature in the 
Central Provinces and parts of Madras. Where the lowlands are 
highly cultivated they are adorned with planted wood, and where 
they are cut off from rain they are nearly completely desert. 

The higher mountains rise abruptly from the plains; on their 
slopes, clothed below almost exclusively with the more tropical forms, 
a vegetation of a warm temperate character, chiefly evergreen, soon 
begins to prevail, comprising Magnoliaceae, Terns troemiaceae, sub- 
tropical Rosaceae, rhododendron, oak, Ilex, Symplocos, Lauraceae, 
Pinus longifolia, with mountain forms of truly tropical orders, palms, 
Pandanus, Musa, Vitis, Verr.onia, and many others. On the east 
the vegetation of the Himalaya is most abundant and varied. The 
forest extends, with great luxuriance, to an elevation of 12,000 ft., 
above which the sub-alpine region may be said to begin, in which 
rhododendron scrub often covers the ground up to 13,000 or 14,000 ft. 
Only one pine is found below 8000 ft., above which several other 
Coniferae occur. Plantains, tree-ferns, bamboos, several Calami, 
and other palms, and Pandanus, are abundant at the lower levels. 
Between 4000 and 8000 ft. epiphytal orchids are very frequent, and 
reach even to 10,000 ft. Vegetation ascends on the drier and less 
snowy mountain slopes of Tibet to above 18,000 ft. On the west, 
with the drier climate, the forest is less luxuriant and dense, and the 
hill-sides and the valleys better cultivated. The warm mountain 
slopes are covered with Pinus longifolia, or with oaks and rhododen- 
dron, and the forest is not commonly dense below 8000 ft., excepting 
in some of the more secluded valleys at a low elevation. From 
8000 to 12,000 ft., a thick forest of deciduous trees is almost universal, 
above which a sub-alpine region is reached, and vegetation as on the 
east continues up to 18,000 ft. or more. The more tropical forms 
of the east, such as the tree-ferns, do not reach west of Nepal. The 
cedar or deodar is hardly indigenous east of the sources of the 
Ganges, and at about the same point the forms of the west begin 
to be more abundant, increasing in number as we advance towards 
Afghanistan. 

The cultivated plants of the Indian region include wheat, barley, 
rice and maize; various millets, Sorghum, Penicillaria, Panicum 
and Eleusine ; many pulses, peas and beans ; mustard and rape ; 
ginger and turmeric; pepper and capsicum; several Cucurbitaceae; 
tobacco, Sesamum, poppy, Crotolaria and Cannabis; cotton, indigo 
and sugar; coffee and tea; oranges, lemons of many sorts; pome- 
granate, mango, figs, peaches, vines and plantains. The more 
common palms are Cocos, Phoenix and Borassus, supplying cocoa-nut 
and toddy. Indian agriculture combines the harvests of the tropical 
and temperate zones. North of the tropic the winter cold is sufficient 
to admit of the cultivation of almost all the cereals and vegetables 
of Europe, wheat being sown in November and reaped early in April. 
In this same region the summer heat and rain provide a thoroughly 
tropical climate, in which rice and other tropical cereals are freely 
raised, being as a rule sown early in July and reaped in September 
or October. In southern India, and the other parts of Asia and of 
the islands having a similar climate, the difference of the winter and 
summer half-years is not sufficient to admit of the proper cultivation 
of wheat or barley. The other cereals may be seen occasionally, 



where artificial irrigation is practised, in all stages of progress at 
all seasons of the year, though the queries of agriculture are,
as a general rule, limited to the rainy months, when alone is the 
requisite supply of water commonly forthcoming. 

The trees of India producing economically useful timber are 
comparatively few, owing to the want of durability of the wood, in 
the extremely hot and moist climate. The teak, Tectona grandis, 
supplies the finest timber. It is found in greatest perfection in the 
forests of the west coasts of Burma and the Indian peninsula, where 
the rainfall is heaviest, growing to a height of 100 or 150 ft., mixed 
with other trees and bamboos. The sai, Shorea robusta, a very 
durable wood, is most abundant along the skirts of the Himalaya 
from Assam to the Punjab, and is found in central India, to which 
the teak also extends. The sal grows to a large size, and is more 
gregarious than the teak. Of other useful woods found in the plains 
may be named the babool, Acacia; toon, Cedrela; and sissoo, 
Dalbergia. The only timber in ordinary use obtained from the 
Himalaya proper is the deodar, Cedrus deodara. Besides these are the 
sandalwood, Santalum, of southern India, and many sorts of bamboo 
found in all parts of the country. The cinchona has recently been 
introduced with complete success; and the mahogany of America 
reaches a large size, and gives promise of being grown for use as 
timber. 

The flora of the rainless region of south-western Asia is continuous 
with the desert flora of northern and eastern Africa, and extends 
from the coast of Senegal to the meridian of 75 E., or from western 
the great African desert to the border of the rainless tract . . 
along the Indus and the southern parts of the Punjab. 
It includes the peninsula of Arabia, the shores of the Persian Gulf, 
south Persia, and Afghanistan and Baluchistan. On the west its 
limit is in the Cape Verde Islands, and it is partially represented in 
Abyssinia. 

The more common plants in the most characteristic part of this 
region in southern Arabia are Capparidaceae, Euphorbiaceae, and 
a few Leguminosae, a Reseda and Dipterygium ; palms, Polygonaceae, 
ferns, and other cryptogams, are rare. The number of families 
relative to the area is very small, and the number of genera and 
species equally restricted, in very many cases a single species being 
the only representative of an order. The aspect of the vegetation 
is very peculiar, and is commonly determined by the predominance 
of some four or five species, the rest being either local or sparingly 
scattered over the area. The absence of the ordinary bright green 
colours of vegetation is another peculiarity of this flora, almost all 
the plants having glaucous or whitened stems. Foliage is reduced to 
a minimum, the moisture of the plant being stored up in massive 
or fleshy stems against the long-continued drought. Aridity has 
favoured the production of spines as a defence from external attack, 
sharp thorns are frequent, and asperities of various sorts predominate. 
Many species produce gums and resins, their stems being encrusted 
with the exudations, and pungency and aromatic odour is an almost 
universal quality of the plants of desert regions. 

The cultivated plants of Arabia are much the same as those of 
northern India — wheat, barley, and the common Sorghum, with 
dates and lemons, cotton and indigo. To these must be added coffee, 
which is restricted to the slopes of the western hills. Among the 
more mountainous regions of the south-western part of Arabia, 
known as Arabia Felix, the summits of which rise to 6000 or 7000 ft., 
the rainfall is sufficient to develop a more luxuriant vegetation, and 
the valleys have a flora like that of similarly situated parts of 
southern Persia, and the less elevated parts of Afghanistan and 
Baluchistan, partaking of the characters of that of the hotter Medi- 
terranean region. In these countries aromatic shrubs are abundant. 
Trees are rare, and almost restricted to Pistacia, Celtis and Dodonaea, 
with poplars, and the date palm. Prickly forms of Statice and 
Astragalus cover the dry hills. In the spring there is an abundant 
herbaceous vegetation, including many bulbous plants, with genera, 
if not species, identical with those of the Syrian region, some of which 
extend to the Himalaya. 

The flora of the northern part of Afghanistan approximates to that 
of the contiguous western Himalaya. Quercus Ilex, the evergreen 
oak of southern Europe, is found in forests as far east as the Sutlej, 
accompanied with other European forms. In the higher parts of 
Afghanistan and Persia Boraginaceae and thistles abound ; gigantic 
Umbelliferae, such as Ferula, Galbanum, Dorema, Bubon, Peucedanum, 
Prangos, and others, alsc characterize the same districts, and some 
of them extend into Tibet. 

The flora of Asia Minor and northern Persia differs but little from 
that of the southern parts of Europe. The mountains are clothed, 
where the fall of rain is abundant, with forests of Quercus, Fagus, 
Ulmus, Acer, Car pinus and Corylus, and various Coniferae. Of 
these the only genus that is not found on the Himalaya is Fagus. 
Fruit trees of the plum tribe abound. The cultivated plants are 
those of southern Europe. 

The vegetation of the Malayan Islands is for the most part that 
of the wetter and hotter region of India; but the greater uniformity 
of the temperature and humidity leads to the predentin- Eastern 
ance of certain tropical forms not so conspicuous in India, Asia. 
while the proximity of the Australian continent has 
permitted the partial diffusion of Australian types which are not 
seen in India. The liquidambar and nutmeg may be noticed among 



FAUNA] 



ASIA 



747 



the former; the first is one of the most conspicuous trees in java, 
on the mountains of the eastern part of which the casuarina, one 
of the characteristic forms of Australia, is also abundant. Rhodo- 
dendrons occur in Borneo and Sumatra, descending to the level of 
the sea. On the mountains of-Java there appears to be no truly 
alpine flora; Saxifraga is not found. In Borneo some of the tem- 
perate forms of Australia appear on the higher mountains. On the 
other islands similar characteristics are to be observed, Australian 
genera extending to the Philippines, and even to southern China. 

The analysis of the Hong Kong flora indicates that about three- 
fifths of the species are common to the Indian region, and nearly 
all the remainder are either Chinese or local- forms. The number 
of species common to southern China, Japan and northern Asia is 
small. The cultivated plants of China are, with a few exceptions, 
the same as those of India. South China, therefore, seems, botanic- 
ally, hardly distinct from the great Indian region, into which many 
Chinese forms penetrate, as before noticed. The flora of north 
China, which is akin to that of Japan, shows manifest relation to that 
of the neighbouring American continent, from which many temperate 
forms extend, reaching to the Himalaya, almost as far as Kashmir. 
Very little is known of the plants of the interior of northern China, 
but it seems probable that a complete botanical connexion is estab- 
lished between it and the temperate region of the Himalaya. 

The vegetation of the dry region of central Asia is remarkable for 
the great relative number of Chenopodiaceae, Salicornia and other 
Central sa ' t pl anl - s being common; Polygonaceae also are abun- 
Asia. dant; leafless forms being of frequent occurrence, which 

gives the vegetation a very remarkable aspect. Peculiar 
forms of Leguminosae also prevail, and these, with many of the other 
plants of the southern and drier regions of Siberia, or of the colder 
regions of the desert tracts of Persia and Afghanistan, extend into 
Tibet, where the extreme drought and the hot (nearly vertical) sun 
combine to produce a summer climate not greatly differing from that 
of the plains of central Asia. 

Fauna. — The zoological provinces of Asia correspond very closely 
with the botanical. The northern portion of Asia, as far south as 
Zoological tne Himalaya, is not zoologically distinct from Europe, 
regions. an d these two areas, with the strip of Africa north of the 
Atlas, constitute the Palaearctic region of Dr Sclater, 
whose zoological primary divisions of the earth have met with the 
general approval of naturalists. The south-eastern portion of Asia- 
with the adjacent islands of Sumatra, Java, Borneo and the Philip- 
pines, form his Indian region. The extreme south-west part of the 
continent constitutes a separate zoological district, comprising 
Arabia, Palestine and southern Persia, and reaching, like the hot 
desert botanical tract, to Baluchistan and Sind; it belongs to what 
Dr Sclater calls the Ethiopian region, which extends over Africa, 
south of the Atlas. Celebes, Papua, and the other islands east of 
Java beyond Wallace's line, fall within the Australian region. 

Nearly all the mammals of Europe also occur in northern Asia, 
where, however, the Palaearctic fauna is enriched by numerous 
mammals additional species. The characteristic groups belong 
and birds. most ly to forms which are restricted to cold and temperate 
regions. Consequently the Quadrumana, or monkeys, 
are nearly unrepresented, a single species occurring in Japan, and 
one or two others in northern China and Tibet. Insectivorous bats 
are numerous, but the frugivorous division of this order is only repre- 
sented by a single species in Japan. Carnivora are also numerous, 
particularly the frequenters of cold climates, such as bears, weasels, 
wolves and foxes. Of the Insectivora numerous forms of moles, 
shrews and hedgehogs prevail. The Rodents are also well repre- 
sented by various squirrels, mice and hares. Characteristic forms 
of this order in northern Asia are the marmots (Arctomys) and the 
pikas, or tailless hares (Lagomys). The great order of Ungulata is 
represented by various forms of sheep, as many as ten or twelve wild 
species of Oi'is being met with in the mountain chains of Asia; and 
more sparingly by several peculiar forms of antelope, such as the 
saiga {Saiga tatarica), and the Gazella gutturosa, or yellow sheep. 
Coming to the deer, we also meet with characteristic forms in 
northern Asia, especially those belonging to the typical genus Cervus. 
The musk deer (Moschus) is also quite restricted to northern Asia, 
and is one of its most peculiar types. 

The ornithology of northern Asia is even more closely allied to 
that of Europe than the mammal fauna. Nearly three-fourths of 
the well-known species of Europe extend through Siberia into the 
islands of the Japanese empire. Here again we have an absence of 
all tropical forms, and a great development of groups characteristic 
of cold and temperate regions. One of the most peculiar of these 
is the genus Phasianus, of which splendid birds all the species are 
restricted in their wild state to northern Asia. The still more 
magnificently clad gold pheasants (Thaumalea) , and the eared 
pheasants {Crossoptilon), are also confined to certain districts in the 
mountains of north-eastern Asia. Amongst the Passeres, such forms 
as the larks, stone-chats, finches, linnets and grosbeaks are well 
developed, and exhibit many species. 

The mammal fauna of the Indian region of Asia is much more 
highly developed than that of the Palaearctic. The Quadrumana 
are represented by several peculiar genera, amongst which are 
Semnopithecus, Hylobates and Simla. Two peculiar forms of the 
Lemurine group are also met with. Both the insectivorous and 



frugivorous divisions of the bats are well represented. Amongst 
the Insectivora very peculiar forms are found, such as Gymnura 
and Tupaia. The Carnivora. are likewise numerous ; and this region 
may be considered as the true home of the tiger, though this animal 
has wandered far north into the Palaearctic division of Asia. Other 
characteristic Carnivora are civets, various ichneumons, and the 
benturong (Arcticlis). Two species of bears are likewise restricted 
to the Indian region. In the order of Rodents squirrels are very 
numerous, and porcupines of two genera are met with. The Indian 
region is the home of the Indian elephant — one of the two sole remain- 
ing representatives of the order Proboscidea. Of the Ungulates, four 
species of rhinoceros and one of tapir are met with, besides several 
peculiar forms of the swine family. The Bovidae, or hollow-horned 
ruminants, are represented by several genera of antelopes, and by 
species of true Bos — such as B. sondaicus, B. frontalis and B. bubalus. 
Deer are likewise numerous, and the peculiar group of chevrotains 
(Tragulus) is characteristic of the Indian region. Finally, this 
region affords us representatives of the order Edentata, in the shape 
of several species of Manis, or scaly ant-eater. 

The assemblage of birds of the Indian region is one of the richest 
and most varied in the world, being surpassed only by that of 
tropical America. Nearly every order, except that of the Struthiones 
or ostriches, is well represented, and there are many peculiar genera 
not found elsewhere, such as Buceros, Harpactes, Lophophorus, 
Euplocamus, Pavo and Ceriornis. The Phasianidae (exclusive of 
true Phasianus) are highly characteristic of this region, as are like- 
wise certain genera of barbets (Megalaema) , parrots (Palaeornis), and 
crows (Dendrocitta, Urocissa and Cissa). The family Eurylaemidae 
is entirely confined to this part of Asia. 

The Ethiopian fauna plays but a subordinate part in Asia, intrud- 
ing only into the south-western corner, and occupying the desert 
districts of Arabia and Syria, although some of the characteristic 
species reach still farther into Persia and Sind, and even into western 
India. The lion and the hunting-leopard, which may be considered 
as, in this epoch at least, Ethiopian types, extend thus far, besides 
various species of jerboa and other desert-loving forms. 

In the birds, the Ethiopian type is shown by the prevalence of larks 
and^stone-chats, and by the complete absence of the many peculiar 
genera of the Indian region. 

The occurrence of mammals of the Marsupial order in the Molucca 
Islands and Celebes, while none have been found in the adjacent 
islands of Java and Borneo, lying on the west of Wallace's line, or 
in the Indian region, shows that the margin of the Australian region 
has here been reached. The same conclusion is indicated by the 
absence from the Moluccas and Celebes of various other Mammals, 
Quadrumana, Carnivora, Insectivora and Ruminants, which abound 
in the western part of the Archipelago. Deer do not extend into 
New Guinea, in which island the genus Sus appears to have its 
eastern limit. A peculiar form of baboon, Cynopithecus, and the 
singular ruminant, Anoa, found in Celebes, seem to have no relation 
to Asiatic animals, and rather to be allied to those in Africa. 

The birds of these islands present similar peculiarities. Those of 
the Indian region abruptly disappear at, and many Australian forms 
reach but do not pass, the line above spoken of. Species of birds akin 
to those of Africa also occur in Celebes. 

Of the' marine orders of Sirenia and Cetacea the Dugong, Halicore, 
is exclusively found in the Indian Ocean; and a dolphin, Platanista, 
peculiar to the Ganges, ascends that river to a great distance from 
the sea. 

Of the sea fishes of Asia, among the Acanthopterygii, or spiny- 
rayed fishes, the Percidae, or perches, are largely represented ; the 
genus Serranus, which has only one species in Europe, is Fishes 
very numerous in Asia, and the forms are very large. 
Other allied genera are abundant, and extend from the Indian seas 
to eastern Africa. The Squamipennes, or scaly-finned fishes, are 
principally found in the seas of southern Asia, and especially near 
coral reefs. The Mullidae, or red mullets, are largely represented 
by genera differing from those of Europe. The Polynemidae, which 
range from the Atlantic through the Indian Ocean to the Pacific, 
supply animals from which isinglass is prepared; one of them, the 
mango-fish, esteemed a great delicacy, inhabits the seas from the 
Bay of Bengal to Siam. The Sciaenidae extend from the Bay 
of Bengal to China, but are not known to the westward. The 
Stromateidae, or pomfrets, resemble the dory, a Mediterranean form, 
and extend to China and the Pacific. The sword fishes, Xiphiidae, 
the lancet fishes, Acanthuridae, and the scabbard fishes, Trichuridae, 
are distributed through the seas of south Asia. Mackerels of various 
genera abound, as well as gobies, blennies and mullets. 

Among the Anacanthini, the cod family so well known in Europe 
shows but one or two species in the seas of south Asia, though the 
soles and allied fishes are numerous along the coasts. Of the Physos- 
tomi, the siluroids are abundant in the estuaries and muddy waters; 
the habits of some of these fishes are remarkable, such as that of the 
males carrying the ova in their mouths till the young are hatched. 
The small family of Scopelidae affords the gelatinous Harpodon, or 
bumalo. The gar-fish and flying-fishes are numerous, extending 
into the seas of Europe. The Ciupeidae, or herrings, are most 
abundant; and anchovies, or sardines, are found in shoals, but at 
irregular and uncertain intervals. The marine eels, Muraenidae, are 
more numerous towards the Malay Archipelago than in the Indian 



74 8 



ASIA 



[ETHNOLOGY 



seas. Forms of sea-horses {Hippocampus), pipe-fishes (Syngnathus), 
fife-fishes {Sclerodermus) , and sun-fish, globe-fish, and other allied 
forms of Gymnodontes, are not uncommon. 

Of the cartilaginous fishes, Chondropterygii, the true sharks and 
hammer-headed sharks, are numerous. The dog-fish also is found, 
one species extending from the Indian seas to the Cape of Good 
Hope. The saw-fishes, Pristidae, the electrical rays, Torpedinae, 
ar d ordinary rays and skates, are also found in considerable numbers. 

The fresh waters of southern Asia are deficient in the typical 
forms of the Acanthopterygii, and are chiefly inhabited by carp, 
siluroids, simple or spined eels, and the walking and climbing fishes. 
The Siluridae attain their chief development in tropical regions. 
Only one Silurus is found in Europe, and the same species extends 
to southern Asia and Africa. The Salmonidae are entirely absent 
from the waters of southern Asia, though they exist in the rivers 
that flow into the Arctic Ocean and the neighbouring parts of the 
northern Pacific, extending perhaps to Formosa; and trout, though 
unknown in Indian rivers, are found beyond the watershed of the 
Indus, in the streams flowing into the Caspian. The Cyprinidae, or 
carp, are largely represented in southern Asia, and there grow to a 
size unknown in Europe; a Barbus in the Tigris has been taken of 
the weight of 300 lb. The chief development of this family, both 
as to size and number of forms, is in the mountain regions with a 
temperate climate ; the smaller species are found in the hotter regions 
and in the low-lying rivers. Of the Clupeidae, or herrings, numerous 
forms occur in Asiatic waters, ascending the rivers many hundred 
miles; one of the best-known of Indian fishes, the hilsa, is of this 
family. The sturgeons, which abound in the Black Sea and Caspian, 
and ascend the rivers that fall into them, are also found in Asiatic 
Russia, and an allied form extends to southern China. The walking 
or climbing fishes, which are peculiar to south-eastern Asia and 
Africa, are organized so as to be able to breathe when out of the 
water, and they are thus fitted to exist under conditions which 
would be fatal to other fishes, being suited to live in the regions of 
periodical drought and rain in which they are found. 

The insects of all southern Asia, including India south of the 
Himalaya, China, Siam and the Malayan Islands, belong to one 
Insects. g rou P : n °t only the genera, but even the species are often 
the same on the opposite sides of the Bay of Bengal. 
The connexion with Africa is marked by the occurrence of many 
genera common to Africa and India, and confined to those two 
regions, and similarities of form are not uncommon there in cases 
in which the genera are not peculiar. Of Coleopterous insects known 
to inhabit east Siberia, nearly one-third are found in western 
Europe. The European forms seem to extend to about 30 N., 
south of which the Indo-Malayan types are met with, Japan being 
of the Europeo-Asiatic group. The northern forms extend generally 
along the south coast of the Mediterranean up to the border of the 
great desert, and from the Levant to the Caspian. 

Of the domesticated animals of Asia may first be mentioned the 
elephant. It does not breed in captivity, and is not found wild west 
Domesti- °^ ' ne J umna river in northern India. The horse is pro- 
cated duced, in the highest perfection in Arabia and the hot 

animals. an d dry countries of western Asia. Ponies are most 
esteemed from the wetter regions of the east, and the 
hilly tracts. Asses are abundant in most places, and two wild species 
occur. The horned cattle include the humped oxen and buffaloes of 
India, and the yak of Tibet. A hybrid between the yak and Indian 
cattle, called zo, is commonly reared in Tibet and the Himalaya. 
Sheep abound in the more temperate regions, and goats are univers- 
ally met with ; both of these animals are used as beasts of burden 
in the mountains of Tibet. The reindeer of northern Siberia call 
also for special notice; they are used for the saddle as well as for 
draught. (R. S.) 

Ethnology 

Asia, including its outlying islands, has become the dwelling-place 
of all the great families into which the races of men have been 
Racial divided. By far the largest area is occupied by the 
types. Mongolian group. These have yellow-brown skins, black 

eyes and hair, flat noses and oblique eyes. They are short 
in stature, with little hair on the body and face. In general terms 
they extend, with modifications of character probably due to ad- 
mixture with other types and to varying conditions of life, over the 
whole of northern .Asia as far south as the plains bordering the 
Caspian Sea, including Tibet and China, and also over the Indo- 
Malayan peninsula and Archipelago, excepting Papua and some of 
the more eastern islands. 

Next in numerical importance to the Mongolians are the races 
which have been called by Professor Huxley Melanochroic and 
Xanthochroic. The former includes the dark-haired people of 
southern Europe, and extends over North Africa, Asia Minor, 
Syria to south-western Asia, and through Arabia and Persia to India. 
The latter race includes the fair-haired people of northern Europe, 
and extends over nearly the same area as the Melanochroi, with 
which race it is greatly intermixed. The Xanthochroi have fair 
skins, blue eyes and light hair; and others have dark skins, eyes and 
hair, and are of a slighter frame. Together they constitute what 
were once called the Caucasian races. The Melanochroi are not 
considered by Huxley to be one of the primitive modifications of 



mankind, but rather to be the result of the admixture of the Xantho- 
chroi with the Australoid type, next to be mentioned. 

The third group is that of the Australoid type. Their hair is dark, 
generally soft, never woolly. The eyes and skin are dark, the beard 
often well developed, the nose broad and flat, the lips coarse, and 
jaws heavy. This race is believed to form the basis of the people 
of the Indian peninsula, and of some of the hill tribes of central 
India, to whom the name Dravidian has been given, and by its 
admixture with the Melanochroic group to have given rise to the 
ordinary population of the Indian provinces. It is also probable that 
the Australoid family extends into south Arabia and Egypt. 

The last group, the Negroid, is represented by the races to which 
has been given the name of Negrito, from the small size of some of 
them. They are closely akin to the negroes of South Africa, and 
possess the characteristic dark skins, woolly but scanty beard and 
body hair, broad flat noses, and projecting lips of the African ; and 
are diffused over the Andaman Islands, a part of the Malay peninsula, 
the Philippines, Papua, and some of the neighbouring islands. The 
Negritos appear to be derived from a mixture of the true Negro with 
the Australoid type. 

The distribution of the Mongolian group in Asia offers no parti- 
cular difficulty. There is complete present, and probably previous 
long-existing, geographical continuity in the area over Mon- 
which they are found. There is also considerable simi- eolians. 
larity of climate and other conditions throughout the 
northern half of Asia which they occupy. The extension of modified 
forms of the Mongolian type over the whole American continent 
may be mentioned as a remarkable circumstance connected with 
this branch of the human race. 

The Mongolians of the northern half of Asia are almost entirely 
nomadic, hunters and shepherds or herdsmen. The least advanced 
of these, but far the most peaceful, are those that occupy Siberia. 
Farther south the best-known tribes are the Manchus, the Mongols 
proper, the Moguls and the Turks, all known under the name 
of Tatars, and to the ancients as Scythians, occupying from east 
to west the zone of Asia comprised between the 40th and 50th 
circles of N. lat. The Turks are Mahommedans; their tribes extend 
up the Oxus to" the borders of Afghanistan and Persia, and' to the 
Caspian, and under the name of Kirghiz into Russia, and their 
language is spoken over a large part of western Asia. Their letters 
are those of Persia. The Manchus and Mongols are chiefly Buddhist, 
with letters derived from the ancient Syriac. The Manchus are now 
said to be gradually falling under the influence of Chinese civilization, 
and to be losing their old nomadic habits, and even their peculiar 
language. The predatory habits of the Turkish, Mongolian and 
Manchu population of northern Asia, and their irruptions into other 
parts of the continent and into Europe, have produced very remark- 
able results in the history of the world. 

The Chinese branch of the Mongolian family are a thoroughly 
settled people of agriculturists and traders. They are partially 
Buddhist, and have a peculiar monosyllabic, uninflected language, 
with writing consisting of symbols, which represent words, not 
letters. 

The countries lying between India and the Mongolian are occu- 
pied by populations chiefly of the Mongolian and Chinese type, 
having languages fundamentally monosyllabic, but using letters 
derived from India, and adopting their religion, which is almost 
everywhere Buddhist, from the Indians. Of these^may be named 
the Tibetans, the Burmese and the Siamese. Cochm-China is more 
nearly Chinese in all respects. It is known that to the Tibeto- 
Chinese modifications of the pure Mongolian type all the eastern 
Burmese tribes — Chins, Kachins, Shans, &c. — belong (as indeed 
do the Burmese themselves), and that a cognate race occupies the 
Himalaya to the eastern limits of Kashmir. 

Some light has been thrown on the connexion between the Tibetan 
race and certain tribes of central India, the Bhils and Kols; and it 
seems more probable that these tribes are the remnants of a Mon- 
golian race which first displaced a yet earlier Negroid population, 
and was then itself shouldered out by a Caucasian irruption, than 
that they entered India by any of the northern passages within 
historic times. Mongolian settlements have lately been found very 
much farther extended into the border countries of north-west India 
than has been hitherto recognized. The Mingals, who, conjointly 
with the Brahuis, occupy the hills south of Kalat to the limits of the 
Rajput province of Las Bela, claim Mongolian descent, and traces 
of a Mongolian colony have been found in Makran. 

The Malays, who occupy the peninsula and most of the islands of 
the Archipelago called after them, are Mongols apparently modified 
by their very different climate, and by the maritime life Malays 
forced upon them by the physical conditions of the ' 

region they inhabit. As they are now known to us, they have under- 
gone a process of partial civilization, first at the hands of the Brah- 
minical Indians, from whom they borrowed a religion, and to some 
extent literature and an alphabet, and subsequently from intercourse 
with the Arabs, which has led to the adoption of Mahommedanism 
by most of them. 

The name of Aryan has been given to the races speaking languages 
derived from, or akin to, the ancient form of Sanskrit, who now 
occupy the temperate zone extending from the Mediterranean, 
across the highlands of Asia Minor, Persia and Afghanistan, to 



HISTORY] 



ASIA 



749 



India. The races speaking the languages akin to the ancient 
Assyrian, which are now mainly represented by Arabic, have been 
called Semitic, and occupy the countries south-west of 
Aryans. Persia, including Syria and Arabia, besides extending into 
North Africa. Though the languages of these races are very different 
they cannot be regarded as physically distinct, and they are both 
without doubt branches of the Melanochroi, modified by admixture 
with the neighbouring races, the Mongols, the Australoids and the 
Xanthochroi. 

The Aryans of India are probably the most settled and civilized 
of all Asiatic races. This type is found in its purest form in the north 
and north-west, while the mixed races and the population referred 
to the Australoid type predominate in the peninsula and southern 
India. The spoken languages of northern India are very various, 
differing one from another in the sort of degree that English differs 
from German, though all are thoroughly Sanskritic in their vocables, 
but with an absence of Sanskrit grammar that has given rise to 
considerable discussion. The languages of the south are Dravidian, 
not Sanskritic. The letters of both classes of languages, which also 
vary considerably, are all modifications of the ancient Pali, and 
probably derived from the Dravidians, not from the Aryans. They 
are written from left to right, exception being made of Urdu or 
Hindostani, the mixed language of the Mahommedan conquerors of 
northern India, the character used for writing which is the Persian. 
From the river Sutlej and the borders of the Sind desert, as far as 
Burma and to Ceylon, the religion of the great bulk of the people 
of India is Hindu or Brahminical, though the Mahommedans are 
often numerous, and in some places even in a majority. West of the 
Sutlej the population of Asia may be said to be wholly Mahommedan 
with the exception of certain relatively small areas in Asia Minor 
and Syria, where Christians predominate. The language of the 
Punjab does not differ very materially from that of Upper India. 
West of the Indus the dialects approach more to Persian, which 
language meets Arabic and Turki west of the Tigris, and along the 
Turkoman desert and the Caspian. Through the whole of this tract 
the letters are used which are common to Persian, Arabic and 
Turkish, written from right to left. 

Considerable progress has been made in the classification of the 
various races which occupy the continent to the west of the great 
Mongolian region. The ancient Sacae, or Scyths, are 
Racial recognized in the Aryan population, who may be found 
dlstri- ; n g rea t numbers and in their purest form in the more 

button. inaccessible mountains and glens of the central highlands. 
These Tajiks (as they are usually called) form the underlying popu- 
lation of Persia, Baluchistan, Afghanistan and Badakshan, and their 
language (in the central districts of Asia) is found to contain words 
of Aryan or Sanskrit derivation which are not known in Persian. 
They have been for the most part dispossessed of their country by 
Turkish immigration and conquests, but they still retain their original 
intellectual superiority over the Turkish and other mixed tribes by 
which they are surrounded. Uzbegs and Kirghiz have but small 
affinity with the Mongol element of Asia. They are the representa- 
tives of those countless Turkish irruptions which have taken place 
through all history. Of the two divisions (Kara Kirghiz and Kassak 
Kirghiz) into which the Kirghiz tribes are divided by Russian 
authorities, the Kassak Kirghiz is the more closely allied to the 
Mongol type; the Kara Kirghiz, who are found principally in the 
valleys of the Tian-shan and Altai mountains, being unmistakably 
Turkish. The Kipchaks are only a Kirghiz clan. The language of 
the Kirghiz is Turki and their religion that of Mahomet. As a 
nomadic people they have great contempt for the Sarts, who repre- 
sent the town dwellers of the tribe. The Kalmucks are a Buddhist 
and Mongolian people who originated in a confederacy of tribes 
dwelling in Dzungaria, migrated to Siberia, and settled on the 
Lower Volga. From thence they returned late in the 18th century 
to the reoccupation of their old ground in Kulja under the Chinese. 
The Turkoman is the purest form of the Turk element, and his lan- 
guage is the purest form of the Turkish tongue, which is represented 
at Constantinople by a comparatively mongrel, or mixed, dialect. 
Ethnographers have traced a connexion between the Turkoman of 
central Asia and the Teutonic races of Europe, based on a similarity 
of national customs and immemorial usage. Evidence of an original 
affinity between Turkoman and Rajput has also been found in the 
mutual possession by these races of a ruddy skin, so that as ethno- 
graphical inquiry- advances the Turk appears to recede from his 
Mongolian affinities and to approach the Caucasian. Turks and 
Mongols alike were doubtless included under the term Scyth by the 
ancients, and as Tatars by more modern writers, insomuch that the 
Turkish dynasty at Delhi, founded by Baber, is usually termed the 
Mogul dynasty, although there can be no distinction traced between 
the terms Mogul and Mongol. The general results of recent inquiry 
into the ethnography of Afghanistan is to support the general 
correctness of Bellew's theories of the origin of the Afghan races. 
The claim of the Durani Afghan to be a true Ben-i-Israel is certainly 
in no way weakened by any recent investigation. The influence of 
Greek culture in northern India is fully recognized, and the distri- 
bution of Greek colonies previous to Alexander's time is attested 
by practical knowledge of the districts they were said to occupy. 
The habitat of the Nysaeana, and the identity of certain tribes of 
Kafiristan with the descendants of these pre-Alexandrian colonists 



from the west, are also well established. To this day hymns are un- 
wittingly sung to Bacchus in the dales and glens of Kafiristan. The 
ethnographical status of the mixed tribes of the mountains that lie 
between Chitral and the Peshawar plains has been fairly well fixed 
by John Biddulph, and much patient inquiry in the vast fields of 
Baluchistan by Major Mockler, G. P. Tate and others has resulted 
in quite a new appreciation of the tribal origin of the great con- 
glomeration of Baluch peoples. 

The result of trans-border surveys to the north and west of India 
has been to establish the important geographical fact that it is by 
two gateways only, one on the north-west and one on the west of 
India, that the central Asiatic tides of immigration have flowed 
into the peninsula. The Kabul valley indicates the north-western 
entrance, and Makran indicates that on the west. By the Kabul 
valley route, which includes at its head the group of passes across 
the Hindu Kush which extend from the Khawak to the Kaoshan, all 
those central Asian hordes, be they Sacae, Yue-chi, Jats, Goths or 
Huns, who were driven towards the rich plains of the south, entered 
the Punjab. Some of them migrated from districts which belong to 
eastern Asia, but none of them penetrated into India by eastern 
passes. Such tides as set towards the Himalaya broke against their 
farther buttresses, leaving an interesting ethnographical flotsam 
in the northern valleys; but they never overflowed the Himalayan 
barrier. Later most of the historic invasions of India from central 
Asia followed the route which leads directly from Kabul to Peshawar 
and Delhi. 

By the western gates of Makran prehistoric irruptions from 
Mesopotamia broke into the plains of Lower Sind, and either passed 
on towards the central provinces of India or were absorbed in the 
highlands south of Kalat. In later centuries the Arabs from the 
west reached the valley of the Indus by their western route, and 
there established a dynasty which lasted for 300 years. The identi- 
fication of existing peoples with the various Scythic, Persian and 
Arab races who have passed from High Asia into the Indian border- 
land, has opened up a vast field of ethnographical inquiry which has 
hardly yet found adequate workers for its investigation. To such 
fields may be added the yet more complicated problems of those 
reflex waves which flowed backwards from India into the border 
highlands. (T. H. H.*) 

History 

1. The borders assigned to Asia on the west are somewhat 
arbitrary. The Urals indicate no real division of races, and in 
both Greek and Turkish times Asia Minor has been connected 
with the opposite shores of Europe rather than with the lands 
lying to the east. A juster view of early history is probably 
obtained by thinking of the countries round the Mediterranean 
as interacting on one another than by separating Palestine and 
Asia Minor as Asiatic. 

2. The words " Asiatic " and " Oriental " are often used as 
if they denoted a definite and homogeneous type, but Russians 
resemble Asiatics in many ways, and Turks, Hindus, 
Chinese, &c, differ in so many important points that A ? ,atl ° t 
the common substratum is small. It amounts to this, / s ^g. 
that Asiatics stand on a higher level than the natives 

of Africa or America, but do not possess the special material 
civilization of western Europe. As far as any common mental 
characteristic can be assigned it is also somewhat negative, 
namely, that Asiatics have not the same sentiment of independ- 
ence and freedom as Europeans. Individuals are thought of as 
members of a family, state or religion, rather than as entities 
with a destiny and rights of their own. This leads to autocracy 
in politics, fatalism in religion and conservatism in both. Hence, 
too, Asiatic history has large and simple outlines. Though 
longer chronologically than the annals of Europe, it is less 
eventful, less diversified and offers fewer personalities of interest. 
But the same conditions which render individual eminence 
difficult procure for it when once attained a more ready recogni- 
tion, and the conquerors and prophets of Asia have had more 
power and authority than their parallels in Europe. Jenghiz 
Khan and Timur covered more ground than Napoleon, and no 
European has had such an effect on the world as Mahomet. 

3. Attention has often been called to the religious character 
of Asia. Not only the great religions of the world — Buddhism, 
Christianity, Islam — but those of secondary import- Religion 
ance, such as Judaism, Parseeism, Taoism, are all and 
Asiatic. No European race left to itself has developed cMiiza- 
anything more than an unsystematic paganism. It is 

true that Greek philosophy advanced far beyond this stage, but 
it produced nothing sufficiently popular to be called a religion. 



75° 



ASIA 



[HISTORY 



On the other hand Christianity, though Asiatic in its origin and 
essential ideas, has to a large extent taken its present form on 
European soil, and some of its most important manifestations — 
notably the Roman Church — are European reconstructions* in 
which little of the Asiatic element remains. Christianity has 
made little way farther east then Asia Minor. Modern missions 
have made no great conquests there, and in earlier times the 
Nestorians and Jacobites who penetrated to central Asia, China 
and India, received respectful hearing, but never had anything 
like the success which attended Buddhism and Islam. Yet 
Buddhism has never made much impression west of India; and 
Islam is clearly repugnant to Europeans, for even when under 
Moslem rule ( as in Turkey) they refuse to accept it in a far larger 
proportion than did the Hindus in similar circumstances. Hence 
there is clearly a deep-seated difference between the religious 
feelings of the two continents. 

Since Asiatic records go back much farther than those of 
Europe, it is natural that Asia should be thought the birthplace 
of civilization. But this originality cannot be absolute, for, 
whatever may have been the relations of Babylonia and the 
Aryans, the latter brought civilization to India from the west, 
and it is not always clear whether similarity of government and 
institutions is the result of borrowing or of parallel development. 
Both in Europe and in Asia small feudal or aristocratic states 
tended to consolidate themselves into monarchies, but whereas 
in Europe from the early days of Rome onwards royalty has often 
been driven out and replaced temporarily or permanently by 
popular government, this change seems not to occur in Asia, 
where revolution means only a change of dynasty. The few 
cases where the government is not monarchical, as Arabia, seem 
to represent the persistence of very ancient conditions. 

The contemplation of Asia suggests that progress is most 
rapid when accompanied by the migration of races or the trans- 
plantation of ideas and institutions. Thus Greece excelled the 
Eastern countries from whom she may have derived her civiliza- 
tion, and Buddhism had a far more brilliant career outside India 
than in it. 

4. In many parts of southern Asia are found semi-barbarous 
races representing the earliest known stratum of population, such 
as the Yeddahs of Ceylon, and various tribes in China 
historical an d the Malay Archipelago. Some of them offer 
outlines. analogies to the Australians. This connexion, if true, 
must be very ancient, since it apparently goes back to 
a time when the distribution of land and water was other than 
at present. In northern Asia are found other aborigines, 'such 
as the Ainus of Japan and the so-called hyperborean 'races 
(Chukchis, &c), but no materials are at present forthcoming 
for their history. There is some record of the migrations of the 
later races superimposed on these aborigines. The Chinese came 
from the west, though how far west is unknown: the Hindus 
and Persians from the north-west: the Burmese and Siamese 
from the north. We do not know if the Mongols, Turks, &c, 
had any earlier home than central Asia, but their extensive 
movements from that region are historical. 

The antiquity of Asiatic history is often exaggerated. With 
the exception of Babylonia and Assyria, we can hardly even 
conjecture what was the condition of this continent much before 
1500 B.C. At that period the Chinese were advancing along the 
Hwang-ho, and the Aryans were entering India from the north- 
west. Both were in conflict with earlier races. The influence 
of Babylonian civilization was probably widespread. Some 
connexion between Babylonia and China is generally admitted, 
and all Indian alphabets seem traceable to a Semitic original 
borrowed in the course of commerce from the Persian Gulf. 

Apart from European conquests, the internal history of Asia 
in the last 2000 years is the result of the interaction of four main 
influences: (a) Chinese, (b) Indian, (c) Mahommedan, (d) Central 
Asian. Of these the first three represent different types of 
civilization: the fourth has little originality, but has been of 
great importance in affecting the distribution of races and 
political power. 

(a) China has moulded the civilization of the eastern mainland 



and Japan, without much affecting the Malay Archipelago. In 
the sphere of direct influence fall Korea, Japan and Annam; 
in the outer sphere are Mongolia, Tibet, Siam, Cambodia and 
Burma, where Indian and Chinese influence are combined, the 
Indian being often the stronger. These countries, except Japan, 
have all been at some time at least nominal tributaries of China. 
Where Chinese influence had full play it introduced Confucianism , 
a special style in art and the Chinese system of writing. After 
the Christian era it was accompanied by Chinese Buddhism. 
The cumbrous Chinese script maintains itself in the Far East, 
but has not advanced west of China proper and Annam. 

(b) Indian influence may be defined as Buddhism, if it is 
understood that Buddhism is not at all periods clearly distinguish- 
able from Hinduism. Its sphere includes Indo-China, much of 
the Malay Archipelago, Tibet and Mongolia. Moreover, China 
and Japan themselves may be said to fall within this sphere, in 
view of the part which Buddhism has played in their develop- 
ment. The Buddhist influence is not merely religious, for it is 
always accompanied by Indian art and literature, and often by 
an Indian alphabet. Much of this art is Greek in origin, being 
derived from the Perso-Greek states on the north-west frontiers 
of India. Indian alphabets have spread to Tibet, Cambodia, Java 
and Korea. The history of Indian civilization in Indo-China 
and the Archipelago is still obscure, in spite of the existence of 
gigantic ruins, but it would appear that in some parts at least two 
periods must be distinguished, first the introduction of Hinduism 
(or mixed Hinduism and Buddhism), perhaps under Indian 
princes, and secondly a later and more purely ecclesiastical 
introduction of Sinhalese Buddhism, with its literature and art. 

(c) Mahommedanism or Islam is perhaps the greatest trans- 
forming force which the world has seen. It has profoundly 
affected and to a large extent subjugated all western Asia 
including India, all eastern and northern Africa as well as Spain, 
and all eastern Europe. Its open advocacy of force attracts 
warlike races, and the intensity of its influence is increased by 
the fusion of secular and religious power, so that the Moslem 
Church is a Moslem state characterized by slavery, polygamy, 
and, subject to the autocracy of the ruler, by the theoretical 
equality of Moslems, who in political status arc superior to non- 
Moslems. Thus, whenever the population of a Moslem country 
is of mixed belief, a ruling caste of Moslems is formed, as in 
Turkey at the present day and India under the Moguls. Islam 
is paramount in Turkey, Persia, Arabia and Afghanistan. India 
is the dividing line: Islam is strong in northern and central India, 
v/eaker in the south. But only one-fifth of the whole population 
is Moslem. Beyond India it has spread to Malacca and the 
Malay Archipelago, where it overwhelmed Hindu civilization, 
and reached the southern Philippines. But it made no-progress 
in Indo-China or Japan; and though there is a large Moslem 
population in China the Chinese influence has been stronger, for 
alone of all Asiatics the Chinese have succeeded in forcing Islam 
to accept the ordinary limitations of a religion and to take its 
place as a creed parallel to Buddhism or any other. 

Even more than Buddhism Islam has carried with it a special 
style of art and civilization. It is usually accompanied by the use 
of the Arabic alphabet, and in the languages of Moslem nations 
(notably Turkish, Persian, Hindustani and Malay) a large 
proportion of the vocabulary is borrowed from Arabic. Hindi 
and Hindustani, two forms of the same language as spoken by 
Hindus and Mahommedans respectively, are a curious example 
of how deeply religion may affect culture. 

(d) The great part which central Asian tribes have played in 
history is obscured by the absence of any common name for 
them. Linguistically they can be divided into several groups 
such as Turks, Mongols and Huns, but they were from time to 
time united into states representing more than one group, and 
their armies were recruited, like the Janissaries, from all the 
military races in the neighbourhood. Soon after the Christian 
era central Asia began to boil over, and at least seven great 
invasions and more or less complete conquests can be ascribed 
to these tribes without counting minor movements, (i.) The 
early invasions of Europe by the Avars, Huns and Bulgarians. 



HISTORY] 



ASIA 



75i 



(ii.) The invasion and temporary subjection of Russia by the 
Mongols, who penetrated as far west as Silesia, (iii.) The 
conquests of Timur. (iv.) The conquest of Asia Minor and 
eastern Europe by the Turks, (v.) The conquest of India by the 
Moguls, (vi.) The conquest of China by the Mongols under 
Kublai. (vii.) The later conquest of China by the Manchus. To 
these may be added numerous lesser invasions of India, China 
and Persia. 

These tribes have a genius for warfare rather than for govern- 
ment, art or literature, and with few exceptions (e.g. the Moguls 
in India) have proved poor administrators. Apart from conquest 
their most important function has been to keep up communica- 
tions in central Asia, and to transport religions and civilizations 
from one region to another. Thus they are mainly responsible 
for the introduction of Islam with its Arabic or Persian civiliza- 
tion into India and Europe, and in earlier times their movements 
facilitated the infiltration of Graeco-Bactrian civilization into 
India, besides maintaining communication between China and 
the West. 

5. Babylonia and Assyria. — The movements mentioned above 
have been the chief factors of relatively modern Asiatic history, 
but in early times the centre of activity and culture lay farther 
west, in Babylonia and Assyria. These ancient states began to 
decline in the 7th century B.C., and on their ruins rose the 
Persian empire, which with various political metamorphoses 
continued to be an important power till the 7th century A.D., 
after which all western Asia was overwhelmed by the Moslem 
wave, and old landmarks and kingdoms were obliterated. 

The materials for the study of their institutions and population 
are abundant, but lend themselves to discussion rather than to 
a summary of admitted facts. In the early history of south- 
western Asia the Semites form the most important ethnic group, 
which is primarily linguistic but also shares other remarkable 
characteristics. Two of the greatest religions of the world, 
Christianity and Islam, are Semitic in origin, as well as Judaism. 
In politics these races have been less successful in modern times, 
but the Semitic states of Babylonia and Assyria were once the 
principal centres for the development and distribution of civiliza- 
tion. It is generally agreed that this civilization can be traced 
back to an earlier race, the Sumero-Akkadians, whose language 
seems allied to the agglutinative idioms of central Asia. If this 
ancient civilized race was really allied to the ancestors of the 
Turks and Huns, it is a remarkable instance of how civilization 
thrives best by being transplanted at a certain period of growth. 
Still less is known of the early non- Aryan races of Asia Minor 
such as the Hittitcs and Alorodians. One hypothesis supposes 
that the shores of the Mediterranean were originally inhabited 
by a homogeneous race neither Aryan nor Semitic. 

The earliest Sumerian records seem to be anterior to 4000 B.C. 
Shortly after that period Babylonia was invaded by Semites, 
who became the ruling race. The city of Babylon came to the 
fore as metropolis about 2285 B.C. under Khammurabi. Assyria 
was an offshoot of Babylonia lying to the north-west, and appar- 
ently colonized before the second millennium. While using 
the same language as the Babylonians, the Assyrians had an 
individuality which showed itself in art and religion. In the 
oth and 8th centuries B.C. they became the chief power within 
their sphere and the suzerain of their parent Babylon. But they 
succumbed before the advance of the Medo-Persian power in 
606 B.C., whereas it was not till 555 that Cyrus took Babylon. 
Assyria, being essentially a military power, disappeared with 
the destruction of Nineveh, but Babylon continued to exercise 
an influence on culture and religion for many centuries after the 
Persian conquest. 

6. China. — This is the oldest of existing states, though its 
authentic history does not go back much beyond 1000 B.C. It is 
generally admitted that there was some connexion between 
the ancient civilizations of China and Babylonia, but its precise 
nature is still uncertain. It is clear, however, that the Chinese 
came from the west, and entered their present territory along 
the course of the Hwang-ho at an unknown period, possibly about 
3000 B.C. In early historical times China consisted of a shifting 



confederacy of feudal states, but about 220 B.C. the state of 
Tsin or Chin (whence the name China) came into prominence, 
and succeeded in forming a homogeneous empire, which advanced 
considerably towards the south. The subsequent history of 
China is mainly a record of struggles with various tribes, com- 
monly, but not very correctly, called Tatars. The empire was 
frequently broken up by successful incursions, or divided 
between rival dynasties, but at least twice became a great 
Asiatic power: under the Han dynasty (about 200 b.c.-a.d. 220), 
and the T'ang (a.d. 618-906). The dominions of the latter 
extended across central Asia to northern India, but were dis- 
membered by the attacks of the Kitans, whence the name Cathay. 
China proper, minus these external provinces, was again united 
under the Sung dynasty (960-1127), but split into the northern 
(Tatar) and southern (Chinese) kingdoms. In the 13th century 
arose the Mongol power, and Kublai Khan conquered China. 
The Mongol dynasty lasted less than a century, but the Ming, 
the native Chinese dynasty which succeeded it, reigned for 
nearly 300 years and despatched expeditions which reached 
India, Ceylon and East Africa. In 1644 the Ming succumbed 
to the attacks of the Manchus, a northern tribe who captured' 
Peking and founded the present imperial house. 

Until the advent of Europeans, the Chinese were always in 
contact with inferior races. Whether they expanded at the 
expense of weak aboriginal tribes or were conquered by more 
robust invaders, Chinese civilization prevailed and assimilated 
alike the conquered and the conquerors. It is largely to this 
that we must ascribe the national conservatism and contempt 
for foreigners. The spirit of the Chinese polity is self-contained, 
anti-military and anti-sacerdotal. Rank is nominally deter- 
mined by merit, as tested by competitive examinations. Society 
is conceived as regulated by mutual obligations, of which the 
duties of parents and children are the most important. The 
emperor is head of the state and the high priest, who sacrifices 
to Heaven on behalf of his people, but he can be deposed, and 
no divine right is inherent in certain families as in Japan and 
Turkey. On the contrary there have been 20 dynasties since 
the Christian era. 

The most conspicuous figure in Chinese literature is Confucius 
(551-475 B.C.). Though he laid no claim to originality and 
merely sought to collect and systematize the traditions of 
antiquity, his influence in the Far East has been unbounded, 
and he must be pronounced one of the most powerful advocates 
of peace and humanity that have ever existed. Confucianism 
is an ethical rather than a religious system, and hence was able 
to co-exist, though not on very friendly terms, with Buddhism, 
which reached China about the 1st century a.d. and was the 
chief source of Chinese religious ideas, except the older ancestor 
worship. But they are not a religious people, and like many 
Europeans regard the church as a department of the state. 

7. Japan appears to have been formerly inhabited by the 
Ainus, who have traditions of an older but unknown population, 
but was invaded in prehistoric times by a race akin to the 
Koreans, which was possibly mingled with Malay elements 
after occupying the southern part of the islands. Authentic 
history does not begin till about the 6th century A.D., when 
Chinese civilization and Buddhism were introduced. The 
government was originally autocratic, but as early as the 7th 
century the most characteristic feature of Japanese politics — 
the power of great families who overshadowed the throne — 
makes its appearance. We hear first of the Fujiwara family, 
and then of the rivalry between the houses of Taira and Mina- 
moto. The latter prevailed, and in 1192 established the dua'i 
system of government under which the emperor or Mikado 
ruled only in name, and the real power was in the hands of a 
hereditary military chief called Shogun. Japan has never been 
invaded in historical times, but an attempt made by Kublai 
Khan to conquer it was successfully repulsed. The chief power 
then passed to the Ashikaga dynasty of Shoguns, who retained 
it for about 200 years and were distinguished for their patronage 
of the arts. The second half of the 16th century was a period 
of ferment and anarchy, marked by the arrival of the Portuguese 



752 



ASIA 



[HISTORY 



and the rise of some remarkable adventurers, one of whom, 
Hideyoshi, conquered Korea and apparently meditated the 
invasion of China. His plans were interrupted by his death, and 
his successor, Ieyasu, who shaped the social and political life 
of Japan for nearly 300 years (1603-1868), definitely decided on a 
policy of seclusion and isolation. All ideas of external conquest 
were abandoned, Christianity was forbidden, and Japan closed 
to foreigners, only the Dutch being allowed a strictly limited 
commerce. In 1854-1859 the Christian powers, beginning 
with the United States, successfully asserted their right to trade 
with Japan. The influx of new ideas provoked civil war, in 
which the already decadent Shogunate was abolished and the 
authority of the Mikado restored. Recognizing that their only 
chance of competing with Europeans was to fight them with 
their own weapons, the Japanese set themselves deliberately 
to assimilate the material civilization and to some extent 
the institutions of Europe, such as constitutional government. 
Their progress and success are without parallel. In 1895 they 
defeated the Chinese and ten years later the Russians. Their 
exceptional status among Asiatic nations has been recognized 
by treaties which, contrary to the general practice in non- 
Christian countries, place all foreigners in Japan under Japanese 
law. 

This sudden development of the Japanese is perhaps the 
most important event of the second half of the 19th century, 
since it marks the rise of an Asiatic power capable of competing 
with Europe on equal terms. Their history is so different from 
that of the rest of Asia that it is not surprising if the result is 
different. The nation hardly came into existence till China and 
India had passed their prime, and remained secluded and free 
from the continual struggle against barbarian invaders, which 
drained the energies of its neighbours. It was left untouched 
by Mahommedanism, and for an unprecedentedly long period 
kept Europeans at bay without wasting its strength in hostilities. 
The military spirit was evolved, not in raids and massacres of 
the usual Asiatic type which create little but intense racial 
hatred, but in feuds between families and factions of the same 
race, which restrained ferocity and tended to create a temper 
like that of the feudal chivalry of Europe. On the other hand 
it is noticeable that the Japanese have little which is original 
in the way of religion, literature or philosophy. Unlike the 
Chinese and Indians, they have hitherto not had the smallest 
influence on the intellectual development of Asia, and though 
they have in the past sometimes shown themselves intensely 
nationalist and conservative, they have, compared with India 
and China, so little which is really their own that their assimila- 
tion of foreign ideas is explicable. 

8. Korea received its civilization and religion from China, but 
differs in language, and to some extent in customs. An alphabet 
derived from Indian sources is in use as well as Chinese writing. 
The country was at most periods independent though nominally 
tributary to China. In the 16th century the Japanese occupied 
it for a short period, and in 1894 they went to war with China 
on account of her claims to suzerainty. In 1895 Korea was 
declared independent. 

9. India. — The population of India comprises at least three 
strata: firstly, uncivilized aborigines, such as the Kols and 
Santhals, and secondly, the Dravidians (Tamils, Kanarese, &c), 
who perhaps represent the earliest northern invaders, and appear 
to have attained some degree of culture on their own account. 
The most recent authorities are of opinion that the Kolarians 
and Dravidians represent a single physical type; but, whatever 
the historical explanation may be, they certainly have different 
languages and show different stages of civilization. In pre- 
historic times they were spread over the whole of India, but were 
driven to the centre and south of the peninsula by the third 
stratum of Aryans, and perhaps also by invasions of so-called 
Mongolian races from the north-west. No historical record has 
been preserved of these latter, but they appear to have profoundly 
affected the population of Bengal, which isbelievedto be Mongolo- 
Dravidian in composition. The Aryans appear to have been 
settled to the north of the Hindu Kush, and to have migrated 



south-eastwards about 1500 B.C. Their original home has been 
a subject of much discussion, but the view now prevalent is that 
they arose in southern Russia or Asia Minor, whence a section 
spread eastwards and divided into two closely related branches — 
the Hindus and Iranians. There were probably two successive 
Aryan immigrations, and the tradition of a struggle between 
them may be preserved in the Mahabharata. The life of the 
ancient Aryans, as portrayed in their sacred songs, the Rig Veda, 
was quasi-nomadic and in many ways democratic, but by the 
6th century B.C. settled states had been formed in the Ganges 
valley. They were absolute monarchies, but the power of the 
king was tempered by the extraordinary influence possessed by 
the hereditary sacerdotal class or Brahmans. The position of 
this class, which has remained till the present day, is connected 
with the institution of caste, a division of the population into 
groups founded partly on racial distinctions. The peaceful 
progress of Brahmanism was hindered by the doctrine of the 
Indian prince Gotama, called the Buddha, which grew into one 
of the greatest religions of the world. For many centuries the 
culture and development of the Hindus depended mainly on 
the interaction of the old Brahmanical religion and Buddhism. 
The latter was finally absorbed, and disappeared in India itself, 
but has spread Indian influence over the whole of eastern Asia, 
where it still flourishes. 

In 326 B.C. Alexander invaded the Punjab. The immediate 
result was small, but the establishment of Perso-Greek kingdoms 
in central Asia had a powerful influence on Indian art and culture. 
It may also have helped to familiarize the Hindu mind with the 
idea of an empire, which appeared among them later than in 
other Asiatic countries. The first empire, called Maurya,reached 
its greatest extent in the time of Asoka (264-227 B.C.), who ruled 
from Afghanistan to Madras. He was a zealous Buddhist and 
gave the first example of a missionary religion, for by his exertions 
the faith was spread over all India and Ceylon. No Hindu 
empires have lasted long, and the Maurya dominions broke up 
fifty years after his death. 

In the next period (c. 150 b.c-a.d. 300) India was invaded 
from the north by tribes partly of Parthian and partly of Turki 
(Yue-chi, &c.) origin. Owing to the absence of dated records, 
the chronology of these invasions has not yet been set beyond 
dispute, but the most important was that of the Kushans, whose 
king Kanishka founded a state which comprised northern India 
and Kashmir. They were Buddhists, and it is probable that 
the Mahayana or northern form of Buddhism was due to an 
amalgamation of Gotama's doctrines with the ideas (largely 
Greek and Persian) which they brought with them. Much of 
Sivaism has probably the same origin. Another native empire, 
known as Gupta, rose on the ruins of the Kushan kingdom, 
and embraced nearly the whole peninsula, but it broke up 
in the 5th century, partly owing to the attacks of new northern 
invaders, the Huns. The Malava dynasty maintained Hindu 
civilization in the 6th century, and from 606 to 646 Harsha 
established a brief but brilliant empire in the north with its 
capital at Kanauj. This epoch is marked by the renaissance of 
Sanskrit literature and the gradual revival of Hinduism at the 
expense of Buddhism. But after Harsha Hindu history is lost 
in a maze of small and transitory states, incapable of resisting 
the ever advancing Mahommedan peril. As early as 712 the 
Arabs conquered Sind, and by the end of the nth century the 
whole of northern India was in Moslem hands. Two periods may 
be distinguished, namely the Turki (1200-15 26) an d the Mogul 
empire. The former comprised several dynasties of mixed Turki 
and Iranian race, but was wanting in coherency. In the neigh- 
bourhood of the Moslem capitals, Islam spread rapidly, but in 
such districts as Rajputana and specially Vijayanagar (Mysore) 
Hindu civilization and religion maintained themselves. 

In 1526 the Moguls descended on India from Transoxiana and 
seized the throne of Delhi. They never subjugated the south, 
but the empire which they founded in the north was for about 
two centuries, under such rulers as Akbar and Shah Jehan, one 
of the most brilliant which Asia has seen. After 1707 it began 
to decline: the governors became independent: a powerful 



HISTORY] 

Mahratta confederacy arose in central India; Nadir Shah of 
Persia sacked Delhi ; and Ahmed Shah made repeated invasions. 
A still more formidable danger, the power of the French and 
English, continued to increase. Amidst such confusion the 
authority oi the Mogul empire rapidly disappeared, but it lasted 
as a name till the Mutiny (1857). 

Indian history until Mahommedan times is marked by the 
unusual prominence of religious ideas, and is a record of in- 
tellectual development rather than of political events. Whatever 
national unity the Hindu peoples possessed came from the 
persistent and penetrating influence of the Brahman caste. 
Kings held a secondary position, and were generally regarded 
as adventitious tyrants, rather than as the heads and repre- 
sentatives of the nation. Even the great dynasties have left 
few traces, and it is with difficulty that the patient historian 
disinters the minor kingdoms from obscurity, but Indian religion, 
literature and art have influenced all Asia from Persia to Japan. 
10. Persia. — The Persians, with whom are often coupled the 
Medes, appear to be pure Aryans in origin, and the earliest form 
of their language and religion offers remarkable analogies to the 
Vedas. It is reasonable to suppose that their ancestors and those 
of the Hindus at one time formed a single tribe somewhere in 
central Asia. The religion was remodelled by Zoroaster, who 
seems to be a historical character and to have lived about the 
7th century B.C. About the same time they shook off the 
domination of Assyria. From the 6th century onwards their 
empire, then known as Median, began to expand at the expense 
of the surrounding states. They destroyed Nineveh in alliance 
with the Babylonians, and half a century later Cyrus took 
Babylon and founded the great dynasty of the Achaemenidae. 
The substitution of the Persian for the Median power, which 
took place with the advent of Cyrus, seems to indicate merely 
the pre-eminence of a particular tribe and not conquest by 
another race. The power of the Achaemenidae, when at its 
maximum, extended from the Oxus and Indus in the east to 
Thrace in the west and Egypt in the south, but fell before Greece, 
after lasting for rather more than 200 years. Darius and Xerxes 
were repulsed in their efforts to subjugate the Greek Peninsula, 
and Alexander the Great conquered their successor Darius III. 
in 329. But the greater part of the empire continued to exist 
under new masters, the Seleucids, as a Hellenistic power which 
was of great importance for the dissemination of Greek culture 
in the East. Bactria soon became independent under an Indo- 
Greek dynasty, and the blending of Greek, Persian, central 
Asiatic and Hindu influences had an important effect on the art 
and religion oi India, and through India on all eastern Asia. 
About the same period (250 b.c.-a.d. 227) the Parthian empire 
arose under the Arsacids in Khorasan and the adjacent districts. 
The Parthians appear to have been a Turanian tribe who had 
adopted many Persian customs. They successfully withstood 
the Romans, and at one time their power extended from India 
to Syria. They succumbed to the Persian dynasty of the 
Sassanids, who ruled successfully for about four centuries, 
established the Zoroastrian faith as their state religion, and 
maintained a creditable conflict with the East Roman empire. 
But in the 7th century they were defeated by Heraclius, and 
shortly afterwards were annihilated before the first impetus of 
the Mahommedan conquest, which established Islam in Persia 
and the neighbouring lands, sweeping away old civilizations 
and boundaries. During the greater part of the Mahommedan 
period Persia has been ruled by troubled and short-lived 
dynasties. It attained a certain dignity and unity under 
Abbas Shah (1585-1628), but in later times was distracted and 
disorganized by Afghan invasions. The present dynasty, which 
is of Turkoman origin, dates from 1789. 

The achievements of the Persians in art, literature and 
religion are by no means contemptible, but somewhat mixed and 
cosmopolitan. Owing to its position, the Persian state, when it 
from time to time became a conquering empire, overlapped Asia 
Minor, Babylon and India, and hence acted as an intermediary 
for transmitting art and ideas, sending for instance Greek 
sculpture to India and the cult of Mithra to western Europe. It 



ASIA 



753 



is perhaps on account of this intermediate flavour that the 
literature of Persia — for instance the adaptations of Omar 
Khayyam — is more appreciated in Europe than that of other 
Oriental nations. On the other hand, the wars between Persia 
and Greece were recognized both at the time and afterwards 
as a struggle between Europe and Asia; the fact that both 
combatants were Aryans was not felt, and has no importance 
compared to the difference of continent. 

11. Jews. — The Israelites appear to have been originally a 
nomadic tribe akin to the Arabs, whom they resemble in their 
want of political instinct and in their extraordinary religious 
genius. Among many remarkable qualities they have been 
distinguished from the earliest times by a species of commen- 
salism, or power of living among other nations without becoming 
either socially merged or politically distinct. Their traditional 
history represents them as migrating to the borders of Egypt 
and living there for some centuries. After the exodus, which 
perhaps took place about 1300 B.C., they moved northwards 
again and founded a state of modest dimensions, which attained 
a short-lived unity under Solomon, but succumbed to internal 
dissensions and to the attacks of Assyria and Babylon. Shal- 
manezer destroyed the northern kingdom or Israel in 720, and 
following the practice of the times deported the majority of the 
population, whose traces became lost to history. There is no 
reason why their descendants should not be found to-day in 
various' tribes, but the physical type commonly called Jewish is 
characteristic not so much of Israel as of western Asia generally. 
In 588 Nebuchadrezzar carried off the Jews in captivity, but 
after the Persian conquest of Babylonia they were allowed to 
return to Palestine in 538. Their institutions and ideas were 
probably considerably modified during this period. Babylon 
long continued to be a Jewish centre whence the Jews radiated 
to other countries. The restored state of Jerusalem lived for 
about six centuries in partial independence under Persian, 
Egyptian, Syrian and Roman rule, often showing an aggressively 
heroic attachment to its national customs, which brought it into 
collision with its suzerains, until the temple was destroyed by 
Titus in a.d. 70, and the country laid waste in the succeeding 
years. But long before this period the Jews of the Dispersion 
had become as important as the inhabitants of Palestine. From 
choice or compulsion large numbers settled in Egypt in the time 
of the Ptolemies, and added an appreciable element to Alex- 
andrine culture, while gradual voluntary emigration established 
Jewish communities in Syria, Asia Minor, Greece and Italy, who 
facilitated the first spread of Christianity. In spite of chronic 
unpopularity and recurring persecutions they have spread over 
nearly all Europe. At the end of the 15th century they were 
expelled from Spain and many of the exiles moved eastwards. 
At present the largest numbers are to be found in the eastern 
parts of Europe. It is remarkable that though the Jews live in 
relative peace with Asiatics, the great majority of them prefer 
Europe as a residence. 

12. Arabs. — The Arabs have hardly any history before the 
rise of Islam, although their name is mentioned by surrounding 
nations from the 9th century B.C. onwards. They appear to 
have had few states or kings, but rather tribes and chiefs. Their 
relationship to the Babylonians and Jews is indicated by linguistic 
and ethnological data. The language and writing of the Semites 
who, at an unknown period, settled in what is now Abyssinia, 
show affinities with those of South Arabia, and these Semites 
may have been immigrants into Africa from that region. It is 
plain from early Moslem literature that Persian, Christian and 
especially Jewish ideas had penetrated into Arabia. 

With the rise of Mahommedanism occurred a sudden effer- 
vescence of the Arabs, who during some centuries threatened to 
impose not only their political authority but their civilization 
and new religion on the whole known world. They successfully 
invaded India and central Asia in the east, Spain and Morocco 
in the west. The Caliphate under the Omayyads of Damascus, 
and then the Abbasids of Bagdad, became the principal power in 
the nearer East. It had not, however, a sufficiently coherent 
organization for permanence; parts of it became independent, 



754 



ASIA 



[HISTORY 



others were first protected and then absorbed by the Turks. 
The Arab rule in Spain, which once threatened to overwhelm 
Europe and was turned back near Tours by Charles Martel, was 
distinguished by its tolerance and civilization, and lingered on 
till the 15th century. 

The collapse of the political power of the Arabs was singularly 
complete. The Caliphate, though Arabian, was always geo- 
graphically outside Arabia, and on its fall Arabia remained as 
it was before Islam, isolated and inaccessible. It is still one of 
the least known parts of the globe, and has hardly any political 
link with the outside, for the Arabs of northern Africa form 
separate states. But in spite of this total political collapse, 
Arabic religion and literature are still one of the greatest forces 
working in the western half of Asia, in northern Africa and to 
some extent in eastern Europe. 

13. Ceylon, though geographically an annex of India, has not 
followed its fortunes historically. According to tradition it was 
invaded by an Aryan-speaking colony from the valley of the 
Ganges in the 6th century B.C. It received Buddhism from 
north India in the time of Asoka, and has had considerable 
importance as a centre of religious culture which has influenced 
Burma and Siam. Its medieval history consists of struggles 
between the native sovereigns and Tamil invaders. A powerful 
native dynasty reigned in the 12th century, but in 1408 the 
island was attacked by Chinese, and from 1505 onwards it was 
distracted by the attacks and squabbles of Eu^peans. It was 
partially subjugated, first by the Portuguese and then by the 
Dutch. In 1796 the Dutch were expelled by the English. 

14. Indo-China. — This is an appropriate name for Burma, 
Siam, Cambodia, Annam, &c, for both in position and in civiliza- 
tion they lie between India and China. Indian influence is 
predominant as far as Cambodia (though with a Chinese tinge), 
Indian alphabets being employed and the Buddhism being of 
the Sinhalese type, but in Annam and Tongking the Chinese 
script and many Chinese institutions are in use. The population 
belongs to various races, and also comprises little-known wild 
tribes, (i.) Languages of the group known as Mon-Annam are 
spoken in Annam and in Pegu, an ancient kingdom originally 
distinct from Burma though now confounded with it. This 
distribution seems to indicate that they once spread over the 
whole region, and were divided by the later advance of the 
Siamese and others. Until Annam was taken by the French, 
its history consisted of a struggle with the Chinese, who alter- 
nately asserted and lost their sovereignty. The Annamese are, 
however, a distinct race. Cochin China was once the seat of a 
kingdom called Champa, which appears to have had a hinduized 
Malay civilization and to have been subsequently absorbed by 
Annam. (ii.) The Burmese are linguistically allied to the 
Tibetans, and probably entered Burma from the north-west. 
The early history consists largely of conflicts between the 
Burmese and Talaings. The kingdom which was annexed by 
Britain in 1S85 was founded about 1750 by Alompra, who 
united his countrymen and broke the power of the Talaings. 
He also invaded Siam. (iii.) The Khmers or Cambodians, 
whose languages appear to belong to the M5n-Annam group, 
form a relatively ancient kingdom, much reduced in the last few 
centuries by the advance of the Siamese and new a French 
protectorate. Remarkable ruins dating from perhaps a.d. 800 
to 1 000 attest the former prevalence of strong Hindu influence. 
(iv.) The Siamese or Thai, who speak a monosyllabic language 
of the Chinese type, but written in an Indian alphabet, represent 
a late invasion from southern China, whence they descended 
about the 13th century. 

15. Malays. — This widely-scattered race has no political 
union and its distribution is a puzzle for ethnography. At 
present it occupies the extremity of the Malay Peninsula, Java, 
Sumatra, Borneo, the Philippines and other islands of the 
Malay Archipelago as well as Madagascar, while the inhabitants 
fi most islands in the South Seas, including New Zealand and 
Hawaii, speak languages which if not Malay have at least under- 
gone a strong Malay influence. It would seem from this dis- 
tribution that the Malays are not continental, but a seafaring 



race with exceptional powers of dispersal, who have spread over 
the ocean from some island centre — perhaps Java. The latest 
theory, however, is that there is a great linguistic group (which 
may or may not prove to correspond to an ethnic unity) com- 
prising the Munda, Monkhmer, Malay, Polynesian and Micro- 
nesian languages, and that the stream of immigration which 
distributed them started from the extreme west. Three periods 
can be traced in the history of the Asiatic Malays. In the first 
(in which such tribes as the Dyaks have remained) they were 
semi-barbarous. In the second, Hindu civilization reached the 
Malay Peninsula, Java, Sumatra and other islands. The 
presence of Hindu ruins, as well as of numerous Indian words 
and customs, testifies to the strength of this influence. It was, 
however, superseded by Islam, which spread to the Malay 
Archipelago and Peninsula before the 16th century. At the 
present time the Arabic alphabet is used on the mainland, but 
Indian alphabets in Java, Sumatra, &c. 

16. Tibet. — This remote and mountainous country has a 
peculiar civilization. It has entirely escaped Islam, and though 
it is a nominal vassal of China, direct Chinese influence has not 
been strong. The most striking feature is the religion, a corrupt 
form of late Indian Buddhism, known as Lamaism, which, 
largely in consequence of the favour shown by Jenghiz Khan 
and his successors, has attained temporal power and developed 
into an ecclesiastical state curiously like the papacy. 

17. Mongols. — Such civilization as the Mongols possess is a 
mixture of Chinese and Indian, the latter derived chiefly through 
Tibet, but their alphabet is a curious instance of transplantation. 
It is an adaptation of the Syriac writing introduced by the 
early Nestorian missionaries. 

18. Almost all Asiatic countries have a literature, but it is 
often not indigenous and consists of foreign works, chiefly 
religious, read either in translations or the original. 

Thus with the exception of a little folklore the literature Lltera- 
of Indo-China, Tibet, Mongolia, Korea and Manchuria sc i e ' ace ' 
is mainly Indian or Chinese. The chief original 
literatures are Chinese, Sanskrit, Pali, Arabic and Persian. The 
Japanese have produced few books of importance, and their 
compositions are chiefly remarkable as being lighter and more 
secular than is usual in Asia, but the older Chinese works take 
high rank both for their merits and the effect they have had. 
The extensive Sanskrit literature, which has reached in transla- 
tions China, Japan and Java, is chiefly theological and poetical, 
history being conspicuously absent. India has also a considerable 
medieval and modern literature in various languages. Pali, 
though only a form of Hindu literature, has a separate history, 
for it died in India and was preserved in Ceylon, whence it was 
imported to Burma and Siam as the language of religion. The 
Pali versions of Buddha's discourses are among the most remark- 
able products of Asia. The literatures of all Moslem peoples are 
largely inspired by Arabic, which has produced a voluminous 
collection of works In prose and poetry. Persian, after being 
itself transformed by Arabic, has in its turn largely influenced 
all west Asiatic Moslem literature from Hindustani to Turkish. 

If one excepts the Old Testament, which is a product of the 
extreme west of Asia, it is remarkable how small has been the 
influence of Asiatic literature on Europe. Though Greek and 
Slavonic almost ceased to be written languages under Turkish 
rule, Europeans showed no disposition to replace them by 
Ottoman or Arabic literature. 

Without counting subdivisions, there would seem to be three 
main schools of art in Asia at present — Chinese, Indian and 
Moslem. The first contains many original elements. It is 
feeblest in architecture and strongest in the branches demanding 
skill and care in a limited compass, such as painting, porcelain 
and enamel. It is the main inspiration of Japanese art, which, 
however, shows great originality in its treatment of borrowed 
themes. Both China and Japan have felt through Buddhism 
the influence of Indian art, which contains at least two elements — 
one indigenous and the other Greco-Persian. Unlike Chinese art 
it has a genius for architecture and sculpture rather than painting. 
Mahommedan art is also largely architectural and has affected 



HISTORY] 



ASIA 



7SS 



con' 
tinents. 



nearly all Moslem countries. Except that the use of Arabic 
inscriptions is one of its principal methods of decoration, it owes 
little to Arabia and much to Byzantium. The Persian variety 
of this art is more ornate, and less averse to representations of 
living beings. Both Moslem and Chinese art are closely connected 
with calligraphy, but Hindus rarely use writing for ornament. 

In both art and literature modern Asia is inferior to the past 
more conspicuously than Europe. 

As for science, astronomy was cultivated by the Babylonians 
at an early period, and it is probably from them that a knowledge 
of the heavenly bodies and their movements spread over Asia. 
Grammar and prosody were studied in India with a marvellous 
accuracy and minuteness several centuries before Christ. Mathe- 
matics were cultivated by the Chinese, Indians and Arabs, but 
nearly all the sciences based on the observation of nature, 
including medicine, have remained in a very backward condition. 
Much the same, however, might have been said of Europe until 
two centuries ago, and the scientific knowledge of the Arabs under 
the earlier Caliphates was equal or superior to that of any of 
their contemporaries. Histories and accounts of travels have 
been composed both in Arabic and Chinese. 

iq. It is only natural that Europe should have chiefly felt the 
influence of western Asia. Though Europeans may be indebted 
Influence to China for some mechanical inventions, she was 
of Asia too distant to produce much direct effect, and the 
on other influence of India has been mainly directed towards 
the East. The resemblances between primitive 
Christianity and Buddhism appear to be coincidences, 
and though both early Greek philosophy and later Alexandrine 
ideas suggest Indian affinities, there is no clear connexion such 
as there is between certain aspects of Chinese thought and India. 

Any general statement as to the debt owed by early European 
civilizations to western Asia would at present be premature, for 
though important discoveries have been made in Crete and 
Babylonia the best authorities are chary of positive conclusions 
as to the relations of Cretan civilization to Egypt and Babylonia. 
Egyptian influence within the Aegean area seems certain, and 
the theory that Greek writing and systems for reckoning time are 
Babylonian in origin has not been disproved, though the history 
of the alphabet is more complex than was supposed. 

In historic times Asia has attempted to assert her influence over 
Europe by a series of invasions, most of which have been repulsed. 
Such were the Persian wars of Greece, and perhaps one may 
add Hannibal's invasion of Italy, if the Carthaginians were 
Phoenicians transplanted to Africa. The Roman empire kept 
back the Persians and Parthians, but could not prevent a series 
of incursions by Avars, Huns, Bulgarians, and later by Mongols 
and Turks. Islam has twice obtained a footing in Europe, under 
the Arabs in Spain and under the Turks at Constantinople. 
The earlier Asiatic invasions were conducted by armies operating 
at a distance from their bases, and had little result, for the 
soldiery retired after a time (like Alexander from India), or more 
rarely (e.g. the Bulgarians) settled down without keeping up any 
connexion with Asia. The Turks, and to some extent the Arabs 
in Spain, were successful because they first conquered the parts 
of Asia and Africa adjoining Europe, so that the final invaders 
were in touch with Asiatic settlements. Though the Turks have 
profoundly affected the whole of eastern Europe, the result of 
their conquests has been not so much to plant Asiatic culture in 
Europe as to arrest development entirely, the countries under 
their rule remaining in much the same condition as under the 
moribund Byzantine empire. 

In general, Europe has in historic times shown itself decidedly 
hostile to Asiatic institutions and modes of thought. It is only 
of recent years that the writings of Schopenhauer and the 
researches of many distinguished orientalists have awakened 
some interest in Asiatic philosophy. 

The influence of Asia on Africa has been considerable, and 
until the middle of the 19th century greater than that of Europe. 
Some authorities hold that Egyptian civilization came from 
Babylonia, and that the so-called Hamitic languages are older 
and less specialized members of the Semitic family. The con- 



nexion between Carthage and Phoenicia is more certain, and the 
ancient Abyssinian kingdom was founded by Semites from 
south Arabia. The traditions of the Somalis derive them from 
the same region. The theory that the ruins in Mashonaland 
were built by immigrants from south Arabia is now discredited, 
but there was certainly a continuous stream of Arab migration 
to East Africa which probably began in pre-Moslem times and 
founded a series of cities on the coast. The whole of the north 
of Africa from Egypt to Morocco has been mahommedanized, 
and Mahommedan influence is general and fairly strong from 
Timbuktu to Lake Chad and Wadai. South of the equator, 
Arab slave-dealers penetrated from Zanzibar to the great lakes 
and the Congo during the second and third quarters of the 19th 
century, but their power, though formidable, has disappeared 
without leaving any permanent traces. 

The relation to Asia of the pre-European civilizations of 
America is another of those questions which admit of no definite 
answer at present, though many facts support the theory that 
the semi-civilized inhabitants of Mexico and Central America 
crossed from Asia by Bering Straits and descended the west 
coast. Some authorities hold that Peruvian civilization had no 
connexion with the north and was an entirely indigenous product, 
but Kechua is in structure not unlike the agglutinative languages 
of central and northern Asia. 

20. European influence on Asia has been specially strong 

at two epochs, firstly after the conquests of Alexander the 

Great, and secondly from the 16th century onwards. 

Alexander's conquests resulted in the foundation of In "" ence 
, , . . ... ... of Europe 

Perso-Greek kingdoms in Asia, which not only hellen- on Asia. 

ized their own area but influenced the art and religion 
of India and to some extent of China. Then follows a long 
period in which eastern Europe was mainly occupied in combating 
Asiatic invasions, and had little opportunity of Europeanizing 
the East. Somewhat later the Crusades kept up communication 
with the Levant, and established there the power of the Roman 
Church, somewhat to the detriment of oriental Christianity, 
but intercourse with farther Asia was limited to the voyages 
of a few travellers. Looking at eastern Europe and western 
Asia only, one must say that Asiatic influences have on the 
whole prevailed hitherto (though perhaps the tide is turning), 
for Islam is paramount in this region and European culture at 
a low ebb. But the case is quite different if one looks at the 
two continents as a whole, for improvement in means of com- 
munication has brought about strange vicissitudes, and western 
Europe has asserted her power in middle and eastern Asia. 

In the ifjth century a new era began with the discovery by 
the Portuguese of the route to India round the Cape, and the 
naval powers of Europe started one after another on careers of 
oriental conquest. The movement was maritime and affected 
the nations in the extreme west of Europe rather than those 
nearer Asia, who were under the Turkish yoke. Also the parts 
of Asia affected were chiefly India and the extreme East. The 
countries west of India, being less exposed to naval invasion, 
remained comparatively untouched. It will thus be seen that 
European (excluding Russian) power in Asia is based almost 
entirely on improved navigation. There was no attempt to 
overwhelm whole empires by pouring into them masses of 
troops, but commerce was combined with territorial acquisition, 
and a continuity of European interest secured by the presence 
of merchants and settlers. The course of oriental conquest 
followed the events of European politics, and the possessions of 
European powers in the East generally changed hands accord-, 
ing to the fortunes of their masters at home. Portugal was 
first on the scene, and in the 16th century established a consider- 
able littoral empire on the coasts of East Africa, India and China, 
fragments of which still remain, especially Goa, where Portuguese 
influence on the natives was considerable. Before the century 
was out the Dutch appeared as the successful rivals of the 
Portuguese, but the real struggle for supremacy in southern 
Asia took place between France and England about 1 740-1 783. 
Both entered India as commercial companies, but the dis- 
organized condition of the Mogul empire necessitated the use 



75 6 



ASIA 



of military force to protect their interests, and allured them to 
conquest. The companies gradually undertook the financial 
control of the districts where they traded and were recognized 
Dy the natives as political powers. The ultimate victory of 
England seems due less to any particular aptitude for dealing 
with oriental problems than to a better command of the seas 
and to considerations of European politics. At the end of the 
Napoleonic wars Portugal had Macao and Goa, Holland Java, 
Sumatra and other islands, France some odds and ends in India, 
while England emerged with Hong Kong, Singapore, Ceylon 
and a free hand in India. Guided by such administrators as 
Warren Hastings, the East India Company had assumed more 
and more definitely the functions of government for a great 
part of India. In 1809 its exclusive trading rights were taken 
away by Parliament, but its administrative status was thus 
made clearer, and when after the mutiny of 1857 it was desir- 
able to define British authority in India there seemed nothing 
unnatural in declaring it to be a possession of the crown. 

Another category of European possessions in Asia comprises 
those acquired towards the end of the 19th century, such as 
Indo-China (France), Burma and Wei-Hai-Wei (Britain), and 
Kiao-Chow (Germany). Whereas the earlier conquests were 
mostly the results of large half-conscious national movements 
working out their destinies in the East, these later ones were 
annexations deliberately planned by European cabinets. It 
seemed to be assumed that Asia was to be divided among the 
powers of Europe, and each was anxious to get its share or 
more. 

The advance of Russia in Asia is entirely different from that 
of the other powers, since it has taken place by land and not 
by sea. Though the geographical extent of Russian territory 
and influence is enormous, she has always moved along the line 
of least resistance. She is a moderately strong empire lying to 
the north of the great Moslem states, and having for neighbours 
a series of very weak principalities or semi-civilized tribes. 
The conquest of Siberia and central Asia presented no real 
difficulties: Persia and Constantinople were left on one side, 
and Russia was defeated as soon as she was opposed by a vigorous 
power in the Far East. As the Russian possessions in Asia are 
continuous with European Russia, it is only natural that they 
should have been russified far more thoroughly than the British 
possessions have been anglicized. 

There has been great difference of opinion as to the extent 
to which Alexander's conquests influenced Asia, and it is equally 
hard to say what is the effect now being produced by Europe. 
Clearly such alterations as the construction of railways in 
nearly all parts of the continent, and the establishment of 
peace over formerly disturbed areas like India, are of enormous 
importance, and must change the life of the people. But the 
mental constitution of Asiatics is less easily modified than their 
institutions, and even Japan has assimilated European methods 
rather than European ideas. (C. El.) 

Authorities. — The modern bibliography of Asia, including the 
works of travellers and explorers since 1880, is voluminous. It is 
impossible to refer to all that has been written in the Survey Reports 

•and Gazetteers of the government of India, or in the records of the 
Royal Asiatic Society, or the Asiatic Society, Bengal ; but amongst 
the more important popular works are the following: — Richthofen, 
" China, Japan, and Korea," vol. iv. Jour. R.G.S., China (Berlin, 
1877); Regel, "Upper Oxus," vol. i. Proc. R.G.S., 1879; Dr 
Bellew, Afghanistan and the Afghans (London, 1879); Nicolas 
Prjevalski, " Explorations in Asia," see vols. i.,ii.,v., ix. and xi. of the 
Proc. R.G.S., 1879-1889; W. Blunt, " A Visit to Jebel Shammar," 

•vol ii. Proc. R.G.S., 1880; Captain W Gill, The River of Golden 
Sand (London, 1880); Sir R. Temple, "Central Plateau of Asia," 
vol. iv. Proc. R.G.S., 1882; Baker, " A Journey of Exploration in 
Western Ssu-Chuan," vol. i. Supplementary Papers R.G.S., 1882- 
1885; Sir C. Wilson, " Notes on Physical and Historical Geography 
of Asia Minor," vol. vi. Proc. R.G.S., 1884; General J. T. Walker, 
" Asiatic Explorers of the Indian Survey," vol. viii. Proc. R.G.S., 
1885; Samuel Beal, Buddhist Records of the Western World (Boston, 
1885); Charles Doughty, Travels in Northern Arabia (Cambridge, 
1886); Travels in Arabia Deserta (Cambridge, 1888); Venukoff, 
"Explorations," vol. viii. Proc. G.R.S., 1886; Ney Elias, "Ex- 
plorations in Central Asia," see vols. viii. and ix. Proc. R.G.S., 1886- 
1887; Arthur Carey, "Explorations in Turkestan," see vol. ix. 



Proc. R.G.S., 1887; Henry Lansdell, Through Central Asia (London, 
1887); Archibald Colquhoun, Report on Railway Connexion between 
Burma and China (London, 1887); Major C. Yate, Northern 
Afghanistan (Edinburgh, 1888); Captain F. Younghusband, The 
Heart of a Continent (London, 1893) ; A Journey through Manchuria, 
&c. (Lahore, 1888); also see vol. x. Proc. R.G.S., and vol. v. Jour. 
R.G.S.; Dutreuil de Rhins, L'Asie Centrale (Paris, 1889); Pierre 
Bonvalot, Through the Heart of Asia, trans. Pitman (London, 1889); 
From Paris to Tonkin, trans. Pitman (London, 1891); Roborovski, 
translation from Russian Invalide, October 1889, vol. xii. Proc. 
R.G.S.; " Central Asia," vol. viii. Jour. R.G.S., 1896; Colonel Mark 
Bell, " Trade Routes of Asia," vol. xii. Proc. R.G.S., 1890; W. W. 
Rockhill, " An American in Tibet," Century Magazine, November 
1 890; The Land of the Lamas (London, 1891); Theodore Bent, 
" Hadramut," vol. iv. Jour. R.G.S., 1894; " Southern Arabia," 
vol. vi. Jour. R.G.S., 1896; " Bahrein Islands," vol. xii. Proc. 
R.G.S., 1890; Grombcherski, " Explorations in Kuen Lun," vol. xii. 
Proc. R.G.S., 1890; Lydekker, " The Geology of the Kashmir Valley 
and Chamba Territories," vols. xiii. and xiv. Geological Survey of 
India; Max Muller, The Sacred Books of the East (Oxford, 1890- 
1894); Elisee Reclus, The Earth and its Inhabitants (series, 1890); 
G. W. Leitner, Dardistan; H. F. Blanford, Elementary Geography 
of India, Burma, and Ceylon (London, 1890); Guide to the Climate 
and Weather of India (London, 1889); Lord Dunmore, The Pamirs 
(London, 1892); A. Tissandier, Voyage au tour du monde (Paris, 
1892); Lord Curzon, Persia and the Persian Question (London, 
1892); Russia and the Anglo-Russian Question (London, 1889); 
Problems of the Far East (London, 1894) ; Captain Hamilton Bower, 
Diary of a Journey across Tibet (Calcutta, 1893); Szechenyi, Die 
wissenschaftlichen Ergebnisse der Reise des Grafen Bela Szechenyi 
in Ostasien (Wien, 1893); R. D. Oldham, "Evolution of Indian 
Geology," vol. iii. Jour. R.G.S., 1894; Baron Toll, " Siberia," 
vol. iii. Jour. R.G.S., 1894; Delmar Morgan, "The Mountain 
Systems of Central Asia," Scottish Geological Magazine, No. 10, of 
1894; Sir Frederick Goldsmid, " Persian Geography," vol. vi. Jour. 
R.G.S., 1895; Warrington Smyth, " Siam," vol. vi. Jour. R.G.S., 
1895; " Siamese East Coast," vol xi. Jour. 1898; Prince Kropotkin, 
" Siberian Railway," vol. v. R.G.S. Jour., 1895; W. R. Lawrence, 
The Vale of Kashmir (Oxford, 1895); Captain Vaughan, " Persia," 
vol. viii. Jour. R.G.S. , 1896; Prince H. d'Orleans, " Yunan to 
India;" vol. vii. Jour. R.G.S., 1896; " Tonkin to Talifu," vol. viii. 
Jour. R.G.S., 1896; Sir T. Holdich, "Ancient and Medieval 
Makran," vol. vii. Jour. R.G.S., 1896; The Indian Borderland 
(London, 1901) ; India (Oxford, 1904) ; Colonel Woodthorpe, 
" Shan States," vol. vii. Jour. R.G.S., 1896; Report of the Pamir 
Boundary Commission (Calcutta, 1896); St George Littledale, 
" Journey Across the Pamirs from North to South," vol. iii. Jour. 
R.G.S., 1894, and vol. vii. Jour. R.G.S., 1896; Sir G. Robertson, 
The Kafirs of the Hindu Kush (London, 1896); Captain Stiff e, 
" Persian Gulf Trading Centres," vols, v.iii., ix. and x. Jour. R.G.S., 
1897 ; Ney Elias and Ross, A History of the Moghuls of Central Asia, 
from the Tarskh-i-Rastisdi of Mirza Haidar (London, 1898) ; Grenard, 
Mission scientifique sur la Haute Asie (Paris, 1898) ; Dr Sven Hedin, 
Through Asia (London, 1898); Central Asia and Tibet (1903); Geo- 
graphie des Hochlandes von Pamir (Berlin, 1894); Captain M. Si 
Wellby, " Through Tibet," R.G.S. Jour., September 1898; Captain 
P. M. Sykes, " Persian Explorations," vol. x. Jour. R.G.S., 1898; 
Ten Thousand Miles in Persia (1902) ; Kronshin, " Old Beds of the 
Oxus," Jour. R.G.S., September 1898; Sir W. Hunter. History of 
British India, vol. i. (London, 1898); Captain H. Deasy, " Western 
Tibet," vol. ix. Jour. R.G.S.; In Tibet and Chinese Turkestan 
(London, 1901); A. Little, The Far East (Oxford, 1905); Captain 
Rawling, The Great Plateau (London, 1905) ; Journal of the Royal 
Geogl. Society, vols. xv. to xxv. (1900-1905); Colonel A. Durand, 
The Making of a Frontier (London, 1899); R. Cobbold, Innermost 
Asia (London, 1900). (T. H. H.*) 

ASIA, in a restricted sense, the name of the first Roman 
province east of the Aegean, formed (133 B.C.) out of the kingdom 
left to the Romans by the will of Attalus III. Philometor, king 
of Pergamum. It included Mysia, Lydia, Caria and Phrygia, 
and therefore, of course, Aeolis, Ionia and the Troad. In 84 B.C., 
on the close of the Mithradatic War, Sulla reorganized the 
province, forming 40 regiones for fiscal purposes, and it was 
later divided into conventus. From 80 to 50 B.C. the upper 
Maeander valley and all Phrygia, except the extreme north, 
were detached and added to Cilicia. In 27 B.C. Asia was made 
a senatorial province under a pro-consul. As the wealthiest 
of Roman provinces it had most to gain by the pax Romano, and 
therefore welcomed the empire, and established and maintained 
the most devout cult of Augustus by means of the organization 
known as the Koinon or Commune, a representative council, 
meeting in the various metropoleis. In this cult the emperor 
came to be associated with the common worship of the Ephesian 
Artemis. By the reorganization of Diocletian, a.d. 297, Asia 
was broken up into several small provinces, and one of these, 



ASIA MINOR 



757 



of which the capital was Ephesus, retained the name of the 
original province (see Asia Minor). 

ASIA MINOR, the general geographical name for the peninsula, 
forming part of the empire of Turkey, on the extreme west 
of the continent of Asia, bounded on the N. by the Black Sea, 
on the W. by the Aegean, and on the S. by the Mediterranean, 
and at its N.W. extremity only parted from Europe by the 
narrow straits of the Bosporus and Dardanelles. On the east, 
no natural boundary separates it from the Armenian plateau; 
but, for descriptive purposes, it will suffice to take a line drawn 
from the southern extremity of the Giaour Dagh, east of the 
Gulf of Alexandretta along the crest of that chain, then along 
that of the eastern Taurus to the Euphrates near Malatia, then 
up the river, keeping to the western arm till Erzingan is reached, 
and finally bending north to the Black Sea along the course of 
the Churuk Su, which flows out west of Batum. This makes the 
Euphrates the main eastern limit, with radii to the north-east 
angle of the Levant and the south-east angle of the Black Sea, 
and roughly agrees with the popular conception of Asia Minor 
as a geographical region. But it must be remembered that this 
term was not used by classical geographers (it is first found in 
Orosius in the 5th century a.d.), and is not in local or official 
use now. It probably arose in the first instance from a vague 
popular distinction between the continent itself and the Roman 
province of " Asia " (q.v.), which at one time included most of 
the peninsula west of the central salt desert ( A xylon) . The name 
Anatolia, in the form Anadol, is used by natives for the western 
part of the peninsula (cis Halym) and not as including ancient 
Cappadocia and Pontus. Before the reconstitution of the pro- 
vinces as vilayets it was the official title of the principal eyalet 
of Asia Minor, and was also used more generally to include all 
the peninsular provinces over which the beylerbey of Anadoli, 
whose seat was at Kutaiah, had the same paramount military 
jurisdiction which the beylerbey of " Rumili " enjoyed in the 
peninsular provinces of Europe. The term " Anatolia " appears 
first in the work of Constantine Porphyrogenitus (10th century). 
The greatest length of Asia Minor, as popularly understood, is 
along its north edge, 720 m. Along the south itis about 650 m. 
The greatest breadth is 420 m. from C. Kerembe to C. Anamur; 
but at the waist of the peninsula, between the head of the Gulf of 
Alexandretta and the southernmost bight of the Black Sea (at 
Ordu), it is not quite 300 m. The greater portion of Asia Minor 
consists of a plateau rising gradually from east to west, 2500 ft. to 
4500 ft. ; east of the Kizil Irmak (Halys), the ground rises more 
sharply to the highlands of Armenia (q.v.). On the south the plateau 
is buttressed by the Taurus range, which stretches in a broken 
irregular line from the Aegean to the Persian frontier. On the north 
the plateau is supported by a range of varying altitude, which 
follows the southern coast of the Black Sea and has no distinctive 
name. On the west the edge of the plateau is broken by broad 
valleys, and the deeply indented coast-line throws out long rocky 
promontories towards Europe. On the north, excepting the deltas 
formed by the Kizil and Yeshil Irmaks, there are no considerable 
coast plains, no good harbours except Sinope and Vona, and no 
islands. On the west there are narrow coast plains of limited extent, 
deep gulfs, which offer facilities for trade and commerce, and a 
fringe of protecting islands. On the south are the isolated plains 
of Pamphylia and Cilicia, the almost land-locked harbours of Mar- 
marice, Makri and Kekova, the broad bay of Adalia, the deep-seated 
gulf of Alexandretta (Iskanderun), and the islands of Rhodes with 
dependencies, Castelorizo and Cyprus. 

Mountains. — The Taurus range, perhaps the most important 
feature in Asia Minor, runs the whole length of the peninsula or. the 
south, springing east of Euphrates in the Armeno-Kurdish highlands, 
and being prolonged into the Aegean Sea by rocky promontories 
and islands. It attains in Lycia an altitude of 10,500 ft., and in the 
Bulgar Dagh (Cilicia) of over 10,000 ft. The average elevation is 
about 7000 ft. East of the Bulgar Dagh the range is pierced by the 
Sihun and Jihun rivers, and their tributaries, but its continuity is 
not broken. The principal passes across the range are those over 
which Roman or Byzantine roads ran: — (1) from Laodicea to Adalia 
(Attalia), by way of the Khonas pass and the valley of the Istanoz 
Chai ; (2) from Apamea or from Pisidian Antioch to Adalia, by Isbarta 
and Sagalassus; (3) from Laranda, by Coropissus and the upper 
valley of the southern Calycadnus, to Germanicopolis and thence to 
Anemourium or Kelenderis; (4) from Laranda, by the lower Caly- 
cadnus, to Claudiopolis and thence to Kelenderis or Seleucia ; (5) from 
Iconium or Caesarea Mazaca, through the Cilician Gates (Gulek 
Boghaz, 3300 ft.) to Tarsus ; (6) from Caesarea to the valley of the Sarus 
and thence to Flaviopolis on the Cilician Plain ; (7) from Caesarea over 
Anti-Taurus by the Kuru Chai to Cocvsus (Geuksun) and thence to 



Germanicia (Marash). Large districts on the southern slopes of the 
Taurus chain are covered with forests of oak and fir, and there are 
numerous yailas or grassy " alps," with abundant water, to which 
villagers and nomads move with their flocks during the summer 
months. 

Anti-Taurus is a term of rather vague and doubtful application, 
(a) Some have regarded it as meaning the more or less continuous 
range which buttresses up the central plateau on the north, parallel 
to the Taurus, (b) Others take it to mean the line of heights and 
mountain peaks which separates the waters running to the Black 
Sea and the Anatolian plateau from those falling to the Persian 
Gulf and the Mediterranean. This has its origin in the high land, 
near the source of the Kizil Irmak, and thence runs south-west 
towards the volcanic district of Mt. Argaeus, which, however, can 
hardly be regarded as orographically one with it. After a low 
interval it springs up again at its southern extremity in the lofty 
sharp-peaked ridge of Ala Dagh (11 ,000 ft.) , and finally joins Taurus, 
(c) South of Sivas a line of bare hills connects this chain with another 
range of high forest-clad mountains, which loses itself southwards 
in the main mass of Taurus, and is held to be the true Anti-Taurus 
by geographers. It throws off, in the latitude of Kaisarieh, a sub- 
sidiary range, the Binboa Dagh, which separates the waters of the 
Sihun from those of the Jihun. The principal passes are those 
followed by the old roads: — (1) from Sebasteia to Tephrike and the 
upper valley of the western Euphrates; (2) from Sebasteia to Melitene, 
by way of the pass of Delikli Tash and the basin of the Tokhma Su ; 
(3) from Caesarea to Arabissus, by the Kuru Chai and the valley of 
Cocysus (Geuksun). The range of Amanus (Giaour Dagh) is separ- 
ated from the mass of Taurus by the deep gorge of the Jihun, whence 
it runs south - south - west to Ras el - Khanzir, forming the limit 
between Cilicia and Syria, various parts bearing different names, as 
Elma Dagh above Alexandretta. It attains its greatest altitude in 
Kaya Duldul (6500 ft.), which rises abruptly from the bed of the 
Jihun, and it is crossed by two celebrated passes: — (1) the Amanides 
Pylae (Baghche Pass), through which ran the road from the Cilician 
Plain to Apamea-Zeugma, on the Euphrates; (2) the Pylae Syriae or 
" Syrian Gates " (Beilan Pass), through which passed the great 
Roman highway from Tarsus to Syria. On the western edge of the 
plateau several short ranges, running approximately east and west, 
rise above the general level : — Sultan Dagh (6500 ft.) ; Salbacus- 
Cadmus (8000 ft.) ; Messogis (3600 ft.) ; Latmus (6000 ft.) ; Tmolus 
(5000 ft.) ; Dindymus (8200 ft.) ; Ida (5800 ft.) ; and the Mysian 
Olympus (7600 ft.). The valleys of the Maeander, Hermus and 
Caicus facilitate communication between the plateau and the 
Aegean, and the descent to the Sea of Marmora along the valleys 
of the Tembris and Sangarius presents no difficulties. The northern 
border range, though not continuous, rises steadily from the west 
to its 'culmination in the Galatian Olympus (Ilkaz Dagh), south of 
Kastamuni. East of the Kizil Irmak there is no single mountain 
chain, but there are several short ranges with elevations sometimes 
exceeding 9000 ft. The best routes from the plateau to the Black 
Sea were followed by the Roman roads from Tavium and Sebasteia 
to Sinope and Amisus, and those from Sebasteia to Cotyora and 
Cerasus-Pharnacia, which at first ascend the upper Halys. Several 
minor ranges rise above the level of the eastern plateau, and in the 
south groups of volcanic peaks and cones extend for about 150 m. 
from Kaisarieh (Caesarea) to Karaman. The most important are 
Mt. Argaeus (Erjish Dagh, 13,100 ft.) above Kaisarieh itself, the 
highest peak in Asia Minor; Ali Dagh (6200 ft.); Hassan Dagh 
(8000 ft.); Karaja Dagh; and Kara Dagh (7500 ft.). On the west 
of the plateau evidences of volcanic activity are to be seen in the 
district of Kula (Katakekaumene), coated with recent erupted 
matter, and in the numerous hot springs of the Lycus, Maeander, 
and other valleys. Earthquakes are frequent all over the peninsula, 
but especially in the south-east and west, where the Maeander valley 
and the Gulf of Smyrna are notorious seismic foci. The centre of the 
plateau is occupied by a vast treeless plain, the Axylon of the Greeks, 
in which lies a large salt lake, Tuz Geul. The plain is fertile where 
cultivated, fairly supplied with deep wells, and in many places 
covered with good pasture. Enclosed between the Taurus and 
Amanus ranges and the sea are the fertile plains of Cilicia Pedias, 
consisting in great part of a rich, stoneless loam, out of which rise 
rocky crags that are crowned with the ruins of Greco-Roman and 
Armenian strongholds, and of Pamphylia, partly alluvial soil, partly 
travertine, deposited by the Taurus rivers. 

Rivers. — The rivers of Asia Minor are of no great importance. 
Some do not flow directly to the sea; others find their way to the 
coast through deep rocky gorges, or are mere torrents; and a few 
only are navigable for boats for short distances from their mouths. 
They cut so deep into the limestone formation of the plateau as 
to over-drain it, and often they disappear into swallow holes (duden) 
to reappear lower down. The most important rivers which flow to 
the Black Sea are the following: — the Boas (Churuk Su) which rises 
near Baiburt, and flows out near Batum; the Iris (Yeshil Irmak), 
with its tributaries the Lycus (Kelkit Irmak), which rises on the 
Armenian plateau, the Chekerek Irmak, which has its source near 
Yuzgat, and the Tersakan Su; the Halys (Kizil Irmak) is the longest 
river in Asia Minor, with its tributaries, the Deiije Irmak (Cappadox), 
which flows through the eastern part of Galatia, and the Geuk Irmak, 
which has its sources in the mountains above Kastamuni. With 



758 



ASIA MINOR 



the exception of Sivas, no town of importance lies in the valley of 
the Kizil Irmak throughout its course of over 600 m. The Sangarius 
(Sakaria) rises in the Phrygian mountains and, after many changes 
of direction, falls into the Black Sea, about 80 m. east of the 
Bosporus. Its tributaries are the Pursak Su (Tembris), which has 
its source in the Murad Dagh (Dindymus), and, after running north 
to tski-shehr, flows almost due east to the Sakaria, and the Enguri 
Su, which joins the Sakaria a little below the junction of the Pursak. 
To the Black Sea, about 40 m. east of Eregli, also flows the Billaeus 
(Filiyas Chai). Into the Sea of Marmora run the Rhyndacus(Edrenos 
Chai) and the Macestus (Susurlu Chai), which unite about 12 m. 
from the sea. The most celebrated streams of the Troad are the 
Granicus (Bigha Chai) and the Scamander (Menderes Su), both 
rising in Mt. Ida (Kaz Dagh). The former flows to the Sea of Mar- 
mora; the latter to the Dardanelles. The most northerly of the 
rivers that flow to the Aegean is the Caicus (Bakir Chai), which runs 
past Soma, and near Pergamum, to the Gulf of Chanderli. The 
Hermus (Gediz Chai) has its principal sources in the Murad Dagh, 
and, receiving several streams on its way, runs through the volcanic 
district of Katakekaumene to the broad fertile valley through which 
it flows past Manisa to the sea, near Lefke. So recently as about 
1880 it discharged into the Gulf of Smyrna, but the shoals formed 
by its silt-laden waters were so obstructive to navigation that it 
was turned back into its old bed. Its principal tributaries are — the 
Phrygius (Kum Chai), which receives the waters of the Lycus 
(Giirduk Chai), and the Cogamus (Kuzu Chai), which in its upper 
course is separated from the valley of the Maeander by hills that 
were crossed by the Roman road from Pergamum to Laodicea. The 
Caystrus (Kuchuk Menderes) flows through a fertile valley between 
Mt. Tmoltis and Messogis to the sea near Ephesus, where its silt has 
filled up the port. The Maeander (Menderes Chai) takes its rise in a 
celebrated group of springs near Dineir, and after a winding course 
enters the broad valley, through which it " meanders" to the sea. 
Its deposits have long since filled up the harbours of Miletus, and 
converted the islands which protected them into mounds in a swampy 
plain. Its principal tributaries are the Glaucus, the Senarus (Banaz 
Chai), and the Hippurius, on the right bank. On the left bank are 
the Lycus (Churuk Su), which flows westwards by Colossae through 
a broad open valley that affords the only natural approach to the 
elevated plateau, the Harpasus (Ak Chai), and the Marsyas (China 
Chai). The rivers that flow to the Mediterranean, with two excep- 
tions, rise in Mt. Taurus, and have short courses, but in winter and 
spring they bring down large bodies of water. In Lycia are the Indus 
(Gereniz Chai), and the Xanthus (Eshen Chai). The Pamphylian 
plain is traversed by the Cestrus (Ak Su), the Eurymedon (Keupri 
Su), and the Melas (Menavgat Chai), which, where it enters the sea, 
is a broad, deep stream, navigable for about 6 m. The Calycadnus 
(Geuk Su) has two main branches which join near Mut and flow 
south-east, and enter the sea, a deep rapid river, about 12 rn. below 
Selefke. The Cydnus (Tersous or Tarsus Chai) is formed by the 
junction of three streams that rise in Mt. Taurus, and one of these 
flows through the narrow gorge known as the Cilician Gates. After 
passing Tarsus, the river enters a marsh which occupies the site of 
the ancient harbour. The Cydnus is liable to floods, and its deposits 
have covered Roman Tarsus to a depth of 20 ft. The Sarus (Sihun) 
is formed by the junction of the Karmalas (Zamanti Su), which 
rises in Uzun Yaila, and the Sarus (Saris), which has its sources in 
the hills to the south of the same plateau. The first, after entering 
Mt. Taurus, flows through a deep chasm walled in by lofty precipices, 
and is joined in the heart of the range by the Saris. Before reaching 
the Cilician Plain the river receives the waters of the Kerkhun Su, 
which cuts through the Bulgar Dagh, and opens a way for the roads 
from the Cilician Gates to Konia and Kaisarieh. After passing 
Adana, to which point small craft ascend, the Sihun runs south-west 
to the sea. There are, however, indications that at one period it flowed 
south-east to join the Pyramus. The Pyramus (Jihun) has its prin- 
cipal source in a group of large springs near Albistan; but before it 
enters Mt. Taurus it is joined by the Sogutli Irmak, the Khurman 
Su and the Geuk Su. The river emerges from Taurus, about 7 m. 
west of Marash, and here it is joined by the Ak Su, which rises in some 
small lakes south of Taurus. The Jihun now enters a remarkable 
defile which separates Taurus from the Giaour Dagh, and reaches 
the Cilician Plain near Budrun. From this point it flows west, and 
then south-west past Missis, until it makes a bend to discharge its 
waters south of Ayas Bay. The river is navigable as far as Missis. 
The only considerable tributary of the Euphrates which comes 
within our region is the Tokhma Su, which rises in Uzun Yaila and 
flows south-east to the main river not far from Malatia. In the 
central and southern portions of the plateau the streams either flow 
into salt lakes, where their waters pass off by evaporation, or into 
freshwater lakes, which have no visible outlets. In the latter cases 
the waters find their way beneath Taurus in subterranean channels, 
and reappear as the sources of rivers flowing to the coast. Thus the 
Ak Geul supplies the Cydnus, and the Beishehr, Egirdir and Kestel 
lakes feed the rivers of the Pamphylian plain. 

Lakes. — The salt lakes are Tuz Geul (anc. Tatta), which lies in the 
great central plain, and is about 60 m. long and 10 to 30 m. broad 
in winter, but in the dry season it is hardly more than a saline 
marsh; Buldur Geul, 2900 ft. above sea-level; and Aji-tuz Geul, 
2600 ft. The freshwater lakes are Beishehr Geul (anc. Karalis), 



3770 ft., a fine sheet of water 30 m. long, which discharges south-east 
to the Soghla Geul ; Egirdir Geul (probably anc. Limnae, a name 
which included the two bays of Hoiran and Egirdir, forming the 
lake), 2850 ft., which is 30 m. long, but less broad than Beishehr 
and noted for the abundance and variety of its fish. In the north- 
west portion of Asia Minor are Isnik Geul (L. Ascania), Abulliont 
Geul (L. Apollonia), and Maniyas Geul (L. Miletopolis). 

Springs. — Asia Minor is remarkable for the number of its thermal 
and mineral springs. The most important are: — Yalova, in the 
Ismid sanjak; Brusa, Chitli, Terje and Eskishehr, in the Brusa 
vilayet; Tuzla, in the Karasi ; Cheshme, Ilija, Hierapolis (with 
enormous alum deposits), and Alashehr, in the Aidin; Terzili 
Hammam and Iskelib in the Angora ; Boli in the Kastamuni; 
and Khavsa, in the Sivas. Many of these were famous in antiquity 
and occur in a list given by Strabo. The Maeander valley is especially 
noted for its hot springs. 

Geology. — The central plateau of Asia Minor consists of nearly 
horizontal strata, while the surrounding mountain chains form a 
complex system, in which the beds are intensely folded. Around 
the coast flat-lying deposits of Tertiary age are found, and these often 
extend high up into the mountain region. The deposits of the 
central, or Lycaonian, plateau consist of freshwater marls and lime- 
stones of late Tertiary or Neogene age. Along the south-eastern 
margin, in front of the Taurus, stands a line of great volcanoes, 
stretching from Kara-Dagh to Argaeus. They are now extinct, 
but were probably active till the close of the Tertiary period. On 
its southern side the plateau is bounded by the high chains of the 
Taurus and the Anti-Taurus, which form a crescent with its con- 
vexity facing southwards. Devonian and Carboniferous fossils 
have been found in several places in the Anti-Taurus. Limestones 
of Eocene or Cretaceous age form a large part of the Taurus, but the 
interior zone probably includes rocks of earlier periods. The folding 
of the Anti-Taurus affects the Eocene but not the Miocene, while 
in the Taurus the Miocene beds have been elevated, but without 
much folding, to great heights. North of the Lycaonian plateau 
lies another zone of folding which may be divided into the East 
Pontian and West Pontian arcs. In the east a well-defined moun- 
tain system runs nearly parallel to the Black Sea coast from Batum 
to Sinope, forming a gentle curve with its convexity facing south- 
wards. Cretaceous limestones and serpentine take a large part in 
the formation of these mountains, while even the Oligocene is in- 
volved in the folds. West of Sinope Cretaceous beds form a long 
strip parallel to the shore line. Carboniferous rocks occur at Eregli 
(Heraclea Pontica), where they have been worked for coal. Devon- 
ian fossils have been found near the Bosporus and Carboniferous 
fossils at Balia Maden in Mysia. Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous 
beds form a band south of the Sea of Marmora, probably the con- 
tinuation of the Mesozoic band of the Black Sea coast. Farther 
south there are zones of serpentine, and of crystalline and schistose 
rocks, some of which are probably Palaeozoic. The direction of the 
folds of this region is from west to east, but on the borders of Phrygia 
and Mysia they meet the north-westerly extension of the Taurus 
folds and bend around the ancient mass of Lydia. Marine Eocene 
beds occur near the Dardanelles, but the Tertiary deposits of this 
part of Asia Minor are mostly freshwater and belong to the upper 
part of the system. In western Mysia they are much disturbed, 
but in eastern Mysia they are nearly horizontal. They are often 
accompanied by volcanic rocks, which are mainly andesitic, and they 
commonly lie unconformably upon the older beds. In the western 
part of Asia Minor there are several areas of ancient rocks about 
which very little is known. The Taurus folds here meet another 
system which enters the region from the Aegean Sea. 

Climate. — The climate is varied, but systematic observations are 
wanting. On the plateau the winter is long and cold, and in the 
northern districts there is much snow. The summer is very hot, but 
the nights are usually cool. On the north coast the winter is cold, 
and the winds, sweeping across the Black Sea from the steppes of 
Russia, are accompanied by torrents of rain and heavy falls of snow. 
East of Samsun, where the coast is partially protected by the 
Caucasus, the climate is more moderate. In summer the heat is 
damp and enervating, and, as Trebizond is approached, the vege- 
tation becomes almost subtropical. On the south coast the winter 
is mild, with occasional frosts and heavy rain ; the summer heat 
is very great. On the west coast the climate is moderate, but the 
influence of the cold north winds is felt as far south as Smyrna, and 
the winter at that place is colder than in corresponding latitudes in 
Europe. A great feature of summer is the inbat or north wind, 
which blows almost daily, often with the force of a gale, off the sea 
from noon till near sunset. 

Products, &c. — The mineral wealth of Asia Minor is very great, 
but few mines have yet been opened. The minerals known to exist 
are — -alum, antimony, arsenic, asbestos, boracide, chrome, coal, 
copper, emery, fuller's earth, gold, iron, kaolin, lead, lignite, magnetic 
iron, manganese, meerschaum, mercury, nickel, rock-salt, silver, 
sulphur and zinc. The vegetation varies with the climate, soil anc' 
elevation. The mountains on the north coast are clothed with dense 
forests of pine, fir, cedar, oak, beech, &c. On the Taurus range the- 
forests are smaller, and there is a larger proportion of pine. On the 
west coast the ilex, plane, oak, valonia oak, and pine predominate. 
On the plateau willows, poplars and chestnut trees grow near the 



ASIA MINOR 



759 



streams, but nine-tenths of the country is treeless, except for scrub. 
On the south and west coasts the fig and olive are largely cultivated. 
The vine yields rich produce everywhere, except in the higher 
districts. The apple, pear, cherry and plum thrive well in the north ; 
the orange, lemon, citron and sugar-cane in the south; styrax and 
mastic in the south-west ; and the wheat lands of the Sivas vilayet 
can hardly be surpassed. The most important vegetable productions 
are — cereals, cotton, gum tragacanth, liquorice, olive oil, opium, 
rice, saffron, salep, tobacco and yellow berries. Silk is produced in 
large quantities in the vicinity of Brusa and Amasia, and mohair 
from the Angora goat all over the plateau. The wild animals include 
bear, boar, chamois, fallow red and roe deer, gazelle, hyena, ibex, 
jackal, leopard, lynx, moufflon, panther, wild sheep and wolf. The 
native reports of a maneless lion in Lycia (arslan) are probably based 
on the existence of large panthers. Amongst the domestic animals 
are the buffalo, the Syrian camel, and a mule camel, bred from 
a Bactrian sire and Syrian mother. Large numbers of sheep and 
Angora goats are reared on the plateau, and fair horses are bred on 
the Uzun Yaila; but no effort is made to improve the quality of 
the wool and mohair or the breed of horses. Good mules can be 
obtained in several districts, and small hardy oxen are largely bred 
for ploughing and transport. The larger birds are the bittern, great 
and small bustard, eagle, francolin, goose; giant, grey and red- 
legged partridge, sand grouse, pelican, pheasant, stork and swan. 
The rivers and lakes are well supplied with fish, and the mountain 
streams abound with small trout. 

The principal manufactures are: — Carpets, rugs, cotton, tobacco, 
mohair and silk stuffs, soap, wine and leather. The exports are: — 
Cereals, cotton, cotton seed, dried fruits, drugs, fruit, gall nuts, gum 
tragacanth, liquorice root, maize, nuts, olive oil, opium, rice, sesame, 
sponges, storax, timber, tobacco, valonia, walnut wood, wine, yellow 
berries, carpets, cotton yarn, cocoons, hides, leather, mohair, silk, 
silk stuffs, rugs, wax, wool, leeches, live stock, minerals, &c. The 
imports are: — Coffee, cotton cloths, cotton goods, crockery, dry- 
salteries, fezzes, glass-ware, haberdashery, hardware, henna, iron- 
ware, jute, linen goods, manufactured goods, matches, petroleum, 
salt, sugar, woollen goods, yarns, &c. 

Communications. — There are few metalled roads, and those that 
exist are in bad repair, but on the plateau light carts can pass nearly 
everywhere. The lines of railway now open are: — (i) From Haidar 
Pasha to Ismid, Eski-shehr and Angora; (2) from Mudania to Brusa; 

(3) from Eski-shehr to Afium-Kara-hissar, Koniaand Bulgurli, east of 
Eregli (the first section of the Bagdad railway). These lines are 
worked by the German Gesellschaft der anatolischen Eisenbahnen. 

(4) From Smyrna to Alanisa, AJa-shehr and Afium Kara-hissar, with , 
a branch line from Manisa to Soma. This line is worked by a French 
company. (5) From Smyrna to Aidin and Dineir, with branches to 
Odemish, Tireh, Sokia, Denizli, Ishekli, Seidi Keui and Bouja, 
constructed and worked by an English company. (6) From Mersina 
to Tarsus and Adana, an English line under a control mainly French. 
There are two competing routes for the eastern trade — one running 
inland from Constantinople (Haidar Pasha), the other from Smyrna. 
The first is connected by ferry with the European railway system ; 
the second with the great sea routes from Smyrna to Trieste, Mar- 
seilles and Liverpool. The right to construct all railways in Armenia 
and north-eastern Asia Minor has been conceded to Russia, and the 
Germans have a virtual monopoly of the central plateau. 

Ethnology. — None of the conquering races that invaded Asia 
Minor, whether from the east or from the west, wholly expelled 
or exterminated the race in possession. The vanquished retired 
to the hills or absorbed the victors. In the course of ages race 
distinction has been almost obliterated by fusion of blood; by 
the complete Hellenization of the country, which followed the 
introduction of Christianity; by the later acceptance of Islam; 
and by migrations due to the occupation of cultivated lands 
by the nomads. It will be convenient here to adopt the modern 
division into Moslems, Christians and Jews: — (a) Moslems. 
The Turks never established themselves in such numbers as to 
form the predominant element in the population. Where the 
land was unsuitable for nomad occupation the agricultural 
population remained, and it still retains some of its original 
characteristics. Thus in Cappadocia the facial type of the non- 
Aryan race is common, and in Galatia there are traces of Gallic 
blood. The Zeibeks of the west and south-west are apparently 
representatives of the Carians and Lycians; and the peasants 
of the Black Sea coast range of the people of Bithynia, Paphla- 
gonia and Pontus. Wherever the people accepted Islam they 
called themselves Turks, and a majority of the so-called " Turks " 
belong by blood to the races that occupied Asia Minor before 
the Seljuk invasion. Turkish and Zaza-speaking Kurds (see 
Kurdistan) are found in the Angora and Sivas vilayets. There 
are many large colonies of Circassians and smaller ones of Noghai 
(Nogais), Tatars, Georgians, Lazis, Cossacks, Albanians and 



Pomaks. East of Boghaz Keui there is a compact population 
of Kizilbash, who are partly descendants of Shia Turks trans- 
planted from Persia and partly of the indigenous race. In the 
Cilician plain there are large settlements of Nosairis who have 
migrated from the Syrian mountains (see Syria). The nomads 
and semi-nomads are, for the most part, representatives of the 
Turks, Mongols and Tatars who poured into the country during 
the 350 years that followed the defeat of Romanus. Turkomans 
are found in the Angora and Adana vilayets; Avshars, a tribe 
of Turkish origin, in the valleys of Anti-Taurus; and Tatars 
in the Angora and Brusa vilayets; Yuruks are most numerous 
in the Konia vilayet. They speak Turkish and profess to be 
Moslems, but have no mosques or imams. The Turkomans have 
villages in which they spend the winter, wandering over the great 
plains of the interior with their flocks and herds during the 
summer. The Yuruks on the contrary are a truly nomad race. 
Their tents are made of black goats' hair and their principal 
covering is a cloak of the same material. They are not limited 
to the milder districts of the interior, but when the harvest is 
over, descend into the rich plains and valleys near the coast. The 
Chepmi and Takhtaji, who live chiefly in the Aidin vilayet, appear 
to be derived from one of the early races, (b) Christians. The 
Greeks are in places the descendants of colonists from Greece, 
many of whom, e.g. in Pamphylia and the Smyrna district, are 
of very recent importation; but most of them belong by blood 
to the indigenous races. These people became " Greeks " as 
being subjects of the Byzantine empire and members of the 
Eastern Church. On the west coast, in Pontus and to some 
extent of late in Cappadocia, and in the mining villages, peopled 
from the Trebizond Greeks, the language is Romaic; on the 
south coast and in many inland villages (e.g. in Cappadocia) 
it is either Turkish, which is written in Greek characters, or a 
Greco-Turkish jargon. In and near Smyrna there are large 
colonies of Hellenes. Armenians are most numerous in the 
eastern districts, where they have been settled since the great 
migration that preceded and followed the Seljuk invasion. 
There are, however, Armenians in every large town. In central 
and western Asia Minor they are the descendants of colonists 
from Persia and Armenia (see Armenia), (c) The Jews live 
chiefly on the Bosporus; and in Smyrna, Rhodes, Brusa and 
other western towns. Gypsies — some Moslem, some Christian — 
are also numerous, especially in the south. 

History. — Asia Minor owes the peculiar interest of its history to 
its geographical position. " Planted like a bridge between Asia 
and Europe," it has been from the earliest period a battle- 
ground between the East and the West. The central plateau 
(2500 to 4500 ft.), with no navigable river and few natural 
approaches, with its monotonous scenery and severe climate, is a 
continuation of central Asia. The west coast, with its alterna- 
tion of sea and promontory, of rugged mountains and fertile 
valleys, its bright and varied scenery, and its fine climate, is 
almost a part of Europe. These conditions are unfavourable to 
permanence, asnd the history of Asia Minor is that of the march of 
hostile armies, and rise and fall of small states, rather than that of 
a united state under an independent sovereign. At a very early 
period Asia Minor appears to have been occupied by non- Aryan 
tribes or races which differed little from each other in religion, 
language and social system. During the past generation much 
light has been thrown upon one of these races — the " Hittites " 
or " Syro-Cappadocians," who, after their rule had passed away, 
were known to Herodotus as " White Syrians," and whose de- 
scendants can still be recognised in the villages of Cappadocia. 1 
The centre of their power is supposed to have been Boghaz 
Keui (see Pteria), east of the Halys, whence roads radiated to 
harbours on the Aegean, to Sinope, to northern Syria and to the 
Cilician plain. Their strange sculptures and inscriptions have 
been found at Pteria, Euyuk, Fraktin, Kiz Hissar (Tyana), Ivriz, 
Bulgar, Muden and other places between Smyrna and the 

1 The people, Moslem and Christian, are physically one and appear 
to be closely related to the modern Armenians. This relationship is 
noticeable in other districts, and the whole original population of 
Asia Minor has been characterized as Proto-Armenian or Armenoid. 



760 



ASIA MINOR 



Euphrates (see Hittites). When the great Aryan immigration 
from Europe commenced is unknown, but it was dying out in the 
nth and 10th centuries B.C. In Phrygia the Aryans founded 
a kingdom, of which traces remain in various rock tombs, 
forts and towns, and in legends preserved by the Greeks. The 
Phrygian power was broken in the 9th or 8th century B.C. by the 
Cimmerii, who entered Asia Minor through Armenia; and on its 
decline rose the kingdom of Lydia, with its centre at Sardis. A 
second Cimmerian invasion almost destroyed the rising kingdom, 
but the invaders were expelled at last by Alyattes, 617 B.C. (see 
Scythia). The last king, Croesus (? 560-546 B.C.) carried the 
boundaries of Lydia to the Halys, and subdued the Greek 
colonies on the coast. The date of the foundation of these 
colonies cannot be fixed; but at an early period they formed a 
chain of settlements from Trebizond to Rhodes, and by the 8th 
century B.C. some of them rivalled the splendour of Tyre and 
Sidon. Too jealous of each other to combine, and too de- 
moralized by luxury to resist, they fell an easy prey to Lydia; 
and when the Lydian kingdom ended with the capture of Sardis 
by Cyrus, 546 B.C. they passed, almost without resistance, to 
Persia. Under Persian rule Asia Minor was divided into four 
satrapies, but the Greek cities were governed by Greeks, and 
several of the tribes in the interior retained their native 
princes and priest-dynasts. An attempt of the Greeks to 
regain their freedom was crushed, 500-494 B.C., but later the 
tide turned and the cities were combined with European Greeks 
into a league for defence against the Persians. The weakness 
of Persian rule was disclosed by the expedition of Cyrus and the 
Ten Thousand Greeks, 402 B.C.; and in the following century 
Asia Minor was invaded by Alexander the Great (q.v.), 334 B.C. 
(See Greece; Persia; Ionia.) 

The wars which followed the death of Alexander eventually 
gave Asia Minor to Seleucus, but none of the Seleucid kings was 
able to establish his rule over the whole peninsula. Rhodes be- 
came a great maritime republic, and much of the south and west 
coast belonged at one time or another to the Ptolemies of Egypt. 
An independent kingdom was founded at Pergamum, 283 B.C., 
which lasted until Attalus III., 133 B.c , made the Romans his 
heirs. Bithynia became an independent monarchy, and Cappa- 
docia and Paphlagonia tributary provinces under native princes. 
In southern Asia Minor the Seleucids founded Antioch, Apamea, 
Attalia, the Laodiceas and Seleuceias, and other cities as centres 
of commerce, some of which afterwards played an import- 
ant part in the Hellenization (see Hellenism) of the country, 
and in the spread of Christianity. During the 3rd century, 
278-277 B.C., certain Gallic tribes crossed the Bosporus and 
Hellespont, and established a Celtic power in central Asia 
Minor. They were" confined by the victories of Attalus I. of 
Pergamum, c. 232 B.C., to a district on the Sangarius and 
Halys to which the name Galatia was applied; and after their 
defeat by Manlius, 189 B.C., they were subjected to the suzer- 
ainty of Pergamum (see Galatia). 

The defeat of A ntiochus the Great at Magnesia, 190 B.C., 
placed Asia Minor . the mercy of Rome; but it was not until 
133 that the first R01 an province, Asia, was formed to include 
only western Anatolia, without Bithynia. Errors in policy and 
in government facilitated the rise of Pontus into a formidable 
power under Mithradates, who was finally driven out of the 
country by Pompey, and died 63 B.C. Under the settlement of 
Asia Minor by Pompey, Bithynia-Pontus and Cilicia became 
provinces, whilst Galatia and Cappadocia were allowed to retain 
nominal independence for over half a century more under native 
kings, and Lycia continued an autonomous League. A long 
period of tranquillity followed, during which the Roman dominion 
grew, and all Asia Minor was divided into two provinces. The 
boundaries were often changed; and about a.d. 297, in Dio- 
cletian's reorganization of the empire, the power of the great 
military commands was broken, and the provinces were made 
smaller and united in groups called dioceses. A great change 
followed the introduction of Christianity, which spread first along 
the main roads that ran north and west from the Cilician Gates, 
and especially along the great trade route to Ephesus. In some 



districts it spread rapidly, in others slowly. With its advance 
the native languages and old religions gradually disappeared, 
and at last the whole country was thoroughly Hellenized, and 
the people united by identity of language and religion. 

At the close of the 6 th century Asia Minor had become wealthy 
and prosperous; but centuries of peace and over-centralization 
had affected the moral of the people and weakened the central 
government. During the 7 th century the provincial system 
broke down, and the country was divided into themes or military 
districts. From 616 to 626 Persian armies swept unimpeded 
over the land, and Chosroes (Khosrau) II. pitched his camp on 
the shore of the Bosporus. The victories of Heraclius forced 
Chosroes to retire; but the Persians were followed by the Arabs, 
who, advancing with equal ease, laid siege to Constantinople, 
a.d. 668. It almost appeared as if Asia Minor would be annexed 
to the dominion of the Caliph. But the tide of conquest was 
stemmed by the iconoclast emperors, and the Arab expeditions, 
excepting those of Harun al-Rashid, 781 and 806, and of el- 
Motasim, 838, became simply predatory raids. In the 10th 
century the Arabs were expelled. They never held more than 
the districts along the main roads, and in the intervals of peace 
the country rapidly recovered itself. But a more dangerous 
enemy was soon to appear on the eastern border. 

In 1067 the Seljuk Turks ravaged Cappadocia and Cilicia; in 
1071 they defeated and captured the emperor Romanus Diogenes, 
and in 1080 they took Nicaea. One branch of the Seljuks 
founded the empire of Rum, with its capital first at Nicaea and 
then at Iconium. The empire, which at one time included 
nearly the whole of Asia Minor, with portions of Armenia and 
Syria, passed to the Mongols when they defeated the sultan of 
Rum in 1243, and the sultans became vassals of the Great Khan. 
The Seljuk sultans were liberal patrons of art, literature and 
science, and the remains of their public buildings and tombs are 
amongst the most beautiful and most interesting in the country. 
The marches of the Crusaders across Asia Minor left no permanent 
impression. But the support given by the Latin princes to the 
Armenians in Cilicia facilitated the growth of the small warlike 
state of Lesser Armenia, which fell in 1375 with the defeat and 
capture of Leo VI. by the Mameluke sultan of Egypt. The 
Mongols were too weak to govern the country they had conquered, 
and the vassalage of the last sultan of Rum, who died in 1307, 
was only nominal. On his death the Turkoman governors of his 
western provinces drove out the Mongols and asserted their 
independence. A contest for supremacy followed, which event- 
ually ended in favour of the Osmanli Turks of Brusa. In 1400 
Sultan Bayezid I. held all Asia Minor west of the Euphrates; 
but in 1402 he was defeated and made prisoner by Timur, who 
swept through the country to the shores of the Aegean. On the 
death of Timur Osmanli supremacy was re-established after 
a prolonged straggle, which ended with the annexation by 
Mahommed II. (1451-1481) of Karamania and Trebizond, and 
the abandonment of the last of the Italian trading settlements 
which had studded the coast during the 13th and 14th centuries. 
The later history of Asia Minor is that of the Turkish empire. 
The most important event was the advance (1832-1833) of an 
Egyptian army, under Ibrahim Pasha, through the Cilician Gates 
to Kohia and Kutaiah. 

The defeat of the emperor Romanus (1071) initiated a change 
in the condition of Asia Minor which was to be complete and 
lasting. A long succession of nomad Turkish tribes, pressing 
forward from central Asia, wandered over the rich country in 
search of fresh pastures for their flocks and herds. They did not 
plunder or ill-treat the people, but they cared nothing for town 
life or for agricultural pursuits, and as they passed onward they 
left the country bare. Large districts passed out of cultivation 
and were abandoned to the nomads, who replaced wheeled 
traffic by the pack horse and the camel. The peasants either 
became nomads themselves or took refuge in the towns or the 
mountains. The Mongols, as they advanced, sacked towns and 
laid waste the agricultural lands. Timur conducted his cam- 
paigns with a ruthless disregard of life and property. Entire 
Christian communities were massacred, flourishing towns were 



ASIENTO— ASIR 



761 



completely destroyed, and all Asia Minor was ravaged. From 
these disasters the country never recovered, and the last traces 
of Western civilization disappeared with the enforced use of the 
Turkish language and the wholesale conversions to Islam under 
the earliest Osmanli sultans. The recent large increase of the 
Greek population in the western districts, the construction of 
railways, and the growing interests of Germany and Russia on 
the plateau seem, however, to indicate that the tide is again 
turning in favour of the West. 

Bibliography. — 1. General Authorities: — C. Texier, Asie 
Mineure (1843); P. Tchihatcheff, Asie Mineure (1853-1860); 
C. Ritter, Erdkunde, vols, xviii. xix. (1858-1859); W. J. Hamilton, 
Researches in Asia Minor (1843); E. Rectus, Nouv. Geog. Univ. 
vol. ix. (1884) ; V. Cuinet, La Turquie d'Asie (1890) ; W. M. Ramsay, 
Hist. Geog. of A. M. (1890) ; Murray's Handbook for A . M. &c, ed. by 
Sir C. Wilson (1895). For Geology see Tchihatcheff, Asie Mineure, 
Geologie (Paris, 1867-1869); Schaffer, Cilicia, Peterm. Mitt. Ergan- 
zungslieft, 141 (1903) ; Philippson, Sitz. k. preuss. Akad. Wiss. (1903), 
pp. 112-124; English, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc. (London, 1904), pp. 243- 
295; see also Suess, Das Antlitz der Erde, vol. iii. pp. 402-412, and 
the accompanying references. 

2. A. Western Asia Minor. — J. Spon and G. Wheler, Voyage 
du Levant (1679); P. de Tournefort, Voyage du Levant (1718); 
F. Beaufort, Ionian Antiquities (181 1); R. Chandler, Travels (1817); 
W. M. Leake, Journal of a Tour in A. M. (1820) ; F. V. J. Arundell, 
Visit to the Seven Churches (1828), and Discoveries, &c. (1834); 
C. Fellows, Excursion in A. M. (1839) ; C. T. Newton, Travels (1867), 
and Discoveries at Halicarnassus, Sec. (1863); Dilettanti Society, 
Ionian Antiquities (1769-1840) ; J. R. S. Sterrett, Epigr. Journey 
and Wolfe Exped. (Papers, Amer. Arch. Inst. ii. iii.) (1.888); J. H. 
Skene, Anadol (1853); G. Radet, Lydie (1893); O. Rayet and 
A. Thomas, Milet et le Golfe Latmique (1872); K. Buresch, Aus 
Lydien (1898); W. M. Ramsay, Cities and Bishoprics of Phrygia 
(1895), and Impressions of Turkey (1898). 

B. Eastern Asia Minor. — W. F. Ainsworth, Travels in A. M. 
(1842); G. Perrot and E. Guillaume, Expl. arch, de la Galatie (1862- 
1872) ; E. J. Davis, Anatolica (1874) ; H. F. Tozer, Turkish Armenia 
(1881); H. J. v. Lennep, Travels (1870); D. G. Hogarth, Wandering 
Scholar (1896); Lord Warkworth, Notes of a Diary, &c. (1898); 
E. Sarre, Reise (1896); D. G. Hogarth and J. A. R. Munro, Mod. 
and Anc. Roads (R.G.S. Supp. Papers iii.) (1893); H. C. Barkley, 
A Ride through A. M. and Armenia (1891); M. Sykes, Dar ul-Islam 
(1904); E. Chantre, Mission en Cappadocie (1898). 

C. Southern Asia Minor. — F. Beaufort, Karamania (1817); C. 
Fellows, Discoveries in Lycia (1841) ; T. A. B. Spratt and E. Forbes, 
Travels in Lycia (1847); V. Langlois, Voy. dans la Cilicie (1861); 
E. J. Davis, Life in Asiatic Turkey (1879); O. Benndorf and E. 
Niemann, Lykien (1884); C. Lanckoronski, Villes de la Pamphylie 
et de la Pisidie (1890); F. v. Luschan, Reisen in S.W. Kleinasien 
1888); E. Petersen and F. v. Luschan, Lykien (1889); K. Humann 
and O. Puchstein, Reisen in Kleinasien und Nordsyrien (1890). 

D. Northern Asia Minor. — J. M. Kinneir, Journey through A. M. 
(1818); J. G. C. Anderson and F. Cumont, Studia Pontica (1903); 
E. Naumann, Vom Goldenen Horn, &c. (1893). 

See also G. Perrot and C. Chipiez, Hist, de I'art dans V anliquile, 
vols. iv. v. (1886-1890); J. Strzygowski, Kleinasien, &c. (1903). 
Also numerous articles in all leading archaeological periodicals, the 
Geographical Journal, Deutsche Rundschau, Petermann's Geog. 
Mitteilungen, &c. &c. 

3. Maps. — H. Kiepert, Nouv. carte gen. des prov. asiat. de I'Emp. 
ottoman (1894), and Spezialkarte v. Westkleinasien (1890); W. von 
Diest, Karte des Nordwestkleinasien (1901); R. Kiepert, Karle von 
Kleinasien (1901); E. Friederich, Handels- und Produktenkarte von 
Kleinasien (1898) ; J. G. C. Anderson, Asia Minor (Murray's Handy 
Class. Maps) (1903). (C. W. W.; D. G. H.) 

ASIENTO, or Assiento (from the verb asentar, to place, or 
establish), a Spanish word meaning a farm of the taxes, or 
contract. The farmer or contractor is called an asentista. The 
word acquired a considerable notoriety in English and American 
history, on account of the " Asiento Treaty " of 1713. Until 1702 
the Spanish government had given the contract for the supply 
of negroes to its colonies in America to the Genoese. But after 
the establishment of the Bourbon dynasty in 1700, a French 
company was formed which received the exclusive privilege of 
the Spanish- American slave trade for ten years — from September 
1 702 to 1 7 1 2. When the peace of Utrecht was signed the British 
government insisted that the monopoly should be given to its 
own subjects. By the terms of the Asiento treaty signed on the 
16th of March 1713, it was provided that British subjects should 
be authorized to introduce 144,000 slaves in the course of thirty 
years, at the rate of 4800 per annum. The privilege was to 
expire on the 1st of May 1743. British subjects were also 
authorized to send one ship of 500 tons per annum, laden with 



manufactured goods, to the fairs of Porto Bello and La Vera 
Cruz. Import duties were to be paid for the slaves and goods. 
This privilege was conveyed by the British government to the 
South Sea Company, formed to work it. The privilege, to which 
an exaggerated value was attached, formed the solid basis of 
the notorious fit of speculative fever called the South Sea Bubble. 
Until 1739 the trade in blacks went on without interruption, but 
amid increasingly angry disputes between the Spanish and the 
British governments. The right to send a single trading ship 
to the fairs of Porto Bello or La Vera Cruz was abused. Under 
pretence of renewing her provisions she was followed by tenders 
which in fact carried goods. Thus there arose what was in fact 
a vast contraband trade. The Spanish government established 
a service of revenue boats {guarda costas) which insisted on 
searching all English vessels approaching the shores of the 
Spanish colonies. There can be no doubt that the smugglers 
were guilty of many piratical excesses, and that the guarda 
costas often acted with violence on mere suspicion. After many 
disputes, in which the claims of the British government were 
metby Spanish counter claims, war ensued in 1739. When peace 
was made at Aix-la-Chapelle in 1 748 Spain undertook to allow the 
asiento to be renewed for the four years which were to run when 
war broke out in 1739. But the renewal for so short a period 
was not considered advantageous, and by the treaty of El Retiro 
of 1750, the British government agreed to the recession of the 
Asiento treaty altogether on the payment by Spain of £100,000. 
A very convenient account of the Asiento Treaty, and of the trade 
which arose under it, will be found in Malachy Postlethwayt's 
Universal Dictionary of Trade and Commerce (London, 1751), s.v. 

ASIR, a district in western Arabia, lying between 17 30' and 
21 N., and 40 30' and 45° E.; bounded N. by Hejaz, E. by 
Nejd, S. by Yemen and W. by the Red Sea. Like Yemen, it 
consists of a lowland zone some 20 or 30 m. in width along the 
coast, and of a mountainous tract, falling steeply on the west 
and merging into a highland plateau which slopes gradually to 
the N.E. towards the Nejd steppes. Its length along the coast 
is about 230 m., and its breadth from the coast to El Besha about 
180. The lowland, or Tehama, is hot and barren; the principal 
places in it are Kanfuda, the chief port of the district, Marsa 
Hali and El Itwad, smaller ports farther south. The mountain- 
ous tract has probably an average altitude of between 6000 and 
7000 ft., with a temperate climate and regular rainfall, and' is 
fertile and populous. The valleys are well watered and produce 
excellent crops of cereals and dates. The best-known are the 
Wadi Taraba and the W. Besha, both running north-east 
towards the W. Dawasir in Nejd. Taraba, according to John 
Lewis Burckhardt, is a considerable town, surrounded by palm 
groves and gardens, and watered by numerous rivulets, and 
famous for its long resistance to Mehemet Ali's forces in 1815. 
Five or six days' journey to the south-east is the district of 
Besha, the most important position between Sana and Taif. 
Here Mehemet Ali's army, amounting to 12,000 men, found 
sufficient provisions to supply it during a fortnight's halt. 
The Wadi Besha is a broad valley abounding with streams 
containing numerous hamlets scattered over a tract some 
six or eight hours' journey in length. Its principal affluent, 
the W. Shahran, rises 120 m. to the south and runs 
through the fertile district of Khamis Mishet, the highest in 
Asir. The Zahran district lies four days west of Besha on the 
crest of the main range: the principal place is Makhwa, a large 
town and market, from which grain is exported in considerable 
quantities to Mecca. Farther south is the district of Shamran. 
Throughout the mountainous country the valleys are well 
watered and cultivated, with fortified villages perched on the 
surrounding heights. Juniper forests are said to exist on the 
higher mountains. Three or four days' journey east and south- 
east of Besha are the encampments of the Bani Kahtan, one of 
the most ancient tribes of Arabia; their pastures extend into 
the adjoining district of Nejd, where they breed camels in large 
numbers, as well as a few horses. 

The inhabitants are a brave and warlike race of mountaineers, 
and aided by the natural strength of their country they have 



7 62 



ASISIUM— ASKEW 



hitherto preserved their independence. Since the beginning of 
the 19th century they have been bigoted Wahhabis, though 
previously regarded by their neighbours as very lax Mahom- 
medans; during Mehemet All's occupation of Nejd their constant 
raids on the Egyptian communications compelled him to send 
several punitive expeditions into the district, which, however, 
met with little success. Since the reconquest of Yemen by the 
Turks, they have made repeated attempts to subjugate Asir, 
but beyond occupying Kanfuda, and holding one or two isolated 
points in the interior, of which Ibha and Manadir are the principal, 
they have effected nothing. 

The chief sources of information regarding Asir are the notes 
madeby J. L. BurckhardtatTaif in i8r4and those of the French 
officers with the Egyptian expeditions into the country from 
1S14 to 1837. No part of Arabia would better repay exploration. 

Authorities. — J. L. Burckhardt, Travels in Arabia (London, 
1829); F. Mengin, Histoire de I'ltgypte, &c. (Paris, 1823); M. O. 
Tamisier, Voyage en Arabie (Paris, 1840). (R. A. W.) 

ASISIUM (mod. Assist), an ancient town of Umbria, in a 
lofty situation about 15 m. E.S.E. of Perusia. As an independent 
community it had already begun to use Latin as well as Umbrian 
in its inscriptions (for one of these recording the chief magistrates 
— marones — see C.I.L. xi. 5390). It became a municipium in 
90 B.C., but, though numerous inscriptions {C.I.L. xi. 5371- 
5606) testify to its importance in the Imperial period, it is hardly 
mentioned by our classical authorities. Scanty traces of the 
ancient city walls may be seen; within the town the best-pre- 
served building is the so-called temple of Minerva, with six 
Corinthian columns of travertine, now converted into a church, 
erected by Gaius and Titus Caesius in the Augustan era. It 
fronted on to the ancient forum, part of the pavement of which, 
with a base for the equestrian statues of Castor and Pollux (as 
the inscription upon it records) has been laid bare beneath the 
present Piazza V'ittorio Emanuele. The remains of the amphi- 
theatre, in opus reticulaltim, may be seen in the north-east corner 
of the town; and other ancient buildings have been discovered. 
Asisium was probably the birthplace of Propertius. (T. As.) 

ASKABAD, or Askhabad, a town of Russian central Asia, 
capital of the Transcaspian province, 345 m. by rail S.E. of 
Krasnovodsk and 594 from Samarkand, situated in a small 
oasis at the N. foot of the Kopet-dagh range. It has a public 
library and a technical railway school; also cotton-cleaning 
works, tanneries, brick-works, and a mineral-water factory. 
The trade is valued at £250,000 a year. The population, 2500 
in 1881, when the Russians seized it, was 19,428 in 1897, one- 
third Persians, many of them belonging to the Babi sect. 

ASKAULES (Gr. cutkcujAtjs [?] from cktkos, bag, cu>A6s, pipe), 
probably the Greek word for bag-piper, although there is no 
documentary authority for its use. Neither it nor acKav\os 
(which would naturally mean the bag-pipe) has been found in 
Greek classical authors, though J. J. Reiske — in a note on Dio 
Chrysostom, Or at. lxxi. ad fin., where an unmistakable descrip- 
tion of the bag-pipe occurs (" and they say that he is skilled to 
write, to work as an artist, and to play the pipe with his mouth, 
on the bag placed under his arm-pits ") — says that affKavXrjs was 
the Greek word for bag-piper. The only actual corroboration 
of this is the use of ascaules for the pure Latin utricularius in 
Martial x. 3. 8. Dio Chrysostom flourished about a.d. 100; 
it is therefore only an assumption that the bag-pipe was known 
to the classical Greeks by the name of aaKav\os. It need not, 
however, be a matter of surprise that among the highly cultured 
Greeks such an instrument as the bag-pipe should exist without 
finding a place in literature. It is significant that it is not 
mentioned by Pollux {Onomast. iv. 74) and Athenaeus (Deipnos. 
iv. 76) in their lists of the various kinds of pipes. 

See articles Aulos and Bag-pipe; art. "Askaules" in Pauly- 
Wissowa, Realcncyclopddie. 

ASKE, ROBERT (d. 1537), English rebel, was a country 
gentleman who belonged to an ancient family long settled in 
Yorkshire, his mother being a daughter of John, Lord Clifford. 
When in 1536 the insurrection called the " Pilgrimage of Grace " 
broke out in Yorkshire, Aske was made leader; and marching 
with the banner of St Cuthbert and with the badge of the " five 



wounds," he occupied York on the 16th of October and on the 
20th captured Pontefract Castle, with Lord Darcy and the 
archbishop of York, who took the oath of the rebels. He caused 
the monks and nuns to be reinstated, and refused to allow the 
king's herald to read the royal proclamation, announcing his 
intention of marching to London to declare the grievances of 
the commons to the sovereign himself, secure the expulsion of 
counsellors of low birth, and obtain restitution for the church. 
The whole country was soon in the hands of the rebels, a military 
organization with posts from Newcastle to Hull was established, 
and Hull was provided with cannon. Subsequently Aske, followed 
by 30,000 or 40,000 men, proceeded towards Doncaster, where 
lay the duke of Norfolk with the royal forces, which, inferior 
in numbers, would probably have been overwhelmed had not 
Aske persuaded his followers to accept the king's pardon, and 
the promise of a parliament at York and to disband. Soon 
afterwards he received a letter from the king desiring him to 
come secretly to London to inform him of the causes of the 
rebellion. Aske went under the guarantee of a safe-conduct 
and was well received by Henry. He put in writing a full 
account of the rising and of his own share in it; and, fully 
persuaded of the king's good intentions, returned home on the 
8th of January 1537, bringing with him promises of a visit from 
the king to Yorkshire, of the holding of a parliament at York, 
and of free elections. Shortly afterwards he wrote to the king 
warning him of the still unquiet state not only of the north but 
of the midlands, and stating his fear that more bloodshed was 
impending. The same month he received the king's thanks for 
his action in pacifying Sir Francis Bigod's rising. But his 
position was now a difficult and a perilous one, and a few weeks 
later the attitude of the government towards him was suddenly 
changed. The new rising had given the court an excuse for 
breaking off the treaty and sending another army under Norfolk 
into Yorkshire. Possibly in these fresh circumstances Aske 
may have given cause for further suspicions of his loyalty, and 
in his last confession he acknowledged that communications to 
obtain aid had been opened with the imperial ambassador and 
were contemplated with Flanders. But it is more probable 
that the government had from the first treacherously affected 
to treat him with confidence to secure the secrets of the rebels 
and to effect his destruction. In March Norfolk congratulated 
Cromwell on the successful accomplishment of his task, having 
persuaded Aske to go to London on false assurances of security. 
He was arrested in April, tried before a commission at West- 
minster, and sentenced to death for high treason on the 17th of 
May; and on the 28th of June he was taken back to Yorkshire, 
being paraded in the towns and country through which he 
passed. He was hanged at York in July, expressing repentance 
for breaking the king's laws, but declaring that he had promise 
of pardon both from Cromwell and from Henry. It is related 
that his servant, Robert Wall, died of grief at the thought of 
his master's approaching execution. Aske was a real leader, 
who gained the affection and confidence of his followers; and 
his sudden rise to greatness and his choice by the people point 
to abilities that have not been recorded. 

See Henry VIII. and the English Monasteries, by F. A. Gasquet 
(1906); Letters and Papers of the Reign of Henry VIII., vols. xi. 
andxii.; English Histor. Review, v. 330, 550 (account of the re- 
bellion, examination and answers to interrogations) ; Chronicle of 
Henry VIII., tr. by M. A. S. Hume (1889); Whitaker's Richmond- 
shire, i. 116 (pedigree of the Askes). 

ASKEW, or Ascue, ANNE (iS2i?-i5 4 6), English Protestant 
martyr, born at Stallingborough about 1521, was the second 
daughter of Sir William Askew (d. 1540) of South Kelsey, 
Lincoln, by his first wife Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas 
Wrottesley. Her elder sister, JMartha, was betrothed by her 
parents to Thomas Kyme, a Lincolnshire justice of the peace, 
but she died before marriage, and Anne was induced or com- 
pelled to take her place. She is said to have had two children 
by Kyme, but religious differences and incompatibility of tem- 
perament soon estranged the couple. Kyme was apparently an 
unimaginative man of the world, while Anne took to Bible- 
reading with zeal, became convinced of the falsity of the doctrine 



ASMA'I— ASMODEUS 



763 



of transubstantiation, and created some stir in Lincoln by her dis- 
putations. According to Bale and Foxe her husband turned her 
out of doors, but in the privy council register she is said to have 
" refused Kyme to be her husband without any honest allega- 
tion." She had as good a reason for repudiating her husband 
as Henry VIII. for repudiating Anne of Cleves. In any case, 
she came to London and made friends with Joan Bocher, who 
was already known for heterodoxy, and other Protestants. She 
was examined for heresy in March 1545 by the lord mayor, and 
was committed to the Counter prison. Then she was examined 
by Bonner, the bishop of London, who drew up a form of re- 
cantation which he entered in his register. This fact led Parsons 
and other Catholic historians to state that she actually recanted, 
but she refused to sign Bonner's form without qualification. 
Two months later, on the 24th of May, the privy council ordered 
her arrest. On the 13th of June 1545, she was arraigned as a 
sacramenfarian under the Six Articles at the Guildhall; but no 
witness appeared against her; she was declared not guilty by 
the jury and discharged after paying her fees. 

The reactionary party, which, owing to the absence of Hertford 
and Lisle and to the presence of Gardiner, gained the upper hand 
in the council in the summer of 1546, were not satisfied with this 
repulse; they probably aimed at the leaders of the reforming 
party, such as Hertford and possibly Queen Catherine Parr, who 
were suspected of favouring Anne, and on the 18th of June 1546 
Anne was again arraigned before a commission including the 
lord mayor, the duke of Norfolk, St John, Bonner and Heath. 
No jury was empanelled and no witnesses were called; she was 
condemned, simply on her confession, to be burnt. On the same 
day she was called before the privy council with her husband. 
Kyme was sent home into Lincolnshire, but Anne was committed 
to Newgate, " for that she was very obstinate and heady in 
reasoning of matters of religion." On the following day she was 
taken to the Tower and racked; according to Anne's own 
statement, as recorded by Bale, the lord chancellor, Wriothesley, 
and the solicitor-general, Rich, worked the rack themselves; but 
she " would not convert for all the pain " (Wriothesley, Chronicle 
i. 168). Her torture, disputed by Jardine, Lingard and others, is 
substantiated not only by her own narrative, but by two con- 
temporary chronicles, and by a contemporary letter {ibid.; 
Narratives of the Reformation, p. 305; Ellis, Original Letters, 2nd 
Ser. ii. 177). For four weeks she was left in prison, and at length 
on the 16th of July, she was burnt at Smith&eld in the presence 
of the same persecuting dignitaries who had condemned her to 
death. 

Authorities. — Bale's two tracts.printed at Marburg in November 
1546 and January 1547, are the basis of Foxe's account. See also 
Acts of the Privy Council (1542-1547), pp. 424. 462; Wriothesley's 
Chron. i. 155, 167-169; Narratives of the Reformation, passim; 
Cough's Index to Parker Soc. Publications; Burnet's Hist, of the 
Reformation; Dixon's Hist, of the Church of England; Diet. Nat. 
Biogr. (A. F. P.) 

ASMA'I [Abu Sa'Id 'Abd ul -Malik ibn Quraib] (c. 739-831), 
Arabian scholar, was born of pure Arab stock in Basra and was 
a pupil there of Abu 'Amr ibn ul-'Ala. He seems to have been a 
poor man until by the influence of the governor of Basra he was 
brought to the notice of Harun al-Rashld, who enjoyed his con- 
versation at court and made him tutor of his son. He became 
wealthy and acquired property in Basra, where he again settled 
for a time; but returned later to Bagdad, where he died in 831. 
Asma'i was one of the greatest scholars of his age. From his 
youth he stored up in his memory the sacred words of the Koran, 
the traditions of the Prophet, the verses of the old poets and the 
stories of the ancient wars of the Arabs. He was also a student 
of language and a critic. It was as a critic that he was the great 
rival of Abu 'Ubaida (q.v.). While the latter followed (or led) the 
Shu'ubite movement and declared for the excellence of all things 
not Arabian, Asma'i was the pious Moslem and avowed supporter 
of the superiority of the Arabs over all peoples, and of the free- 
dom of their language and literature from all foreign influence. 
Some of his scholars attained high rank as literary men. Of 
Asma'i's many works mentioned in the catalogue known as the 
Fihrist, only about half a dozen are extant. Of these the Book 
of Distinction has been edited by D. H. Miiller (Vienna, 1876); 



the Book of the Wild Animals by R. Geyer (Vienna, 1887); the 
Book of the Horse, by A. Haffner (Vienna, 1895); the Book of the 
Sheep, by A. Haffner (Vienna, 1896). 

For life of Asma'i, see Ibn Khallikan, Biographical Dictionary, 
translated from the Arabic by McG. de Slane (Paris and 
London, 1842), vol. ii. pp. 123-127. For his work as a grammarian,. 
G. Fliigel, Die grammatischen Schulen der Araber (Leipzig, 1862), 
pp. 72-80. (G. W. T.) 

ASMARA, the capital of the Italian colony of Eritrea, N.E. 
Africa. It is built on the Hamasen plateau, near its eastern edge, 
at an elevation of 7800 ft., and is some 40 m. W.S.W. in a direct 
line of the seaport of Massawa. Pop. (1904) about 9000, including 
the garrison of 300 Italian soldiers, and some 1000 native troops. 
The European civil population numbers over 500; the rest 
of the inhabitants are chiefly Abyssinians. There is a small 
Mahommedan colony. The town is strongly fortified. The 
European quarter contains several fine public buildings, including 
the residence of the governor, club house, barracks and hospital. 
Fort Baldissera is built on a hill to the south-west of the town 
and is considered impregnable. 

Asmara, an Amharic word signifying " good pasture place," is 
a town of considerable antiquity. It was included in the mari- 
time province of northern Abyssinia, which was governed by a 
viceroy who bore the title of Bahar-nagash (ruler of the sea). 
By the Abyssinians the Hamasen plateau was known as the plain 
of the thousand villages. Asmara appears to have been one of 
the most prosperous of these villages, and to have attained 
commercial importance through being on the high road from 
Axum to Massawa. When Werner Munzinger (q.v.) became 
French consul at Massawa, he entered into a scheme for annexing 
the Hamasen (of which Asmara was then the capital) to France, 
but the outbreak of the war with Germany in 1870 brought the 
project to nought (cf. A. B. Wylde, Modern Abyssinia, 1901). 
In 1872 Munzinger, now in Egyptian service, annexed Asmara 
to the khedivial dominions, but in 1884, owing to the rise of the 
mahdi,Egypt evacuated her Abyssinian provinces and Asmara was 
chosen by Ras Alula, the representative of the negus Johannes 
(King John), as his headquarters. Shortly afterwards the Italians 
occupied Massawa, and in 1889 Asmara (see Abyssinia : History) . 
In 1900 the seat of government was transferred from Massawa 
to Asmara, which in its modern form is the creation of the 
Italians. It is surrounded by rich agricultural lands, cultivated 
in part by Italian immigrants, and is a busy trading centre. A 
railway from Massawa to Asmara was completed as far as Ghinda, 
at the foot of the plateau, in 1904. At Medrizien, 6 m. north of ' 
Asmara, are gold-mines which have been partially worked. 

See G. Dainelli, In Africa. Lettere doll' Eritrea (Bergamo, 1908) ; 
R. Perini, Di qua dal Mareb (Florence, 1905). 

ASMODEUS, or Ashmedai, an evil demon who appears in later 
Jewish tradition as "king of demons." He is sometimes identified * 
with Beelzebub or Apollyon (Rev. ix. n). In the Talmud he 
plays a great part in the legends concerning Solomon. In the 
apocryphal book of Tobit (iii. 8)occurs the well-known story of 
his love for Sara, the beautiful daughter of Raguel, whose seven 
husbands were slain in succession by him on their respective 
bridal nights. At last Tobias, by burning the heart and. liver of 
a fish, drove off the demon, who fled to Egypt. From the part 
played by Asmodeus in this story, he has been often familiarly 
called the genius of matrimonial unhappiness or jealousy, and 
as such may be compared with Lilith. Le Sage makes him the 
principal character in his novel Le Diable boiteux. Both the 
word and the conception seem to have been derived originally 
from the Persian. The name has been taken to mean "covetous." 
It is in any case no doubt identical with the demon Aeshma of 
the Zend-Avesta and the Pahlavi texts. But the meaning is not 
certain. It is generally agreed that the second part of the name 
Asmodeus is the same as the Zend daewa, dew, " demon." The 
first part may be equivalent to Aeshma, the impersonation of 
anger. But W. Baudissin (Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklopddie) 
prefers to derive it from ish, to drive, set in motion; whence 
ish-min, driving, impetuous. 

The legend of Asmodeus is given fully in the Jewish Encyclo- 
paedia,s.y. See also the articles in the Encyclopaedia Biblica, Hastings' 
Dictionary of the Bible, and Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklopddie. 



764 



ASMONEUS— ASPARAGINE 



ASMONEUS, or Asamonaetjs (so Josephus), great-grandfather 
of Mattathias, the father of Judas Maccabaeus. Nothing more is 
known of him, and the name is only given by Josephus (not in 
1 Mace. ii. 1). But the dynasty was known to Josephus and the 
Mishna (once) as " the sons (race) of the Asamonaeans (of A.) "; 
and the Targum of 1 Sam. ii. 4 has " the house of tte Hash- 
moneans who were weak, signs were wrought for them and 
strength." If not the founder, Asmoneus was probably the home 
of the family (cf. Heshmon, Jos. xv. 27). 

See Schurer, Geschichte des jiidischen Volkes, i. 248 N; art. 
" Maccabees," § 2, in Ency. Biblica. (J. H. A. H.) 

ASNIERES, a town of northern France, in the department of 
Seine, on the left bank of the Seine, about 15 m. N.N.W. of the 
fortifications of Paris. Pop. (1906) 35,883. The town, which 
has grown rapidly in recent years, is a favourite boating centre 
for the Parisians. The industries include boat-building and the 
manufacture of colours and perfumery. 

ASOKA, a famous Buddhist emperor of India who reigned 
from 264 to 228 or 227 b.c. Thirty-five of his inscriptions on 
rocks or pillars or in caves still exist (see Inscriptions: Indian), 
and they are among the most remarkable and interesting of 
Buddhist monuments (see Buddhism). Asoka was the grandson 
of Chandragupta, the founder of the Maurya (Peacock) dynasty, 
who had wrested the Indian provinces of Alexander the Great 
from the hands of Seleucus, and he was the son of Bindusara, 
who succeeded his father Chandragupta, by a lady from Champa. 
The Greeks do not mention him and the Brahmin books ignore 
him, but the Buddhist chronicles and legends tell us much about 
him. The inscriptions, which contain altogether about five 
thousand words, are entirely of religious import, and their 
references to worldly affairs are incidental. They begin in the 
thirteenth year of his reign, and tell us that in the ninth year he 
had invaded Kalinga, and had been so deeply impressed by the 
horrors involved in warfare that he had then given up the desire 
for conquest, and devoted himself to conquest by " religion." 
What the religion was is explained in the edicts. It is purely 
ethical, independent alike of theology and ritual, and is the code 
of morals as laid down in the Buddhist sacred books for laymen. 
He further tells us that in the ninth year of his reign he formally 
joined the Buddhist community as a layman, in the eleventh 
year he became a member of the order, and in the thirteenth he 
" set out for the Great Wisdom " (the Sambodhi), which is the 
Buddhist technical term for entering upon the well-known, eight- 
fold path to Nirvana. One of the edicts is addressed to the 
order, and urges upon its members and the laity alike the learn- 
ing and rehearsal of passages from the Buddhist scriptures. 
Two others are proclamations commemorating visits paid by the 
king, one to the dome erected over the ashes of Konagamana, the 
Buddha, another to the birthplace of Gotama, the Buddha (q.v.). 
Three very short ones are dedications of caves to the use of 
an order of recluses. The rest either enunciate the religion as 
explained above, or describe the means adopted by the king for 
propagating it, or acting in accordance with it. These means are 
such as the digging of wells, planting medicinal herbs, and trees 
for shade, sending out of missionaries, appointment of special 
officers to supervise charities, and so on. The missionaries were 
sent to Kashmir, to the Himalayas, to the border lands on the 
Indus, to the coast of Burma, to south India and to Ceylon. 
And the king claims that missions sent by him to certain Greek 
kingdoms that he names had resulted in the folk there conform- 
ing themselves to his religion. The extent of Asoka's dominion 
included all India from the thirteenth degree of latitude up to the 
Himalayas, Nepal, Kashmir, the Swat valley, Afghanistan as 
far as the Hindu Kush, Sind and Baluchistan. It was thus as 
large as, or perhaps somewhat larger than, British India before 
the conquest of Burma. He was undoubtedly the most powerful 
sovereign of his time and the most remarkable and imposing of 
the native rulers of India. " If a man's fame," says Koppen, 
" can be measured by the number of hearts who revere his 
memory, by the number of lips who have mentioned, and still 
mention him with honour, Asoka is more famous than Char- 
lemagne or Caesar." At the same time it is probable that, 



like Constantine's patronage of Christianity, his patronage of 
Buddhism, then the most rising and influential faith in India, 
was not unalloyed with political motives, and it is certain that 
his vast benefactions to the Buddhist cause were at least one of 
the causes that led to its decline. 

See also Asoka, by Vincent Smith (Oxford, 1901); Inscriptions de 
Piyadasi, by E. Senart (Paris, 1891); chapters on Asoka in T. W. 
Rhys Davids's Buddhism(20th ed. .London, 1903), and Buddhist India 
(London, 1903); V.A.Smith,Edictsof Asoka (1909). (T.W.R.D.) 

ASOLO (anc. Acelum), a town of Venetia, Italy, in the province 
of Treviso, about 19 m. N.W. direct from the town of Treviso, 
and some 10m. E. of Bassanoby road. Pop. (1901) 5847. It is 
well situated on a hill, 690 ft. above sea-level. Remains of 
Roman baths and of a theatre have been discovered in the 
course of excavation {Notizie degli scavi, 1877, 2 35! 1881, 205; 
1882, 289), and the town was probably a municipium. It 
became an episcopal see in the 6th century. It was to Asolo 
that Catherine Cornaro, queen of Cyprus, retired on her abdica- 
tion. Here she was visited by Pietro Bembo, who conceived here 
his Dialoghi degli Asolani, and by Andrea Navagero (Naugerius). 
Paulus Manutius was born here. The village of Maser is 45 m. to 
the E., and near it is the Villa Giacomelli, erected by Palladio, con- 
taining frescoes by Paolo Veronese, executedin 1 566-1 568 for Marc- 
antonio Barbaro of Venice, and ranking among his best works. 

ASOR (Hebr. for " ten "), an instrument " of ten strings " 
mentioned in the Bible, about which authors are not agreed. 
The word occurs only three times in the Bible, and has not been 
traced elsewhere. In Psalm xxxiii. 2 the reference is to " kinnor, 
nebel and asor "; in Psalm xcii. 3, to " nebel and asor "; in 
Psalm cxliv. to " nebel-asor." In the English version asor is 
translated " an instrument of ten strings," with a marginal note 
" omit " applied to " instrument." In the Septuagint, the word 
being derived from a root signifying " ten," the Greek is h> 
StKa\op8cp or xpahrripiov denaxopSov, in the Vulgate in deca- 
chordo psalterio. Each time the word asor is used it follows the 
word nebel (see Psaltery), and probably merely indicates a 
variant of the nebel, having ten strings instead of the customary 
twelve assigned to it by Josephus {Antiquities, vii. 12. 3). 

See also Mendel and Reissmann, Musikalisch.es Conversations- 
Lexikon, vol. i. (Berlin, 1881); Sir John Stainer, The Music of the 
Bible, pp. 35-37; Forkel, Allgemeine Geschichte der Musik, Bd. i. 
p. 133 (Leipzig, 1788). (K. S.) 

ASP ( Vipera aspis), a species of venomous snake, closely allied 
to the common adder of Great Britain, which it represents 
throughout the southern parts of Europe, being specially 
abundant in the region of the Alps. It differs from the adder 
in having the head entirely covered with scales, shields being 
absent, and in having the snout somewhat turned up. The term 
" Asp " (do"7r£s) seems to have been employed by Greek and 
Roman writers, and by writers generally down to comparatively 
recent times, to designate more than one species of serpent; 
thus the asp, by means of which Cleopatra is said to have ended 
her life, and so avoided the disgrace of entering Rome a captive, 
is now generally supposed to have been the cerastes, or horned 
viper {Cerastes cornutus) , of northern Africa and Arabia, a snake 
about 15 in. long, exceedingly venomous, and provided with 
curious horn-like protuberances over each eye, which give it a 
decidedly sinister appearance. The snake, however, to which 
the word " asp " has been most commonly applied is undoubtedly 
the haje of Egypt, the spy-slange or spitting snake of the Boers 
{Naja haje), one of the very poisonous Elarinae, from 3 to 4 ft. 
long, with the skin of its neck loose, so as to render it dilatable 
at the will of the animal, as in the cobra of India, a species from 
which it differs only in the absence of the spectacle-like mark 
on the back of the neck. Like the cobra, also, the haje has its 
fangs extracted by the jugglers of the country, who afterwards 
train it to perform various tricks. The asp {Pethen, jng) is 
mentioned in various parts of the Old Testament. This name 
is twice translated " adder," but as nothing is told of it beyond 
its poisonous character and the intractability of its disposition, 
it is impossible accurately to determine the species. 

ASPARAGINE, C4H8N2O3, a naturally occurring base, found 
in plants belonging to the natural orders Leguminosae and 



ASPARAGUS— ASP ASIA 



765 



Cruciferae. It occurs in two optically active forms, namely, as 
laevo-asparagine and dextro-asparagine. Laevo-asparagine was 
isolated in 1805 by L. N. Vauquelin. A. Piutti (Gazz. chim. ltd., 
1887, 17, p. 126; 1888, 18, p. 457) synthesized the asparagines 
from the monomethyl ester of inactive aspartic acid by heating 
it with alcoholic ammonia. In this way a mixture of the two 
asparagines was obtained, which were separated by picking out 
the hemihedral crystals. 
HOOC-CH-NH 2 -CH 2 -COOC 2 H 6 +NH 3 

= C 2 H 6 OH+HOOC-CH-NH 2 -CH 2 -CONH 2 . 

Laevo-asparagine is slightly soluble in cold water and readily 
soluble in hot water. It crystallizes in prisms, containing one 
molecule of water of crystallization, the anhydrous form melt- 
ing at 234-235°C. Nitrous acid converts it into malic acid, 
HOOC-CHOH-CH 2 -COOH. It is laevo-rotatory in aqueous or 
in alkaline solution, and dextro-rotatory in acid solution (L. 
Pasteur, Ann.Chim. Phys., 1851 [2I, 3i,p. 67). Dextro-asparagine 
was first found in 1886 in the shoots of the vetch (Piutti). It 
forms rhombic crystals possessing a sweet taste. It is dextro- 
rotatory in aqueous or alkaline solution, and laevo-rotatory 
in acid solution. 

Hydrolysis by means of acids or alkalis converts the aspara- 
gines into aspartic acid; whilst on heating with water in a sealed 
tube they are converted into ammonium aspartate. The con- 
stitution of the asparagines has been determined by A. Piutti 
{Gazz. chim. Ital., 1888, 18, p. 457). 

ASPARAGUS, a genus of plants (nat. ord. Liliaceae) containing 
more than 100 species, and widely distributed in the temperate 
and warmer parts of the Old World; it was introduced from 
Europe into America with the early settlers. The name is 
derived from the Greek acnrapayos or a<r<j>apayos, the origin 
of which is obscure. Sperage or sparage was the form in use from 
the 1 6th to 1 8th centuries, cf. the modern Italian spar agio. The 
vulgar corruption sparrow-grass or sparagrass was in accepted 
popular use during the 18th century, " asparagus " being con- 
sidered pedantic. The plants have a short, creeping, under- 
ground stem from which spring slender, branched, aerial shoots. 
The leaves are reduced to minute scales bearing in their axils 
tufts of green, needle-like branches (the so-called cladodes), 
which simulate, and perform the functions of, leaves. In one 
section of the genus, sometimes regarded as a distinct genus 
Myrsiphyllum, the cladodes are flattened. The plants often 
climb or scramble, in which they are helped by the develop- 
ment of the scale-leaves into persistent spines. The flowers are 
small, whitish and pendulous; the fruit is a berry. 

Several of the climbing species are grown in greenhouses for 
their delicate, often feathery branches, which are also valu- 
able for cutting; the South African Asparagus plumosus is an 
especially elegant species. The so-called smilax, much used for 
decoration, is a species of the Myrsiphyllum section, A. medeo- 
loides, also known as Myrsiphyllum asparagoides. The young 
shoots of Asparagus officinalis have fro"m very remote times been 
in high repute as a culinary vegetable, owing to their delicate 
flavour and diuretic virtues. The plant, which is a native of the 
north temperate zone of the Old World, grows wild on the south 
coast of England; and on the waste steppes of Russia it is so 
abundant that it is eaten by cattle like grass. In common with 
the marsh-mallow and some other plants, it contains asparagine 
or aspartic acidamide. The roots of asparagus were formerly 
used as an aperient medicine, and the fruits were likewise 
employed as a diuretic. Under the name of Prussian asparagus, 
the spikes of an allied plant, Ornithogalum pyrenaicum, are used 
in some places. The diuretic action is extremely feeble, and 
neither the plant nor asparagine is now used medicinally. 

Asparagus is grown extensively in private gardens as well as 
for market. The asparagus prefers a loose, light, deep, sandy soil; 
the depth should be 3 ft., the soil being well trenched, and all 
surplus water got away. A considerable quantity of well-rotted 
dung or of recent seaweed should be laid in the bottom of the 
trench, and another top-dressing of manure should be dug in 
preparatory to planting or sowing. The beds should be 3 ft. 
or 5 ft. wide, with intervening alleys of 2 ft., the narrower beds 



taking two rows of plants, the wider ones three rows. The beds 
should run east and west, so that the sun's rays may strike 
against the side of the bed. In some cases the plants are grown 
in equidistant rows 3 to 4 ft. apart. Where the beds are made 
with plants already prepared, either one-year-old or two-year-old 
plants may be used, for which a trench should be cut sufficient 
to afford room for spreading out the roots, the crowns being all 
kept at about 2 in. below the surface. Planting is best done in 
April, after the plants have started into growth. To prevent 
injury to the roots, it is, however, perhaps the better plan to 
sow the seeds in the beds where the plants are to remain. To 
experience the finest flavour of asparagus, it should be eaten 
immediately after having been gathered; if kept longer than one 
day, or set into water, its finer flavour is altogether lost. If 
properly treated, asparagus beds will continue to bear well for 
many years. The asparagus grown at Argenteuil, near Paris, 
has acquired much notoriety for its large size and excellent 
quality. The French growers plant in trenches instead of 
raised beds. The most common method of forcing asparagus 
is to prepare, early in the year, a moderate hot-bed of stable 
litter with a bottom heat of 70 , and to cover it with a common 
frame. After the heat of fermentation has somewhat subsided, 
the surface of the bed is covered with a layer of light earth or 
exhausted tan-bark, and in this the roots of strong mature plants 
are closely placed. The crowns of the roots are then covered 
with 3 to 6 in. of soil. A common three-light frame may hold 
500 or 600 plants, and will afford a supply for several weeks. 
After planting, linings are applied when necessary to keep up 
the heat, but care must be taken not to scorch the roots; air 
must be occasionally admitted. Where there are pits heated 
by hot water or by the tank system, they may be advantageously 
applied to this purpose. A succession of crops must be main- 
tained by annually sowing or planting new beds. 

The " asparagus-beetle " is the popular name for two beetles, 
the " common asparagus beetle " (Crioceris asparagi) and the 
" twelve-spotted " (C. duodecimpunctata) , which feed on the 
asparagus plant. C. asparagi has been known in Europe since 
early times, and was introduced into America about 1856; the 
rarer C. duodecimpunctata (sometimes called the " fed " to 
distinguish it from the " blue " species) was detected in America 
in 1881. For an admirable account of these pests see F. H. 
Chittenden, Circular 102 of the U. S. Dep. of Agriculture, Bureau 
of Entomology, May 1908. 

The " asparagus-stone " is a form of apatite, simulating aspar- 
agus in colour. 

ASPASIA, an Athenian courtesan of the sth century B.C., was 
born either at Miletus, or at Megara, and settled in Athens, where 
her beauty and her accomplishments gained for her a great 
reputation. Pericles, who had divorced his wife (445), made her 
his mistress, and, after the death of his two legitimate sons, 
procured the passing of a law under which his son by her was 
recognized as legitimate. It was the fashion, especially among 
the comic poets, to regard her as the adviser of Pericles in all 
his political actions, and she is even charged with having caused 
the Samian and Peloponnesian wars (Aristoph. Acharn. 497). 
Shortly before the latter war, she was accused of impiety, and 
nothing but the tears and entreaties of Pericles procured her 
acquittal. On the death of Pericles she is said to have become 
the mistress of one Lysicles, whom, though of ignoble birth, she 
raised to a high position in the state; but, as Lysicles died a year 
after Pericles (428), the story is unconvincing. She was the 
chief figure in the dialogue Aspasia by Aeschines the Socratic, 
in which she was represented as criticizing the manners and 
training of the women of her time (for an attempted reconstruc- 
tion of the dialogue see P. Natorp in Philologus, li. p. 489, 1892); 
in the Menexenus (generally ascribed to Plato) she is a teacher 
of rhetoric, the instructress of Socrates and Pericles, and a funeral 
oration in honour of those Athenians who had given their lives 
for their country (the authorship of which is attributed to 
Aspasia) is repeated by Socrates; Xenophon (Oecon. Hi. r4) also 
speaks of her in favourable terms, but she is not mentioned by 
Thucydides. In opposition to this view, Wilamowitz-MollendorS 



766 



ASPASIUS— ASPENDUS 



(Hermes, xxxv. 1900) regards her simply as a courtesan, whose 
personality would readily become the subject of rumour, favour- 
able or unfavourable. There is a bust bearing her name in the 
Pio Clementino Museum in the Vatican. 

See Le Conte de Bievre, Les Deux Aspasies (1736) ; J. B. Capefigue, 
Aspasie el le sircle de Pericles (1862) ; L. Becq de Fouquieres. Aspasie 
de Milet (1872); H. Houssaye, Aspasie, Cleopdtre, Theodora (1899); 
R. Hamerling, Aspasia (a romance; Eng. trans, by M. J. Safford, 
New York, 1882) ; J. Donaldson, Woman (1907). Also Pericles. 

ASPASIUS, a Greek peripatetic philosopher, and a prolific 
commentator on Aristotle. He flourished probably towards the 
close of the 1st century a.d., or perhaps during the reign of 
Antoninus Pius. His commentaries on the Categories, De 
Inter pretatione, De Sensu, and other works of Aristotle are 
frequently referred to by later writers, but have not come down 
to us. Commentaries on Plato, mentioned by Porphyry in his 
life of Plotinus, have also been lost. Commentaries on books 
1-4, 7 (in part), and 8 of the Nicomachean Ethics are preserved; 
that on book 8 was printed with those of Eustratius and others 
by Aldus Manutius at Venice in 1536. They were partly (2-4) 
translated into Latin by Felicianus in 1541, and have frequently 
been republished, but their authenticity has been disputed. 
The most recent edition is by G. Heylbut in Commentaria in 
Aristotelcm Gracca, xix. 1 (Berlin, 1889). 

Another Aspasius, in the 3rd century a.d., was a Roman sophist 
and rhetorician, son or pupil of the rhetorician Demetrianus. He 
taught rhetoric in Rome, and filled the chair of rhetoric founded 
by Vespasian. He was secretary to the emperor Maximin. His 
orations, which are praised for their style, are lost. 

ASPEN, an important section of the poplar genus (Populus) 
of which the common aspen of Europe, P. tremu/a, may be taken 
as the type, — a tall fast-growing. tree with rather slender trunk, 
and grey bark becoming rugged when old. The roundish leaves, 
toothed on the margin, are slightly downy when young, but after- 
wards smooth, dark green on the upper and greyish green on the 
lower surface; the long slender petioles, much flattened towards 
the outer end, allow of free lateral motion by the lightest breeze, 
giving the foliage its well-known tremulous character. By their 
friction on each other the leaves give rise to a rustling sound. 
It is supposed that the mulberry trees (Becaim) mentioned in 
1 Chronicles xiv. 14, 15 were really aspen trees. The flowers, 
which appear in March and April, are borne on pendulous hairy 
catkins, 2-3 in. long; male and female catkins are, as in the other 
species of the genus, on distinct trees. 

The aspen is found in moist places, sometimes at a considerable 
elevation, 1600 ft. or more, in Scotland. It is an abundant tree 
in the northern parts of Britain, even as far as Sutherland, and is 
occasionally found in the coppices of the southern counties, but 
in these latter habitats seldom reaches any large size; through- 
out northern Europe it abounds in the forests, — in Lapland 
flourishing even in 70 N. lat., while in Siberia its range extends 
to the Arctic Circle; in Norway its upper limit is said to coincide 
with that of the pine; trees exist near the western coast having 
stems 15 ft. in circumference. The wood of the aspen is very 
light and soft, though tough; it is employed by coopers, chiefly 
for pails and herring-casks; it is also made into butchers' trays, 
pack-saddles, and various articles for which its lightness recom- 
mends it; sabots are also made of it in France, and in medieval 
days it, was valued for arrows, especially for those used in target 
practice; the bark is used for tanning in northern countries; 
cattle and deer browse greedily on the young shoots and abundant 
suckers. Aspen wood makes but indifferent fuel, but charcoal 
prepared from it is light and friable, and has been employed in 
gunpowder manufacture. The powdered bark is sometimes given 
to horses as a vermifuge; it possesses likewise tonic and febrifugal 
properties, containing a considerable amount of salicin. The 
aspen is readily propagated either by cuttings or suckers, but 
has been but little planted of late years in Britain. P. trepida, 
or tremuloides, is closely allied to the European aspen, being 
chiefly distinguished by its more pointed leaves; it is a native 
of most parts of Canada and the United States, extending 
northwards as far as Great Slave Lake. The wood is soft and 
neither strong nor durable; it burns better in the green state 



than that of most trees, and is often used by tbe hunters of the 
North-West as fuel; split into thin layers, it was formerly 
employed in the United States for bonnet and hat making. It 
is largely manufactured into wood-pulp for paper-making. The 
bark is of some value as a tonic and febrifuge. P. grandidentata, 
the large-leaved American aspen, has ovate or roundish leaves 
deeply and irregularly serrated on the margin. The wood is 
light, soft and close-grained, but not strong. In northern New 
England and Canada it is largely manufactured into wood-pulp; 
it is occasionally used in turnerV and for wooden-ware. 

ASPENDUS (mod. Balkis Kale , or, more anciently in the 
native language, Estvedys (whence the adjective Eslvedijys on 
coins), an ancient city of Pamphylia, very strongly situated on 
an isolated hill on the right bank of the Eurymedon at the 
point where the river issues from the Taurus. The sea is now 
about 7 m. distant, and the river is navigable only for about 
2 m. from the mouth; but in the time of Thucydides ships could 
anchor off Aspendus. Really of pre-Hellenic date, the place 
claimed to be an Argive colony. It derived wealth from great 
salines and from a trade in oil and wool, to which the wide 
range of its admirable coinage bears witness from the 5th century 
B.C. onwards. There Alcibiades met the satrap Tissaphernes in 
411 B.C., and thence succeeded in getting the Phoenician fleet, 
intended to co-operate with Sparta, sent back home. The 
Athenian, Thrasybulus, after obtaining contributions from 
Aspendus in 389, was murdered by .the inhabitants. The city 
bought off Alexander in ^^3^ but, not keeping faith, was forcibly 
occupied by the conqueror. In due course it passed from 
Pergamene to Roman dominion, and according to Cicero, was 
plundered of many artistic treasures by Verres. It was ranked 
by Philos'tratus the third city of Pamphylia, and in Byzantine 
times seems to have been known as Primopolis, under which 
name its bishop signed at Ephesus in a.d. 431. In medieval 
times it was evidently still a strong place, but it has now sunk, 
in the general decay of Pamphylia, to a wretched hamlet. 

The ruins still extant are very remarkable, and, with the 
noble Roman theatre, the finest in the world, have earned for 
the place (as is the case with certain other great monuments) a 
legendary connexion with Solomon's Sheban queen. On the 
summit of the hillock, surrounded by a wall with three gates, 
lie the remains of the city. The public buildings round the forum 
can all be traced, and parts of them are standing to a considerable 
height. They consist of a fine nympheum on the north with a 
covered theatre behind it, covered market halls on the west, and 
a peristyle hall and a basilica on the east. In the plain below are 
large thermae, and ruins of a splendid aqueduct. But all else 
seems insignificant beside the huge theatre, half hollowed out of 
the north-east flank of the hill. This was first published by 
C. F. M. Texier in 1849, an d has now been completely planned, 
&c, by Count Lanckoronski's expedition in 1884. It is built of 
local conglomerate and is in marvellous preservation. Erected 
to the honour of the emperors Marcus Aurelius and L. Verus by 
the architect Zeno, for the heirs of a local Roman citizen (as an 
inscription repeated over both portals attests), its auditorium 
has a circuit of 313-17 feet. There are forty tiers of seating, 
divided by one diazoma, and crowned by an arched gallery of 
rather later date, repaired in places with brick. This auditorium 
held 7500 spectators. The seats are not perfect, but so nearly 
so as to appear practically intact. The wooden stage has, of 
course, perished, but all its supporting structures are in place, 
and the great scena wall stands to its full height, and produces a 
magnificent impression whether from within or from without. 
Inwardly it was decorated with two orders of columns one above 
the other, with rich entablatures, much of which survives. In 
the tympanum is a relief of Bacchus (wrongly supposed to be of a 
female, and called the Bal-Kis, i.e. " Honey Girl "). The position 
of the sounding board above the stage is apparent. Under the 
forepart of the auditorium, built out from the hill, are immense 
vaults. The whole structure was enclosed within one great wall, 
pierced with numerous windows. This structure was probably 
put to some ecclesiastical Byzantine use, as certain mutilated 
heads of saints appear upon it; and later it became a fortress 



ASPER— ASPERN-ESSLING 



767 



and received certain additions. It is now under the care of the 
local aghd and not allowed to be plundered for building stone. 

See C. Lanckoronski, Villes de la Pamphylie et de la Pisidu, i. 
(1890). (D. G. H.) 

ASPER, AEMILIUS, Latin grammarian, possibly lived in the 
2nd century a.d. He wrote commentaries on Terence, Sallust 
and Virgil. Numerous fragments of the last show that as both 
critic and commentator he possessed good judgment and taste. 
They are printed in Keil, Probi in Vergilii Bucolica Commentarius 
(1848); see also Suringar, Hisloria Critica Scholiastarum Lali- 
norum (1834) ; Grafenhan, Geschichtc der klassischen Philologie im 

Alterthum, iv. (1S43-1830). Two short grammatical treatises, 

extant under the name of Asper, and of very little value, have 
nothing to do with the commentator, but belong to a much 
later date — the time of Priscian (6th century). Both are 
printed in Keil, Grammatici Latini. See also Schanz, Geschichte 
der rbmischen Litleratur, § 598. 

ASPER, HANS (1499-1571), Swiss painter, was born and died 
at Zurich. He wrought in a great variety of styles, but excelled 
chiefly in flower and fruit pieces, and in portrait-painting. 
Many of his pictures have perished, but his style may be judged 
from the illustrations to Gessner's Hisloria Animalium, for which 
he is said to have furnished the designs, and from portraits of 
Zwingli and his daughter Regula Gwalter, which are preserved 
in the public library of Zurich. It has been usual to class Asper 
among the pupils and imitators of Holbein, but an inspection of 
his works is sufficient to show that this is a mistake. Though 
Asper was held in high reputation by his fellow-citizens, who 
elected him a member of the Great Council, and had a medal 
struck in his honour, he seems to have died in poverty. 

ASPERGES (" thou wilt sprinkle," from the Latin verb 
asper gcrc), the ceremony of sprinkling the people with holy water 
before High Mass in the Roman Catholic Church, so called from 
the first word of the verse (Ps. iv. 0) Asperges me, Domini, 
hyssopo et mundabor, with which the priest begins the ceremony. 
The brush used for sprinkling is an aspergill {asper gillum), or 
aspersoir, and the vessel for this water an aspersorium. The act 
of sprinkling the water is called aspersion. 

ASPERN-ESSLING, Battle of (1809), a battle fought on the 
21st and 22 nd of May 1809 between the French and their allies 
under Napoleon and the Austrians commanded by the arch- 
duke Charles (see Napoleonic Campaigns). At the time of the 
battle Napoleon was in possession of Vienna, the bridges over 
the Danube had been broken, and the archduke's army was on 
and about the Bisamberg, a mountain near Korneuburg, on 
the left bank of the river. The first task of the French was the 
crossing of the Danube. Lobau, one of the numerous islands 
which divide the river into minor channels, was selected as the 
point of crossing, careful preparations were made, and on the 
night of the i9th-2oth of May the French bridged all the channels 
from the right bank to Lobau and occupied the island. By the 
evening of the 20th great masses of men had been collected there 
and the last arm of the Danube, between Lobau and the left bank, 
bridged. Massena's corps at once crossed to the left bank and 
dislodged the Austrian outposts. Undeterred by the news of 
heavy attacks on his rear from Tirol and from Bohemia, Napoleon 
hurried all available troops to the bridges, and by daybreak on 
the 21st, 40,000 men were collected on the Marchfeld, the broad 
open plain of the left bank, which was also to be the scene of 
the battle of Wagram. The archduke did not resist the passage; 
it was his intention, as soon as a large enough force had crossed, 
to attack it before the rest of the French army could come to its 
assistance. Napoleon had, of course, accepted the risk of such 
an attack, but he sought at the same time to minimize it by 
summoning every available battalion to the scene. His forces 
on the Marchfeld were drawn up in front of the bridges facing 
north, with their left in the village of Aspern ( Gross- Aspern) 
and their right in Essling (or Esslingen). Both places lay close 
to the Danube and could not therefore be turned; Aspern, 
indeed, is actually on the bank of one of the river channels. 
But the French had to fill the gap between the villages, and also 
Xu move forward to give room for the supports to form up. 



Whilst they were thus engaged the archduke moved to the 
attack with his whole army in five columns. Three under 
Hiller, Bellegarde and Hohenzollern were to converge upon 
Aspern, the other two, under Rosenberg, to attack Essling. 
The Austrian cavalry was in the centre, ready to move out 
against any French cavalry which should attack the heads of 
the columns. During the 21st the bridges became more and 
more unsafe, owing to the violence of the current, but the 
French crossed without intermission all day and during the night. 
The battle began at Aspern; Hiller carried the village at the 
first rush, but Massena recaptured it, and held his ground with 

the same tenacity as he had shown it Genoa in 1800. The 

French infantry, indeed, fought on this day with the old stubborn 
bravery which it had failed to show in the earlier battles of the 
year. The three Austrian columns fighting their hardest through 
the day were unable to capture more than half the village; the 
rest was still held by Massena when night fell. In the meanwhile 
nearly all the French infantry posted between the two villages 
and in front of the bridges had been drawn into the fight on 
either flank. Napoleon therefore, to create a diversion, sent 
forward his centre, now consisting only of cavalry, to charge the 
enemy's artillery, which was deployed in a long line and firing 
into Aspern. The first charge of the French was repulsed, but 
the second attempt, made by heavy masses of cuirassiers, was 
more serious. The French horsemen, gallantly led, drove off 
the guns, rode round Hohenzollern's infantry squares, and 
routed the cavalry of Lichtenstein, but they were unable to do 
more, and in the end they retired to their old position. In the 
meanwhile Essling had been the scene of fighting almost as 
desperate as that of Aspern. The French cuirassiers made 
repeated charges on the flank of Rosenberg's force, and for long 
delayed the assault, and in the villages Lannes with a single 
division made a heroic and successful resistance, till night ended 
the battle. The two armies bivouacked on their ground, and in 
Aspern the French and Austrians lay within pistol shot of each 
other. The latter had fought fully as hard as their opponents, 
and Napoleon realized that they were no longer the professional 
soldiers of former campaigns. The spirit of the nation was in 
them and they fought to kill, not for the honour of their arms. 
The emperor was not discouraged, but on the contrary renewed 
his efforts to bring up every available man. All through the 
night more and more French troops were put across. 

At the earliest dawn of the 22nd the battle was resumed. 
Massena swiftly cleared Aspern of the enemy, but at the same 
time Rosenberg stormed Essling at last. Lannes, however, 
resisted desperately, and reinforced by St Hilaire's division, 
drove Rosenberg out. In Aspern Massena had been less for- 
tunate, the counter-attack of Hiller and Bellegarde being as 
completely successful as that of Lannes and St Hilaire. Mean- 
time Napoleon had launched a great attack on the Austrian 
centre. The whole of the French centre, with Lannes on the 
right and the cavalry in reserve, moved forward. The Austrian 
line was broken through, between Rosenberg's right and Hohen- 
zollern's left, and the French squadrons poured into the gap. 
Victory was almost won when the archduke brought up his last 
reserve, himself leading on his soldiers with a colour in his hand. 
Lannes was checked, and with his repulse the impetus of the 
attack died out all along the line. Aspern had been lost, and 
graver news reached Napoleon at the critical moment. The 
Danube bridges, which had broken down once already, had at 
last been cut by heavy barges, which had been set adrift down 
stream for the purpose by the Austrians. Napoleon at once 
suspended the attack. Essling now fell to another assault of 
Rosenberg, and though again the French, this time part of the 
Guard, drove him out, the Austrian general then directed his 
efforts on the flank of the French centre, slowly retiring on the 
bridges. The retirement was terribly costly, and but for the 
steadiness of Lannes the French must have been driven into the 
Danube, for the archduke's last effort to break down their 
resistance was made with the utmost fury. Only the complete 
exhaustion of both sides put an end to the fighting. The French 
lost 44,000 out of 90,000 successively engaged, and amongst the 



768 



ASPHALT— ASPHODEL 



killed were Lannes and St Hilaire. The Austrians, 75,000 strong, 
lost 23,360. Even this, the first great defeat of Napoleon, did 
not shake his resolution. The beaten forces were at last with- 
drawn safely into the island. On the night of the 22nd the 
great bridge was repaired, and the army awaited the arrival of 
reinforcements, not in Vienna, but in Lobau. 

See sketch map in article Wagram. 

ASPHALT, or Asphaltum. The solid or semi-solid kinds of 
bitumen (q.v.) were termed acr^aXros by the Greeks; and by 
some ancient classical writers the name of pissasphaltum (iriffaa, 
pitch) was also sometimes employed. The asphalt of the Dead 
Sea (known as Lacus Asphaltites) received considerable notice 
from early travellers, and Diodorus the historian states that the 
inhabitants of the surrounding parts were accustomed to collect 
it for use in Egypt for embalming. In common with other forms 
of bitumen, asphalt is very widely distributed geographically 
and occurs in greater or less quantity in rocks of all ages. There 
is some divergence in the views expressed as to the precise 
manner of its production, but it may certainly be said that the 
principal asphalt deposits are merely the result of the evaporation 
and oxidation of liquid petroleum which has escaped from 
outcropping strata. The celebrated Pitch Lake of Trinidad 
was long regarded as the largest deposit of asphalt in existence, 
but it is said to be exceeded in area, if not in depth also, by one 
in Venezuela. The Trinidad " Lake " has an area of 99-3 acres, 
and is sufficiently firm in places to support a team of horses. The 
deposit is worked with picks to a depth of a foot or two, and the 
excavations soon become filled up by the plastic material flowing 
in from below and hardening. The depth of the deposit is not 
accurately known. The surface is not level but is composed of 
irregularly tumescent masses of various sizes, each said to be 
subject to independent motion, whereby the interior of each 
rises and flows centrifugally towards the edges. As the spaces 
between them are always filled with water, these masses are 
prevented from coalescing. The softer parts of the lake constantly 
evolve gas, which is stated to consist largely of carbon dioxide 
and sulphuretted hydrogen, and the pitch, which is honey- 
combed with gas-cavities, continues to exhibit this action for 
some time after its removal from the lake. The working of the 
deposit is in the hands of the New Trinidad Asphalt Company, 
who hold the concession up to the year 1930 on payment to the 
government of a minimum royalty of £10,000 a year. A circular 
line of tramway, supported on palm-leaves, has been laid on 
the lake to facilitate the removal 6f the asphalt. Very large 
quantities are exported for paving and other purposes, the annual 
shipments amounting to about 130,000 tons from the lake and 
about 30,000 tons from other properties. The amount of asphalt 
in the lake has been estimated at 158,400 tons for each foot of 
depth, and if the average depth be taken at 20 ft. this would give 
a total of 3,168,000 tons; but in 1908, though 1,885,600 tons 
had been removed in the previous thirty-five years, there was 
but little evidence of reduction in the quantity. The Venezuelan 
deposit already referred to is in the state of Bermudez, and the 
area of it is reported to be more than 1000 acres. The asphalt 
of Cuba is a well-known article of commerce, of which 7252 tons 
was exported to the United States in 1902. The principal 
deposits are near the harbour of Cardenas (70 ft. thick), in the 
Pinar del Rio, near Havana (18 ft. thick), at Canas Tomasita 
^105 ft. thick); and a specially pure variety near Vuelta. 

The comparative composition of Trinidad and Cuba asphalt 
is given in the following table: — 



The chemical composition of Trinidad asphalt has been given 



C. 


H. 


N. 


0. 


s. 


80-32 


6-30 


0-50 


1-40 


11-48 





Refined 


Refined 


Refined 




Trinidad, 


Cuba (soft), 


Cuba(hard), 




Melting 


Melting 


Melting 




point 


point 


point 




185° F. 


U5°F. 


160 F. 


Water 


0-17 


0-13 


O-II 


Volatile bitumen . 


5i-8i 


64-03 


8-34 


Sulphur .... 


IO-OO 


a-35 


8-92 


Ash (earthy matter) . 


28-30 


19-51 


16-60 


Fixed carbon . 


9-72 


7-98 


66-03 


1 


IOO-OO 


IOO-OO 


IOO-OO 



The following is a comparison 


of Trinidad 


and Venezuela 


iermudez) asphalt: — 








Refined 


Refined 




Trinidad. 


Bermudez. 


Specific gravity at 60° F. . 


1-373 


1-071 


Bitumen soluble in carbon bi- 






sulphide .... 


61-507% 


92-22 % 


Mineral matter (ash) 


34-51 „ 


i-5o „ 


Non-bituminous organic matter . 


3-983 „ 


1-28 „ 


Portion of total bitumen soluble 






in alcohol .... 


8-24 „ 


u-66 ,, 


Portion of total bitumen soluble 






in ether .... 


8o-oi „ 


81-63 -. 


Loss at 212 F. . . . 


0-65 „ 


1-37 „ 


,, 400° F. in ten hours 


7-98 „ 


17-80 „ 


Loss at 400° on total bitumen . 


12-811,, 


18-308 „ 


Evolution of sulphuretted hydro- 






gen at .... 


410 F. none at 437° F. 


Softening-point 


160 F. 


„ 113 F. 


Flowing-point .... 


192° F. 


„ I5°° F. 



Asphalt in its purest forms is generally black or blackish 
brown in colour, and is frequently brittle at ordinary tempera- 
tures. Apart from its principal use in the manufacture of 
paving materials, it is largely employed in building as a " damp- 
course " and as a water-excluding coating for concrete floors, 
as well as in the manufacture, of roofing-felt. It also enters 
largely into the composition of black varnish. The material 
chiefly used in the construction of asphalt roadways is an 
asphaltic or bituminous limestone found in the Val de Travers, 
canton of Neuchatel; in the neighbourhood of Seyssel, depart- 
ment of Ain; at Limmer, near the city of Hanover; and else- 
where. The proportion of bitumen present in asphalt rock 
usually ranges from 7 to 20 %, but it is found that rock containing 
more than 11% cannot be satisfactorily used for street pave- 
ments, and it is accordingly customary to mix the richer and 
poorer varieties in fine powder in such respective quantities 
that the proportion of bitumen present is from 9 to 10 %. The 
richer rock is utilized as a source of asphalt " mastic," which is 
employed for footpaths, floors, roofs, &c. Excellent foundations 
-for steam-hammers, dynamos and high-speed engines are made 
of asphaltic concrete. (B. R.) 

ASPHODEL (Asphodelus) , a genus of the lily order (Liliaceae), 
containing seven species in the Mediterranean region. The 
plants are hardy herbaceous perennials with narrow tufted 
radical leaves and an elongated stem bearing a handsome spike 
of white or yellow flowers. Asphodelus albus and A. fistulosus 
have white flowers and grow from i| to 2 ft. high; A. ramosus is 
a larger plant, the large white flowers of which have a reddish- 
brown line in the middle of each segment. Bog-asphodel 
(Narthecium ossifragum) , a member of the same family, is a small 
herb common in boggy places in Britain, with rigid narrow radical 
leaves and a stem bearing a raceme of small golden yellow 
flowers. 

In Greek legend the asphodel is the most famous of the plants 
connected with the dead and the underworld. Homer describes 
it as covering the great meadow (<x<7$6<5eXos \eifioiv), the haunt of 
the dead (Od. xi. 539, 573; xxiv. 13). It was planted on graves, 
and is often connected with Persephone, who appears crowned 
with a garland of asphodels. Its general connexion with death 
is due no doubt to the greyish colour of its leaves and its yellowish 
flowers, which suggest the gloom of the underworld and the pallor 
of death. The roots were eaten by the poorer Greeks; hence 
such food was thought good enough for the shades (cf. Hesiod, 
Works and Days, 41; Pliny, Nat. Hist. xxi. 17 [68]; Lucian, De 
luctu, 19). The asphodel was also supposed to be a remedy for 
poisonous snake-bites and a specific against sorcery; it was fatal 
to mice, but preserved pigs from disease. The Libyan nomads 
made their huts of asphodel stalks (cf. Herod, iv. 190). 



ASPHYXIA— ASQUITH 



769 



No satisfactory derivation of the word is suggested. The 
English word " daffodil " is a perversion of " asphodel," formerly 
written " affodil." The d may come from the French fleur 
d'qffodille. It is no part of the word philologically. 

See Pauly-Wissowa, Realencyclopadie, s.v. ; H. O. Lenz, Botanik 
der alten Griechen und Romer (1859); J. Murr, Die Pflanzenwelt in 
der griechischen Mythologie (1890). 

ASPHYXIA (Gr. d- priv., <r(j>v£t,s, a pulse), a term in medicine, 
literally signifying loss of pulsation, which is applied to describe 
the arrestment of the function of respiration from some hindrance 
to the entrance of air into the lungs. (See Respiratory System : 
Pathology.) 

ASPIC (French, from Lat. aspis), an asp or viper found in 
Egypt whose bite is supposed to cause a swift and easy death, 
hence poetically a term for any venomous snake. From associa- 
tion, perhaps, with the coldness of the aspic (as in the French 
proverb, froid comme un aspic), the word is used for a savoury 
jelly containing meat, fish or eggs, &c. It is also the botanical 
name of the Lavandula spica, or spikenard, from which a white, 
aromatic and highly inflammable oil is distilled, called huile 
d' as pic. 

ASPIDISTRA, a small genus of the lily order (Liliaceae), 
native of the Himalayas, China and Japan. Aspidistra lurida is 
a favourite pot-plant, bearing large green or white-striped leaves 
on an underground stem, and small dark purplish, cup-shaped 
flowers close to the ground. 

ASPIROTRICHACEAE (O. Butschli), an order of Cilia te 
Infusoria, characterized by an investment, general or partial, 
of nearly uniform cilia, without any distinct adoral wreath, and 
one or two adoral endoral undulating membranes. With the 
Gymnostomaceae it formed the Holotricha of Stein. 

ASPIROZ, MANUEL DE (1836-1905), Mexican statesman and 
diplomatist, was born at Puebla, and educated at the university 
of Mexico, where he took his degree in 1855. He took part in the 
war against the emperor Maximilian, and in 1867, on the 
establishment of the republic, was appointed assistant secretary 
of state for foreign affairs. In 1873 he became Mexican consul at 
San Francisco, where he remained till his election to the Senate 
in 1875. He was professor of jurisprudence at the college of 
Puebla from 1883 to 1890, when he was again appointed assistant 
secretary of foreign affairs. From 1899 till he died in 1905 he 
was Mexican ambassador to the United States. Among his 
writings may be mentioned; Codigo de extranjeria de los Estados- 
Unidos Mexicanos (1876), and La liber dad civil como base del 
der echo inter nacional privado (1896). 

ASPROMONTE, a mountain of Calabria, Italy, rising behind 
Reggio di Calabria, the west extremity of the Sila range. The 
highest point is 6420 ft. and the slopes are clad with forest. 
Here Garibaldi was wounded and taken prisoner by the Italian 
troops under Pallavicini in 1862. 

ASQUITH, HERBERT HENRY (1852- ), English states- 
man, son of Joseph Dixon Asquith, was born at Morley, York- 
shire, on the 12th of September 1852. He came of a middle-class 
Yorkshire family of pronounced Liberal and Nonconformist 
views, and was educated under Dr Edwin Abbott at the City of 
London school, from which he went as a scholar to Balliol, 
Oxford; there he had a distinguished career, taking a first-class 
in classics, winning the Craven scholarship and being elected a 
fellow of his college. He was president of the Union, and im- 
pressed all his contemporaries with his intellectual ability, Dr 
Jowett himself confidently predicting his signal success in any 
career he adopted. On leaving Oxford he went to the bar, and 
as early as 1800 became a K.C. In 1887 he unsuccessfully 
defended Mr R. B. Cunninghame Graham and Mr John Burns 
for their share in the riot in Trafalgar Square; and in 1889 he 
was junior to Sir Charles (afterwards Lord) Russell as counsel 
for the Irish Nationalists before the Parnell Commission— an 
association afterwards bitterly commented upon by Mr T. Healy 
in the House of Commons (March 30, 1908). But though he 
attained a fair practice at the bar, and was recognized as a lawyer 
of unusual mental distinction and clarity, his forensic success 

11. 25 .y 



was not nearly so conspicuous as that of some of his con- 
temporaries. His ambitions lay rather in the direction of the 
House of Commons. He had taken a prominent part in politics 
as a Liberal since his university days, especially in work for the 
Eighty Club, and in 1886 was elected member of parliament 
for East Fife, a seat which he retained in subsequent elections. 
Mr Gladstone was attracted by his vigorous ability as a speaker, 
and his evidence of sound political judgment; and in August 
1892, though comparatively unknown to the general public, he 
was selected to move the vote of want of confidence which 
overthrew Lord Salisbury's government, and was made home 
secretary in the new Liberal ministry. At the Home Office he 
proved his capacity as an administrator; he was the first to 
appoint women as factory inspectors, and he was responsible for 
opening Trafalgar Square to Labour demonstrations; but he 
firmly refused to sanction the proposed amnesty for the dyna- 
miters, and he was violently abused by extremists on account of 
the shooting of two men by the military at the strike riot at 
Featherstone in August 1893. It was he who coined the phrase 
(Birmingham, 1894) as to the government's "ploughing the 
sands " in their endeavour to pass Liberal legislation with a 
hostile House of Lords. His Employers' Liability Bill 1893 
was lost because the government refused to accept the 
Lords' amendment as to " contracting-out." His suspensory 
bill, with a view to the disestablishment of the church in 
Wales, was abortive (1895), but it served to recommend 
him to the Welsh Nationalists as well as to the disestablish- 
ment party in England and Scotland. During his three years 
of office he more than confirmed the high opinion formed of 
his abilities. 

The Liberal defeat in 1895 left him out of office for eleven 
years. He had married Miss Helen Melland in 1877, and was 
left with a family when she died in 189 1; in 1894, however, he 
had married again, his second wife being the accomplished Miss 
Margaret (" Margot ") Tennant, daughter of the wealthy iron- 
master, Sir Charles Tennant, Bart., a lady well known in London 
society as a member of the coterie known as " Souls," and 
commonly identified as the original of Mr E. F. Benson's Dodo 
(1893). On leaving the Home Office in 1895, Mr Asquith decided 
to return to his work at the bar, a course which excited much 
comment, since it was unprecedented that a minister who had 
exercised judicial functions in that capacity should take up again 
the position of an advocate; but it was obvious that to maintain 
the tradition was difficult in the case of a man who had no 
sufficient independent means. During the years of Unionist 
ascendancy Mr Asquith divided his energies between his legal 
work and politics; but his adhesion to Lord Rosebery (q.v.) 
as a Liberal Imperialist at the time of the Boer War, while it 
strengthened his position in the eyes of the public, put him in 
some difficulty with his own party, led as it was by Sir Henry 
Campbell-Bannerman (q.v.), who was identified with the " pro- 
Boer " policy. He was one of the founders of the Liberal League, 
and his courageous definiteness of view and intellectual vigour 
marked him out as Lord Rosebery's chief lieutenant if that 
statesman should ever return to power. He thus became iden- 
tified with the Roseberyite attitude towards Irish Home Rule; 
and, while he continued to uphold the Gladstonian policy in 
theory, in practice the Irish Nationalists felt, that very little 
could be expected from his advocacy. In spite of his Imperialist 
views, however, he did much to smooth over the party difficulties, 
and when the tariff-reform movement began in 1903, he seized 
the opportunity for rallying the Liberals to the banner of free- 
trade and championing the " orthodox " English political 
economy, on which indeed he had been a lecturer in his younger 
days. During the critical years of Mr Chamberlain's crusade 
(1903-1906) he made himself the chief spokesman of the Liberal 
party, delivering a series of speeches in answer to those of the 
tariff-reform leader; and his persistent following and answering 
of Mr Chamberlain had undoubted effect. He also made useful 
party capital out of the necessity for financial retrenchment, 
owing to the large increase in public expenditure, maintained by 
the Unionist government even after the Boer War was over, 



77° 



ASS— ASSAM 



and his mastery of statistical detail and argument made his 
appointment as chancellor of the exchequer part of the natural 
order of things when in December 1905 Mr Balfour resigned and 
Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman (q.v.) became prime minister. . 

During Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman's premiership, Mr 
Asquith gradually rose in political importance, and in 1907 the 
prime minister's ill-health resulted in much of the leadership in 
the Commons devolving on the chancellor of the exchequer. 
At first the party as a whole had regarded him somewhat coldly. 
And his unbending common-sense, and sobriety of criticism in 
matters which deeply interested the less academic Radicals who 
were enthusiasts for extreme courses, would have made the 
parliamentary situation difficult but for the exceptional popu- 
larity of the prime minister. In the autumn of 1907, however, 
as the latter's retention of office became more and more improb- 
able, it became evident that no other possible successor had equal 
qualifications. The session of 1908 opened with Mr Asquith 
acting avowedly as the prime minister's deputy, and the course 
of business was itself of a nature to emphasize his claims. After 
two rather humdrum budgets he was pledged to inaugurate a 
system of old-age pensions (forming the chief feature of the 
budget of 1008, personally introduced by him at the beginning of 
May), and his speech in April on the Licensing. Bill was a triumph 
of clear exposition, though later in the year, after passing the 
Commons, it was thrown out by the Lords. On the 5th of April 
it was announced that Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman had re- 
signed and Mr Asquith been sent for by the king. As the latter 
was staying at Biarritz, the unprecedented course was followed 
of Mr Asquith journeying there for the purpose, and on the 8th 
he resigned the chancellorship of the exchequer and kissed hands 
as prime minister. The names of the new cabinet were announced 
on the 13th. The new appointments were: Lord Tweedmouth 
as lord president of the council (instead of the admiralty) ; 
Lord Crewe as colonial secretary (instead of lord president of 
the council) ; Mr D. Lloyd George, chancellor of the exchequer 
(transferred from the Board of Trade) ; Mr R. McKenna, first 
lord of the admiralty (instead of minister of education); Mr 
Winston Churchill, president of the Board of Trade; and Mr 
Walter Runciman, minister of education. Lord Elgin ceased 
to be colonial secretary, but Lord Loreburn (lord chancellor), 
Lord Ripon (lord privy seal), Mr H. Gladstone (Home Office), 
Sir E. Grey (foreign affairs), Mr Haldane (War Office), Mr 
Sinclair (secretary for Scotland; created in 1909 Lord Pentland), 
Mr Burns (Local Government Board), Lord Carrington (Board 
of Agriculture), Mr Birrell (Irish secretary), Mr S. Buxton 
(postmaster-general), Mr L. Harcourt (commissioner of works), 
Mr John Morley (India) and Sir Henry Fowler (duchy of Lan- 
caster) retained their offices, the two latter being created peers. 
The Budget (see Lloyd George) was the sole feature of political 
interest in 1909, and its rejection in December by the Lords led 
to the general election of January 1910, which left the Liberals 
and Unionists practically equal, with the Labour and Irish 
parties dominating the situation (L. 275, U. 273, Lab. 40, 1. 82). 
Mr Asquith was in a difficult position, but the ministry re- 
mained in office; and he had developed a concentration 
of forces with a view to attacking the veto of the House of 
Lords (see Parliament), when the death of the king in May 
caused a suspension of hostilities. A conference between the 
leaders on both sides was arranged, to discViss whether any 
compromise was possible, and controversy was postponed to 
an alftumn session. (H. Ch.) 

ASS (O.E. assa; Lat. asinus), a common name (the syno- 
nym " donkey " is supposed to be derived either by analogy 
from " monkey," or from the Christian name Duncan; cf. 
Neddy, Jack, Dicky, &c.) for different varieties of the sub-genus 
Asinus, belonging to the horse tribe, and especially for the 
domestic ass; it differs from the horse in its smaller size, long 
ears, the character of its tail, fur and markings, and its proverbial 
dulness and obstinacy. The ancient Egyptians symbolized an 
ignorant person by the head and ears of an ass, and the Romans 
thought it a bad omen to meet one. In the middle ages the 
Germans of Westphalia made the ass the symbol of St Thomas, 



the incredulous apostle; the boy who was last to enter school 
on St Thomas' day was called the " Ass Thomas " (Gubernatis's 
Zoological Mythology, i. 362). The foolishness and obstinacy 
of the ass has caused the name to be transferred metaphorically 
to human beings; and the fifth proposition of Book i. of Euclid 
is known as the Pons Asinorum, bridge of asses. 

ASS, FEAST OF THE, formerly a festival in northern France, 
primarily in commemoration of the biblical flight into Egypt, 
and usually held on the 14th of January. A girl with a baby at 
her breast and seated on an ass splendidly caparisoned was led 
through the town to the church, and there placed at the gospel 
side of the altar while mass was said. The ceremony degenerated 
into a burlesque in which the ass of the flight became confused 
with Balaam's ass. So scandalous became the popular revels 
associated with it, that the celebration was prohibited by the 
church in the 15th century. (See Fools, Feast or.) 

ASSAB, a bay and port on the African shore of the Red Sea, 
60 m. N. of the strait of Bab-el Mandeb. Assab Bay was the 
first territory acquired by Italy in Africa. Bought from the 
sultan of Raheita in 1870, it was not occupied until 1880, 
(See Eritrea, and Italy: History.) 

ASSAM, a former province of British India, which was amal- 
gamated in 1905 with " Eastern Bengal and Assam " {q.v.). 
Area 56,243 sq. m.; pop. (1901 ) 6,126,343. The province of 
Assam lies on the N.E. border of Bengal, on the extreme 
frontier of the Indian empire, with Bhutan and Tibet beyond 
it on the N., and Burma and Manipur on the E. It com- 
prises the valleys of the Brahmaputra and Surma rivers, together 
with the mountainous watershed which intervenes between them. 
It is situated between 24° o' and 28° 17' N. lat., and between 
89 46' and 97° 5' E. long. It is bounded on the N. by the 
eastern section of the great Himalayan range, the frontier 
tribes from west to east being successively Bhutias, Akas, 
Daphlas, Miris, Abors and Mishmis; on the N.E. by the 
Mishmi hills, which sweep round the head of the Brahmaputra 
valley; on the E. by the unexplored mountains that mark 
the frontier of Burma, by the hills occupied by the independent 
Naga tribes and by the state of Manipur; on the S. by the 
Lushai hills, the state of Hill Tippera, and the Bengal district 
of Tippera; and on the W. by the Bengal districts of Mymen- 
singh and Rangpur, the state of Kuch Behar and Jalpaiguri 
district. 

Natural Divisions.— Assam is naturally divided into three 
distinct tracts, the Brahmaputra valley, the Surma valley and 
the hill ranges between the two. The Brahmaputra valley is 
an alluvial plain, about 450" m. in length, with an average 
breadth of 50 m., lying almost east and west. To the north is 
the main chain of the Himalayas, the lower ranges of which rise 
abruptly from the plain; to the south is the great elevated 
plateau or succession of plateaus known as the Assam range. 
The various portions of this range are called by the names of the; 
tribes who inhabit them — the Garo, the Khasi, the Jaintia, the 
North Cachar and the Naga hills. The range as a whole is, 
joined at its eastern extremity by the Patkai to the Himalayan 
system, and by the mountains of Manipur to the Arakan Yoma. 
The highest points in the range are Nokrek peak (4600 ft.) in 
the Garo hills, Shillong] peak (6450 ft.) in the Khasi-Jaintia hills, 
and Japva peak (nearly 10,000 ft.) in the Naga hills. South of- 
the range comes the third division of the province, the Surma 
valley, comprising the two districts of Cachar and Sylhet. The 
Surma valley is much smaller than the Brahmaputra valley, 
covering only 7306 against 24,283 sq. m.; its mean elevation 
is much lower and its rivers are more sluggish. 

Physical Aspects. — Assam is a fertile series of valleys, with the 
great channel of the Brahmaputra (literally, the Son of Brahma) 
flowing down its middle, and an infinite number of tributaries and 
watercourses pouring into it from the mountains on either side. 
The Brahmaputra spreads out in a sheet of water several miles broad 
during the rainy season, and in its course through Assam forms a 
number of islands in its bed. Rising in the Tibetan plateau, far to 
the north of the Himalayas, and skirting round their eastern passes 
not far from the Yang-tsze-kiang and the great river of Cambodia, it 
enters Assam by a series of waterfalls and rapids, amid vast boulders 
and accumulations of rocks. The gorge, situated in Lakhimpur 



ASSAM 



771 



district, through which the southernmost branch of the Brahma- 
putra enters, has from time immemorial been held in reverence by 
the Hindus. It is called the Brahmakunda or Parasiiramkunda ; 
and although the journey to it is both difficult and dangerous, it is 
annually visited by thousands of devotees. After a rapid course 
westwards down the whole length of the Assam valley, the Brahma- 
putra turns sharply to the south, spreading itself over the alluvial 
districts of the Bengal delta, and, after several changes of name, 
ends its course of 1800 m. in the Bay of Bengal. Its first tributaries 
in Assam, after crossing the frontier, are the Kundil and the Digaru, 
flowing from the Mishmi hills on the north, and the Tengapani and 
Dihing, which take their rise on the Singpho hills to the south-east. 
Shortly afterwards it receives the Dibang, flowing from the north- 
east; but its principal confluent is the Dihong, which, deriving its 
origin, under the name of the Tsangpo, from a spot in the vicinity of 
the source of the Sutlej, flows in a direction precisely opposite to that 
river, and traversing the tableland of Tibet, at the back of the great 
Himalaya range, falls into the Brahmaputra in 27 48' N. lat., 
95 26' E. long., after a course of nearly 1000 m. Doubts were long 
entertained whether the Dihong could be justly regarded as the 
continuation of the Tsangpo, but these were practically set at rest 
by the voyage of F. J. Needham in 1886. Below the confluence, tne 
united stream flows in a south-westerly direction, forming the 
boundary between the districts of Lakhimpur and Darrang, situated 
on its northern bank, and those of Sibsagar and Nowgong on the 
south ; and finally bisecting Kamrup, it crosses over the frontier 
of the province and passes into Bengal. In its course it receives 
on the left side the Dihing, a river having its rise at the south-eastern 
angle of the province; and lower down, on the opposite side, it parts 
with a considerable offset termed the Buri Lohit, which, however, 
reunites with the Brahmaputra 60 m. below the point of divergence, 
bearing with it the additional waters of the Subansiri, flowing from 
Tibet. A second offset, under the name of the Kalang river, rejoins 
the parent stream a short distance above the town of Gaunati. 
The remaining rivers are too numerous to be particularized. The 
streams of the south are not rapid, and have no considerable current 
until May or June. Among the islands formed by the intersection 
and confluence of the rivers is Majulij or the Great Island, as it is 
called by way of pre-eminence. This island extends 55 m. in length 
by about 10 in breadth, and is formed by the Brahmaputra on the 
south-east and the Buri Lohit river on the north-west. In the upper 
part of the valley, towards the gorge where the Brahmaputra enters, 
the country is varied and picturesque, walled in on the north and 
east by the Himalayas, and thickly wooded from the base to the 
snow-line. On either bank of the Brahmaputra a long narrow strip 
of plain rises almost imperceptibly to the foot of the hills. Gigantic 
reeds and grasses occupy the low lands near the banks of the great 
river; expanses of fertile rice-land come next; a little higher up, 
dotted with villages encircled by groves of bamboos and fruit trees 
of great size and beauty, the dark forests succeed, covering the 
interior table-land and mountains. The country in the vicinity of 
the large rivers is flat, and impenetrable from dense tangled jungle, 
with the exception of some very low-lying tracts which are either 
permanent marshes or are covered with water during the rains. 
Jungle will not grow on these depressions, and they are covered 
either with water, reeds, high grasses or rice cultivation. On or 
near such open spaces are collected all the villages. As the traveller 
proceeds farther down the valley, the country gradually opens out 
into wide plains. In the western district of Kamrup the country 
forms one great expanse, with a few elevated tracts here and there, 
varying from 200 to 800 ft. in height. 

Soils. — The soil is exceedingly rich and well adapted to all kinds 
of agricultural purposes, and for the most part is composed of a rich 
black loam reposing on a grey sandy clay, though occasionally it 
exhibits a light yellow clayey texture. The land may be divided into 
three great classes. The first division is composed of hills, the largest 
group within the valley being that of the Mikir Mountains, which 
stand out upon the plain. Another set of hills project into the valley 
at Gauhati. But these latter are rather prolongations of spurs from 
the Khasi chain than isolated groups belonging to the plains. The 
other hills are all isolated and of small extent. The second division 
of the lands is the well-raised part of the valley whose level lies above 
the ordinary inundations of the Brahmaputra. The channels of 
some of the hill streams, however, are of so little depth that the 
highest lands in their neighbourhood are liable to sudden floods. On 
the north bank of the great river, lands of this sort run down the 
whole length of the valley, except where they are interrupted by the 
beds of the hill streams. The breadth of these plains is in some 
places very trifling, whilst in others they comprise a tract of many 
miles, according to the number and the height of the rocks or hills 
that protect them from the aberrations of the river. The alluvial 
deposits of the Brahmaputra and of its tributary streams may be 
considered as the third general division of lands in Assam. These 
lands are very extensive, and present every degree of fertility and 
elevation, from the vast chars of pure sand, subject to annual inun- 
dations, to the firm islands, so raised by drift-sand and the accumu- 
lated remains of rank vegetable matter, as no longer to be liable 
to flood. The rapidity with which wastes, composed entirely of sand 
newly washed forward by the current during floods, become converted 
into rich pasture is astonishing. As the freshets begin to lessen and 



retire into the deeper channels, the currents form natural embank- 
ments on their edges, preventing the return of a small portion of 
water which is thus left stagnant on the sands, and exposed to the 
action of the sun's rays. It slowly evaporates, leaving a thin crust 
of animal and vegetable matter. This is soon impregnated with the 
seeds of the Saccharum spontaneum and other grasses that have been 
partly brought by the winds and partly deposited by the water. 
Such places are frequented by numerous flocks of aquatic birds, 
which resort thither in search of fish and mollusca. As vegetation 
begins to appear, herds of wild elephants and buffaloes are attracted 
by the supply of food and the solitude of the newly-formed land, and 
in their turn contribute to manure the soil. 

Geology. — Geographically the Assam hills lie in the angle between 
the Himalayas and the Burmese ranges, but geologically they 
belong to neither. The older rocks are like those of Bengal, and the 
newer beds show no sign of either the Himalayan or the Burmese 
folding — on the top of the plateau they are nearly horizontal, but 
along the southern margin they are bent sharply downwards in a 
simple monoclinal fold. The greater part of the mass is composed of 
gneiss and schists. The Sylhet traps near the southern margin are 
correlated with the Rajmahal traps of Bengal. The older rocks are 
overlaid unconformably by Cretaceous beds, consisting chiefly of 
sandstones with seams of coal, the whole series thinning rapidly 
towards the north and thus indicating the neighbourhood of the 
old shore-line. The fossils are very similar to those of the South 
Indian Cretaceous, but very different from those of the corresponding 
beds in the Nerbudda valley. The overlying Tertiary series includes 
nummulitic beds and valuable seams of coal. 

The border ranges of the east and south of Assam belong to 
the Burmese system of mountain chains (see Burma), and consist 
largely of Tertiary beds, including the great coal seams of Upper 
Assam. The Assam valley is covered by the alluvial deposits of the 
Brahmaputra. 

Of the mineral productions by far the most valuable is coal. 
Compared with the Gondwana coal of the peninsula of India the 
Tertiary coal seams of Assam are remarkable for their purity and 
their extraordinary thickness. The " Thick Seam " of Margherita, 
in Upper Assam, averages 50 ft., and in some places reaches as much 
as 80 ft. The average percentage of ash in 27 assays of Assam coal 
was 3-8 as against 16-3 in 17 assays of Raniganj coal. The coal 
seams are commonly associated with petroleum springs. Gold is 
found in the alluvial deposits, but the results of exploration have 
not been very promising. 

Earthquakes. — Assam is liable to earthquakes. There was a severe 
earthquake in Cachar on the 10th of January 1869, a severe shock 
in Shillong and Gauhati in September 1875, and one in Silchar in 
October 1882; but by far the severest shock known is that which 
occurred on the evening of 12th June 1897. The area of this seismic 
disturbance extended over north-eastern India, from Manipur to 
Sikkim; but the focus was in the Khasi and Garo hills. In the 
station of Shillong every masonry building was levelled to the 
ground. Throughout the country bridges were shattered, roads 
were broken up like ploughed fields, and the beds of rivers were 
dislocated. In the hills there were terrible landslips, which wrecked 
the little Cherrapunji railway and caused 600 deaths. The total 
mortality recorded was 1542, including two Europeans at Shillong. 
The levels of the country were so affected that the towns of Goalpara 
and Barpeta became almost uninhabitable during the rains. 

Fauna. — The zoology of Assam presents some interesting features. 
Wild elephants abound and commit many depredations, entering 
villages in large herds, and consuming everything suitable to their 
tastes. Many are caught by means of female elephants previously 
tamed, and trained to decoy males into the snares prepared for 
subjecting them to captivity. A considerable number are tamed 
and exported from Assam every year. Many are killed every year 
in the forests for the sake of the ivory which they furnish. The 
government keddah establishment from Dacca captures large numbers 
of elephants in the province, and the right of hunting is also sold 
by auction to private bidders. The annual catch of. the latter 
averages about two hundred. The rhinoceros is fourid in the denser 
parts of the forests and generally in swampy places. This animal 
is hunted and killed for its skin and its horn. The skin affords 
the material for the best shields. The horn is sacred in the eyes of 
the natives. Contrary to the usual belief, it is stated that, if caught 
young, the rhinoceros is easily tamed and becomes strongly attached 
to his keeper. Tigers abound, and though many are annually de- 
stroyed for the sake of the government reward, their numbers seem 
scarcely, if at all, to diminish. Leopards and bears are numerous; 
and the sand-badger, the Arctonyx collaris of Cuvier, a small animal 
somewhat resembling a bear, but haVing the snout, eyes and tail 
of a hog, is found. Among the most formidable animals known 
is the wild buffalo or gaur which is of great size, strength and 
fierceness. The fox and the jackal exist, and the wild hog is very 
abundant. Goats, deer of various kinds, hares, and two or three 
species of antelope are found, as are monkeys in great variety. 
The porcupine, the squirrel, the civet cat, the ichneumon and the 
otter are common. The birds are too various to admit of enumera- 
tion. Wild game is plentiful; pheasants, partridges, snipe and 
water- fowl of many descriptions make the country a tempting field 
for the sportsman. Vultures and other birds of prey are met with. 



772 



ASSAM 



Crocodiles (commonly called alligators) swarm in all parts of the 
Brahmaputra, and are very destructive to the fish, of which hun- 
dreds of varieties are found, and which supply a valuable article of 
food. The most destructive of the ferae naturae, as regards human 
life, are, however, the snakes. Of these, several poisonous species 
exist, including the cobra and karait {Naja, tripudians and Bun- 
garus caeruleus). The bite of a fairly-grown , healthy serpent of 
either of these species is deadly; and it is ascertained that more 
deaths occur from snake-bite than from all the other wild. beasts put 
together. Among the non-poisonous serpents the python ranks 
first. This is an enormous boa-constrictor of great length and 
weight, which drops upon his prey from the branch of a tree, or steals 
upon it in the thick grass. He kills his- victim by rolling himself 
round the body till he breaks its ribs, or suffocates it by one irre- 
sistible convolution round its throat. He seldom or never attacks 
human beings unless in self-defence, and loss of life from this cause 
is scarcely ever reported. 

Agriculture. — The principal and almost the only food - grain of 
the plains portion of the province is rice. The production of this 
staple is carried on generally under the same conditions as in 
Bengal; but the times of sowing and reaping and the names given 
to the several crops vary much in different parts of the province. 
In 1901-1902 out of a total cultivated area of 1,736,000 acres, there 
were 1,194,000 acres under rice, In addition jute is grown to a 
considerable extent in Goalpara and Sylhet; cotton is grown in 
large quantities along the slopes of the Assam range. Rubber is 
grown in government plantations artd is also brought in by the hill 
tribes; while lac, mustard and potatoes are also produced. 

Tea Plantations. — The most important article of commerce pro- 
duced in Assam is tea. The rice crop covers a very great proportion 
of the cultivated land, but it is used for local consumption, and the 
Brahmaputra valley does not produce enough for its own consump- 
tion, large quantities being imported for the coolies. The tea 
plantations are the one great source of wealth to the province, and 
the necessities of tea cultivation are the .chief stimulants ; to the 
development of Assam. The plant was discovered in 1823 by 
Mr Robert Bruce, who had proceeded thither on a mercantile 
exploration. The country, however, then formed part. of. the 
Burmese dominions. But war with this monarchy shortly after- 
wards broke out, and a. brother of the first discoverer, happening to 
be appointed to the command of a division of gunboats employed 
in some part of the queries, followed up the pursuit of the subject,
and obtained several hundred plants and a considerable quantity 
of seed. Some specimens were ultimately forwarded to the super- 
intendent of the botanic garden at Calcutta. In. 1832 Captain F. 
Jenkins was deputed by the governor-general of India, Lord William 
Bentinck, to report upon the resources of the country, and the tea 
plant was brought to his especial notice by Mr Bruce; in 1834 a 
minute was recorded by the governor-general on the subject, .in 
which it is stated that his attention had been called to it in 1827 
before his departure from England. Jn accordance -with the views 
of that minute, a committee was appointed to prosecute inquiries, 
and to promote the cultivation of the plant. Communications were 
opened with China with a view to obtain fresh plants and seeds, and, 
a deputation, composed of gentlemen versed in botanical studies, 
was despatched to Assam. Some seeds were obtained from China; 
but they proved to be of small importance, as it was clearly ascer- 
tained by the members of the Assam deputation that both the black 
and the green tea plants were indigenous here, and might be multi- 
plied to any extent ; another result of the Chinese mission, that of 
procuring persons skilled in the cultivation and manufacture of black 
tea, was of more material benefit. Subsequently, under Lord 
Auckland, a further supply of Chinese cultivators and manu- 
facturers was obtained— men well acquainted with the processes 
necessary for the production of green tea, as the former set were 
with those requisite for black. In 1838 the first twejve chests of tea 
from Assam were received in England, They had been injured in 
some degree on the passage, but on samples being submitted to 
brokers, and others of long experience and tried judgment, the 
reports were highly favourable. It was never, however, fhe in- 
tention of government to carry on the trade, but to resign it to 
private adventure as soon as the experimental course could be fairly 
completed. Mercantile associations for the culture and manufacture 
of tea in Assam began to be formed as early as 1839; a nd ,in ,1849 
the government disposed of their establishment,, and relinquished 
the manufacture to the ordinary operation of commercial enterprise. 
In 1851 the crop of the principal company was estimated to produce 
280,000 lb. Since then the enterprise has rapidly developed. Tea 
is now cultivated in all the plains district of the. provinces. When 
the industry was first established, the land whjqh was supposed 
to be best for the plant was hill or undulating ground; _but now 
it has been found in the Surma valley that with good drainage the 
heaviest crops of tea can be raised from low-lying land, even such 
as formerly supported rice cultivation. At the close of. the year 
1905 there were 942 gardens in all, with 422,335 acres, and employ- 
ing 464,912 coolies. The majority of gardens are owned by Euro- 
peans, 405,486 acres belonging to them as against 16,849 to Indians. 
The total out-turn for the province in igos^was 193,556,047 ft). 
Between 1893 and 1898 there was a great extension of tea cultivation, 
with the result that the industry began to suffer from the congestion 



that follows over-production. Also to meet the requirements of the 
industry, an enormous number of coolies had to be brought into the 
province from other parts of India, and in recent years the supply 
of labour has begun to fall off, causing a rise in the cost of pro- 
duction. For these reasons there was a crisis in the tea industry of 
Assam, which was relieved to some extent by the reduction of the 
English duty on tea in 1906. 

Tea-Garden Coolies.— The labour required on the tea gardens 
is almost entirely imported,; as the natives of the province are 
too prosperous to do such work.. During the decade 1891-1901, 
596,856 coolies were imported, or about a tenth of the total popu- 
lation of the province. Thq, importation of coolies is controlled 
by an elaborate system of legislation, which provides for the regis- 
tration of. .contracts, the medical inspection of coolies during the 
journey,' and supervision over rates of pay, &c., on the gardens. 
The first labour act was passed in 1863, and since then the law on the 
subject has been changed by successive enactments. The measure 
now in force is called Act VI. of 1901. Under this act the maximum 
term of the labour contract is fixed at four years, and a minimum 
monthly wage is laid down, the payment of which, however, is conT 
tingent on the completion of a daily task by the labourer. Labourer's 
under contract deserting; are liable to fine and imprisonment, and, 
subject to certain restrictions, may be arrested without warrant 
by, their employers. In addition to the labourers engaged under 
this act, a large number are employed under contract enforceable 
by Act XHL of 1859, which provides penalties for breach of the 
contract, but does not allow of the arrest of deserters without 
warrant. Neither does this act regulate in any way the terms of 
the contract, nor contain any special provisions for the protection 
of the labourer. Many labourers on the conclusion of their first 
engagement under Act VI. of 1901 enter into renewed contracts 
under ActXIII. of 1859. In 1905 there were in all 664,296 labourers, 
and ,24,209 fresh importations, of whom 62 % chose the old act. 

Railways. — The Assam-Bengal railway runs from the seaport of 
Ghittagong to the Surma valley, and thence across the hills to 
Dibrugarh, at the head of the Brahmaputra valley, with a branch 
to Gauhati lower down the Brahmaputra. The hill section of this 
line was found exceedingly difficult of construction, and extensive 
damage was, done by the earthquake of 1897 ; but it is now complete! 
This railway is financed by the government, though worked by a 
company, arid therefore ranks as a state line. At the end of 1904 
its open mileage was 576 m. There are several short lines of light 
railway or tramway in the province. The most important is the 
Dibru-Sadiya railway, at the head of the Brahmaputra valley, with 
a .branch to the coal-fields. 

Trade. — The external trade of Assam is conducted partly by 
steamer, partly by native boat, and to a small extent by rail. In 
the Brahmaputra valley steamers carry as much as 86 % of the 
exports, and, 94% ■■ of the imports. In the Surma valley native 
boats, carry about 4.3% of both. In 1904-1905 the total exports 
were valued at 726 lakhs of rupees. The chief items were tea, rice 
in. the husk, oil-seeds, tea-seed, timber, coal and jute. The imports 
were valued at 457 lakhs of rupees. The chief items were cotton 
piece-goods, rice not in the husk, sugar, grain and pulse,, salt, iron 
and steel, tobacco, cotton twist and yarn, and brass and copper. 
No less than two-thirds of the total trade is conducted with Calcutta. 
The trans-frontier trade is insignificant; and most of it is conducted 
with the Bengal state of Hill Tippera. The trade through Chi.tta- 
gong is increasing owing to the opening of the hill-section of the 
Assam-Bengal railway, which gives direct communication between 
the districts of Upper Assam and the port of Chittagong, and the 
incorporation of that port in the new province of Eastern Bengal 
and Assam. 

Inhabitants.— The total population of Assam, according to 
the census of 1901, was 6,126,343, of whom 3,429,099 were 
Hindus, 1,581,317 Mahommedans and 1,068,334 Animists. 
The number of foreigners in the population due to immigration 
by the tea-garden coolies was 775,844. But in spite of this 
immigration the rate of increase in the population was only 
5-9 % in the decade, and with the immigrants deducted 1-36%. 
Amongst nativerborn Assamese during the deca,de there was a 
serious decrease in Nowgong and some other districts, due to 
kalaazar and other diseases. The Assamese are an interesting 
race, of distinct origin from the neighbouring Bengalis. A large 
proportion of them derive their origin from tribes who came 
from the Himalayan ranges, from Burma or from the" Chinese 
frontier. The most important of these are the Ahoms or Ahams, 
an offshoot of the Shan race of northern Burma. They were the 
last conquerors of Assam before the Burmese, and they long 
preserve*! their ancient traditions, habits and institutions. 
Hinduism first made its encroachments among their kings and 
nobility. Several generations ago they gave up eating beef, 
and they are now completely Hinduized, except in a few remote 
recesses of Assam. Hinduism, has also impressed its language 



•ASSAM? 



•773 



upon the province, and the vernacular Assamese possesses a close 
affinity to Bengali, with the substitution of * for the Bengali ch, 
of a guttural h for the Bengali h or sh, and a few other dialectic 
changes. Indeed, so close was the resemblance that for a time 
Bengali was used as the court and official language of the province 
under British rule. But with the development of the country 
the Assamese tongue asserted its claimsto be treated as a distinct 
vernacular, and a resolution of government (1873) re-established 
it as the language of official life and public business. 

The Assam peasant, living in a half -populated province, and 
surrounded by surplus land, is indolent, good-natured and, on 
the whole, prosperous. He raises sufficient food for his wants 
with very little labour, and, with the exception of a few religious 
ceremonies, he has no demand made upon him for money, saving 
the light rental of his fields. Under the peaceful influences of 
British rule, he has completely lost his ancient warlike instincts, 
and forgotten his predatory habits. In complexion he is a shade 
or two fairer than the Bengali. His person is in general short 
and robust, but devoid of the grace and flexibility of the Hindu. 
A flat face, with high cheek-bones, presents a physiognomy 
resembling the Chinese, and suggests no idea of beauty. His 
hair is abundant, black, lank and coarse, but the beard is scanty, 
and usually plucked out, which gives him an effeminate appear- 
ance. The women form a striking contrast to the men; there is 
more of feminine beauty in them than is commonly seen in the 
women of Bengal, with a form and feature somewhat approach- 
ing the European. The habits of life of the Assamese peasantry 
are pre-eminently domestic. Great respect is paid to old age; 
when parents are no longer capable of labour they are supported 
by their children, and scarcely any one is allowed to become a 
burden to the public. They have also in general a very tender 
regard for their offspring, and are generous and kind to their 
relations. They are hospitable to people of their own caste, but 
to no others. The use of opium is very general; 
- Hill Tribes. — The hill and frontier tribes of Assam include the 
Nagas, Singphos, Daphlas, Miris, Khamtis, Mishmis, Abors, &c, 
nearly all of whom, excepting the Nagas, are found near the fron- 
tiers of Lakhimpur district. The principal of these, in point of 
numbers, are the Nagas, who inhabit the hills and forests along 
the eastern and south-eastern frontier of Assam. They reside 
partly in the British district of the Naga hills and partly in 
independent territory under the political Control of the deputy- 
commissioner of the adjoining districts. They cultivate rice, 
cotton, yams and Indian corn, and prepare salt from the brine 
springs in their hills. The different tribes of Nagas are inde- 
pendent of and unconnected with one another, and are often 
at war with each other. The Singphos are another of the main 
population of the same race, who occupy in force the hilly 
country between the Patkai and Chindwin rivers, and are nomin- 
ally subject to Burma. The Akas, Daphlas, Miris, Abors, 
Mishmis and Khamtis are described under separate headings. 
Under regulation V. of 1873, an inner line has been laid down 
in certain districts, up to which the protection of British authority 
is guaranteed, and beyond which, except by special permission, 
it is not lawful for British subjects to go. This inner line has 
been laid down in Darrang towards the Bhutias, Akas and 
Daphlas; in Lakhimper towards the Daphlas, Miris, Abors, 
Mishmis, Khamtis, Singphos and Nagas; and in Sibsagar towards 
the Nagas. The inner line formerly maintained along the Lushai 
border has since 1895 been allowed to fall into desuetude, but 
Lushais visiting Cachar are required to take out passes from the 
superintendent of the Lushai hills. The line is marked at 
intervals by frontier posts held by military police and com- 
manding the roads of access to the tract beyond; and any 
person from the plains who has received permission to cross the 
line has to present his pass at these posts. 

History. — Assam was the province of Bengal which remained 
most stubbornly outside the limits of the Mogul empire and of 
the Mahommedan polity in India. Indeed, although frequently 
overrun by Mussulman armies* and its western districts annexed 
to the Mahommedan vice-royalty of Bengal, the province main- 
tained an uncertain independence till its invasion by the Burmese 



towards the end of the 18th century* and its final cession to the 
British in 1826. - It seems to have been originally included, along 
with the greater part of north-eastern Bengal, in the old Hindu 
territory of Kamrup. Its early legends point to great religious 
revolutions between the rival rites of Krishna and Siva: as a 
source of dynastic changes. Its roll of kings extends deep into 
pre-historic times, but the first rajah capable of indentificatidn 
flourished about the year 76 a.d. Kamrup, the Pragjotishpur 
of the ancient Hindus, was the capital of a legendary king Narak, 
whose son Bhagadatta distinguished himself in the great war of 
the Mahdbharata. 

When Hsiian Tsang visited the country in a.d. 640, a prince 
named Kumar Bhaskara Barman was on the throne. Thepeople 
are described as being of small stature with dark yellow com? 
plexions; they were fierce in appearance, but upright and 
studious. Hinduism was the state religion, and the number of 
Buddhists was very small. The soil was deep and fertile, and 
the towns were surrounded by moats with water brought from 
rivers or banked-up lakes. Subsequently we read of Pal rulers 
in Assam. It is supposed that these kings were Buddhist and 
belbnged to the Pal dynasty of Bengal. Although the whole of 
Kamrup appears from time to time to have been united into one 
kingdom under some unusually powerful monarch, it was more 
often split up into numerous petty states; and for several 
centuries the Koch, the Ahom and the Chutia powers contested 
for the Assam valley. In the early part of the 13th. century 
the Ahoms or Ahams, from northern Burma and the Chinese 
frontiers, poured into the eastern districts of Assam; founded a 
kingdom^ and held it firmly for several centuries. The Ahoms 
were Shans from the ancient Shan kingdom of Pong. Their 
manners* customs, religion and language were, and for a long 
time continued to be, different from those of the Hindus; but 
they found themselves compelled to respect the superior civiliza- 
tion of; this race, and slowly adopted its customs and language: 
The conversion of their king Chuchengpha to Hinduism took 
place in the year a.d. 1655, and all the Ahoms of Assam 
gradually followed his example. In medieval history, the 
Assamese were known to the Mussulman population as a warlike, 
predatory race, who sailed down the Brahmaputra in fleets of 
innumerable canoes, plundered the rich districts of the delta, 
and retired in safety to their forests and swamps. As the 
Mahommedan power consolidated itself in Bengal, repeated ex- 
peditions were sent out against these river pirates of the north- 
east. The physical difficulties which an invading force had to 
contend with in Assam, however, prevented anything like a 
regular subjugation of the country; and after repeated efforts, 
the Mussulmans contented themselves with occupying * the 
western districts at the mouth of the Assam valley. The follow- 
ing details will suffice for the history of a struggle in which no 
great political object was attained, and which left the Assamese 
still the same wild and piratical people as when their fleets of 
canoes first sallied forth against the Bengal delta. In 1638, 
during the reign of the emperor Shah Jahan, the Assamese 
descended the Brahmaputra, and pillaged the country round the 
city of Dacca; they were expelled by the governor of Bengal; 
who retaliated upon the plunderers by ravaging Assam. During 
the civil wars between the sons of Shah Jahan, the king of Assam 
renewed his predatory incursions into Bengal; upon the termina- 
tion of the contest* Aurangzeb determined to avenge these 
repeated insults, and despatched a considerable force for the 
regular invasion of the Assamese territory (1660- 166 2). His 
general, Mir Jumla, defeated the rajah, who fled to the mountains, 
and most of the chiefs made their submission to the conqueror. 
But the rains set in with unusual violence, and Mir Jumla 's army 
was almost annihilated by famine and sickness. Thus terminated 
the last expedition against Assam by the Mahommedans, whose 
fortunes in this country were never prosperous. A writer of the 
Mahommedan faith says:--" Whenever an invading army has 
entered their territories, the Assamese have sheltered themselves 
in strong posts, and have distressed the enemy by stratagems, 
surprises And alarms* and by cutting off their provisions. If 
these means failed, they have declined a battle in the field, but 



774 



ASSAMESE— ^ASSASSIN 



have carried the peasants into the mountains, burned the grain 
and left the country desert. But when the rainy season has set 
in upon the advancing enemy, they have watched their oppor- 
tunity to make excursions and vent their rage; the famished 
invaders have either become their prisoners or been put to death. 
In this manner powerful and numerous armies have been sunk 
in that whirlpool of destruction, and not a soul has escaped." 
The same writer states that the country was spacious, populous 
and hard to be penetrated; that it abounded in dangers; that 
the paths and roads were beset with difficulties; and that the 
obstacles to conquest were more than could be expressed. The 
inhabitants, he says, were enterprising, well-armed and always 
prepared for battle. Moreover, they had lofty forts, numerously 
garrisoned and plentifully provided with warlike stores; and 
the approach to them was opposed by thick and dangerous 
jungles, and broad and boisterous rivers. The difficulties in the 
way of successful invasion are of course not understated, as it 
was the object of the writer to exalt the prowess and perseverance 
of the faithful. He accounts for their temporary success by 
recording that " the Mussulman hordes experienced the comfort 
of fighting for their religion, and the blessings of it reverted to 
the sovereignty of his just and pious majesty." The short-lived 
triumph of the Mussulmans might, however, have warranted a 
less ambitious tone. About the middle of the 17th century the 
chief became a convert to Hinduism. By what mode the con- 
version was effected does not clearly appear, but whatever were 
the means employed, it seems that the decline of the country 
commenced about the same period. Internal dissensions, in- 
vasion and disturbances of every kind convulsed the province, 
and neither prince nor people enjoyed security. Late in the 
1 8th century some interference took place on the part of the 
British government, then conducted by Lord Cornwallis; but 
the successor of that nobleman, Sir John Shore, adopting the 
non-intervention policy, withdrew the British force, and aban- 
doned the country to its fate. Its condition encouraged the 
Burmese to depose the rajah, and to make Assam a dependency 
of Ava. The extension of their encroachments on a portion of 
the territory of the East India Company compelled the British 
government to take decisive steps for its own protection. Hence 
arose the series of hostilities with Ava known in Indian history as 
the first Burmese War, on the termination of which by treaty in 
February 1826, Assam remained a British possession. In 1832 
that portion of the province denominated Upper Assam was 
formed into an independent native state, and conferred upon 
Purandhar Singh, the ex-rajah of the country; but the ad- 
ministration of this chief proved unsatisfactory, and in 1838 his 
principality was reunited with the British dominions. After a 
period of successful administration and internal development, 
under the lieutenant-governor of Bengal, it was erected into a 
separate chief-comrnissionership in 1874. 

In 1886 the eastern Dwars were annexed from Bhutan; and 
in 1874 the district of Goalpara, the eastern Dwars and the 
Garo hills were incorporated in Assam. In 1898 the southern 
Lushai hills were transferred from Bengal to Assam, and the 
north and south Lushai hills were amalgamated as a district of 
Assam, and placed under the superintendent of the Lushai hills. 
Frontier troubles occasionally occur with the Akas, Daphlas, 
Abors and Mishmis along the northern border, arising out of 
raids from the independent territory into British districts. In 
October 1905 the whole province of Assam was incorporated in 
the new province of Eastern Bengal and Assam. 

See E. A. Gait, The History of Assam (1906). 

ASSAMESE, the Indo- Aryan language spoken in the Assam 
valley. In 1901 the number of its speakers was 1,350,846. 
It is closely related to Bengali and Oriya, forming with them 
and with Bihari the Eastern Group of the Indo-Aryan vernacu- 
lars. For further particulars see Bengali. 

ASSAROTTI, OTTAVIO GIOVANNI BATTISTA (1753-1829), 
the founder of schools for the education of deaf-mutes in Italy, 
was born at Genoa in 1753. After qualifying himself for the 
church, he entered the society of the Pietists, " Scuole Pie," 
who devoted themselves to the training of the young. His 



superior learning caused him to be appointed to lecture on 
theology to the students of the order. In 1801 he heard of the 
Abb£ Sicard's training of deaf-mutes in Paris, and resolved to 
try something similar in Italy. He began with one pupil, and 
had by degrees collected a small number round him, when, in 1805, 
Napoleon, hearing of his endeavours, ordered a convent to be 
given him for a school-house, and funds for supporting twelve 
scholars to be taken from the convent revenues. This order was 
scarcely attended to till 1811, when it was renewed, and in the 
following year Assarotti, with a considerable number of pupils, 
took possession of the new school. Here he continued, with the 
exception of a short interval in 1814, till his death in 1829. A 
pension, which had been awarded him by the king of Sardinia, 
he bequeathed to his scholars. 

ASSARY, or Assarion, a Roman copper coin, the " farthing " 
of Matthew x. 29. 

ASSASSIN (properly Hashishin, from Hashish, the opiate 
made from the juice of hemp leaves), a general term for a secret 
murderer, originally the name of a branch of the Shiite sect 
(see Shiites), known as Isma'ilites, founded by Hassan (ibn) 
Sabbah at the end of the nth century, and from that time active 
in Syria and Persia until crushed in the 13th century by the 
Mongols under Hulaku (Hulagu) in Persia, and by the Mameluke 
Bibars in Syria. The father of Hassan Sabbah, a native of 
Khorasan, and a Shiite, had been frequently compelled to profess 
Sunnite orthodoxy, and from prudential motives had sent his 
son to study under an orthodox doctor at Nishapur. Here 
Hassan made the acquaintance of Nizam-ul-Mulk, afterwards 
vizier of the sultan Malik-Shah (see Seljuks). During the 
reign of Alp-Arslan he remained in obscurity, and then appeared 
at the court of Malik-Shah, where he was at first kindly received 
by his old friend the vizier. Hassan, who was a man of great 
ability, tried to supplant him in the favour of the sultan, but was 
outwitted and compelled to take his departure from Persia. He 
went to Egypt (1078-79), and, on account of his high reputation, 
was received with great honour by the lodge at Cairo. He soon 
stood so .high in the caliph Mostansir's favour as to excite against 
him the jealousy of. the chief general, and a cause of open enmity 
soon arose. The caliph had nominated first one and then 
another of his sons as his successor, and in consequence a party 
division took place among the leading men. Hassan, who 
adopted the cause of Nizar, the eldest son, found his enemies too 
strong for him, and was forced to leave Egypt. After many 
adventures he reached Aleppo and Damascus, and after a sojourn 
there, settled near Kuhistan (Kohistan). He gradually spread 
his peculiar modification of Isma'llite doctrine, and, having 
collected a considerable number of followers, formed them into a 
secret society. In 1090 he obtained, by stratagem, the strong 
mountain fortress of Alamut in Persia, and, removing there 
with his followers, settled as chief of the famous society after- 
wards called the Assassins. 

The speculative principles of this body were identical with 
those of the Isma'ilites, but their external policy was marked by 
one peculiar and distinctive feature — the employment of secret 
" assassination " against all enemies. This practice was introduced 
by Hassan, and formed the essential characteristic of the sect. 
In organization they closely resembled the western lodge at 
Cairo. At the head was the supreme ruler, the Sheik-al-J abal 
(Jebel), i.e. Chief, or, as it is commonly translated, Old Man of 
the Mountains. Under him were three Dai-al-Kirbdl, or, as 
they may be called, grand priors, who ruled the three provinces 
over which the sheik's power extended. Next came the body 
of Da* is, or priors, who were fully initiated into all the secret 
doctrines, and were the emissaries of the faith. Fourth were 
the Refiqs, associates or fellows, who were in process of initiation, 
and who ultimately advanced to the dignity of dd'is. Fifth 
came the most distinctive class, the Fedais {i.e. the devoted 
ones) , who were the guards or assassins proper. These were all 
young men, and from their ranks were selected the agents for 
any deed of blood. They were kept uninitiated, and the blindest 
obedience was exacted from and yielded by them. When the 
sheik required the services of any of them, the selected fedais 



ASSAULT 



775 



were intoxicated with the hashish. When in this state they were 
introduced into the splendid gardens of the sheik, and sur- 
rounded with every sensual pleasure. Such a foretaste of 
paradise, only to be granted by their supreme ruler, made them 
eager to obey his slightest command; their lives they counted as 
nothing, and would resign them at a word from him. Finally, 
the sixth and seventh orders were the Lasiqs, or novices, and 
the common people. Hassan well knew the efficacy of estab- 
lished law and custom in securing the obedience of a mass 
of people; accordingly, upon all but the initiated, the observ- 
ances of Islam were rigidly enforced. As for the initiated, they 
knew the worthlessness of positive religion and morality; they 
believed in nothing, and scoffed at the practices of the faithful. 

The Assassins soon began to make their power felt. One of 
their first victims was Hassan's former friend, Nizam-ul-Mulk, 
whose son also died under the dagger of a secret murderer. The 
death by poison of the sultan Malik-Shah was likewise ascribed 
to this dreaded society, and contributed to increase their evil 
fame. Sultan Sinjar, his successor, made war upon them, but 
he was soon glad to come to terms with enemies against whose 
queries no precaution seemed available. After a long and
prosperous rule Hassan died at an advanced age in 1124. He 
had previously slain both his sons, one on suspicion of having 
been concerned in the murder of a dd'i at Kuhistan, the other 
for drinking wine, and he was therefore compelled to name as his 
successor his chief da'i, Kia-Busurg-Omid. 

During the fourteen years' reign of this second leader, the 
Assassins were frequently unfortunate in the open field, and 
their castles were taken and plundered; but they acquired a 
stronghold in Syria, while their numerous murders made them 
an object of dread to the neighbouring princes, and spread abroad 
their evil renown. A long series of distinguished men perished 
under the daggers of the fedais; even the most sacred dignity 
was not spared. The caliph Mostarshid was assassinated in his 
tent, and not long after, the caliph Rashid suffered a similar fate* 
Busurg-Omid was succeeded by his son Mahommed I., who, 
during the long period of twenty-five years, ruthlessly carried out 
his predecessor's principles. In his time Massiat became the 
chief seat of the Syrian branch of the society. Mahommed's 
abilities were not great, and the affections of the people were 
drawn towards his son Hassan, a youth of great learning, skilled 
in all the wisdom of the initiated, and popularly believed to be 
the promised Imam become visible on earth. The old sheik 
prevented any attempt at insurrection by slaying 250 of Hassan's 
adherents, and the son was glad to make submission. When, 
however, he attained the throne, he began to put his views into 
effect. On the 17th of the month Ramadan, 1164, he assembled 
the people and disclosed to them the secret doctrines of the 
initiated; he announced that the doctrines of Islam were now 
abolished, that the people might give themselves up to feasting 
and joy. Soon after, he announced that he was the promised 
Imam, the caliph of God upon earth. To substantiate these 
claims he gave out that he was not the son of Mahommed, but 
was descended from Nizar, son of the Egyptian caliph Mostansir, 
and a lineal descendant of Isma'il. After a short reign of four 
years Hassan was assassinated by his brother-in-law, and his 
son Mahommed II. succeeded. One of his first acts was to slay 
his father's murderer, with all his family and relatives; and his 
long rule, extending over a period of forty-six years, was marked 
by many similar deeds of cruelty. He had to contend with many 
powerful enemies, especially with the great Atabeg sultan 
Nureddin, and his more celebrated successor, Saladin, who had 
gained possession of Egypt after the death of the last Fatifnite 
caliph, and against whom even secret assassination seemed 
powerless. During his reign, also, the Syrian branch of the 
society, under their da'i, Sinan, made themselves independent, 
and remained so ever afterwards. It was with this Syrian branch 
that the Crusaders made acquaintance; and it appears to have 
been their emissaries who slew Count Raymund of Tripoli and 
Conrad of Montferrat. 

Mahommed II. died from the effects of poison, administered, 
it is believed, by his son, Jelaleddin Hassan III., who succeeded. 



He restored the old form of doctrines—secret principles for the 
initiated, and Islam for the people — and his general piety and 
orthodoxy procured for him the name of the new Mussulman. 
During his reign of twelve years no assassinations occurred, and 
he obtained a high reputation among the neighbouring princes. 
Like his father, he was removed by poison, and his son, 'Ala-ed-din 
Mahommed III., a child of nine years of age, weak in mind and 
body, was placed on the throne. Under his rule the mild 
principles of his father were deserted, and a fresh course of 
assassination entered on. In 1255, after a reign of thirty years, 
'Ala-ed-din was slain, with the Connivance of his son, Rukneddln, 
the last ruler of the Assassins. In the following year Hulaku 
(Hulagu), brother of the Tatar, Mangu Khan, invaded the hill 
country of Persia, took Alamut and many other castles, and 
captured Rukneddln (see Mongols). He treated him kindly, 
and, at his own request, sent him under escort to Mangu. On 
the way, Rukneddln treacherously incited the inhabitants of 
Kirdkuh to resist the Tatars. This breach of good faith was 
severely punished by the khan, who ordered Rukneddln to be 
put to death, and sent a messenger to Hulaku (Hulagu) com- 
manding him to slay all his captives. About 12,000 of the 
Assassins were massacred, and their power in Persia was com- 
pletely broken. The Syrian branch flourished for some years 
longer, till Bibars, the Mameluke sultan of Egypt, ravaged their 
country and nearly extirpated them. Small bodies of them 
lingered about the mountains of Syria, and are believed still to 
exist there. Doctrines somewhat similar to theirs are still to be 
met with in north Syria. 

See J. von Hammer, Geschichte der Assassinen (1818); S. de Sacy, 
Memoires de I'Institut, iv. (1818), who discusses the etymology fuljy ; 
Calcutta Review, vols. Iv., lvi. ; A. Jourdain in Michaud's Histoire des 
Croisades, ii. pp. 465-484, and trans, of the Persian historian 
Mirkhond in Notices et extraits des manuscrits, xiii. pp. 143 sq. ; cf. 
R. Dozy, Essai sur Vhistoire de V Islamisme (Leiden and Paris, 1879); 
ch. ix. (G. W. T.) 

ASSAULT (from Lat. ad, to or on, and saltare, to leap), in 
English law, " an attempt or offer with force or violence to do 
corporal hurt to another, as by striking at another with a stick 
or other weapon, or without a weapon, though the party misses 
his aim." Notwithstanding ancient opinions to the contrary, 
it is now settled that mere words, be they ever so provoking, 
will not constitute an assault. Coupled with the attempt or 
threat to inflict corporal injury, theie must in all cases be the 
means of carrying the threat into effect. A battery is more than a 
threat or attempt to injure the person of another; the injury 
must have been inflicted, but it makes no difference however 
small it may be, as the law does not "draw the line between 
degrees of violence," but " totally prohibits the first and lowest 
stage of it." Every battery includes an assault. A common 
assault is a misdemeanour, and is punishable by imprisonment 
with or without hard labour to the extent of one year, and if it 
occasions bodily harm, with penal servitude for three years, or 
imprisonment to the extent of two years, with or without hard 
labour. There are various different kinds of assaults which are 
provided against by particular enactments of parliament, such 
as the Offences against the Person Act 1861, the Prevention of 
Crimes Act 187 1, &c; and there are also certain aggravated 
assaults for which the punishment is severer than for common 
assault, as an assault with intent to murder, with intent to 
commit a rape, &c. In certain cases an assault and battery is 
sometimes justifiable, as in the case where a person in authority, 
as a parent or schoolmaster, inflicts moderate punishment upon 
a child, or in certain cases of self-defence, or in defence of one's 
goods and chattels. An assault may be both a tort and a crime, 
giving a civil action for damages to the person injured, as well as 
being the subject of a criminal prosecution. 

United States. — The general principles applicable throughout 
the United States are the same as in England. Riding a horse 
threateningly near a person; or riding a bicycle against another 
{Mercer v. Corbin, 117 Indiana Rep. 450); waking one from 
sleep to present a milk bill {Richmond v. Fiske, 160 Mass. 34), 
are assaults. A minor is liable for damages for an assault 
{HUdreth v. Hancock, 156 Illinois Rep. 618). In Texas it has 



776 



ASSAYE^-ASSAYING 



been held that an assault with a knife is not necessarily an 
aggravated assault (Warren v. State, 3 S.W. 240)) and an axe 
is not necessarily a " deadly weapon" with which to assault 
(Gladney v. State, 12 S.W. 868), and the State must prove that it 
would be likely to produce death or serious bodily injury (Melton 
v. State, 17 S.W. 257). Neither, a pistol nor brass knuckles are 
necessarily deadly weapons; the State must show their size or 
manner of use in making the assault (Ballard v. State, 13 S.W. 
674; Miles v. State, 5 S.W. 250). But in 1903 a pistol was held 
by the Texas Supreme Court to be a deadly weapon if not used 
simply as a club (Lockland v. State, 73 S.W. 1054), and the same 
court held in 1904 that a pistol is a deadly weapon (Pace v. State, 
79 S.W. 531), and so the assault was an aggravated assault. In 
North Carolina it has been held that an axe is ex vi termini a 
" deadly weapon" (State v. Shields, no N.C. 49). 

ASSAYE, a village of Hyderabad or the Nizam's Dominions, 
in southern India, just beyond the Berar frontier. The place is 
celebrated as the site of a battle fought on the 23rd of September 
1803 between the combined Mahratta forces Under Sindhia and 
the rajah of Berar and the British under Major-General Wellesley, 
afterwards the duke of Wellington. The Mahratta force con- 
sisted of 50,000 men, supported by 10b pieces of cannon served 
by French artillerymen, and entrenched in a strong position. 
Against this the English had but a force of 4500 men, which, 
however, after a severe struggle, gained the most complete 
victory that ever crowned British valour in India.. Of the 
enemy 12,000 were killed and wounded; and General Wellesley 
lost 1657 — one-third of his little force — killed and wounded. 
Assaye is 261 m. north-west of Hyderabad. 

ASSAYING. To "assay" (or "essay"; Fr. essayer) is in 
general to try, or attempt, so to make trial or test. In a restricted 
sense the term assaying is applied in metallurgy to the deter- 
mination of the amount of gold or silver in ores or alloys; in this 
article, however, it will be used in a wider technical signification, 
and will include a description of the methods for the quantitative 
determination of those elements in ores which affect their value 
in metallurgical queries. It would be impossible to give in
detail here all the precautions necessary for the successful use 
of the methods, and the descriptions will therefore be confined 
to the principles involved and the general manner in which they 
are applied to secure the desired results. 

Gold and Silver. — Ores containing gold or silver are almost 
invariably assayed in the dry way; that is, by fusion with 
appropriate fluxes and ultimate separation of the elements in 
the metallic form. One of the customs which has grown out of 
our peculiar system of weights is the form of statement of the 
results of such an assay. Instead of expressing the amounts of 
gold and silver in percentages of the weight of ore, they are 
expressed in ounces to the ton, the ounce being the troy ounce 
and the ton that of 2000 avoirdupois pounds. To simplify 
calculation and to enable the assayer to use the metric system 
of weights employed in all chemical calculations, the " assay 
ton " (" A.T. " = 29-166 grammes) has been devised, which bears 
the same relation to the ton of 2000 lb avoirdupois that one 
milligram does to the troy ounce; when one assay ton of ore is 
used, each milligram of gold or silver found represents one ounce 
to the ton. 

The assay of an ore for gold or silver consists of two queries.
In the first the gold or silver is made to combine or alloy with 
metallic lead, the other constituents of the ore being separated 
from the lead as slag. In the second, the lead button containing 
the gold or silver is cupelled and the resulting gold or silver button 
is weighed. The first is conducted in one of two ways, known 
respectively as the crucible method and the scorification method. 
The crucible method is generally used for ores containing gold 
in small amounts and for certain classes of silver ores. The 
amount of ore taken for assay is generally one-half " A.T.," but in 
very low-grade ores one, two, and sometimes even four " A.T.s " 
are used. In the scorification method one-tenth of an " A.T." is 
the amount commonly taken. While in both methods the same 
result is sought, the means employed are quite different. In the 
scorification method the ore is mixed in the scorifier (a shallow 



dish of burned clay) with from ten to twenty times its weight of 
granulated metallic lead (test lead) and a little borax glass, and 
heated in a muffle, the front of which is at first closed. When 
the lead melts and begins to oxidize, the lead oxide, or so-called 
litharge, combines with or dissolves the non-metallic and readily 
oxidizable constituents of the ore, while the gold and silver alloy 
with the lead. As the slag thus formed flows off to the sides of 
the scorifier, the assay clears and the melted metallic lead forms 
an " eye " in the middle. The door of the muffle is then opened 
and the current of air which is drawn over the scorifier rapidly 
oxidizes the lead, while the melted litharge gradually closes over 
the metal. When the " eye " has quite disappeared the door is 
closed and the temperature raised to make the slag very liquid. 
The scorifier is taken from the muffle in a pair of tongs and the 
contents poured into a mould, the lead forming a button in the 
bottom while the slag floats on top. When 1 cold, the contents 
of the mould are taken out and the lead button hammered into 
the form of a cube, the slag, which is glassy and brittle, separating 
readily from the metal, which is then ready for cupellation. In 
the crucible method the ore is mixed with from once to twice its 
Weight of flux, which varies in composition, but of which the 
following may be taken as a type: — 



Sodium bicarbonate . 
Potassium carbonate. 
Powdered borax 
Flour . 
Litharge . . 



8 parts. 

3 - 

4 „ 
1 .. 

9 .. 



The mixture is charged into a round clay crucible from 106 mm*, 
to 125 mm. high, and heated either in a muffle or in a crucible 
furnace at a gradually increasing heat for forty or fifty minutes. 
At the expiration of this time, when the charge shouldbe perfectly 
liquid and in a tranquil state of fusion, the crucible is removed 
from the furnace and the contents are poured into a mould. 
The resulting lead button hammered into shape and carefully 
cleansed from slag is ready for the cupel. If the button is too 
large for cupellation, or if it is hard, it may be scorified either 
alone or mixed with test lead before cupellation. The character 
and amount of the flux necessarily depend upon the character of 
the ore, the object being to concentrate in the lead button all the 
gold and silver while dissolving and carrying off in the slag the 
other constituents of the ore. Under the most favourable con- 
ditions there is a slight loss of gold and silver in the fusion, 1 the 
scorification and the cupellation, both by absorption in the slag 
and by actual volatilization and absorption in the cupel. In ores 
containing.much copper, this metal is largely concentrated in the 
lead button, making it hard, and necessitating repeated scorifica- 
tions and, in some cases, a preliminary removal of the copper 
by solution of the ore in nitric acid. This leaves the gold in 
the insoluble residue, which is filtered off, and the silver in the 
solution is thrown down by hydrochloric acid. The resulting 
precipitate of silver chloride is filtered, and the residue and the 
precipitate are scorified together. Ores containing much arsenic 
or sulphur are generally roasted at a low heat and the assay 
is made on the roasted material. 

The process of cupellation is briefly as follows:— The gold 
alloy is fused with a quantity of lead, and a little silver if silver 
is already present. The resulting alloy, which is called the lead 
button, is then submitted to fusion on a very porous support, 
made of bone-ash, and called a cupel. The fusion being effected 
in a current of air, the lead oxidizes. The heat is sufficient to 
keep the resulting lead oxide fused, and the porous cupel has the 
property of absorbing melted lead oxide without taking up any 
of the metallic globule, exactly in the same way that blotting- 
paper will absorb water whilst it will, not touch a globule of 
mercury. The heat being continued, and the current of air 
always passing over the surface of the melted lead button, and 
the lead oxide being sucked up by the cupel as fast as it is formed, 
the metallic globule rapidly diminishes in size until at last all 
the lead has been got rid of. Now, if this were the only action, 
little good would have been gained, for we should simply have 
put lead into the gold alloy, and then taken it out again;' but 
another action goes on whilst the lead is oxidizing in the current 



ASSAYING 



777 



of air. Other metals, except the silver and gold, also oxidize, 
and are carried by the melted litharge into the cupel. If the lead 
is therefore rightly proportioned to the standard of alloy, the 
resulting button will consist of only gold and silver, and these are 
separated by the operation of parting, which consists in boiling 
the alloy (after rolling it to a thin plate) in strong nitric acid, 
which dissolves the silver and leaves the gold as a coherent 
sponge. To effect this parting properly, the proportion of silver 
to gold should be as 3 to i. The operation by which the alloy is 
brought to this standard is termed quartation or inquartation, 
and consists in fusing the alloy in a cupel with lead and the 
quantity of fine silver or fine gold necessary to bring it to the 
desired composition. 

Lead. — The " dry " or fire assay for lead is largely used for the 
valuation of lead ores, although it is being gradually replaced by 
volumetric methods. One part of the ore is mixed with from 
three to five parts of a flux of the following composition: — 

Potassium carbonate , . . . 40-6 % 
Sodium bicarbonate . . . . 31-3 ,, 

Borax ...... 15-6 ,, 

Flour 12-5 „ 

The mixture is charged into a clay crucible and heated for twenty 
minutes at a good red heat. When the mixture has been in a 
tranquil state of fusion for a few minutes it is poured into a mould. 
When cold, the button is hammered, cleaned carefully from slag, 
and weighed. The proportion is calculated from the amount 
of ore used, and the result is expressed in parts in a hundred 
or percentage of the ore. Various impurities, such as copper, 
antimony and sulphur, go into the lead button, so that the result 
is generally too high. The most accurate method for the deter- 
mination of lead in ores is the gravimetric method, in which it is 
weighed as lead sulphate after the various impurities have been 
separated. Nearly all lead ores contain more or less sulphur; 
and as in the process of solution in nitric acid this is oxidized 
to sulphuric acid which unites with the lead to form the very 
insoluble lead sulphate, it is simpler to add sulphuric acid to 
convert all the lead into sulphate and then evaporate until the 
nitric acid is expelled. The salts of iron, copper, &c, are then 
dissolved in water and filtered from the insoluble silica, lead 
sulphate, and calcium sulphate, which are washed with dilute 
sulphuric acid. The insoluble matter is treated with a hot solu- 
tion of alkaline ammonium acetate, which dissolves the lead 
sulphate, the other materials being separated by filtration. The 
lead sulphate, re-precipitated in the filtrate by an excess of 
sulphuric acid and alcohol, is then filtered on an asbestos felt in 
a Gooch crucible, washed with dilute sulphuric acid and alcohol, 
ignited, and weighed. Lead sulphate contains 68-30 % of 
metallic lead. 

There are several volumetric methods for assaying lead ores, 
but the best known is that based on the precipitation of lead by 
ammonium molybdate in an acetic acid solution. The lead 
sulphate, obtained as described above and dissolved in ammonium 
acetate, is acidulated with acetic acid diluted with hot water and 
heated to boiling-point. A standardized solution of ammonium 
molybdate is then added from a burette. As long as the solution 
contains lead, the addition of the molybdate solution causes 
a precipitation of white lead molybdate. An excess of the 
precipitant is shown by a drop of the solution imparting a 
yellow colour to a solution of tannin, prepared by dissolving 
one part of tannin in 300 of water; drops of this solution are 
placed on a white porcelain plate, and as the precipitant is added 
to the lead solution a drop of the latter is removed from time to 
time on a glass stirring-rod and added to one of the drops on the 
porcelain plate. The appearance of a yellow colour shows that 
all the lead has been precipitated and that the solution contains 
an excess of molybdate. From the reading of the burette the 
lead is calculated. The molybdate solution should be of such a 
strength that 1 cc. will precipitate o-oi gramme of lead. It is 
standardized by dissolving a weighed amount of lead sulphate in 
ammonium acetate and proceeding as described above. 

Zinc. — Chemically the ores of zinc consist of the silicates, 
carbonates, oxides, and sulDhides of zinc associated with other 



metals, some of which complicate the methods of assay. The 
most modern and the most generally accepted method is volu- 
metric, and is based on the reaction between zinc chloride and 
potassium ferrocyanide, by which insoluble zinc ferrocyanide 
and soluble potassium chloride are formed; the presence of the 
slightest excess of potassium ferrocyanide is shown by a brownish 
tint being imparted by the solution to a drop of uranium nitrate. 
The ore (0-5 gramme) is digested with a mixture of potassium 
nitrate and nitric acid. A saturated solution of potassium 
chlorate in strong nitric acid is added, and the mass evaporated 
to dryness. It is then heated with a mixture of ammonium 
chloride and ammonia, filtered and washed with a hot dilute 
solution of the same mixture. The filtrate diluted to 200 cc. is 
carefully neutralized with hydrochloric acid, and excess of 6 cc. 
of the strong acid is added, and the solution saturated with 
hydrogen sulphide, which precipitates the copper and cadmium, 
metals which would otherwise interfere. Without filtering, the 
standard solution is added from a burette, and from time to time 
a drop of the solution is removed on the glass stirring-rod and 
added to a drop or two of a strong solution of uranium nitrate, 
previously placed on a white porcelain plate. The appearance 
of a brown tint in one of these tests shows the end of the reaction. 
When cadmium is not present the copper may be precipitated 
by boiling the acidulated ammoniacal solution with test lead and 
titrating, as before described, without removing the lead and 
copper from the solution. The ferrocyanide solution is standard- 
ized by dissolving 1 gramme of pure zinc in 6 cc. of hydrochloric 
acid, adding ammonium chloride, and titrating as before. This 
method is modified in practice by the character of the ores, 
carbonates and silicates free from sulphides being decomposed 
by hydrochloric acid, with the addition of a little nitric acid. 

Copper. — The fire assay for copper ores was abandoned years 
ago and the electrolytic method took its place; this in turn is 
now largely replaced by volumetric methods. In the electrolytic 
method from 0-5 to 5 grammes of ore are treated in a flask or 
beaker, with a mixture of 10 cc. of nitric and 10 cc. of sulphuric 
acid, until thoroughly decomposed. When this liquid is cold it 
is diluted with cold water, heated until all the soluble salts are 
dissolved, transferred to a tall, narrow beaker, and diluted to 
about 1 50 cc. The electrodes are attached to a frame connected 
with the battery and the beaker is placed on a stool, which can 
be raised so that the electrodes are immersed in the liquid and 
reach the bottom of the beaker. The electrodes consist of two 
cylinders of platinum (placed one inside the other) about 75 mm. 
high, the smaller of the two 37 mm. and the larger 50 mm. in 
diameter, both pierced with 10 to 12 holes 5 mm. in diameter, 
evenly distributed over the surfaces to facilitate diffusion of the 
liquids. The surfaces of the cylinders are roughened with a sand 
blast to increase the areas and make the deposited metals adhere 
more firmly. Each cylinder has a platinum wire fused to the 
upper circumference to connect with a clamp from which a wire 
leads to the proper pole of the battery. The smaller cylinder is 
generally the negative electrode on which the copper is deposited. 
The framework carrying the clamps is arranged so that a number 
of determinations may be made at one time, the wires from the 
clamps running from a rheostat, so arranged that currents of any 
strength may be Used simultaneously. The cylinder, having 
been carefully weighed, is placed in position, the beaker con- 
taining the solution is adjusted, and the current passed until all 
the copper is precipitated. This generally requires from two to 
twelve hours. The cylinders are then removed from the solution 
and washed with distilled water, the one holding the deposited 
copper being washed with alcohol, dried and weighed; the 
increase in weight represents the copper contents of the ore. 
The deposited copper should be firmly adherent and bright rosy 
red in colour. Silver, arsenic and cadmium, if present, are 
precipitated with the copper and affect the accuracy of the 
results; they should be removed by special methods. 

Volumetric methods are more expeditious and require less 
apparatus. The potassium cyanide method is based on the 
fact that, when potassium cyanide is added to an ammoniacal 
solution of a salt of copper, the insoluble copper cyanide is 



778 



ASSEGAI— ASSELIJN 



formed, the end of the reaction being indicated by the disappear- 
ance of the blue colour of the solution. One gramme of the ore 
is treated in a flask with a mixture of nitric and sulphuric acids 
and evaporated until all the nitric acid is expelled. After cooling 
a little, water is added, and then a few grammes of aluminium 
foil free from copper. On this foil the copper in the solution is 
all precipitated by electrolytic action in a few minutes, and the 
aluminium is dissolved by the addition of an excess of sulphuric 
acid. Water is added, and as soon as the gangue and copper 
particles have settled the clear solution is decanted, and the 
residue washed several times in the same way. The copper is 
then dissolved in 5 cc. of nitric acid; if silver is present a drop or 
two of hydrochloric acid is added, the solution diluted to about 
50 cc, and filtered. To the nitrate (or, if no silver is present, to 
the diluted nitric acid solution) 10 cc. of ammonia are added, 
and a standard solution of potassium cyanide is run in from 
a burette until the blue colour has nearly disappeared. The 
solution is filtered to get rid of the precipitate, and the titration 
is finished in the nearly clear filtrate, which should be always 
about 200 cc. in volume. The titration is complete when the 
blue colour is so faint that it is almost imperceptible after the 
flask has been vigorously shaken. T u " potassium cyanide solu- 
tion is standardized by dissolving 0-5 gramme of pure copper 
in 5 cc. of nitric acid, diluting, adding 10 cc. of ammonia, and 
titrating exactly as described above. 

When potassium iodide is added to a solution of cupric acetate, 
the reaction (Cu(C 2 H 3 2 ) 2 + 2KI = CuI + 2K(C 2 H 3 2 ) + I takes 
place; that is, for each atom of copper one atom of iodine is 
liberated. If a solution of sodium thiosulphate (hyposulphite) 
is added to this solution, hydriodic acid, sodium iodide and 
tetrathionate are formed; and if a little starch solution has been 
added, the end of the reaction is indicated by the disappearance 
of the blue colour, due to the iodide of starch. The amount of 
iodine liberated is therefore a measure of the copper in the 
solution, and when the sodium thiosulphate has been carefully 
standardized the method is extremely accurate. The ore is 
treated as described in the cyanide method until the copper 
precipitated by the aluminium foil has been washed and dissolved 
in 5 cc. of nitric acid; then 0-25 gramme of potassium chlorate 
is added, and the solution boiled nearly dry to oxidize any 
arsenic present to arsenic acid. The solution is cooled, 50 cc. 
water added, then 5 cc. ammonia, and the solution is boiled for 
five minutes. Next 5 cc. of glacial acetic acid are added, the 
solution cooled, and 5 cc. of a solution of potassium iodide (300 
grammes to the litre) and the standard solution of sodium 
thiosulphate run in from a burette until the brown colour has 
nearly disappeared. A few drops of starch solution are then 
added, and when the blue colour has nearly vanished a drop or 
two of methyl orange makes the end reaction very sharp. The 
thiosulphate solution is standardized by dissolving 0-3 to 0-5 
gramme of pure copper in 3 cc. of nitric acid, adding 50 cc. of 
water ,and 5 cc. of ammonia, and titrating as above after the 
addition of 5 cc. of glacial acetic acid and 5 cc. of the potassium 
iodide solution. 

Iron. — The methods used in the assay for iron are volumetric, 
and are all based on the property possessed by certain reagents 
of oxidizing iron from the ferrous to the ferric state. Two salts 
are in common use for this purpose, potassium permanganate and 
potassium bichromate. It is necessary in the first place, after 
the ore is in solution, to reduce all the iron to the ferrous con- 
dition; then the carefully standardized solution of the oxidizing 
reagent is added until all the iron is in the ferric state, the 
volume of the standard solution used being the measure of the 
iron contained in the ore. The end of the reaction when potassium 
permanganate is employed is known by the change in colour 
of the solution. As the solution of potassium permanganate, 
which is deep red in colour, is dropped into the colourless iron 
solution, it is quickly decolorized while the iron solution 
gradually assumes a yellowish tinge, the first drop of the perman- 
ganate solution in excess giving it a pink tint. With potassium 
bichromate solution, which is yellow, the iron solution becomes 
green from the chromium chloride or sulphate formed, and the 



end of the reaction is determined by removing a drop of the 
solution on the stirring-rod and adding it to a drop of a dilute 
solution of potassium ferricyanide on a white tile. So long as the 
solution contains a ferrous salt, the drop on the tile changes to 
blue; hence the absence of a blue coloration indicates the 
complete oxidation of all the ferrous salt and the end of the 
reaction. One gramme of ore is usually taken for assay and 
treated in a small flask or beaker with 10 cc. of hydrochloric acid. 
All the iron in the ore generally dissolves upon heating, and a 
white residue is left. Occasionally this residue contains a small 
amount of iron in a difficultly soluble form; in that case the 
solution is slightly diluted with water and filtered into a larger 
flask. The residue in the filter is ignited and fused with a little 
sodium carbonate and nitrate, or with sodium peroxide. The 
product is treated with water, filtered, and the residue dissolved 
in hydrochloric acid and added to the main solution. This 
solution, which should not exceed 50 cc. or 75 cc. in volume* 
contains the iron in the ferric state and is ready for reduction. 

In the reduction by metallic zinc, 1 about 3 grammes of granu- 
lated or foliated zinc are placed in the flask, which is closed with 
a small funnel; when the iron is reduced, add 10 cc. of sulphuric 
acid, and as soon as all the zinc is dissolved the solution is ready 
for titration. In the reduction by stannous chloride the solution 
of the ore in the flask is heated to boiling, and a strong solution 
of stannous chloride is added until the solution is completely 
decolorized; then 60 cc. of a solution of mercuric chloride (50 
grammes to the litre) are run in and the contents of the flask 
poured into a dish containing 600 cc. of water and 60 cc. of a solu- 
tion containing 200 grammes of manganous sulphate, 1 litre of 
phosphoric acid (1-3 sp. gr.), 400 cc. of sulphuric acid, and 1600 
cc. of water. The solution is then ready for titration with the 
standard permanganate solution. 

The permanganate or bichromate solution is standardized by 
dissolving 0-5 of a gramme of pure iron wire in a flask, in hydro- 
chloric acid, oxidizing it with a little potassium chlorate,' boiling 
off all traces of chlorine, deoxidizing by one of the methods 
described above, and titrating with the solution. As the wire 
always contains impurities, the absolute amount of iron in the 
wire must be determined and the correction made accordingly. 
Pure oxalic acid may also be used, which, in the presence of 
sulphuric acid, is oxidized by the standard solution according to 
the reaction:— 

5(H 2 C 2 4 2H 2 0) +3H 2 S0 4 +2KMnO < = 10CO 2 + 2MnS0 4 

+K 2 S04+i8H 2 O 

The reaction in case of ferrous sulphate is :— 

10FeSO 4 +2KMnO4-|-8H 2 SO,;=5Fe 2 (SO4).3+K 2 SO, 

+2MnS04+8H 2 0; 

that is, the same amount of potassium permanganate is required 
to oxidize 5 molecules of oxalic acid that is necessary to oxidize 
10 molecules of iron in the form of ferrous sulphate to ferric 
sulphate, or 63 parts by weight of oxalic acid equal 56 part$ by 
weight of metallic iron. Ammonium ferrous sulphate may also be 
used; it contains one-seventh of its weight of iron. ,(A. A. B.) 

ASSEGAI, or Assagai (from Berber-Arab as-zahayah, through 
Portuguese azagaia), *a weapon for throwing or hurling, a light 
spear or javelin made of wood and pointed with iron, particularly 
the spear used by the Zulu and other Kaffir tribes of South 
Africa. In addition to the long-handled assegai there is a shorter 
weapon for use at close quarters. 

ASSELIJN, HANS (1610-1660), Dutch painter, was born at 
Diepen, near Amsterdam. He received instruction from Esaias 
Vandevelde (1587-1630), and distinguished himself particularly 
in landscape and animal painting, though his historical works 
and battle pieces are also admired. He travelled much in France 
and Italy, and modelled his style greatly after Bambpccio (Peter 
Laer). He was one of the first Dutch painters who introduced a 
fresh and clear manner of painting landscapes in the style of 
Claude Lorraine, and his example was speedily followed by other 
artists. Asselijn's pictures were in high estimation at Amster- 
dam, and several of them are in the museums of • that city. 
Twenty-four, painted in Italy, were engraved. ,, , , 



ASSEMANI— ASSER 



779 



ASSEMANI* the name of a Syrian Maronite family of famous 
Orientalists. 

1. Joseph Simon, a Maronite of Mount Lebanon, was born in 
1687. When very young he was sent to the Maronite college in 
Rome, and was transferred thence to the Vatican library. In 
1717 he was sent to Egypt and Syria to search for valuable MSS., 
and returned with about 1 50 very choice ones. The success of 
this expedition induced the pope to send him again to the East 
in 1735, and he, returned with a still more valuable collection. 
On his return he was made titular archbishop of Tyre and 
librarian of the Vatican library. He instantly began to carry 
into execution most extensive plans for editing and publishing 
the most valuable MS. treasures of the Vatican. His two great 
works are the Bibliotheca Orientalis Clementino-V aticana rec. 
manuscr. codd. Syr., Arab., Pers., Turc, Hebr., Samarit., Armen., 
Aethiop., Graec, Aegypl., Iber., et.Malab., jussu et munif. Clem. 
XI. (Rome, 1719-1728), 9 vols, folio, and Ephraemi Syri opera 
omnia quae extant, Gr., Syr., et Lat., 6 vols, folio (Rome, 1737- 
1746). Of the Bibliotheca the first three vols, only were completed. 
The work was to have been in four parts — (1) Syrian and allied 
MSS., orthodox, Nestorian and Jacobite; (2) Arabian MSS., 
Christian and Mahommedan; (3) Coptic, Aethiopic, Persian 
and Turkish MSS.; and (4) Syrian and Arabian MSS. not 
distinctively theological; only the first part was completed, 
but extensive preparations were made for the others. There is a 
German abridgment by A. F. Pfeiffer. 

2. Joseph Aloysius, brother of Joseph Simon, and professor 
of Oriental languages at Rome. Hediedin 1782. Besidesaiding 
his brother in his literary labours, he published, in 1749-1760, 
Codex Liturgicus Ecclesiae Universae in xv. libris (this is incom- 
plete), and Comment, de Catholicis sive Patriarchis Chaldaeorum 
et Nestorianorum (Rome, 1775). 

3. Stephen Evodius, nephew of Joseph Simon and Joseph 
Aloysius, was the chief assistant of his uncle Joseph Simon in his 
work in the Vatican library. He was titular archbishop of 
Apamea in Syria, and held several rich prebends in Italy. His 
literary labours were very extensive. His two most important 
works were a description of certain valuable MSS. in his Biblio- 
thecac Mediceo-Laurentianae et Palatinae codd. manuscr. Orien- 
talium Catalogus (Flor. 1742), fol., and his Acta SS. Martyrum 
Orientalium. He made several translations from the Syrian, 
and in conjunction with his uncle he began the Bibliothecae 
Apostol. Vatic, codd. manusc. Catul., in Ires partes distributus. 
Only three vols, were published, and the fire in the Vatican 
library in 1768 consumed the manuscript collections which had 
been prepared for the continuation of the work. 

4. Simon, grandnephew of Joseph Simon, was born at Tripoli 
in 1752, and was professor of Oriental languages in Padua. He 
died in 1820. He is best known by his masterly detection of the 
literary imposture of Vella, which claimed to be a history of the 
Saracens in Syria. 

ASSEMBLY, UNLAWFUL, the term used in English law for an 
assembly of three or more persons with intent to commit a crime 
by force, or to carry out a common purpose (whether lawful or 
unlawful), in such a manner or in such circumstances as would 
in the opinion of firm and rational men endanger the public 
peace or create fear of immediate danger to the tranquillity of 
the neighbourhood. In the Year Book of the third year of 
Henry VII. 's reign assemblies were referred to as not punishable 
unless in terrorem populi domini regis. It has been suggested 
(Criminal Code Commission, 1879) that legislation first became 
necessary at a time when it was usual for those landed proprietors 
who were on bad terms with one another to go to market at the 
head of bands of armed retainers (Statute of Northampton, 
1328, 2 Edw. III. c. 3). An assembly, otherwise lawful, is not 
made unlawful if those who take part in it know beforehand 
that there will probably be organized opposition to it, and that 
it may cause a breach of the peace (Beatty v. Gillbanks, 1882, 
9 Q. B. D. 308). All persons may, and must if called upon to do 
so, assist in dispersing an unlawful assembly (Redford v. Birley, 
1822, 1 St. Tr. n.s.1215; R. v. Pinney, 1831, 3 St. Tr. n.s. n). 
An assembly which is lawful cannot be rendered unlawful by 



proclamation unless the proclamation is one authorized by 
statute (R. v. Fursey, 1833, 3 St. Tr. n.s. 543, 567; R.v.. 
O'Connell, 1831, 2 St. Tr. n.s. 629, 656; see also the Prevention 
of Crimes [Ireland] Act 1887). Meetings for training or drilling, 
or military movements, are unlawful assemblies unless held under 
lawful authority from the crown, the lord-lieutenant, or two 
justices of the peace (Unlawful Drilling Act 1820, s. 11). 

An unlawful assembly which has made a motion towards its 
common purpose is termed a rout, and if the unlawful assembly 
should proceed to carry out its purpose, e.g. begin to demolish a 
particular enclosure, it becomes a riot (q.v.). All three offences 
are misdemeanours in English law, punishable by fine and 
imprisonment. The common law as to unlawful assembly 
extends to Ireland, subject to the special legislation referred to 
under the title Riot. The law of Scotland includes unlawful 
assembly under the same head as rioting. 

British Dominions Abroad. — The law of the British colonies 
as a general rule as to unlawful assemblies follows the common 
law of England. The definitions in the Criminal Codes of Canada 
(1892, s. 79) and Queensland (1899, s. 61) are substantially the 
same as the common-law definition above given. Under the 
Indian Penal Code (s. 141) an assembly of five or more persons 
is designated an unlawful assembly if the common object of the 
persons composing that assembly is — (1) to overawe by criminal 
force, or show of criminal force, the legislative or executive 
government of India, or the government of any presidency or 
any lieutenant-governor, or any public servant in the exercise 
of the lawful power of such public servant; (2) to resist the 
execution of any law or of any legal process; (3) to commit any 
mischief or" criminal trespass " or other offence; (4) by means 
of criminal force or show of criminal force to any person, to take 
or obtain possession of any property, or to deprive any person of 
the enjoyment of a right of way, or of the use of water, or other 
corporeal right of which he is in possession or enjoyment, or 
to enforce any right or supposed right; or (5) by means of 
criminal force or show of criminal force, to compel any person 
to do what he is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do 
what he is legally entitled to do (see Mayne, Ind. Cr. Law, ed. 
1896, p. 480). In South Africa and Mauritius the law on this 
subject is derived from the Roman Dutch and French law (see 
Riot.) 

United States. — The common-law definition of unlawful 
assembly is accepted in the United States subject to the special- 
legislation of the constituent states. The New York Penal Code 
(s. 451) declares that whenever three or more persons being 
assembled attempt or threaten any act tending towards a breach 
of the peace or injury to person or property, or any unlawful 
act, such assembly is unlawful (see Bishop, Amer. Crim. Law,_ 
8th ed., 1892, vol. i. s. 534, vol. ii. s. 1256). 

ASSEN, the capital of the province of Drente, Holland, 16 m. 
by rail S. of Groningen, at the junction of the two canals which 
run north and south to Groningen and Meppel respectively. 
Pop. (1900) 11,329. It is partly surrounded by a small forest 
belonging to the state. Assen possesses schools (a gymnasium 
and burgher school), a chamber of commerce, a museum of 
antiquities and a court-house. Peat-cutting forms a considerable 
industry. Many prehistoric remains found in the neighbourhood 
are in the museum at Leiden. Until the 19th century Assen was 
a small place built round the convent in which Otto II. (of Lippe) , 
bishop of Utrecht, was murdered after being taken prisoner at 
Koevorden in 1237. 

ASSER, or Asserius Menevensis (d. c. 910), English bishop, 
and author of a life of Alfred the Great, was a native of the 
western part of Wales, and was related to Nobis, bishop of St 
David's. He became a monk at St David's, and having acquired 
some reputation for learning, he was invited by King Alfred to 
his court. The king met the monk at Denu (probably East or 
West Dean, near Seaford in Sussex), but Asser did not at once 
accept the invitation of Alfred, and returned to Wales to consult 
his colleagues. He then agreed to spend six months of each year 
with the king and six months in his own land; but his first stay 
at the royal court extended to eight months, and it is probable 



780 



ASSESSMENT— ASSETS 



that the annual visit to Wales was curtailed if not altogether 1 
discontinued. It is difficult to fix the date of Asser's arrival in 
England, but it was probably about 885. He assisted the king 
in his studies, received from him the monasteries of Congresbury 
and Banwell, and sometime later " Exeter and its diocese in 
Saxonland and Cornwall." He became bishop of Sherborne 
before 900, and his death is recorded in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle 
under the date 910, although it is possible that it occurred a 
year or two earlier. The scanty details of Asser's life are taken 
from his biography of Alfred, from which it is inferred that he 
was acquainted with one or two Frankish biographies, and 
possibly had visited the continent of Europe. 

Asser's work, Annates return, gestarum Alfredi magni, was 
written about 893, and consists of a chronicle of English history 
from 849 to 887, and an account of Alfred's life, largely drawn 
from personal knowledge, down to 887. The only manuscript 
of which there is any record daces from about 1000, and was 
destroyed by fire in 1731. From this manuscript an edition was 
printed in 1574 under the direction of Matthew Parker, arch- 
bishop of Canterbury; but this contained many interpolations 
and alterations which were copied by subsequent editors. The 
text has since been the subject of careful study, and the edition 
edited by W. H. Stevenson (Oxford, 1904) distinguishes between 
the original work of Asser and the later additions. Some doubt 
has been cast upon the authenticity of the work, especially by 
T. Wright in the Biographia Britannica literaria (London, 1842), 
who ascribes the life to a monk of St Neots; but the latest 
scholarship regards it as the work of Asser, although all the 
difficulties which surround the authorship have not been removed. 
The life was largely used by subsequent chroniclers, among 
others by Florence of Worcester, Simeon of Durham, Roger of 
Hoveden, and William of Malmesbury. 

See W. H. Stevenson, Introduction to Asser's Life of King Alfred 
(Oxford, 1904) ; R. Pauli, Introduction to Konig A elf red (Berlin, 1851). 

ASSESSMENT, (from Lat. assessare, to sit beside, to judge), a 
term expressing either an official valuation of income or property 
for purposes of taxation, or the amount so determined (see 
Taxation and Valuation). It is also applied to the amount 
of damages fixed by a jury in a court of law (see Damages). 

An assessment committee is a statutory committee appointed 
under the Union Assessment Acts 1862, 1880, for the purpose of 
making out the valuation lists upon which the poor-law rate is 
based. 

An assessment policy, in life insurance, is a policy issued at a 
fixed premium, the excess of which over the portion necessary 
to meet current claims and expenses goes to form a reserve fund 
which is devoted to various forms of benefit for the policy- 
holders. See Insurance and Friendly Societies. 

ASSESSOR (Lat. assessare, assidere, to sit by), a -Roman term 
originally applied to a trained lawyer who sat beside a governor 
of a province or other magistrate, to instruct him in the ad- 
ministration of the laws (see Roll, De assessoribus magistratuum 
Romanorum, Leipzig, 1872). The system is still exemplified in 
Scotland, where it is usual in the larger towns for municipal 
magistrates, in the administration of their civil jurisdiction, to 
have the aid of professional assessors. In England, by the Judi- 
cature Act 1873, the court of appeal and the High Court may 
in any cause or matter call in the aid of assessors. The Patents 
Act 1907 makes special provision for assessors in patent and 
trade-mark cases. By the Supreme Court of Judicature Act 
1891 the House of Lords may, in appeals in admiralty actions, 
call in the aid of assessors, while in the admiralty division of the 
High Court it is usual for the Elder Brethren of Trinity House to 
assist as nautical assessors. In admiralty cases in the county 
courts, too, the judge is frequently assisted by assessors of 
" nautical skill and experience " (County Court Admiralty 
Jurisdiction Act 1868). In the ecclesiastical courts assessors 
assist the bishop in proceedings under the Church Discipline Act 
1S40, s. 11, while under the Clergy Discipline Act 1892, s. 2, 
they assist the chancellor in determining questions of fact. By 
the Appellate Jurisdiction Act 1876, s. 14, the king in council 
may make rules for the attendance of archbishops and bishops 



'as assessors in the hearing of ecclesiastical cases by the judMal 
committee of the privy council. 

The term " assessor "is also very generally applied to persons 
appointed to ascertain and fix the value of rates, taxes, &c, 
and in this- sense the word is used in the United States. 

In : France and in all European countries where the civil law 
system prevails, the term assesseur is applied to those assistant 
judges who, with a president, compose a judicial court. 

In Germany an Assessor, or Beisitzer, is -a member of' the legal 
profession who has passed four years in actual practice and 
become qualified for the position of a judge. 

ASSETS (from the O. Nor. Fr. assets, mod. Fr. assez, " enough"), 
in English law, strictly the property of a debtor in the 
hands of his representative sufficient for the satisfaction of his 
creditors or legatees. Thus the property of a bankrupt is termed 
his assets and is the fund out of which his liabilities must be paid. 
All property of the debtor is assets, and it is not necessary that 
it should have been reduced into possession by him. 

The creditors of a debtor are either secured or unsecured. A 
secured creditor, e.g. a mortgagee, has a prior claim to be paid his 
debt out of his security. If on realization of the security there is 
a balance after paying the debt, such balance becomes assets for* 
the unsecured creditors; if there is a deficit, then the creditor 
becomes ail unsecured creditor for such deficit. The unsecured 
creditors were formerly divided into creditors by specialty and 
by simple contract, the first being creditors secured by instrument 
under seal who ranked in priority to simple contract creditors. 
But by Hinde Palmer's Act [the Executors Act] 1869 all un- 
secured creditors rank alike. 

Assets are divisible into legal assets and equitable assets, and 
the former class is again divisible into assets real and personal. 
These distinctions, though formerly of great importance, have 
now lost most of their meaning, btit it is necessary briefly to de- 
scribe the nature of these divisions and their consequences: The 
distinction between assets legal and equitable depends entirely 
upon the remedy open to the creditor to recover his debt and in 
no way upon the nature of the property from which the debt is 
sought to be recovered. If the creditor had to sue the executor 
of a debtor at law to obtain payment out of the property, that 
property was legal assets; but if the only remedy open to the 
creditor to get at the property was to bring an action in chancery 
for the administration of the estate, then the assets were 
equitable. 

Legal assets, as has been said, were divided into real and 
personal assets. The personal assets were those which devolved 
virtute officii on the executor or administrator; such assets are 
since Hihde Palmer's Act available equally for specialty and 
simple contract creditors. The real assets consisted of those 
descending to the heir or devised to a devisee, and were at law 
only liable for specialty debts. However, by the Land Transfer 
Act 1897 it is provided that the real estate of a deceased shall 
devolve upon the executor and " shall be administered in the 
same manner . . . and with the same incidents as if it were 
personal estate." The distinction, therefore, between assets real 
and personal has practically ceased to exist, and only continues 
in regard to such property as is not included in the act, the most 
important of which is land held in copyhold. 

The equitable assets were treated otherwise. In the eyes of 
equity all unsecured creditors stand upon the same footing; 
and a creditor suing for administration of the estate sued on 
behalf of himself and all other creditors of the estate, and the 
distinction between specialty and simple contract creditors was 
ignored. Land was not at law liable to satisfy simple con- 
tract creditors; but if a testator expressly charged it with pay- 
ment of his debts or devised it to his executors upon trust 
to pay his debts, equity treated it as equitable- assets and so 
made it available to satisfy simple contract creditors; and 
finally by an act of 1833 it was provided that real estate 
should in all cases be assets to be administered by equity 
for the benefit of simple contract creditors as well as creditors 
by specialty. It will be seen therefore that, generally speaking, 
all creditors have now the same remedies against the executors 



ASSIDEANS— ASSIGNATS 



781 



either at law or in equity. The only property as to which these 
distinctions at all survive is that not touched by the Land 
Transfer Act 1897. 

The act of 1833 just mentioned does not, however, deal with 
legacies, which continue to be payable only out of personalty 
unless they are expressly charged upon the realty by the testator; 
it has been contended that the effect of the Land Transfer Act 
1897 has been to alter this and make the realty assets for the 
purpose of paying legacies, but this view is believed to be un- 
sound. 

It is necessary for the representative so to distribute the assets 
that any fund primarily liable shall bear its proper burden, and 
that as far as possible all debts and legacies may be paid; this 
is said to be " marshalling the assets," and a few examples of 
the principal cases of marshalling will make this clear. If the 
personalty is exhausted in satisfying the creditors the legatees 
are left without a fund from which to be paid. But inasmuch as 
the creditor could have got paid out of the realty, as well as the 
personalty, it is not fair that the legatee should suffer by the 
creditor's choice, and he will therefore get payment from the 
real estate. So again if one legacy is charged upon the real 
estate and another is not, then if the former be paid out of the 
personalty the latter will stand in its place and be paid from 
the real estate. 

Finally it shall be noticed that an insolvent estate may be 
administered in bankruptcy. In such a case the law of bank- 
ruptcy regulates the order in which the assets are divided among 
the creditors (see Bankruptcy), but by the Judicature Act 1875, 
it is provided that an insolvent estate may be administered in 
the chancery division, and in such a case " the same rules shall 
prevail and be observed as to the respective rights of secured 
and unsecured creditors and as to the debts and liabilities 
provable and as to the valuation of annuities and future and 
contingent liabilities respectively as may be in force for the time 
being under the law of bankruptcy." This clause must be 
construed strictly, and it is only in the three cases specifically 
mentioned that the rules of bankruptcy will be imported into 
the administration of an insolvent estate by the chancery 
division. 

In a less strict sense, the term " assets," or " an asset," is 
used derivatively as a synonym for any property, or as opposed 
to " liabilities." Cecil Rhodes once spoke of the British flag 
as a " great commercial asset " in South Africa, meaning 
merely that the imperial connexion was a source of strength and 
credit. 

ASSIDEANS (the Anglicized form, derived through the Greek, 
of the Hebrew ffasidim, " the pious "), the name of a party or 
sect which stood out against the Hellenization of the Jews in 
the 2nd century B.C. After the massacre of those who fled from 
the forces of Antiochus Epiphanes and would not resist on the 
sabbath, Mattathias (or Judas) decided to set aside the law and 
was joined by a company of Assideans, brave men of Israel 
every one, who offered themselves willingly for the law (1 Mace, 
ii. 42, cf. 2 Mace. viii. 1). On the appointment of Alcimus (162 
B.C.), " a descendant of Aaron " as high-priest, " the Assideans 
were the first who sought peace " (1 Mace. vii. 13 f.); but the 
treacherous murder of sixty of them (t&. 16) threw them back 
into the arms of Judas. According to 2 Mace, xiv., Alcimus 
identified them with the whole party of the rebels, of which 
they were only one, though the most important, section. 

See Schurer, Geschichte des jiidischen Volkes, i. 203 ; art. in Jewish 
Encyclopaedia, s-v. " fclasidim " (S. M. Dubnow). (J. H. A. H.) 

ASSIGNATS (from Lat. assignatus, assigned), a form of paper- 
money issued in France, from 1789 to 1796. Assigriats were so 
termed, as representing land assigned to the holders. 

The financial strait of the French government in 1789 was 
extreme. Coin was scarce, loans were not taken up, taxes had 
ceased to be productive, and the country was threatened with 
imminent bankruptcy. In this emergency assignats were issued 
to provide a substitute for a metallic currency. They were 
originally of the nature of mortgage bonds on the national lands. 
These lands consisted of the church property confiscated, on the 



motion of Mirabeau, by the Constituent Assembly on the 2nd 
of November 1789, and the crown lands, which had been 
taken over by the nation on the 7th of October (see French 
Revolution). 

The assignats were first to be paid to the creditors of the state. 
With these the creditors could purchase national land, the 
assignats having, for this purpose, the preference over other 
forms of money. If the creditor did not care to purchase land, 
it was supposed that he could obtain the face-value for them 
from those who desired land. Those assignats which were re- 
turned to the state as purchase-money were to be cancelled, and 
the whole issue, it was argued, would consequently disappear as 
the national lands were distributed. 

A first issue was made of 400,000,000 francs' worth of 
assignats, each note being of 100 francs' value and bearing 
interest daily at a rate of 5%. They were to be redeemed by 
the product of the sales, and from certain other sources, at the 
rate of 120,000,000 francs in 1791, 100,000,000 francs in 1792, 
80,000,000 francs in 1793 and 1794, and the surplus in 1795. 
The success of the issue was undoubted, and, possibly, if the 
assignats had been restricted, as Mirabeau at first desired, to 
the extent of one-half the value of the lands sold, they would 
not have shared the usual fate of inconvertible paper money. 
Mirabeau was a strenuous advocate of the assignats. " They 
represent," he said, "real property, the most secure of all 
possessions, the soil on which we tread." " There cannot be a 
greater error than the fear so generally prevalent as to the over- 
issue of assignats . . . reabsorbed progressively in the purchase 
of the national domains, this paper-money can never become 
redundant." 

In 1790 the interest was reduced to 3%, and as the treasury 
had again become exhausted, a further issue was decided upon ; 
it was also decreed that the assignats were to be accepted as 
legal tender, all public departments being instructed to receive 
theni as the equivalent of metallic money. This second issue 
amounted to 800,000,000 francs and carried no interest. It was 
solemnly declared in the decree authorizing the issue that the 
maximum issue was never to exceed twelve hundred millions. 
This pledge, however, was soon broken, and further issues 
brought the total up to 3 ,7 50,000,000 francs. The consequence of 
these further issues was instant depreciation, and the note of 100 
francs nominal value sank to less than 20 francs coin. Recourse 
was then had to protective legislation. The first step was to 
decree the penalty of six years' imprisonment against any 
person who should sell specie for a more considerable quantity 
of assignats, or who should stipulate a different price for com- 
modities according as the payment was to be made in specie or in 
assignats. For the second offence the penalty was to be twenty 
years' imprisonment (August 1, 1793), for which the death 
penalty was ultimately substituted (May 10, 1794). This 
severe provision was, however, repealed after the fall of Robes- 
pierre. Notwithstanding these precautions, the value of assignats 
still declined, till the proportion to specie had become that of six' 
to one. Then came the passing by the Convention on the 3rd of 
May 1793 of the absurd " maximum." The decree required all 
farmers and com-dealers to declare the quantity of corn in their 
possession and to sell it only in recognized markets. No person 
was to be allowed to lay in more than one month's supply. A 
maximum price was fixed, above which no one was to buy or sell 
under severe penalties. These measures were soon stultified by 
further issues, and by June 1794 the total number of assignats 
aggregated nearly 8,000,000,000, of which only 2,464,000,000 
had returned to the treasury and been destroyed. The extension 
of the " maximum " to all commodities only increased the 
confusion. Trade was paralysed and all manufacturing establish- 
ments were closed down. Attempts by the Convention to 
increase the value of the assignats were of no avail. Too many 
causes operated in favour of their depreciation: the enormous 
issue, the uncertainty as to their value if the Revolution should 
fail, the relation they bore to both specie and commodities, 
which retained their value and refused to be exchanged for 
a money of Constantly diminishing purchasing power. Even 



782 



ASSIGNMENT— ASSIUT 



between the assignats themselves there were differences. The 
royal assignats, which had been issued under Louis XVI., had 
depreciated less than the republican ones. They were worth 
from 8 to 15% more, a fact due to the hope that in case of a 
counter-revolution they would be less likely to be discredited. 

The Directory was guilty of even greater abuses in dealing 
with the assignats. By 1 796 the issues had reached the enormous 
figure of 45,500,000,000 francs, and even this gigantic total was 
swollen still more by the numerous counterfeits introduced into 
France from the neighbouring countries. The assignats had now 
become totally valueless — the abolition of the " maximum " the 
previous year (1795) had produced no effect, and, though, by 
various payments into the treasury, the total number had been 
reduced to about 24,000,000,000 francs, their face-value was 
about 30 to 1 of coin. At this value they were converted into 
800,000,000 francs of land-warrants, or mandats territoriaux, 
which were to constitute a mortgage on all the lands of the 
republic. These mandats were no more successful than the 
assignats, and even on the day of their issue were at a discount 
of 82 %. They had an existence of six months, and were finally 
received back by the state at about the seventieth part of their 
face-value in coin. 

Authorities. — L. A. Thiers, Histoire de la revolution francaise, 
gives a full and graphic account of the assignats, the causes of their 
depreciation, &c. ; J. Gamier, Traite des Finances (1862) ; J. Bresson, 
Histoire financiere de la France (1829) ; R. Stourm, Les Finances 
de I'ancien regime et de la revolution (1885); F. A. Walker, Money 
(1891); Heniy Higgs, in the Cambridge Modern History, vol. viii. 
(1904). (T. A. I.) 

ASSIGNMENT, Assignation, Assignee (from Lat. assignare, 
to mark out), terms which, as derivatives of the verb " to 
assign," are of frequent technical use in law. To assign is to 
make over, and the term is generally used to express a trans- 
ference by writing, in contradistinction to a transference by actual 
delivery. In England the usual expression is assignment, in 
Scotland it is assignation. The person making over is called the 
assignor or cedent; the recipient, the assign or assignee. An 
assignee may be such either by deed, as when a lessee assigns his 
lease to another, or in law, as when property devolves upon an 
executor. The law as to assignment in connexion with each 
particular subject, as the assignment of a chose in action, 
assignment in contract, of dower, of errors, of a lease, &c, will be 
found under the respective headings. In a colloquial sense, " as- 
signation " means a secretly contrived meeting between lovers. 

ASSINIBOIA, a name formerly applied to two districts of 
Canada, but not now held by any. (1) A district formed in 1835 
by the Hudson's Bay Company, having in it Fort Garry at the 
junction of the Red and Assiniboine rivers in Rupert's Land, 
North America. It extended over a circular area, with a radius 
of 50 m. from Fort Garry. It was governed by a local council 
nominated by the Hudson's Bay Company. It ceased to exist 
when Rupert's Land was transferred to Canada in 1870. (2) A 
district of the North-west Territories, which was given definite 
existence by an act of the Dominion parliament in 187 5. Assini- 
boia extended from the western boundary of Manitoba (99 W. 
in 1875, and 101 25' W. in 1881) to ni° W., and from 
49 N. to 5 2 N. The name was a misnomer, as it barely 
touched the Assiniboine river. To the north of the district lay 
the district of Saskatchewan, so that when the two were united 
by the Dominion act of 1905, they were somewhat changed in 
boundaries and the name Saskatchewan was given to the new 
province. The derivation of Assiniboia is from two Ojibway 
words, assini meaning a stone, and the termination " to cook 
, by roasting "; from these came a name first applied to a Dakota 
or Sioux tribe living on the Upper Red river; afterwards when 
this tribe separated from the Dakotas, its name was given to the 
branch of the Red river which the tribe visited, the river being 
known as the Assiniboine and the tribe as Assiniboin. 

ASSINIBOIN (" Stone-Cookers "), a tribe of North American 
Indians of Siouan stock. Their name (see above) is said to refer 
to their method of boiling water by dropping red-hot stones into 
it. Their former range was between the Missouri and the middle 
Saskatchewan on both sides of the Canadian frontier. In 1904 



there were 1234 in the United States, all on reservations in 
Montana; and in 1902 there were 1371 in Canada. 

See Handbook of American Indians, ed. F. W. Hodge (Washington, 
io°7)- 

ASSISE (from the Fr., derived from Lat. assidere, to sit beside) , 
a geological term for two or more beds of rock united by the 
occurrence of the same characteristic species or genera. 

ASSISI (anc. Asisium), a town and episcopal see of Umbria, 
Italy, in the province of Perugia, 15 m. E.S.E. by rail from the 
town of Perugia. Pop. (1901) town, 5338; commune, 17,240. 
The town occupies a fine position on a mountain (1345 ft. above 
sea-level) with a view over the valleys of the Tiber and Topino. 
It is mainly famous in connexion with St Francis, who was 
born here in 1182, and returned to die in 1226. The Franciscan 
monastery and the lower and upper church of St Francis were 
begun immediately after his canonization in 1228, and completed 
in 1253, being fine specimens of Gothic architecture. The crypt 
was added in 1818, when the sarcophagus containing his remains 
was discovered. The lower church contains frescoes by Cimabue, 
Giotto and others, the most famous of which are those over the 
high altar by Giotto, illustrating the vows of the Franciscan 
order; while the upper church has frescoes representing scenes 
from the life of St Francis (probably by Giotto and his con- 
temporaries) on the lower portion of the walls of the nave, and 
scenes from Old and New Testament history by pupils of Cimabue 
on the upper. The church of Santa Chiara (St Clare), the 
foundress of the Poor Clares, with its massive lateral buttresses, 
fine rose-window, and simple Gothic interior, was begun in 1257, 
four years after her death. It contains the tomb of the saint 
and 13th-century frescoes and pictures. Santa Maria Maggioce 
is also a good Gothic church. The cathedral (San Rufmo) has a 
fine facade with three rose-windows of 1140; the interior was 
modernized in 1572. The town is dominated by the medieval 
castle (1655 ft.), built by Cardinal Albornoz (1367) and added 
to by Popes Pius II. and Paul III. Two miles to the east in 
a ravine below Monte Subasio is the hermitage delle Carceri 
(2300 ft.), partly built, partly cut out of the solid rock, given to 
St Francis by Benedictine monks as a place of retirement. 
Below the town to the south-west, close to the station, is the large 
pilgrimage church of Santa Maria degli Angeli, begun in 1569 
by Pope Pius V., with Vignpla as architect; but not completed 
until 1640. It contains the original oratory of St Francis and 
the cell in which he died. Adjacent is the garden in which the 
saint's thornless roses bloom in May. Half a mile outside the 
town to the south-east is the convent of San Damiano, erected 
by St Francis, of which St Clare was first abbess. ... 

In the early middle ages Assisi was subject to the dukes of 
Spoleto; but in the nth century it seems to have been inde- 
pendent. It became involved, however, in the disputes of Guelphs 
and Ghibellines, and was frequently at war with Perugia. It 
was sacked by Perugia and the papal troops in 1442, and even 
after that continued to be the prey of factions. The place is 
now famous as a resort of pilgrims, and is also important for the 
history of Italian art. The poet Metastasio was born here in 

1698. .. , ■ ■ 

See L. Duff-Gordon, Assisi (" Mediaeval Towns " series, London, 
1900). For ancient history see Asisium. (T. As.) 

ASSIUT, or Siut, capital of a province of Upper Egypt of the 
same name, and the largest and best-built town in the Nile 
Valley south of Cairo, from which it is distant 248 m. by rail. 
The population rose from 32,000 in 1882 to 42,000 in 1900. 
Assiut stands near the west bank of the Nile across which, just 
below the town, is a barrage, completed in 1902, consisting of an 
open weir, 2733 ft. long, and over 100 bays or sluices, each 165 
ft. wide, which can be opened or closed at will. At the western 
end of the barrage begins the Ibrahimia canal, the feeder of the 
Bahr Yusuf, the largest irrigation canal of Egypt. The Ibra- 
himia canal is skirted by a magnificent embankment planted 
with shady trees leading from the river to the town. There are 
several bazaars, baths and handsome mosques, one noted for its 
lofty minaret, and here the American Presbyterian mission has 
established a college for both sexes. Assiut is famous for its red 
and black pottery and for ornamental wood and ivory work, 



ASSIZE-^ASSOCIATE 



783 



which find a ready market all over Egypt. It is one of the chief 
centres of the Copts. Here also is the northern terminus of the 
caravan route across the desert, which, passing through the 
Kharga oasis, goes south-west to Darfur. It is known as the 
Arbain, or forty days road, from the time occupied on the journey. 
Assiut (properly Asyut) is the successor of the ancient Lycopolis 
(Eg. Sioout), capital of the 13 th nome of Upper Egypt. Here 
were worshipped two canine gods (see Anubis), Ophols (Wepwoi) 
being the principal god of the city, while Anubis apparently 
presided over the necropolis. No ruins are visible, the mounds of 
the old city being for the most part hidden under modern 
buildings; but the slopes of the limestone hills behind it are 
pierced with an infinity of rock-cut tombs, some of which were 
large and decorated with sculptures, paintings and long inscrip- 
tions. The archaeological commission of the Description de 
VEgypte visited them in 1799, when the walls of many of the large 
tombs were still almost intact; in the first half of the 19th cen- 
tury (and to some extent later) an immense amount of destruction 
was caused by blasting for stone. Three of the tombs illustrate 
one of the darkest periods in Egypt's history, when the princes of 
Siut played a leading part in the struggle between Heracleopolis 
and Thebes (Dyns. IX.-XL); another, of the Xllth Dynasty, 
contains a remarkable inscription detailing the contracts made 
by the nomarch with the priests of the temples of Opho'is 
and Anubis for perpetual services at his tomb (see Breasted, 
Ancient Records of Egypt, Historical Documents, vol. i. pp. 
179, 258). Remains of the mummies of dogs and similar 
animals sacred to these deities are scattered among the debris 
on the hillside in abundance. Lycopolis was the birthplace 
of Plotinus, the founder of Neo-Platonism (a.d. 205-270). 
From the 4th century onwards its grottoes were the dwellings 
of Christian hermits, amongst whom John of Lycopolis was 
the most celebrated. (F. LI. G.) 

ASSIZE, or Assise (Lat. assidere, to sit beside; O. Fr. assire, 
to sit, assis, seated), a legal term, meaning literally a " session," 
but in fact, as Littleton has styled it, a nomen aequivocum, mean- 
ing sometimes a jury, sometimes the sittings of a court, and 
sometimes the ordinances of a court or assembly. 

It originally signified the form of trial by a jury of sixteen 
persons, which eventually superseded the barbarous judicial 
combat; this jury was named the grand assize and was sworn 
to determine the right of seisin of land (see Evidence). The 
grand assize was abolished in 1833; but the term assize is still 
applicable to the jury in criminal causes in Scotland. 

In the only sense in which the word is not now almost 
obsolete, assize means the periodical session of the judges of the 
High Court of Justice, held in the various counties of England, 
chiefly for the purposes of gaol delivery and trying causes at 
nisi prius. Previous to Magna Carta (1215) writs of assize had 
all to be tried at Westminster, or to await trial in the locality in 
which they had originated at the septennial circuit of the justices 
in eyre; but, by way of remedy for the great consequent delay 
and inconvenience, it was provided by this celebrated act that 
the assizes of tnort d'ancestor and novel disseisin should be tried 
annually by the judges in every county. By successive enact- 
ments, the civil jurisdiction of the justices of assize was extended, 
and the number of their sittings increased, till at last the necessity 
of repairing to Westminster for judgment in civil actions was 
almost obviated to country litigants by an act, passed in the reign 
of Edward I., which provided that the writ summoning the jury 
to Westminster should also appoint a time and place for hearing 
such causes within the county of their origin. The date of the 
alternative summons to Westminster was always subsequent to 
the former date, and so timed as to fall in the vacation preceding 
the Westminster term, and thus " Unless before'' or nisi prius, 
issues came to be dealt with by the judges of assize before the 
summons to Westminster could take effect. The nisi prius 
clause, however, was not then introduced for the first time. It 
occurs occasionally in writs of the reign of Henry III. The royal 
commissions to hold the assizes are — (1) general, (2) special. 
The general commission is issued twice a year to the judges of the 
High Court of Justice, and two judges are generally sent on each 



circuit. It covers commissions — (1) of oyer and terminer, by 
which they are empowered to deal with treasons, murders, 
felonies, &c. This is their largest commission ; (2) of nisi prius 
(q.v.); (3) of gaol delivery, which requires them to try every 
prisoner in gaol, for whatsoever offence committed; (4) of the 
peace, by which all justices must be present at their county 
assizes, or else suffer a fine. Special commissions are granted for 
inquest in certain causes and crimes. See also the articles 
Circuit; Jury. 

Assizes, in the sense of ordinances or enactments of a court or 
council of state, as the " assize of bread and ale," the " assize of 
Clarendon," the " assize of arms," are important in early eco- 
nomic history. As early as the reign of John the observance of 
the assisae vetialium was enforced, and for a period of 500 
years thereafter it was considered no unimportant part of the 
duties of the legislature to regulate by fixed prices, for the pro- 
tection of the lieges, the sale of bread, ale, fuel, &c. (see 
Adulteration). Sometimes in city charters the right to assize 
such articles is specially conceded. Regulations of this descrip- 
tion were beneficial in the repression of fraud and adulteration. 
Assizes are sometimes used in a wider legislative connexion by 
early chroniclers and historians — the " assisae of the realme," 
e.g. occasionally meaning the organic laws of the country. For 
the " assizes of Jerusalem " see Crusades. 

The term assize, Originally applying to an assembly or court, 
became transferred to actions before the court or the writs 
by which they were instituted. The following are the more 
important. 

Assize of darrien presentment, or last presentation, was a 
writ directed to the sheriff to summon an assize or jury to 
enquire who was the last patron that presented to a church 
then vacant, of which the plaintiff complained that he was 
deforced or unlawfully deprived by the defendant. It was 
abolished in 1833 and the action of quare impedit (q.v.) sub- 
stituted. But by the Common Law Procedure Act i860, no 
quare impedit can be brought, so that an action in the king's 
bench of the High Court was substituted for it. 

Assize of mort d'ancestor was a writ which lay where a plaintiff 
complained of an "abatement" or entry upon his freehold, 
effected by a stranger on the death of the plaintiff's father, 
mother, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, &c. It was abolished in 1833. 

Assize of novel disseisin was an action to recover lands of which 
the plaintiff had been " disseised " or dispossessed. It was 
abolished in 1833. See Pollock and Maitland, Hist. Eng. Law. 

Assize, clerk of, an officer "who writes all things judicially 
done by the justices of assizes in their circuits." He has charge 
of the commission, and takes recognizances, records, judgments 
and sentences, grants certificates of conviction, draws up orders, 
&c. By the Clerks of Assize Act 1869 he must either have 
been for three years a barrister or solicitor in actual practice, or, 
have acted for three years in the capacity of subordinate officer 
of a clerk of assize on circuit. 

United States. — There are no assize courts in the United States ; 
it is not the custom for supreme court judges of the states to go 
on circuit, but the judges of the United States Supreme Court do 
sit as members of the United States circuit courts in the several 
states periodically throughout the year. These courts are not 
assize courts, but are federal as distinguished from state courts, 
and have a special and limited jurisdiction. In the several states 
the highest court is divided into departments, in each of which 
there are courts presided over by supreme court judges residing 
in that department, thus avoiding the assize court or circuit- 
going system. 

ASSMANNSHAUSEN, a village of Germany, in the Prussian 
province of Hesse-Nassau, on the right bank of the Rhine and 
the railway from Frankfort-on-Main to Niederlahnstein. Pop. 
1 100. It has a lithium spring, baths and a Kurhaus, and is 
famed for its red wine (Assmannshduser), which resembles light 
Burgundy. From here a railway ascends the Niederwald. 

ASSOCIATE (Lat. associatus, from ad, to, and sociare to join).* 
one who is united with another, and so generally a companion, 
in particular a subordinate member of an institution or society, 



7 »4 



AS$O££AO20N OF lH>E AS 



as an associate of the Royal Academy, or one holding a degree in 
a learned society lower than that of fellow. In English law the 
associates are officers of the supreme court, whose duties are to 
draw up the list of causes, enter verdicts, hand the records to the 
parties, &c, and generally to conduct the business of trials. By 
the Judicature (Officers) Act 1879 they were styled masters of 
the supreme court, but the office is now amalgamated with the 
crown office department, of which they are clerks. 

ASSOCIATION OF IDEAS, or Mental Association, a term 
used in psychology to express the conditions : under which 
representations arise in consciousness, and also for a principle 
put forward by an important historical school of thinkers to 
account generally for the facts of mental life. Modern physio- 
logical psychology has so altered the approach to this subject 
that much of the older discussion has become antiquated, but it 
may be recapitulated here for historical purposes. 

Earlier Theory. — In the long and erudite Note D**, appended by 
Sir W. Hamilton to his edition of Reid's Works, many anticipations 
of modern statements on association are cited from the works of 
ancient or medieval thinkers; and for Aristotle, in particular the 
glory is claimed of having at once originated the doctrine and 
practically brought it to perfection. 1 As translated by Hamilton, 
but without his interpolations, the classical passage from the De 
Memoria et Reminiscentia runs as follows :— .,-.■■ 

" When, therefore, we accomplish an act of reminiscence, we pass, 
through a certain series of precursive movements, until we arrive 
at a movement on which the one we are in quest of is habitually 
consequent. Hence, too, it is that we hunt through the mental 
train, excogitating from the present or some other, and from similar 
or contrary or coadjacent. Through this process reminiscence takes 
place. For the movements are, in these cases, sometimes at the 
same time, sometimes parts of the same whole, so that the subsequent 
movement is already more than half accomplished." 

The passage is obscure, but it does at all events indicate the various 

§rinciples commonly termed contiguity, similarity and contrast, 
imilar principles are stated by Zeno the Stoic, by Epicurus (see 
Diog. Laert. vii. § 52, x. § 32), and by St Augustine {Confessions, 
x. e. 19). Aristotle's doctrine received a more of less intelligent 
expansion and illustration from the ancient commentators and the 
schoolmen, and in the still later period of transition from. the age 
of scholasticism to the time of modern philosophy, prolonged in the, 
works of some writers far into the 17th century, Hamilton adduced 
not a few philosoohical authorities who gave prominence to the 
general fact of mental association — the Spaniard Ludovieus Vives 
(1492-1540) especially being most exhaustive in his account of 
memory. 

In Hobbes's psychology much importance is assigned to what he 
called, variously, the succession, sequence, series, consequence, 
coherence, train of imaginations or thoughts in mental discourse. 
But not before Hume is there express question as to what are the 
distinct principles of association. John Locke had, meanwhile, 
introduced the phrase " Association of Ideas " as the title of a supple- 
mentary chapter incorporated with the fourth edition of his Essay, 
meaning it, however, only as the name of a principle accounting for 
the mental peculiarities of individuals, with, little or no suggestion 
of its general psychological import. Of this last Hump had the 
strongest impression; he reduced the principles of association to 
three — Resemblance, Contiguity in time and place, Cause and (or) 
Effect. Dugald Stewart put forward Resemblance, Contrariety, 
and Vicinity in time and place, though ha added, as another obvious 
principle, accidental coincidence in the sounds of words, and further 
noted three other cases of relation, namely, Cause and Effect, Means 
and End, Premisses and Conclusion, as holding among the trains of 
thought under circumstances of special attention. Reid, preceding 
Stewart, was rather disposed to make light df the subject of.associa- 
tion, vaguely remarking that.it seems to require no other original 
quality of mind but the power of habit to explain the spontaneous 
recurrence of trains of thinking, when become familiar by frequent 
repetition (Intellectual Powers, p. 387). 

Hamilton's own theory of mental reproduction, suggestion or 
association is a development, greatly modified, of the doctrine ex- 
pounded in his Lectures on Metaphysics (vol. ii. p. 223, seq.), which 
reduced the principles of association first to two — Simultaneity 
and Affinity, arid these further to one supreme principle of Redin- 
tegration or Totality. In the ultimate schertie he posits no less than 
four general laws of mental succession concerned in reproduction,:- 

(1) Associability or possible co-suggestion (all thoughts of the same 
mental subject are associable or capable of suggesting each other) ; 

(2) Repetition or direct remembrance (thoughts coidentical in 

, — . -, , , , . — 1 ,- — , — , , _„. 

'There are, however, distinct anticipations of, the theory in" 
Plato (Phaedo), as part of the doctrine of dyd^j'ijffis ; :tfyu9 ; we find 
the idea of Simmias recalled by the picture of Simmias (similarity), 
and that of a friend by the sight df the lyre on which he played 
(contiguity). • 



modification, but differing in time, tend to suggest each other); 
(3) Redintegration, direct remembrance or reminiscence (thoughts 
once Coidentical in time, are, however, different as mental modes, 
again suggestive of each other , and that in the mutual ordei - which 
they originally held) ; (4) Preference (thoughts are suggested not 
merely by force of the general subjective relation subsisting between 
themselves, they are also suggested in proportion to the relation of 
interest, from whatever source, in which they stand to the individual 
mind). Upon these follow, as special laws: — A, Primary — inodes 
of the laws of Repetition and Redintegration — (1) law of Similars 
(Analogy, Affinity); (2) law of Contrast; (3) law of Coadjacency 
(Cause and Effect, &c.) ; B, Secondary — modes of the law of Pre- 
ference, under the law of Possibility — (1) laws of Immediacy and 
Homogeneity ; (2) law of Facility. 

The Associationist School. — This name is given to the English 
psychologists who aimed at explaining all mental acquisitions, and 
the more complex mental processes generally under laws not other 
than those which have just been set out as determining simple 
reproduction. Hamilton, though professing to deal with reproduc- 
tion only, formulates a number of still more general laws of mental 
succession — rlaw of Succession, law of Variation, law of Dependence, 
law of Relativity or Integration (involving lawof Conditioned), and, 
finally, law of Intrinsic or Objective Relativity — as the highest to 
which human consciousness is subject; but it is in & sense quite 
different that the ' psychologists of ' the so-called Associationist 
School intend their appropriation of the principle or principles 
comrhonly signalized. As far as can be judged from imperfect 
records, tney were anticipated to some extent by the experientialists 
of ancient times, both Stoic and Epicurean (cf. Diogenes Laeftius, 
as above). In the modern period, Hobbes is the first thinker of 
permanent note to whom this doctrine may be traced. Though, 
in point of fact, he took anything but an exhaustive view of the 
phenomena of mental succession, yet, after dealing with trains of 
imagination, or what' he called mental discourse, he sought in the 
higher departments of intellect to explain reasoning as a discourse 
in words, dependent upon an arbitrary system of marks, each 
associated with, or standing for, a variety of imaginations; and, 
save for a general assertion that reasoning is a reckonings — otherwise, 
a -compounding and resolving— he had no other account of know- 
; ledge to: give. The whole emotional side of mind, or, in his language* 
the passions, he, in like manner, resolved into an expectation of 
consequences based on past experience ; of pleasures and .pains', of 
sense. Thus, though he made no serious attempt to justify his 
analysis in detail, he is undoubtedly to be classed with the assofcia- 
tionists of the next century. They, however, were wont to trace ; 
their psychological theory no further back than to Locke's Essay. 
Bishop Berkeley was driven to posit expressly a principle of sugges- 
tion or association in these terms: — " That one idea may suggest' 
another to the mind, it will suffice that they have been observed to 
go together; without any demonstration of the necessity of theiT! 
coexistence, or so much as knowing what it is that makes them so: to, 
coexist " (New Theory of Vision, § 25); and to, support the, obvious 
application of the principle . to the case of the sensations of sight 
and touch before him, he constantly urged that association of sound" 
and sense of language which the later school has always put in the 
foreground, whether as illustrating the principle in general or: in 
explanation of the supreme importance of language for knowledge. 
It was natural, then, that Hume, coming after Berkeley, and assum- 
ing Berkeley's results, though he reverted to the larger inquiry of 
Locke, should be more explicit in his reference to association; but 
he was original also, when he spoke of it as a " kind'of attraction 
which in the mental world will be found to have as extraordinary 
effects as in the natural, arid to show. itself in as many and. asjvarious 
forms " (Human Nature, i. 1, §'4). Other inquirers about the same' 
time conceived of association with this breadth of view, and set 
themselves to track, as psychologists, its effects in; detail. 

David Hartley in his Observations on Man, published in 1749) 
(eleven years after the Human Nature, and one year after the better- 
known Inquiry, of Hume), Opened the path for all the investigations 
of like nature that have been so characteristic of English psycho- 
logy. A physician by profession, he sought to combine with an 
elaborate theory of mental association a minutely detailed hypo- 
thesis as to the corresponding action of the nervous system, based 
upon the suggestion of a vibratory motion within the nerves thrown 
out by Newton in the last paragraph of the Principia. So far, how- 
ever, from promoting the acceptance of the psychological theory, 
this physical hypothesis proved to have rather the opposite effect, 
and it began to be dropped by Hartley's followers (as F. Priestley, in 
his abridged edition of the Observations, 1775) before it was seriously 
impugned from .without. When it is studied in the original, and 
not taken upon the report of hostile critics, who would not, or could 
not understand it, no little importance must still be accorded to the 
first attempt, not seldom a curiously felicitous one, to carry through 
that parallelism of the physical and psychical, which since then has 
come to count for more and more in the science of mind. Nor should' 
it be forgotten that Hartley himself, for all his paternal interest in the 
doctrine of vibrations, was careful to keep separate from its fortunes 
the cause of his other doctrine of mental association. Of this the point 
lay in no mere restatement, with new precision, of a principle of 
coherence among" ideas," but In its being tak°n as a clue by which' 



ASSOCIATION OF IDEAS 



785 



to follow the progressive development of the mind's powers. Hold- 
ing that mental states could be scientifically understood only as they 
were analysed, Hartley sought for a principle of synthesis to explain 
the complexity exhibited not only in trains of representative images, 
but alike in the most involved combinations of reasonings and (as 
Berkeley had seen) in the apparently simple phenomena of objective 
perception, as well as in the varied play of the emotions, or, again, 
in the manifold conscious adjustments of the motor system. One 
principle appeared to him sufficient for all, running, as enunciated 
for the simplest case, thus: " Any sensations A, B, C, &c, by being 
associated with one another a sufficient number of times, get such a 
power over the corresponding ideas (called by Hartley also vestiges, 
types, images) a, ft, c, &c, that any one of the sensations A, when 
impressed alone, shall be able to excite in the mind b, c, &c, the 
ideas of the rest." To render the principle applicable in the cases 
where the associated elements are neither sensations nor simple 
ideas of sensations, Hartley's first care was to determine the con- 
ditions under which states other than these simplest ones have their 
rise in the mind, becoming the matter of ever higher and higher 
combinations. The principle itself supplied the key to the difficulty, 
when coupled with the notion, already implied in Berkeley's investi- 
gations, of a coalescence of simple ideas of sensation into one complex 
idea, which may cease to bear any obvious relation to its constituents. 
So far from being content, like Hobbes, to make a rough generaliza- 
tion to all mind from the phenomena of developed memory, as if 
these might be straightway assumed, Hartley maae a point of 
referring them, in a subordinate place of their own, to his universal 
principle of mental synthesis. He expressly put forward the law of 
association, endued with such scope, as supplying what was wanting 
to Locke's doctrine in its more strictly psychological aspect, and 
thus marks by his work a distinct advance on the line of development 
of the experiential philosophy. 

The new doctrine received warm support from some, as Law and 
Priestley, who both, like Hume and Hartley himself, took the prin- 
ciple of association as having the like import for the science of mind 
that gravitation had acquired for the science of matter. The prin- 
ciple began also, if not always with direct reference to Hartley, yet, 
doubtless, owing to his impressive advocacy of it, to be applied 
systematically in special directions, as by Abraham Tucker (1768) 
to morals, and by Archibald Alison (1790) to aesthetics. Thomas 
Brown (d. 1820) subjected anew to discussion the question of theory. 
Hardly less unjust to Hartley than Reid or Stewart had been, and 
forward to proclaim all that was different in his own position, Brown 
must yet be ranked with the associationists before and after him 
for the prominence he assigned to the associative principle in sense- 
perception (what he called external affections of mind), and for his 
reference of all other mental states (internal affections) to the two 
generic capacities or susceptibilities of Simple and Relative Sugges- 
tion. He preferred the word Suggestion to Association, which seemed 
to him to imply some prior connecting process, whereof there was 
no evidence in many of the most important cases of suggestion, nor 
even, strictly speaking, in the case of contiguity in time where the 
term seemed least inapplicable. According to him, all that could 
be assumed was a general constitutional tendency of the mind to 
exist successively in states that have certain relations to each other, 
of itself only, and without any external cause or any influence 
previous to that operating at the moment of the suggestion. Brown's 
chief contribution to the general doctrine of mental association, 
besides what he did for the theory of perception, was, perhaps, his 
analysis of voluntary reminiscence and constructive imagination — 
faculties that appear at first sight to lie altogether beyond the ex- 
planatory range of the principle. In James Mill's Analysis of the 
Phenomena of tlie Human Mind (1829), the principle, much as 
Hartley had conceived it, was carried out, with characteristic 
consequence, over the psychological field. With a much enlarged 
and more varied conception of association, Alexander Bain re- 
executed the general psychological task, while Herbert Spencer 
revised the doctrine from the new point of view of the evolution- 
hypothesis. John Stuart Mill made only occasional excursions into 
the region of psychology proper, but sought, in his System of Logic 
(1843)^0 determine the conditions of objective truth from the point 
of view of the associationist theory, and, thus or otherwise being 
drawn into general philosophical discussion, spread wider than any 
one before him its repute. 

The Associationist School has been composed chiefly of British 
thinkers, but in France also it has had distinguished representatives. 
Of these it will suffice to mention Condillac, who professed to explain 
all knowledge from the single principle of association {liaison) of 
ideas, operating through a previous association with signs, verbal 
or other. In Germany, before the time of Kant, mental association 
svas generally treated in the traditional manner, as by Wolff. Kant's 
inquiry into the foundations of knowledge, agreeing in its genera) 
purport with Locke's, however it differed in its critical procedure, 
brought him face to face with the newer doctrine that had been 
grafted on Locke's philosophy ; and to account for the fact Of syn- 
thesis in cognition, in express opposition to associationism, as 
represented by Hume, was, in truth, his prime object, starting, as 
he did, from the assumption that there was that in knowledge which 
no mere association of experiences could explain. To the extent, 
therefore, that his influence prevailed, all inquiries made by the 



English associationists were discounted in Germany. Notwith- 
standing, under the very shadow of his authority a corresponding, if 
not related, movement was initiated by J. F. Herbart. Peculiar, 
and widely different from anything conceived by the associatipnists, 
as Herbart's metaphysical opinions were, h'e was at one with them, 
and at variance with Kant, in assigning fundamental importance to 
the psychological investigation of the development of consciousness, 
nor was his conception of the laws determining the interaction and 
flow of mental presentations and representations, when taken in its 
bare psychological import, essentially different from theirs. In F. E. 
Beneke's psychology also, and in more recent inquiries conducted 
mainly by physiologists, mental association has been understood in 
its wider scope, as a general principle of explanation. 

The associationists differ not a little among themselves in the 
statement of their principle, or, when they adduce several principles, 
in their conception of the relative importance of these. Hartley 
took account only of Contiguity, or the repetition of impressions 
synchronous or immediately successive; the like is true of James 
Mill, though, incidentally, he made an express attempt to resolve 
the received principle of Similarity, and through this the other 
principle of Contrast, into his fundamental law — law of Frequency, 
as he sometimes called it, because upon frequency, in conjunction 
with vividness of impressions, the strength of association, in his 
view, depended. In a sense of his own, Brown also, while accepting 
the common Aristotelian enumeration of principles, inclined to the 
opinion that " all suggestion may be found to depend on prior co- 
existence, or at least on such proximity as is itself very probably a 
modification of coexistence," provided account be taken of " the 
influence of emotions and other feelings that are very different 
from ideas, as when an analogous object suggests an analogous 
object by the influence of an emotion which each separately may 
have produced before, and which is, therefore, common to both. ' 
To the contrary effect, Spencer maintained that the fundamental 
law of all mental association is that presentations aggregate or 
cohere with their like in past experience, and that, besides this law, 
there is in strictness no other, all further phenomena of association 
being incidental. Thus in particular, he would have explained 
association by Contiguity as due to the circumstance of imperfect 
assimilation of the present to the past in consciousness. A. Bain 
regarded Contiguity and Similarity logically, as perfectly distinct 
principles, though in actual psychological occurrence blending 
intimately with each other, contiguous trains being started by a first 
(it may be, implicit) representation through Similarity, while the 
express assimilation of present to "past in consciousness is always, 
or tends to be, followed by the revival of what was presented in 
contiguity with that past. 

The highest, philosophical interest, as distinguished from that 
which is more strictly psychological, attaches to the mode of mental 
association called Inseparable. The coalescence of mental states 
noted by Hartley, as it had been assumed by Berkeley, was farther 
formulated by James Mill, in these terms :— 

" Some ideas are by frequency and strength of association so 
closely combined that they cannot be separated ; if one exists, the 
other exists along with it in spite, of whatever effort we make to 
disjoin them." — (Analysis of the Human Mind, 2nd ed. vol. i.'p. 93.) 

J. S. Mill's statement is more guarded and particular:— 

' When two phenomena have been very often experienced in con- 
junction, and have not, in any single instance, occurred separately 
either in experience or in thought, there is produced between them 
what has been called inseparable, or, less correctly, indissoluble, 
association; by which is not meant that the association must 
inevitably last to the end of life — • that no subsequent experience or 
process of thought can possibly avail to dissolve it; but only that 
as long as no such experience or process of thought has taken place, 
the association is irresistible; it is impossible for us to think the 
one thing disjoined from the other. "- — (Examination of Hamilton's 
Philosophy, 2nd ed. p. 191.) 

It is chiefly by J. S. Mill that the philosophical application of the 
principle has been made. The first and most obvious application 
is to so-called necessary truths— such, namely, as are not merely 
analytic judgments but involve a synthesis of distinct notions. 
Again, the same thinker sought to prove Inseparable Association 
the ground of belief in an external objective world. The former 
application, especially, is facilitated, when the experience through 
which the association is supposed to be constituted is understood 
as cumulative in the race, and transmissible as original endowment 
to individuals—endowment that may be expressed either, subjec- 
tively, as latent intelligence, or, objectively, as fixed nervous 
connexions. Spencer, as before suggested, is the author of this 
extended view of mental association. 

Modem Criticism. — Of recent years the associationist theory has 
been subjected to searching criticism, and it has been maintained 
by many writers that the laws are both unsatisfactorily expressed 
and insufficient to explain the facts. Among the most vigorous and 
comprehensive of these investigations is that of F. H. Bradley in his 
Principles of Logic (1883). Having admitted the psychological fact 
of mental association, he attacks the theories of Mill and Bam 
primarily on the ground that they purport to give an account of 
mental life as a whole, a metaphysical doctrine of existence. Accord- 
ing to this doctrine, mental activity is ultimately reducible to- 



y86 



ASSONANCE 



particular feelings, impressions, ideas, which are disparate and un- 
connected, until chance Association brings them together. On this 
assumption the laws of Association naturally emerge in the following 
form: — (l) The law of Contiguity. — "Actions, sensations and states 
of feeling, occurring together or in close connexion, tend to grow 
together, or cohere, in such a way that, when any one of them is 
afterwards presented to the mind, the others are apt to be brought 
up in idea " (A. Bain, Senses and Intellect, p. 327). (2) The law of 
Similarity. — " Present actions, sensation, thoughts or emotions tend 
to revive their like among previous impressions or states " (A. Bain, 
ibid. 457. Compare J. S. Mill, Logic, ii. p. 440, 9th ed.). The 
fundamental objection to (1) is that ideas and impressions once 
experienced do not recur; they are particular existences, and, as 
such, do not persevere to recur or be presented. So Mill is wrong 
in speaking of two impressions being " frequently experienced." 
Bradley claims thus to reduce the law to " When we have experienced 
(or even thought of) several pairs of impressions (simultaneous or 
successive), which pairs are like one another; then whenever an 
idea occurs which is like all the impressions on one side of these pairs, 
it tends to excite an idea which is like all the impressions on the other 
side." This statement is destructive of the title of the law, because 
it appears that what were contiguous (the impressions) are not 
associated, and what are associated (the ideas) were not contiguous; 
in other words, the association is not due to contiguity at all. 

Proceeding to the law of Similarity (which in Mill's view is at the 
back of association by contiguity), and having made a similar 
criticism of its phrasing, Bradley maintains that it involves an even 
greater absurdity; if two ideas are to be recognized as similar, 
they must both be present in the rriind ; if one is to call up the othfcr, 
one must be absent. To the obvious reply that the similarity is 
recognized ex post facto, and not while the former idea is being called 
up, Bradley replies simply that such a view reduces the law to the 
mere statement of a phenomenon and deprives it of any explanatory 
value, though he hardly makes it clear in what sense this necessarily 
invalidates the law from a psychological point of view. He further 
points out with greater force that in point of fact mere similarity 
is not the basis of ordinary cases of mental reproduction, inasmuch 
as in any given instance there is more difference than similarity 
between the ideas associated. 

Bradley himself bases association on identity plus contiguity: — - 
" Any part of a single state of mind tends, if reproduced, to re-instate 
the remainder," or " any element tends to reproduce those elements 
with which it has formed one state of mind." This law he calls by 
the name " redintegration," understood, of course, in a sense different 
from that in which Hamilton used it. The radical difference between 
this law and those of Mill and Bain is that it deals not with particular 
units of thoughts but with universals or identity between individuals. 
In any example of such reproduction the universal appears in a 
particular form which is more or less different from that in which it 
originally existed. 

Psychophysical Researches. — Bradley's discussion deals with the 
subject purely from the metaphysical side, and the total result 
practically is that association occurs only between universals. From 
the point of view of empirical psychologists Bradley's results are 
open to the charge which he made against those who impugned his 
view of the law of similarity, namely that they are merely a state- 
ment — -not in any real sense an explanation. The relation between 
the mental and the physical phenomena of association has occupied 
the attention of all the leading psychologists (see Psychology). 
William James holds that association is of " objects " not of " ideas," 
is between "things thought of" — so far as the word stands for an 
effect. " So far as it stands for a cause it is between processes in 
the brain." Dealing with the law of Contiguity he says that the 
" most natural way of accounting for it is to conceive it as a result 
of the laws of habit in the nervous system ; in other words to ascribe 
it to a physiological cause." Association is.thus due to the fact that 
when a nerve current has once passed by a given way, it will pass 
more easily by that way in future; and this fact is a physical fact. 
He further seeks to maintain the important deduction that the only 
primary or ultimate law of association is that of neural habit. 

The objections to the associationist theory are summed up by 
Ci. F. Stout {Analytic Psychol., vol. ii. pp. 47 seq.) under three heads. 
Of these the first is that the theory as stated, e.g. by Bain, lays far 
(00 much stress on the mere connexion of elements hitherto entirely 
separate; whereas, in fact, every new mental state or synthesis 
consists in the development or modification of a pre-existing state or 
psychic whole. Secondly, it is quite false to regard an association as 
merely an aggregate of disparate units; in fact, the form of the new 
idea is quite as important as the elements which it comprises. 
Thirdly, the phraseology used by the associationists seems to assume 
that the parts that go to form the whole retain their identity un- 
impaired; in fact, each part or element is ipso facto modified by the 
very fact of its entering into such combination. 

The experimental methods now in vogue have to a large extent 
removed the discussion of the whole subject of association of ideas, 
depending in the case of the older writers on introspection, into a new 
sphere. In such a work as E. B. Titchener's Experimental Psychology 
(1905), association is treated as a branch of the study of mental 
reactions, of which association reactions are one division. 

Bibliography. — See Psychology; and the works of Bradley, 



Stout, and James, above quoted, and general works on psychology: 
articles in Mind (passim); A. Bain, Senses and Intellect (4th ed-, 
1894), and in Mind, xii. (1887) pp. 237-249; John Watson, An 
Outline of Philosophy (1898); H. Hoffding, Hist, of Mod. Philos. 
(Eng. trans., Lond., 1900), Psychologie in Umrissen auf Grundlage 
der Erfahrung (2nd ed., Leipzig, 1893); Jas. Sully, The Human 
Mind (1892), and Outlines of Psych. (Lond., 1892); E. B. Titchener, 
Outline of Psych. (New York, 1896), and in his trans, of O. Kiilpe's 
Outlines of Psych. (New York, 1895,); Jas. Ward in Mind, viii. 
(1883), xii. (1887), new series ii. (1893), iii. (1894); G. T. Ladd, 
Psychology, Descriptive and Explanatory (Lond., 1894); C. L. C. 
Morgan, Introd. to Comparative Psych. (Lond., 1894) ; W. Wundt, 
Princip. of Physiol. Psych. (Eng. trans., 1904), Human and Animal 
Psych. (Eng. trans., 1894), pp. 282-307; Outlines of Psych. (Eng. 
trans., 1897); E. Claparede, L' Association des idees (1903). For 
associationism in Greek philosophy see J. I. Beare, Greek Theories 
of Elementary Cognition (Oxford, 1906), part iii. §§ 14, 43 seq. 

1 ASSONANCE (from Lat. adsonare or assonare, to sound to 01 
answer to), a term defined, in its prosodical sense, as " the 
corresponding or riming of one word with another in the accented 
vowel and those which follow it, but not in the consonants " 
(New English Dictionary, Oxford). In other words, assonance 
is an improper or imperfect form of rhyme, in which the ear is 
satisfied with the incomplete identity of sound which the vowel 
gives without the aid of consonants. Much rustic or popular 
verse in England is satisfied with assonance, as in such cases as 
" And pray who gave thee that jolly red nose? 
Cinnamon, Ginger, Nutmeg and Cloves," 

where the agreement between the two o's permits the ear to 
neglect the discord between 5 and v. But in English these 
instances are the result of carelessness or blunted ear. It is not 
so in several literatures, such as in Spanish, where assonance is 
systematically cultivated as a literary ornament. It is an error 
to confound alliteration, — which results from the close juxta- 
position of words beginning with the same sound or letter, — and 
assonance, which is the repetition of the same vowel-sound in a 
syllable at points where the ear expects a rhyme. The latter is 
a more complicated and less primitive employment of artifice 
than the former, although they have often been used to intensify 
the effect of each other in a single couplet. Assonance appears, 
nevertheless, to have preceded rhyme in several of the European 
languages, and to have led the way towards it. It is particularly 
observable in the French poetry which was composed before tlje 
1 2th century, and it reached its highest point in the " Chanson 
de Roland," where the sections are distinguished by the fact that 
all the lines in a laisse or stanza close with the same vowel-sound. 
When the ear of the French became more delicate, and pure 
rhyme was introduced, about the year n 20, assonance almost 
immediately retired before it and was employed no more, until 
recent years, when several French poets have re-introduced 
assonance, in order to widen the scope of their effects of sound. 
It held its place longer in Provencal and some other Romance 
literatures, while in Spanish it has retained its absolute authority 
over rhyme to the present day. It has been observed that in the 
Romance languages the ear prefers the correspondence of vowels, 
while in the Teutonic languages the preference is given to 
consonants. This distinction is felt most strongly in Spanish, 
where the satisfaction in rimas asonantes is expressed no less in 
the most elaborate works of the poets and dramatists than in 
the rough ballads of the people. The nature of the language here 
permits the full value of the corresponding vowel-sounds to be 
appreciated, whereas in English — and even in German, where, 
however, a great deal of assonant poetry exists — the divergence 
of the consonants easily veils or blunts the similarity of sound. 
Various German poets of high merit, and in particular Tieck 
and Heine, have endeavoured to obviate this difficulty, but with- 
out complete success. Occasionally they endeavour, as English 
rhymers have done, to mix pure rhyme with assonance, but the 
result of this in almost all cases is that the assonances, &c, 
which make a less strenuous appeal to the ear, are drowned and 
lost in the stress of the pure rhymes. Like alliteration, assonance 
is a very frequent and very effective ornament of prose style, but 
such correspondence in vowel-sound is usually accidental and 
involuntary, an instinctive employment of the skill of the writer. 
To introduce it with a purpose, as of course must be done in 



ASSUAN— ASSUR 



787 



poetry, has always been held to be a most dangerous, practice 
in prose. Assonance as a conscious art, in fact, is scarcely 
recognized as legitimate in English literature. (E. G.) 

ASSUAN, or Aswan, a town of Upper Egypt on the east bank 
of the Nile, facing Elephantine Island below the First Cataract, 
and 590 m. S. of Cairo by rail. It is the capital of a province of 
the same name — the southernmost province of Egypt. Popula- 
tion (1907) 16,128. The principal buildings are along the river 
front, where a broad embankment has been built. Popular 
among Europeans as a winter health resort and tourist centre, 
Assuan is provided with large modern hotels (one situated on 
Elephantine Island), and there is an English church. South-east 
of the railway station are the ruins of a temple built by Ptolemy 
Euergetes, and still farther south are the famous granite quarries 
of Syene. On Elephantine Island are an ancient nilometer and 
other remains, including a granite gateway built under Alexander 
the Great at the temple of the local ram-headed god Chnubis or 
Chnumis (Eg. Khnum), perhaps on account of his connexion 
with Ammon (q.v.) ; two small but very beautiful temples of the 
XVIII th Dynasty were destroyed there about 1820. In the hill 
on the opposite side of the river are tombs of the Vlth to Xllth 
dynasties, opened by Lord Grenfcll in 1 885-1886. The inscrip- 
tions show that they belonged to frontier-prefects whose ex- 
peditions into Nubia, &c, are recorded in them. Three and a 
half miles above the town, at the beginning of the Cataract, the 
Assuan Dam stretches across the Nile. This great engineering 
work was finished in December 1902 (see Irrigation: Egypt; 
and Nile). Above the dam the Nile presents the appearance of 
a vast lake. Consequent on the rise of the water-level several 
islands have been wholly and others partly submerged, among 
the latter Philae (q.v.). On the east bank opposite Philae is the 
village of Shellal, southern terminus of the Egyptian railway 
system and the starting point of steamers for the Sudan. 

In ancient times the chief city, called Yeb, capital of the 
frontier nome, the first of the Upper Country, was on the island 
of Elephantine, guarding the entrance to Egypt. But, owing to 
the cataract, the main route for traffic with the south was by 
land along the eastern shore. Here, near the granite quarries — 
whence was obtained the material for many magnificent monu- 
ments — there grew up another city, at first dependent on' and 
afterwards successor to the island town. This city was called 
Swan, the Mart, whence came the Greek Syene and Arabic 
Aswan. Syene is twice mentioned (as Seveneh) in the prophecies 
of Ezekiel, and papyri, discovered on the island, and dated in 
the reigns of Artaxerxes and Darius II. (464-404 B.C.), reveal 
the existence of a colony of Jews, with a temple to Yahu ( Yahweh, 
Jehovah), which had been founded at some time before the con- 
quest of Egypt by Cambyses in 523 b.c. They also mention the 
great frontier garrison against the Ethiopians, referred to by 
Herodotus. Syene was one of the bases used by Eratosthenes 
in his calculations for the measurement of the earth. In Roman 
times Syene was strongly garrisoned to resist the attacks of the 
desert tribes. Thither, in virtual banishment, Juvenal was sent 
as prefect by Domitian. In the early days of Christianity the 
town became the seat of a bishopric, and numerous ruins of 
Coptic convents are in the neighbourhood. Syene appears also 
to have flourished under its first Arab rulers, but in the 12th 
century was raided and ruined by Bedouin and Nubian tribes. 
On the conquest of Egypt by the Turks in the 16th century, 
Selim I. placed a garrison here, from whom, in part, the present 
townsmen descend. As the southern frontier town of Egypt 
proper, Assuan in times of peace was the entrepot of a consider- 
able trade with the Sudan and Abyssinia, and in 1880 its trade 
was valued at £2,000,000 annually. During the Mahdia (1884- 
1898) Assuan was strongly garrisoned by Egyptian and British 
troops. Since the defeat of the khalifa at Omdurma?. and the 
fixing (1899) of the Egyptian frontier farther south, the military 
value of Assuan has declined. 

For the Jewish colony see A. H. Sayce and A. E. Cowley, Aramaic 
Papyri discovered at Assuan (Oxford, 1906); E. Sachau, Drei 
Aramdische papyrus- Urkunden cus Elephantine (Berlin, 1907). 
For the dam see W. Willcocks, The Nile Reservoir Dam at Assuan 
(London, 1901). (F. Ll. G.) 



ASSUMPSIT (" he has undertaken," from Lat. assumere), a 
word applied to an action for the recovery of damages by reason 
of the breach or non-performance of a simple contract, either 
express or implied, and whether made orally or in writing. 
Assumpsit was the word always used in pleadings by the plaintiff 
to set forth the defendant's undertaking or promise, hence the 
name of the action. Claims in actions of assumpsit were ordi- 
narily divided into (a) common or indebitatus assumpsit, brought 
usually on an implied promise, and (b) special assumpsit, founded 
on an express promise. Assumpsit as a form of action became 
obsolete after the passing of the Judicature Acts 1873 and 1875. 
(See further Contract; Pleading and Tort.) 

ASSUMPTION, FEAST OF. The feast of the " Assumption of 
the blessed Virgin Mary " (Lat. festum assumptionis, dormitionis, 
depositionis, pausationis B. V. M. ; Gr. Koifiriais or ava\r)]pis rrjs 
BeoroKov) is a festival of the Christian Church celebrated on the 
15th of August, in commemoration of the miraculous ascent into 
heaven of the mother of Christ. The belief on which this festival 
rests has its origin in apocryphal sources, such as the els rijv 
KoinriaLV tt)s virepayias Beawoivrjs ascribed to the Apostle John, 
and the de transitu Mariae, assigned to Melito, bishop of Sardis, 
but actually written about a.d. 400. Pope Gelasius I. (492-496) 
included them in the list of apocryphal books condemned by the 
Decretum de libris recipiendis et non recipiendis; but they were 
accepted as authentic by the pseudo-Dionysius {de nominbus 
divinis c. 3), whose writings date probably from the 5th century, 
and by Gregory of Tours (d. 593 or 594). The latter in his De 
gloria martyrum (i. 4) gives the following account of the miracle: 
As all the Apostles were watching round the dying Mary, Jesus 
appeared with His angels and committed the soul of His Mother 
to the Archangel Michael. Next day, as they were carrying the 
body to the grave, Christ again appeared and carried it with Him 
in a cloud to heaven, where it was reunited with the soul. This 
story is much amplified in the account given by St John of 
Damascus in the homilies In dormitionem Mariae, which are still 
read in the Roman Church as the lesson during the octave of the 
feast. According to this the patriarchs and Adam and Eve 
also appear at the death-bed, to praise their daughter, through 
whom they had been rescued from the curse of God; a Jew who 
touches the body loses both his hands, which are restored to 
him by the Apostles; and the body lies three days in the grave 
without corruption before it is taken up into heaven. 

The festival is first mentioned by St Andrew of Crete (c. 650), 
and, according to the Byzantine historian Nicephorus Callistus 
(Hist. Eccles. xvii. 28), was first instituted by the Emperor 
Maurice in a.d. 582. From the East it was borrowed by Rome, 
where there is evidence of its existence so early as the 7th century. 
In the Gallican Church it was only adopted at the same time as 
the Roman liturgy. But though the festival thus became in- 
corporated in the regular usage of the Western Church, the belief 
in the resurrection and bodily assumption of the Virgin has 
never been defined as a dogma and remains a " pious opinion," 
which the faithful may reject without imperilling their immortal 
souls, though not apparently — to quote Melchior Cano (De Locis 
Theolog. xii. 10) — without " insolent temerity," since such rejec- 
tion would be contrary to the common agreement of the Church. 
By the reformed Churches, including the Church of England, 
the festival is not observed, having been rejected at the Reforma 
tion as being neither primitive nor founded upon any " certain 
warrant of Holy Scripture." 

See Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklopadie (ed. 3), s. " Maria " ; Mgr.L. 
Duchesne, Christian Worship (Eng. trans., London, 1904); Wetzer 
and Welte, Kirchenlexikon, s. "Marienfeste " ; The Catholic Encyclo- 
paedia (London and New York, 1907, &c), s. " Apocrypha," 
" Assumption." 

ASSUR (Auth. Vers. Asshur), a Hebrew name, occurring in 
many passages of the Old Testament, for the land and dominion 
of Assyria. 1 The country of Assyria, which in the Assyro-Baby- 
lonian literature is known as mat Assur (ki), " land of Assur," 
took its name from the ancient city of Assur, situated at the 

1 The name Assur is not connected with the Asshur of I Chron.ii. 24 ; 
ii. 45. Note that it is customary to spell the god-name Asur and the 
country-name Assur. 



788 



ASSUR 



southern extremity of Assyria proper, whose territory, soon after 
the first Assyrian settlement, was bounded on the N. by the 
Zagros mountain range in what is now Kurdistan and on the S. 
by the lower Zab river. The kingdom of Assyria, which was the 
outgrowth of the primitive settlement on the site of the city of 
Assur, was developed by a probably gradual process of coloniza- 
tion in the rich vales of the middle Tigris region, a district 
watered by the Tigris itself and also by several tributary streams, 
the chief of which was the lower Zab. 1 

It seems quite evident that the city of Assur was originally 
founded by Semites from Babylonia at quite an early, but as 
yet undetermined date. In the prologue to the law-code of the 
great Babylonian monarch Khammurabi (c. 2250 B.C.), the cities 
of Nineveh and Assur are both mentioned as coming under that 
king's beneficent influence. Assur is there called A-usar(ki) , 2 
in which combination the ending -ki ("land territory") proves 
that even at that early period there was a province of Assur more 
extensive than the city proper. It is probable that this non- 
Semitic form A-usar means "well watered region," 3 a most 
appropriate designation for the river settlements of Assyria. 
The problem as to the meaning of the name Assur is rendered 
all the more confusing by the fact that the city and land are also 
called Assures well as A-usar) ,bothby the Khammurabi records 4 
and generally in the later Assyrian literature. Furthermore, 
the god- and country-name Assur also occurs at a late date in 
Assyrian literature in the forms An-Sar, A n- sar (ki), which form 6 
was presumably read Assur. In the Creation tablet, the heavens 
personified collectively were indicated by this term An-sar, 
"host of heaven," in contradistinction to the earth = Ki-sar, 
" host of earth." In view of this fact, it seems highly probable 
that the late writing An-sar for Assur was a more or less conscious 
attempt on the part of the Assyrian scribes to identify the 
peculiarly Assyrian deity Asur (see Assur, the god, below) with 
the Creation deity An-sar. On the other hand, there is an epithet 
A Sir or Ashir ("overseer") applied to several gods and particu- 
larly to the deity ASur, a fact which introduced a third element 
of confusion into the discussion of the name Assur. It is probable 
then that there is a triple popular etymology in the various forms 
of writing the name AsSur; viz. A-usar, 6 An-Sar and the stem 
aiaru, all of which is quite in harmony with the methods 
followed by the ancient Assyro-Babylonian philologists 7 

See also A. H. Layard, Discoveries in the Ruins of Nineveh and 
Babylon (1853); G. Smith, Assyrian Discoveries (1875); R. W. 
Rogers, History of Babylonia and Assyria, i. 297; ii. 13; ii. 30,76, 
102; J. F. M'Curdy, History, Prophecy and the Monuments, §§ 74, 
171 f., 247, 258, 283; 57, 59 f. (on the god). (J. D. Pr.) 

ASSUR, the primitive capital of Assyria, now represented by 
the mounds of Kaleh Sherghat (Qal'at Shergat) on the west bank 
of the Tigris, nearly midway between the Upper and Lower Zab. 
It is still doubtful (see discussion on the name in the preceding 
article) whether the national god of Assyria took his name from 
that of the city or whether the converse was the case. It is 
most probable, however, that it was the city which was deified 
(see Sayce, Religion of Ancient Egypt and Babylonia, 1902, pp. 
366, 367). Sir A. H. Layard, through his assistant Hormuzd 
Rassam, devoted two or three days to excavating on the site, 
but owing to the want" of pasturage and the fear of Bedouin 
attacks he left the spot after finding a broken clay cylinder 

1 Cf. Rassam, Asshur and the Land of Nimrod, 250-251, and many 
other works. 

2 Robert Harper, Code of Hammurabi, pp. 6-7, lines 55-58. 

5 Thus already Delitzsch, Wo lag das Parodies? p. 252. The 
element a means " water," and in u-sar it is probable that u also 
means " water," while sir is " park, district." See Prince, Materials 
for a Sumerian Lexicon, s.v. usar. 

1 The name appears as A$-sur(ki) and Ai-iu-ur(ki). See King, 
Letters and Inscriptions of Hammurabi, iv, p. 23, obv. 27 ; and Nagel, 
Beitrage zur Assyriologie, iv. p. 404; also Cun. Texts from Bab. 
Tablets, vi. pi. 19, line 7. 

' Meissner-Rost, Bauinschrift Sanheribs, K. 5413a; K. 1306, 
rev. 16. 

* See on this entire subject, Morris Jastrow, Jr., Journal Amer. 
Orient. Soc, xxiv. pp. 282-311; also Die Religion Bab. u. Assyr., 
pp. 207 ff. 

' On the philological methods of the ancient Babylonian priest- 
hood, see Prince, Materials for a Sumerian Lexicon, Introduction. 



containing the annals of Tiglath-Pileser I., and for many years 
no subsequent efforts were made to explore it. In 1 904, however, 
a German expedition under Dr W. Andrae began systematic 
excavations, which have led to important ' results. The city 
originally grew up round the great temple of the god Assur, 
the foundation of which was ascribed to the High-priest Uspia. 
For many centuries Assur and the surrounding district, which 
came accordingly to be called the land of Assur (Assyria), were 
governed by high-priests under the suzerainty of Babylonia. 
With the decay of the Babylonian power the high-priests suc- 
ceeded in making themselves independent kings, and Assur 
became the capital of an important kingdom. It was already 
surrounded by a wall of crude brick, which rested on stone 
foundations and was strengthened at certain points by courses of 
burnt brick. A deep moat was dug outside it by Tukulti-In- 
aristi or Tukulti-Masu (about 1270 B.C.), and it was further 
defended on the land side by a salkhu or outwork. In the 1 5th 
century B.C. it was considerably extended to the south in order 
to include a " new town " which had grown up there. The wall 
was pierced by " the gate of Assur," " the gate of the Sun-god," 
" the gate of the Tigris," &c, and on the river side was a quay 
of burnt brick and limestone cemented with bitumen. The 
temples were in the northern part of the city, together with 
their lofty towers, one of which has been excavated. Besides 
the temple of Assur there was another great temple dedicated to 
Anu and Hadad, as well as the smaller sanctuaries of Bel, Ishtar, 
Merodach and other deities. After the rise of the kingdom, 
palaces were erected separate from the temples; the sites of 
those of Hadad-nirari I., Shalmaneser I., and Assur-nazir-pal 
have been discovered by the German excavators, and about a 
dozen more are referred to in the inscriptions. Even after the 
rise of Nineveh as the capital of the kingdom and the seat of the 
civil power, Assur continued to be the religious centre of the 
country, where the king was called on to reside when performing 
his priestly functions. The city survived the fall of Assyria, 
and extensive buildings as well as tombs of the Parthian age 
have been found upon the site. 

See Mitteilungen der detUschen Orient-Gesellschaft (1904-1906). 

(A. H. S.) 

ASSUR, Asur, or Ashur, the chief god of Assyria, was origin- 
ally the patron deity of the city of Assur on the Tigris, the ancient 
capital of Assyria from which as a centre the authority of the 
patesis (as the rulers were at first called) spread in various direc- 
tions. The history of Assyria (q.v.) can now be traced back 
approximately to 2500 B.C., though it does not rise to political 
prominence until c. 2000 B.C. The name of the god is identical 
with that of the city, though an older form A-shir, signifying 
" leader," suggests that a differentiation between the god and 
the city was at one time attempted. Though the origin of the 
form Ashur (or Assur) is not certain, it is probable that the name 
of the god is older than that of the city (see discussion on the 
name above) . 

The title Ashir was given to various gods in the south, as 
Marduk and Nebo, and there is every reason to believe that it 
represents a direct transfer with the intent to emphasize that 
Assur is the " leader " or head of the pantheon of the north. 
He is in fact to all intents and purposes of the north. Originally 
like Marduk a solar deity with the winged disk — the disk always 
typifying the sun 8 — as his symbol, he becomes as Assyria develops 
into a military power a god of war, indicated by the attachment 
of the figure of a man with a bow to the winged disk. While the 
cult of the other great gods and goddesses of Babylonia was 
transferred to Assyria, the worship of Assur so overshadowed 
that of the rest as to give the impression of a decided tendency 
towards the absorption of all divine powers by the one god. 
Indeed, the other gods, Sin, Shamash (Samas), Adad, Ninib and 
Nergal, and even Ea, take on the warlike traits of Assur in the 
epithets and descriptions given of them in the annals and 
votive inscriptions of Assyrian rulers to such an extent as to 
make them appear like little Assurs by the side of the great one. 
Marduk alone retains a large measure of his independence as a 
8 See Prince, Journ. Bibl. Lit., xxii. 35. 



ASSUR-BANI-PAL 



789 



concession on the part of the Assyrians to the traditions of the 
south, for which they always manifested a profound respect. 
Even during the period that the Assyrian monarchs exercised 
complete sway over the south, they rested their claims to the 
control of Babylonia on the approval of Marduk, and they or 
their representatives never failed to perform the ceremony of 
" taking the hand " of Mardtik, which was the formal method 
of assuming the throne in Babylonia. Apart from this conces- 
sion, it is Assur who pre-eminently presides over the fortunes of 
Assyria. 1 In his name, and with his approval as indicated by 
favourable omens, the Assyrian armies march to battle. His 
symbol is carried into the thick of the fray, so that the god is 
actually present to grant assistance in the crisis, and the victory 
is with becoming humility invariably ascribed by the kings 
" to the help of Assur." With the fall of Assyria the rule of 
Assur also comes to an end, whereas it is significant that the 
cult of the gods of Babylonia — more particularly of Marduk — 
survives for several centuries the loss of political independence 
through Cyrus' capture of Babylonia in 539 B.C. The name of 
Assur's temple at Assur, represented by the mounds of Kaleh 
Sherghat, was known as E-khar-sag-gal-kur-kurra, i.e. " House 
of the great mountain of the lands." Its exact site has been 
determined by excavations conducted at Kaleh Sherghat since 
1903 by the German Oriental Society. The name indicates the 
existence of the same conception regarding sacred edifices in 
Assyria as in Babylonia, where we find such names as E-Kur 
(" mountain house ") for the temple of Bel (q.v.) at Nippur, and 
E-Saggila (" lofty house ") for Marduk's (q.v.) temple at Babylon 
and that of Ea (q.v.) at Eridu, and in view of the general depend- 
ence of Assyrian religious beliefs as of Assyrian culture in general, 
there is little reason to doubt that the name of Assur's temple 
represents a direct adaptation of such a name as E-Kur, further 
embellished by epithets intended to emphasize the supreme 
control of the god to whom the edifice was dedicated. The 
foundation of the edifice can be traced back to Uspia (Ushpia), 
c. 2000 B.C., and may turn out to be even older. Besides the chief 
temple, the capital contained temples and chapels to Anu, Adad, 
Ishtar, Marduk, Gula, Sin, Shamash, so that we are to assume the 
existence of a sacred precinct in Assur precisely as in the religious 
centres of the south. On the removal of the seat of residence of 
the Assyrian kings to Calah (c. 1300 B.C.), and then in the 8th 
century to Nineveh, the centre of the Assur cult was likewise 
transferred, though the sanctity of the old seat at Assur con- 
tinued to be recognized. At Nineveh, which remained the 
capital till the fall of the Assyrian empire in 606 B.C., Assur had 
as his rival Ishtar, who was the real patron deity of the place, 
but a reconciliation was brought about by making Ishtar the 
consort of the chief god. The combination was, however, of an 
artificial character, and the consciousness that Ishtar was in 
reality an independent goddess never entirely died out. She 
too, like Assur, was viewed as a war deity, and to such an 
extent was this the case that at times it would appear that 
she, rather than Assur, presided over the fortunes of the Assyrian 
armies. (M. J a.) 

ASSUR-BANI-PAL ("Assur creates a son"), the grand 
monarque of Assyria, was the prototype of the Greek Sardana- 
palus, and appears probably in the corrupted form of Asnapper 
in Ezra iv. 10. He had been publicly nominated king of Assyria 
(on the 1 2 th of Iyyar) by his father Esar-haddon, some time 
before the latter's death, Babylonia being assigned to his twin- 
brother Samas-sum-yukin, in the hope of gratifying the national 
feeling of the Babylonians. After Esar-haddon's death in 668 
B.C. the first task of Assur-bani-pal was to finish the Egyptian 
campaign. Tirhakah, who had reoccupied Egypt, fled to 
Ethiopia, and the Assyrian army spent forty days in ascending 
the Nile from Memphis to Thebes. Shortly afterwards Necho, 
the satrap of Sais, and two others were detected intriguing with 
Tirhakah; Necho and one of his companions were sent in chains 
to Nineveh, but were there pardoned and restored to their 

1 As essentially a national god, he is almost identical in character 
with the early Yahweh of Israel. See Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, 
Religion of Ancient Babylonia, p. 129. 



principalities. Tirhakah died 667 B.C., and his successor 
Tandaman (Tanuat-Amon) entered Upper Egypt, where a general 
revolt against Assyria took place, headed by Thebes. Memphis 
was taken by assault and the Assyrian troops driven out of the 
country. Tyre seems to have revolted at the same time. Assur- 
bani-pal, however, lost no time in pouring fresh forces into the 
revolted province. Once more the Assyrian army made its way 
up the Nile, Thebes was plundered, and its temples destroyed, 
two obelisks being carried to Nineveh as trophies (see Nahum iii. 
8). Meanwhile the siege of insular Tyre was closely pressed; 
its water-supply was cut off, and it was compelled to surrender. 
Assur-bani-pal was now at the height of his power. The land of 
the Manna. (Minni), south-east of Ararat, had been wasted, its 
capital captured by the Assyrians, and its king reduced to vassal- 
age. A war with Teumman of Elam had resulted in the over- 
throw of the Elamite army; the head of Teumman was sent to 
Nineveh, and another king, Umman-igas, appointed by the 
Assyrians. The kings of Cilicia and the Tabal offered their 
daughters to the harem of Assur-bani-pal; embassies came from 
Ararat, and even Gyges of Lydia despatched envoys to " the 
great king" in the hope of obtaining help against the Cim- 
merians. Suddenly the mighty empire began to totter. The 
Lydian king, finding that Nineveh was helpless to assist him, 
turned instead to Egypt and furnished the mercenaries with 
whose help Psammetichus drove the Assyrians out of the country 
and suppressed his brother satraps. Egypt was thus lost to 
Assyria for ever (660 B.C.). In Babylonia, moreover, discontent 
was arising, and finally Samas-sum-yukin put himself at the 
head of the national party and declared war upon his brother. 
Elamite aid was readily forthcoming, especially when stimulated 
by bribes, and the Arab tribes joined in the revolt. The resources 
of the Assyrian empire were strained to their utmost. But 
thanks in some measure to the intestine troubles in Elam, the 
Babylonian army and its allies were defeated and driven into 
Babylon, Sippara, Borsippa and Cutha. One by one the- cities 
fell, Babylon being finally starved into surrender (648 B.C.) after 
Samas-sum-yukin had burnt himself in his palace to avoid falling 
into the conqueror's hands. It was now the turn of the Arabs, 
some of whom had been in Babylon during the siege, while 
others had occupied themselves in plundering Edom, Moab and 
the Hauran. Northern Arabia was traversed by the Assyrian 
forces, the Nabataeans were almost exterminated, and the 
desert tribes terrorized into order. Elam was alone left to be 
dealt with, and the last resources of the empire were therefore 
expended in preventing it from ever being again a thorn in the 
Assyrian side. 

But the effort had exhausted Assyria. Drained of men and 
resources it was no longer able to make head against the Cim- 
merian and Scythian hordes who now poured over western Asia. 
The Cimmerian Dugdamme (Lygdamis in Strabo i. 3, 16), whom 
Assur-bani-pal calls " a limb of Satan," after sacking Sardis, 
had been slain in Cilicia, but other Scythian invaders came to 
take his place. When Assur-bani-pal died in 626 (?) B.C. his 
empire was already in decay, and within a few years the end came. 
He was luxurious and indolent, entrusting the command of his 
armies to others whose successes he appropriated, cruel and 
superstitious, but a magnificent patron of art and literature. 
The great library of Nineveh was to a considerable extent his 
creation, and scribes were kept constantly employed in it 
copying the older tablets of Babylonia, though unfortunately 
their patron's tastes inclined rather to omens and astrology 
than to subjects of more modern interest. The library was 
contained in the palace that he built on the northern side of the 
mound of Kuyunjik and lined with sculptured slabs which 
display Assyrian art at its best. Whether Kandalanu (Kinela- 
danos), who became viceroy of Babylonia after the suppression 
of the revolt, was Assur-bani-pal under another name, or a 
different personage, is still doubtful (see Sardanapalus). 

Authorities. — George Smith, History of Assurbanipal (1871); 
S. A. Smith, Die Keilschrifttexte Asurbanipals (1887-1889) ; P. Jensen 
in E. Schrader's Keilinschriftliche BibUothek, ii. (1889); J. A. 
Knudtzon, AssyriscKe Gebete an den Sonnengott (1893) ; C. Lehmann, 
Schamashschumukin (1892). (A. H. S.) 



79° 



ASSUS— ASTARABAD 



ASS US [mod. Behram], an ancient Greek city of the Troad, 
on the Adramyttian Gulf. The situation is one of the most 
magnificent in all the Greek lands. The natural cleavage of the 
trachyte into joint planes had already scarped out shelves 
which it was comparatively easy for human labour to shape; 
and so, high up this cone of trachyte, the Greek town of Assus 
was built, tier above tier, the summit of the crag being crowned 
with a Doric temple of Athena. The view from the summit is 
very beautiful and of great historical interest. In front is Lesbos, 
one of whose towns, Methymna, is said to have sent forth the 
founders of Assus, as early, perhaps, as rooo or 900 B.C. The 
whole south coast-line of the Troad is seen, and in the south-east 
the ancient territory of Pergamum, from whose masters the 
possession of Assus passed to Rome by the bequest of Attalus III. 
(133 B.C.). The great heights of Ida rise in the east. Northward 
the Tuzla is seen winding through a rich valley. This valley was 
traversed by the road which St Paul must have followed when he 
came overland from Alexandria Troas to Assus, leaving his fellow- 
travellers to proceed by sea. The north-west gateway, to which 
this road led, is still flanked by two massive towers, of Hellenic 
work. On the shore below, the ancient mole can still be traced 
by large blocks under the clear water. Assus affords the only 
harbour on the 50 m. of coast between Cape Lectum and the 
east end of the Adramyttian Gulf; hence it must always have 
been the chief shipping-place for the exports of the southern 
Troad. The great natural strength of the site protected it against 
petty assailants; but, like other towns in that region, it has 
known many masters — Lydians, Persians, the kings of Per- 
gamum, Romans and Ottoman Turks. From the Persian wars 
to about 350 B.C. Assus enjoyed at least partial independence. 
It was about 348-345 B.C. that Aristotle spent three years at 
Assus with Hermeas, an ex-slave who had succeeded his former 
master Eubulus as despot of Assus and Atarneus. Aristotle has 
left some verses from an invocation to Arete (Virtue), com- 
memorating the worth of Hermeas, who had been seized by 
Persian treachery and put to death. 

Under its Turkish name of Behram, Assus is still the com- 
mercial port of the southern Troad, being the place to which 
loads of valonia are conveyed by camels from all parts of the 
country. Explorations were conducted at Assus in 1881-1883 
by Mr J. T. Clarke for the Archaeological Institute of America. 
The main object was to clear the Doric temple of Athena, built 
about 470 B.C. This temple is remarkable for a sculptured 
architrave which took the place of the ordinary frieze. The scenes 
are partly mythological (labours of Heracles), partly purely 
heraldic. Eighteen panels were transported to the Louvre in 
1838; other fragments rewarded the Americans, and a scientific 
ground-plan was drawn. The well-preserved Hellenistic walls 
were also studied. 

See J. T. Clarke, Assos, 2 vols., 1882 and 1898 (Papers of Arch. 
Inst, of America, i. ii.) ; and authorities under Troad. (D. G. H.) 

ASSYRIA. The two great empires, Assyria and Babylon, 
which grew up on the banks of the Tigris and Euphrates, can be 
separated as little historically as geographically. From the 
beginning their history is closely intertwined; and the power of 
the one is a measure of the weakness of the other. This inter- 
dependence of Assyrian and Babylonian history was recognized 
by ancient writers, and has been confirmed by modern discovery. 
But whereas Assyria takes the first place in the classical accounts 
to the exclusion of Babylonia, the decipherment of the inscrip- 
tions has proved that the converse was really the case, and that, 
with the exception of some seven or eight centuries, Assyria 
might be described as a province or dependency of Babylon. 
Not only was Babylonia the mother country, as the tenth chapter 
of Genesis explicitly states, but the religion and culture, the 
literature and the characters in which it was contained, the 
arts and the sciences of the Assyrians were derived from their 
southern neighbours. They were similar in race and language. 
(See Babylonia and Assyria.) 

AST, GE0R6 ANTON FRIEDRICH (1778-1841), German 
philosopher and philologist, was born at Gotha. Educated there 
and at the university of Jena, he became privat-doccnt at Jena 



ii 1802. In 1805 he became professor of classical literature in 
the university of Landshut, where he remained till 1826, when 
it was transferred to Munich. There he lived till his death on 
the 31st of October 1841. In recognition of his work he was 
made an aulic councillor and a member of the Bavarian Academy 
of Sciences. He is known principally for his work during the 
last twenty-five years of his life on the dialogues of Plato. His 
Platan's Leben und Schriften (1816) was the first of those critical 
inquiries into the life and works of Plato which originated in the 
Introductions of Schleiermacher and the historical scepticism 
of Niebuhr and Wolf. Distrusting tradition, he took a few of 
the finest dialogues as his standard, and from internal evidence 
denounced as spurious not only those which are generally 
admitted to be so (Epinomis, Minos, Theages, Arastae, Clitophon, 
Hippmchus, Eryxias, Letters and Definitions), but also the Meno, 
Euthydemus, Charmides, Lysis, Laches, First and Second Alci- 
biades, Hippias Major and Minor, Ion, Euthyphro, Apology, 
Crito, and even (against Aristotle's explicit assertion) The Laws. 
The genuine dialogues he divides into three series: — (1) the 
earliest, marked chiefly by the poetical and dramatic element, 
i.e. Protagoras, Phaedrus, Gorgias, Phaedo; (2) the second, 
marked by dialectic subtlety, i.e. Theaetelus, Sophist, Statesman, 
Parmenides, Cratylus; (3) the third group, combining both 
qualities harmoniously, i.e. the Philebus, Symposium, Republic, 
Timaeus, Critias. The work was followed by a complete 
edition of Plato's works (11 vols., 1819-1832) with a Latin 
translation and commentary. His last work was the Lexicon 
Platonicum (3 vols., 1834-1839), which is both valuable and 
comprehensive. In his works on aesthetics he combined the 
views of Schelling with those of Winckelmann, Lessing, Kant, 
Herder, Schiller and others. His histories of philosophy are 
marked more by critical scholarship than by originality of 
thought, though they are interesting as asserting the now 
familiar principle that the history of philosophy is not the 
history of opinions, but of reason as a whole ; he was among 
the first to attempt to formulate a principle of the development 
of thought. Beside his works on Plato, he wrote, on aesthetics, 
System der Kunstlehre (1805) and Grundriss der Aesthetik (1807) ; 
on the history of philosophy, Grundlinien der Philosophic (1807, 
republished 1809, but soon forgotten), Grundriss einer Geschichle 
der Philosophic (1807 and 1825), and Hauptmomenle der Geschichte 
der Philosophie (1829); in philology, Grundlinien der Philologie 
(1808), and Grundlinien der Grammatik, Hcrmeneutik und 
Kritik (1808). 

ASTARA, a port of Russian Transcaucasia, government of 
Baku, on the Caspian, in 38 27' N. lat. and 48 53' E. long., on 
the river of the same name, which forms the frontier between 
Persia and Russia. Russian merchandize is landed there and 
forwarded to Azerbaijan and Tabriz via Ardebil. 

ASTARABAD, a province of Persia bounded N. by the Caspian 
Sea and Russian Transcaspian, S. by the Elburz Mountains, 
W. by Mazandaran, and* E. by Khorasan. The country, 
mountainous in its southern portion, possesses extensive forests, 
fertile valleys, producing rice, wheat and other grains in 
abundance, and rich pasturages. The soil, even with little 
culture, is exceedingly productive, owing to the abundance of 
water which irrigates and fertilizes it. But while the province 
in many parts presents a landscape of luxuriant beauty, it is a 
prey to the ravages of disease, principally malarial fevers due 
to the extensive swamps formed by waters stagnating in the 
forests, and to the frequent incursions of the Goklan and Yomut 
Turkomans, who have their camping-grounds in the northern 
part of the province, and until about 1890 plundered caravans 
sometimes at the very gates of Astarabad city, and carried 
people off into slavery and bondage. The province has a popula- 
tion of about 100,000 and pays a yearly revenue of about £30,000. 
The inhabitants, notwithstanding the unhealthiness of their 
climate, are a strong and athletic race, belying their yellow and 
sickly appearance. The province has the following bulfik 
(administrative, divisions) : — (1) Astarabad town; (2) Astarabad 
rustak (villages); (3) Sadan rustak; (4). Anazan; (5) Katul; 
(6) Findarisk, with Kuhsar and Nodeh; (7) Shahkuh Savar. 



AST ARTE— ASTER 



79 1 



Astarabad, the capital of the province, is situated on the 
Astar, a small tributary of the Kara Su (Black river), which 
flows into the Caspian Sea 20 m. W. of the city, and about 18 m. 
S. of the Gurgan river, in 36 51' N. lat. and 54° 26' E. long. 
It is surrounded by a mud wall about 30 ft. in height and about 
3 5 m. in circuit, but much of the enclosed space is occupied by 
gardens, mounds of refuse, and ruins. At one time of greater 
size, it was reduced by Nadir Shah within its present limits. 
Astarabad owes its origin to Yazid ibn Mohallab, who occupied 
the province early in the 8th century for Suleiman, the seventh 
of the Omayyad caliphs (715-717), and was destroyed by 
Timur (Tamerlane) in 1384. Jonas Hanway, the philanthropist 
(d. 1786), visited the place in 1744, and attempted to open a 
direct trade through it between Europe and central Asia. 
Owing to the noxious exhalations of the surrounding forests 
the town is so extremely unhealthy during the hot weather 
as to have acquired the title of the " Abode of the Plague." 
It has post and telegraph offices, and a population of about 
10,000. Since 1890 the Turkomans who impeded trade by their 
perpetual raids have been kept more in check, and with the 
decrease of insecurity the commercial activity of Astarabad 
has increased considerably. 

ASTARTE, a Semitic goddess whose name appears in the 
Bible as Ashtoreth. 1 She is everywhere the great female principle, 
answering to the Baal of the Canaanites and Phoenicians 2 and 
to the Dagon of the Philistines. She had temples at Sidon and 
at Tyre (whence her worship was transplanted to Carthage), 
and the Philistines probably venerated her at Ascalon (1 Sam. 
xxxi. 10). Solomon built a high-place for her at Jerusalem 
which lasted until the days of King Josiah (1 Kings xi. 5; 2 
Kings xxiii. 13), and the extent of her cult among the Israelites 
is proved as much by the numerous biblical references as by the 
frequent representations of the deity turned up on Palestinian 
soil. 3 The Moabites formed a compound deity, Ashtar-Chemosh 
(see Moab), and the absence of the feminine termination occurs 
similarly in the Babylonian and Assyrian prototype Ishtar. 
The old South Arabian phonetic equivalent 'Athtar is, however, 
a male deity. Another compound, properly of mixed sex, 
appears in the Aramaean Atargatis ('At[t]ar-'athe), worn down 
to Derketo, who is specifically associated with sacred pools 
and fish (Ascalon, Hierapolis-Mabog). (See Atargatis.) 

The derivation of the name Ishtar is uncertain, and the original 
attributes of the goddess are consequently unknown. She 
assumes various local forms in the old Semitic world, and this 
has led to consequent fusion and identification with the deities 
of other nations. As the great nature-goddess, the attributes 
of fertility and reproduction are characteristically hers, as 
also the accompanying immorality which originally, perhaps, 
was often nothing more than primitive magic. As patroness of 
the hunt, later identification with Artemis was inevitable. 
Hence the consequent fusion with Aphrodite, Artemis, Diana, 
Juno and Venus, and the action and reaction of one upon the 
other in myth and legend. Her star was the planet Venus, and 
classical writers give her the epithet Caelestis and Urania. 
Whether Astarte was also a lunar goddess has been questioned. 
As the female counterpart of the Phoenician Baal (viewed as a 
sun-god) , and on the testimony of late writers (Lucian, Herodian) 
that she was represented with horns, the place-name Ashteroth- 
Karnaim in Gilead (" Ashteroth of the horns ") has been con- 
sidered ample proof in favour of the theory. But it is probable 
that the horns were primarily ram's horns, 4 and that Astarte 
the moon-goddess is due to the influence of the Egyptian Isis 

1 The vocalization suggests the Heb. boshelh, " shame " ; see Baal. 

* Add also the Hittites; for Sutekh, the Egyptian equivalent of 
the male partner, see W. M. Miiller, Mitt.- d. vordernsial. Gesell. 
(1902), v. pp. 11, 38. Astarte was introduced also into Egypt and 
had her temple at Memphis. See also S. A. Cook, Religion of 
Ancient Palestine, Index, s.v. 

5 Such figurines are in a sense the prototypes of the Venus of 
Medici. On the influence of her cult upon that of the Virgin Mary, 
see Rosch, Studien u. Krit. (1888), pp. 265 sqq. 

4 A model of an Astarte with ram's horns was unearthed by R. A. S. 
Macalister at Gezer {Pal. Explor. Fund, Quart. Statement, 1903, p. 227 
with figure facing). 



and Hathor. Robertson Smith, too, argues that Astarte was 
originally a sheep-goddess, and points to the interesting use of 
" Astartes of the flocks " (Deut. vii. 13, see the comm.) to 
denote the offspring. To nomads, Astarte may well have been 
a sheep-goddess, but this, if her earliest, was not her only type, 
as is clear from the sacred fish of Atargatis, the doves of Ascalon 
(and of the Phoenician sanctuary of Eryx), and the gazelle or 
antelope of the goddess of love (associated also with the Arabian 
Athtar). 

The literature is vast; see G. A. Barton, Amer. Journ. of Sent. 
Lang. vols. ix. x., and his Semitic Origins; Driver, Hastings' 
Diet. Bible, i. pp. 167-171; Zimmern, Keilinschr. und das alte 
Test.' pp. 420 sqq.; Lagrange, Etudes d. Relig. Sem. pp. 123-140; 
and the articles Adonis, Aphrodite, Artemis, Baal. 

(S. A. C.) 

ASTELL, MARY (1668-1731), English author, was born at 
Newcastle-upon-Tyne. She was instructed by her uncle, a 
clergyman, in Latin and French, logic, mathematics and 
natural philosophy. In her twentieth year she went to London, 
where she continued her studies. She published, in 1697, a work 
entitled A Serious Proposal to the Ladies, wherein a Method is 
offered for the Improvement of their Minds. With the same end 
in view she elaborated a scheme for a ladies' college, which 
was favourably entertained by Queen Anne, and would have 
been carried out had not Bishop Burnet interfered. The most 
important of her other works was The Christian Religion, as pro- 
fessed by a Daughter of the Church of England, published in 1705. 

ASTER (Gr. aaritp, a star), the name of a genus of plants, 
given from the fact of the flowers having a radiated or star-like 
appearance (see below). The Greek word also provides many 
derivatives: e.g. asterism (Gr. aarepia jxos) , a constellation (q.v.); 
asteroid (Gr. ctorepo-eiS^s, star-like), an alternative name for 
planetoids or minor planets (see Planet). 

The genus of composite plants named aster (natural order 
Compositae) is found largely in North America, and scattered 
sparingly over Asia, Europe and South America. They are 
usually herbaceous perennials; their flowers arranged in 
numerous heads (capitula) recall those of the daisy, whence 
they are popularly known in England as Michaelmas daisies, 
since many are in bloom about that time. They are valuable 
plants in a garden, the various species flowering from late 
summer right on to November or December. The only British 
species is Aster Tripolium, found abundantly in saline marshes 
near the sea. One of the species, Aster alpinus, grows at a consider- 
able height on the mountains of Europe. Some of them, such as 
Aster spectabilis of North America, are very showy. They are 
mostly easy to cultivate in ordinary garden soil, and are readily 
propagated by dividing the roots in early spring. The following 
are some of the better known forms: — A. alpinus, barely 1 ft. 
high, and A. Amellus, if ft., with its var. bessarabicus, have 
broadish blunt leaves and large starry bluish flowers; A. 
longifolius var. formosus, 2 ft., bright rosy lilac; A. acris, 
2 to 3 ft., with blue flowers in August; A. ericoid.es,' 3 ft., with 
heath-like leaves and masses of small white flowers; A. puniceus, 
4 to 6 ft., blue or rosy -lilac; A. turbinellus, 2 to 3 ft., mauve- 
coloured, are showy border plants; and A. Novae- Angliae, 5 to 6 
ft., rosy-violet; A. Novi-Belgii, 3 to 6 ft., pale blue; A. laevis, 
2 to 6 ft., blue -lilac; and A. grandiflorus, 3 ft., violet, are 
especially useful from their late-flowering habit. 

The China aster (Callistephus chinensis) is also a member of 
the order Compositae. It is a hardy annual, a native of China, 
which by cultivation has yielded a great variety of forms. Some 
of the best for ornamental gardening are the chrysanthemum- 
flowered, the paeony-flowered, the crown or cockade, the comet, 
and the globe-quilled. Crown asters have a white centre, and 
dark crimson or purple circumference, and are very beautiful. 
The colours range from white and blush through pink and rose to 
crimson, and from lilac through blue to purple, in various shades. 
They should be sown early in March in pans, in a gentle heat, the 
young plants being quickly transferred to a cool pit, and there 
pricked out in rich soil as soon as large enough, and eventually 
planted out in the garden in May or June, in soil which has 
been well worked and copiously manured, where they grow from 



792 



ASTERIA— ASTHMA 



8 to 18 in. high, and flower towards the end of summer. They 
also make handsome pot plants for the conservatory. 

ASTERIA, or Star-Stone (from Gr. aarrjp, star), a name 
applied to such ornamental stones as exhibit when cat en 
cabochon a luminous star. The typical asteria is the star- 
sapphire, generally a bluish-grey corundum, milky or opalescent, 
with a star of six rays. (See Sapphire.) In red corundum the 
stellate reflexion is less common, and hence the star-ruby occa- 
sionally found with the star-sapphire in Ceylon is among the 
most valued of " fancy stones." When the radiation is shown 
by yellow corundum, the stone is called star-topaz. Cymophane, 
or chatoyant chrysoberyl, may also be asteriatedi In all these 
cases the asterism is due to the reflexion of light from twin- 
lamellae or from fine tubular cavities or thin enclosures definitely 
arranged in the stone. The astrion of Pliny is believed to have 
been our moonstone, since it is described as a colourless stone 
from India having within it the appearance of a star shining 
with the light of the moon. All star-stones were formerly 
regarded with much superstition. 

ASTERID, a group of starfish. They are the starfish proper, 
and have the typical genus Asterias (see Starfish). 

ASTERISK (from Gr. LartpiaKos, a little star), the sign* 
used in typography. The word is also used in its literal meaning 
in old writers, and as a description of an ornamental form 
(star-shaped) in one of the utensils in the Greek Church. 

ASTERIUS, of Cappadocia, sophist and teacher of rhetoric 
in Galatia, was converted to Christianity about the year '300, 
and became the disciple of Lucian, the founder of the school of 
Antioch. During the persecution under Maximian (304) he 
relapsed into paganism, and thus, though received again into 
the church by Lucian and supported by the Etisebian party, 
never attained to ecclesiastical office. He is b6st known as ah 
able defender of the semi-Arian ' position, and was styled by 
Athanasius the " advocate " of the Ariaris. His chief work was 
the Syntagmation, but he wrote many others, including comment- 
aries on the Gospels, the Psalms, and Romans. He attended 
many synods, and we last hear of him at the synod of Antioch 
in 341. 

ASTERIUS, bishop of Amasia, in Pontus, c. 400. He was 
partly contemporary with the emperor Julian (d. 363) and lived 
to a great age. His fame rests chiefly on his Homilies, which 
were much esteemed in the Eastern Church. Most of these have 
been lost, but twenty-one are given in full by Migne (Patrol. 
Ser. Gr. xl. 164-477), and there are fragments of others in Photius 
(Cod. 271). Asterius was a man of much culture, and his works 
are a valuable contribution to our knowledge of the history of 
preaching. 

ASTHMA (Gr. a.<r$p.a, gasping, whence icrdfialvoi, I gasp for 
breath), a disorder of respiration characterized by severe 
paroxysms of difficult breathing (dyspnoea) usually followed by 
a period of complete relief, with recurrence of the attacks at 
more or less frequent intervals. The' term is often loosely 
employed in reference to states of embarrassed respiration, 
which are plainly due to permanent organic disease of the 
respiratory organs (see Respiratory System: Pathology). 

The attacks occur quite suddenly, and in some patients at 
regular, in others at irregular intervals. They are characterized 
by extreme difficulty both in inspiration and expiration, but 
especially in the latter, the chest becoming distended and the 
diaphragm immobile. In the case of "pure " "idiopathic " or 
" nervous " asthma, there is no fever or other sign of inflamma- 
tion. But where the asthma is secondary to disease of some organ 
of the body, the symptoms will depend largely on that organ and 
the disease present. Such secondary forms may be bronchitic, 
cardiac, renal, peptic or thymic. 

The mode of onset differs very markedly in different cases. 
In some the attack begins quite suddenly and without warning, 
but in others various sensations well known to the patient 
announce that an attack is imminent. According to the late 
Dr Hyde Salter the commonest warning is that of an intense 
desire for sleep, so overpowering that though the patient knows 
his only chance of warding off the attack is to keep awake, he is 



yet utterly unable to fight against his drowsiness. Among ;other 
patients, however, a condition of unwonted mental- excitement 
presages the attack. Again the secondary forms of the disease 
may be ushered in by flatulence, constipation and loss of appetite, 
and a symptom which often attends the onset, though it is not 
strictly premonitory, is a profuse diuresis, the urine being 
watery and nearly colourkss, as in the' condition of hysterical 
diuresis. In the majority of instances the attack begins during 
the night, sometimes abruptly but often by degrees. The patient 
may or may not be aware that his asthma is threatening. A few 
hours after midnight he is aroused from sleep by a sense of 
difficult breathing. In some cases this is. a slowly increasing 
condition, not becoming acute for some hour or more. But in 
others the attack is so sudden, so severe, that the patient springs 
from his bed and makes his way at once to an open window, 
apparently struggling for breath. Most asthmatics have some 
favourite attitude which best enables them to use all the 
auxiliary muscles of respiration in their struggle for breath, 
and this attitude they immediately assume, and guard fixedly 
until the attack begins to subside. The picture is characteristic 
and a very painful one to watch. The face is pale, anxious, und 
it may be livid. The veins of the forehead stand out, the eyes 
bulge, and perspiration bedews the face. The head is .fixed in 
position, and likewise the powerful muscles of the back to aid the 
attempt at respiration. The breath is whistling and wheezing, 
and if it becomes necessary for the patient to speak, the words are 
uttered with great difficulty. If the chest be watched it is seen 
to be almost motionless, and the respirations may become 
extraordinarily slowed. Inspiration is difficult as the chest is 
already over+distended, but expiration is an even far greater 
struggle. The attack may last any time from an hour to several 
days; and between the attacks the patient is usually quite at 
ease. But notwithstanding the intensely distressing character 
of the attacks, asthma is not one of the diseases that shorten life. 

In the child, asthma is usually periodic in its recurrence, but 
as he ages it tends to become more erratic in both its manifesta- 
tions and time of appearance. Also, though at first it may be 
strictly "pure" asthma, later in life it becomes -attended by 
chronic bronchitis, which in its turn gives rise to emphysema. 

As to the underlying cause of the disease, one has only to read 
the many utterly different theories put forward to account for it, 
to see how little is really known. But it has now been clearly 
shown that in the asthmatic state the respiratory centre is in an 
unstable and excitable condition, and that there is a morbid 
connexion between this and some part of the nasal apparatus, 
Dr Alexander Francis has shown, however, that the disease is not 
directly due to any mechanical obstruction of the nasal passages, 
and that the nose comparatively rarely supplies the immediate 
exciting cause of the asthmatic attack. Paroxysmal sneezing is 
another form in which asthma may show itself, and, curiously 
enough, this form occurs more frequently in women, asthma of 
the more recognized type in men. In infants and young children 
paroxysmal bronchitis is another form of the same disease. 
Dr James Goodhart notes the connexion between asthma and 
certain skin troubles, giving cases of the alternation of asthma 
and psoriasis, and also of asthma and eczema. The disease 
occurs in' families with a well-marked neurotic inheritance, and 
twice as frequently in men as in women. The immediate cause 
of an attack may be anything or nothing. Dr Hyde Salter notes 
that 80% of cases in the young date from an attack qf whooping 
cough, bronchitis or measles. 

In the general treatment of asthma there are two methods of 
dealing with the patient, either that of hardening the individual, 
widening his range of accommodation, and thus making him less 
susceptible, or that (5f modifying and adapting the environment 
to the patient. These two methods correspond to the two 
methods of drug treatment, tonic or sedative. During the last 
few years the method of treatment first used by Dr Alexander 
Francis has come into prominence. His plan is to restore the 
stability of the respiratory centre, by cauterizing the septal 
mucous membrane, and combining with this general hygienic 
measures. In his own words the operation, which is entirely 



ASTI— ASTOR 



793 



painless and insignificant, is performed as follows > — "After 
painting one side of the septum nasi with a few drops of cocaine 
and resorcin, I draw a line with a galvano-cautery point from a 
spot opposite the middle turbinated body, forwards and slightly 
downwards for a distance of rather less than half an inch. In 
about one week's time I repeat the operation on the other side." 
In his monograph on the subject, he classifies a large number of 
cases treated in this manner, most of which resulted in complete 
relief, some in very great improvement, and a very few in slight 
or no relief. 

ASTI (anc. Hasta), a town and episcopal see of Piedmont, 
Italy, in the province of Alessandria, situated on the Tanaro; 
it is 22 m. W. by rail from Alessandria. Pop. (iqoi) town, 
19,787; commune, 41,047. Asti has still numerous medieval 
towers, a fine Gothic cathedral of the 14th century, the remains 
of a Christian basilica of the 6th century, and the octagonal 
baptistery of S. Pietro (nth century). It was the birthplace of 
the poet Vittorio Alfieri. In ancient times it manufactured 
pottery. It is now famous for its sparkling wine (Asti spumante), 
and is a considerable centre of trade. 

ASTLEY, JACOB ASTLEY, Baron (1570-1652), royalist 
commander in the English Civil War, came of a Norfolk family. 
In 1598 he joined Counts Maurice and Henry of Orange in the 
Netherlands, where he served with distinction, and afterwards 
fought under the elector palatine Frederick V. and Gustavus 
Adolphus in the Thirty Years' War. He was evidently thought 
highly of by the states-general, for when he was absent, serving 
under the king of Denmark, his company in the Dutch army 
' was kept open for him. Returning to England with a well- 
deserved reputation, he was in the employment of Charles I. 
in various military capacities. As " sergeant-major^'or general 
of the infantry, he went north in 1639 to organize the defence 
against the expected Scottish invasion. Here his duties were as 
much diplomatic as military, as the discontent which ended in 
the Civil War was now coming to a head. In the ill-starred 
" Bishops' War," Astley did good service tp the cause of the 
king, and he was involved in the so-called " Army Plot." At 
the outbreak of the Great Rebellion (1642) he at once joined 
Charles, and was made major-general of the foot. His character- 
istic battle-prayer at Edgehill has become famous: <1 '0 Lord, 
Thou knowest how busy I must be this day. If I forget Thee, 
do not forget me. March on, boys!" At Gloucester he com- 
manded a division, and at the first battle of Newbury he led the 
infantry of the royal army. With Hopton, in 1644, he served 
at Arundel and Cheriton. At the second battle of Newbury 
he made a gallant and memorable defence of Shaw House. He 
was made a baron by the king, and at Naseby he once more 
commanded the main body of the foot. He afterwards served 
in the west, and with 1500 men fought stubbornly but vainly 
the last battle for the king at Stow-on-the-Wold (March 1646). 
His remark to his captors has become as famous as his words 
at Edgehill, " You have now done your work and may go play, 
unless you will fall out amongst yourselves." His scrupulous 
honour forbade him to take any part in the Second Civil War, 
as he had given his parole at Stow-on-the-Wold; but he had 
to undergo his share of the discomforts that were the lot of 
the vanquished royalists. He died in February 1651/2. The 
barony became extinct in 1668. 

ASTLEY, SIR JOHN DUGDALE, Bart. (1828-1894), English 
soldier and sportsman, was a descendant of Lord Astley, and 
son of the 2nd baronet (cr. 1821). From 1848 to 1859 he was in 
the army, serving in the Crimean War and retiring as lieutenant- 
colonel. He married an heiress in 1858, and thenceforth devoted 
himself to horse-racing, pugilism and sport in general. He 
succeeded to the baronetcy in 1873, and from 1874 to 1880 was 
Conservative M.P. for North Lincolnshire. He was a popular 
figure on the turf, being familiarly known as " the Mate," and 
won and lost large sums of money. Just before bis death, on 
the 10th of October 1894, he published some entertaining reminis^ 
cences, under the title of Fifty Years of my Life. 

ASTON, ANTHONY (fi. 1712-1731), English actor and 
dramatist, began to be known on the London stage in the early 



years of the 18th century. He had tried the law and other 
professions, which he finally abandoned for the theatre. He 
had some success as a dramatic author, writing Love in a 
Hurry, performed in Dublin about 1709, and Pastor a, or the Coy 
Shepherdess, an opera (171 2). For many years he toured the 
English provinces with his wife and son, producing pieces which 
he himself wrote, or medleys from various plays fitted together 
with songs and dialogues of his own. 

ASTON MANOR, a municipal and parliamentary borough of 
Warwickshire, England, adjoining Birmingham on the north-east. 
Pop. (1901) 77,326. There are extensive manufactures, including 
those of motors and cycles with their accessories, also paper- 
mills, breweries, &c, and the population is largely industrial. 
Aston Hall, erected by Sir Thomas Holte in 1618-1635, is an 
admirable architectural example of its period, built of red brick. 
It stands in a large park, the whole property being acquired by 
the corporation of Birmingham in 1864, when the mansion 
became a museum and art gallery. It contains the panelling 
of a room from the house of Edmund Hector, which formerly 
stood in Old Square, Birmingham^ where Dr Samuel Johnson 
was a frequent visitor. Aston Lower Grounds, adjoining the 
park, contain an assembly hall, and the playing field of the 
Aston Villa Football Club, where the more important games 
are witnessed by many thousands of spectators. Aston Manor 
was incorporated in 1903. The parliamentary borough returns 
one member. The corporation consists of a mayor, 6 aldermen 
and 18 councillors Area, 060 acres. 

ASTOR, JOHN JACOB (1763-1848), American merchant, 
was born at the village of Walldorf, near Heidelberg, Germany, 
on the 17th of July 1763. Until he was sixteen he worked in the 
shop of his father, a butcher; he then joined an elder brother 
in London, and there for four years was employed in the piano 
and flute factory of an uncle, of the firm of Astor & Broadwood. 
In 1783 he emigrated to America, and settled in New York, 
whither one of his brothers had previously gone. On the voyage 
he became acquainted with a fur-trader, by whose advice he 
devoted himself to the same business, buying furs directly from 
the Indians, preparing them at first with his own hands for the 
market, and selling them in London and elsewhere at a great 
profit. He was also the agent in New York of the firm of Astor 
& Broadwood. By his energy, industry and sound judgment 
he gradually enlarged his queries, did business in all the fur
markets of the world, and amassed an enormous fortune, — the 
largest up to that time made by any American. He devoted 
many years to carrying out a project for organizing the fur 
trade from the Great Lakes to the Pacific Ocean, and thence 
by way of the Hawaiian Islands to China and India. In 1811 
he founded at the mouth of the Columbia river a settlement 
named after him Astoria, which was intended to serve as the 
central depot; but two years later the settlement was seized 
and occupied by the English. The incidents of this undertaking 
are the theme of Washington Irving's Astoria. A series of 
disasters frustrated the gigantic scheme. Astor made vast 
additions to, his wealth by investments in real estate in New 
York City, and erected many buildings there, including the 
hotel known as the Astor House. The last twenty-five years of 
his life were spent in retirement in New York City, where, he 
died on the 29th of March 1848, his fortune then being estimated 
at about $30,600,000. He made various charitable bequests 
by his will, and among them a gift of $50,000 to found an 
institution, opened as the " Astor House " in 1854, for the 
education of poor children and the relief of the aged and the 
destitute in his native villagein Germany. His chief benefaction, 
however, was a bequest of $400,000 for the foundation and 
endowment of a public library in New York City, since known 
as the Astor library, and since 1895 part of the New York public 
library. 

See Parton'sXtJe of John Jacob Astor (New York, 1865). 

His eldest son, William Backhouse Astor (1792-1875), 
inherited the greater part of his father's fortune, and chiefly by 
judicious investments in real estate greatly increased it. He 
was sometimes known as the " Landlord of New York." Under 



794 



ASTORGA— ASTRAKHAN 



his direction the building for the Astor library was erected, and 
to the library he gave about $550,000, including a bequest 
of $200,000. His son, John Jacob Astor (1822-1890), was 
also well known as a capitalist and philanthropist, giving 
liberally to the Astor library. 

The son of the last named, William Waldorf Astor (1848- 
), served in the New York assembly in 1877, and in the state 
senate in 1880-81. He was United States minister to Italy from 
1882 to 1885. He published two romances, Valentine (1885) and 
Sforza (1889). His wealth, arising from property in New York, 
where also he built the New Netherland hotel and the Waldorf 
hotel, was enormous. In 1890 he removed to England, and in 
1899 was naturalized. In 1893 he became proprietor of the Pall 
Mall Gazette, and afterwards started the Pall Mall Magazine. 

ASTORGA, EMANUELE D' (1681-1736), Italian musical 
composer, was born at Naples on the nth of December 1681. 
No authentic account of Astorga's life can be successfully con- 
structed from the obscure and confusing evidence that has been 
until now handed down, although historians have not failed to 
indulge many pleasant conjectures According to some of these, 
his father, a baron of Sicily, took an active part in the attempt 
to throw off the Spanish yoke, but was betrayed by his own 
soldiers and publicly executed. His wife and son were compelled 
to be spectators of his fate; and such was the effect upon them 
that his mother died on the spot, and Emanuele fell into a state 
of gloomy despondency, which threatened to deprive him of 
reason. By the kindness of the princess Ursini, the unfortunate 
young man was placed in a convent at Astorga, in Leon, where 
he completed a musical education which is said to have been 
begun in Palermo under Francesco Scarlatti. Here he recovered 
his health, and his admirable musical talents were cultivated 
under the best masters. On the details of this account no 
reliance can safely be placed, nor is there any certainty that in 
1703 he entered the service of the duke of Parma. Equally un- 
trustworthy is the story that the duke, suspecting an attachment 
between hi? niece Elizabeth Farnese and Astorga, dismissed 
the musician. The established facts concerning Astorga are 
indeed few enough. They are: that the opera Dafne was 
written and conducted by the composer in Barcelona in 1709; 
that he visited London, where he wrote his Stabat Mater, possibly 
for the society of " Antient Musick "; that it was performed in 
Oxford in 17 13; that in 17 12 he was in Vienna, and that he 
retired at an uncertain date to Bohemia, where he died on the 
21st of August 1736, in a castle which had been given to him in 
the domains of Prince Lobkowitz, in Raudnitz. Astorga deserves 
remembrance for his dignified and pathetic Stabat Mater, and 
for his numerous chamber-cantatas for one or two voices. He 
was probably the last composer to carry on the traditions 
of this form of chamber-music as perfected by Alessandro 
Scarlatti. 

ASTORGA, a city of N.W. Spain, in the province of Leon; 
situated near the right bank of the river Tuerto, and at the 
junction of the Salamanca-Corunna and Leon-Astorga railways. 
Pop. (1900) 5573. Astorga was the Roman Asturica Augusta, a 
provincial capital, and the meeting-place of four military roads. 
Though sacked by the Goths in the 5th century, and later by the 
Moors, it is still surrounded by massive walls of Roman origin. 
A ruined castle, near the city, recalls its strategic importance in 
the 8th century, when Asturias, Galicia and Leon were the 
headquarters of resistance to the Moors. Astorga has been the 
see of a bishop since the 3rd century, and was formerly known as 
the City of Priests, from the number of ecclesiastics resident 
within its walls. Its Gothic cathedral dates from the 15th 
century. The city confers the title of marquis on the Osorio 
family, the ruins of whose palace, sacked in 1810 by the French, 
are still an object of interest. 

For the history, especially the ecclesiastical history, of Astorga, 
see the anonymous Historia de la ciudad de Astorga (Valladolid, 
1840); with Fundacionde la . . . iglesia . . . de Astorga, by P. A. 
Ezpeleta (Madrid, 1634); and Fundacion, nombre y armas de . . . 
Astorga, by P. J unco (Pamplona, 1635). 

ASTORIA, a city, port of entry, and the county-seat of 
Clatsop county, Oregon, U.S.A., on the Columbia river, 8 m. 



from its mouth. Pop. (1890) 6184; (1900) 8381, of whom 3779 
were foreign-born (many being Finns,— a Finnish weekly was 
established here in 1905), and 601 were Chinese; (1910, C2ftsus) 
9599. It is served by the Astoria & Columbia River railroad 
(Northern Pacific System), and by several coastwise and foreign 
steamship lines (including that of the Oregon Railway & Naviga- 
tion Co.). The river here is about 6 m. wide, and the city has a 
water-front of about 5 m. and a deep, spacious and placid 
harbour. By dredging and the construction of jetties the Federal 
government has since 1885 greatly improved the channel at the 
mouth of the river. The business portion of the city occupies the 
low ground of the river bottom; the residence portion is on the 
hillsides overlooking the harbour. Astoria is the port of entry 
for the Oregon Customs District, Oregon; in 1907 its imports 
were valued at $21,262, and its exports at $329,103. The city 
is especially important as a salmon fishing and packing centre 
(cod, halibut and smaller fish also being abundant) ; it has also 
an extensive lumber trade, important lumber manufactories, 
pressed brick and terra-cotta factories, and dairy interests. In 
1905 the value of the factory product was $3,092,628 (of which 
$1,759,871 was the value of preserved and canned fish), being 
an increase of 41 -8% in five years. Astoria is the oldest American 
settlement in the Columbia Valley. It was founded in i8u, as a 
depot for the fur trade, by John Jacob Astor, in whose honour 
it was named. It was seized by the British in 1813, but was 
restored in 1818. In 1-821, while occupied by the North-West 
Fur Company, it was burned and practically abandoned, only 
a few settlers remaining. It was chartered as a city in 1876. 

See Washington Irving's Astoria; or Anecdotes of an Enterprise 
beyond the Rocky Mountains (Philadelphia, 1 836). 

ASTRAEA, in Greek legend, the "star maiden," daughter of 
Zeus and Themis, or of Astraeus the Titan and Eos, in which case 
she is identified with Dike. During the golden age she remained 
among men distributing blessings, but when the iron (or bronze) 
age came on, she was forced to withdraw, being the last of the 
goddesses' to quit the earth. In the heavens she is amongst the 
signs of the zodiac as the constellation Virgo. She is usually 
represented with a pair of scales and a crown of stars. 

Ov. Met. i. 150; Juv. vi. 19; Aratus, Phaenomena, 96. 

ASTRAGAL (from the Gr. dorpa/yaXos, the ankle-joint), an 
architectural term for a convex moulding. This term is gener- 
ally applied to small mouldings, " torus " (q.v.) to large ones of 
the same form. The Lesbian astragal referred to by Vitruvius, 
bk. iv. ch. vi., was in all probability an astragal carved with a 
bead and reel enrichment. 

ASTRAKHAN, a government of S.E. Russia, on the lower 
Volga, bounded N. by the governments of Samara and Saratov, 
W. by Saratov and the government of the Don Cossacks, S. by 
Stavropol and Terek, and E. by the Caspian Sea and the govern- 
ment of the Urals. Area, 91,327 sq. m., of which 6730 sq. m. 
belong to the delta of the Volga and its brackish lagoons, and 
62,290 sq. m. are covered by the Kalmuck and Kirghiz Steppes. 
The surface is a low-lying plain, except that in the west the 
Ergeni Hills (500-575 ft.) form the water-parting between the 
Volga basin and that of the Don. The climate is very hot and 
dry, the average temperature for the year being 50 Fahr., for 
January 21 , and for July 78 , rainfall 7^3 in., but often there 
is no rain at all in the summer. Pop. (1897) 1,005,460, of whom 
I 3 2 )383 were urban. The Kalmucks (138,580 in 1897) and 
Kirghiz (260,000) are semi-nomads. In addition to them the 
population includes nearly 44,000 Tatars, 4270 Armenians; with 
Poles and Jews. Fishing off the mouth of the Volga gives 
occupation to 50,600 persons; the fish, chiefly herrings and 
sturgeon, together with the caviare prepared from the latter, are 
sold for the most part at Nizhniy-Novgorod. Over 300,000 tons 
of salt are extracted annually from the lakes, principally those 
of Baskunchak and Elton. Cattle-breeding is an important 
industry. Market-gardening (mustard, water-melons, fruit) is 
on the increase; but pure agriculture is relatively not much 
developed. The government is divided into five districts, the 
chief towns of which are Astrakhan, Enotayevsk (pop. 2810 
in 1897), Krasnyi-yar (4680), Chernyi-yar (5140), and Tsarev 



ASTROLABE 



Plate. 




ASTRAKHAN— ASTROLOGY 



795 



(8900). The Kalmucks and Kirghiz have their own local 
administrations, and so have the Astrakhan Cossacks (25,600). 

ASTRAKHAN, a town of E. Russia, capital of the government 
of Astrakhan, on the left bank of the main channel of the Volga, 
50 m. from the Caspian Sea, in 46 21' N. lat. and 48 5' E. long. 
Since the growth of the petroleum industry of Baku and the 
construction of the Transcaspian railway, Astrakhan has become 
an important commercial centre, exporting fish, caviare, sugar, 
metals, naphtha, cottons and woollens, and importing grain, 
cotton, fruit and timber, to the aggregate value of £8,250,000 
with foreign countries and of £14,500,000 with the interior of 
Russia. The town gives its name to the " fur " called " astra- 
khan," the skin of the new-born Persian lamb, and so to an 
imitation in rough woollen cloth. There is some tanning, ship- 
building and brewing, and making of soap, tar and machinery. 
Astrakhan is the chief port on the Caspian Sea and the head- 
quarters of the Russian Caspian fleet. The city consists 
of (1) the kreml or citadel (1550), crowning a hill, on which 
stand also the spacious brick cathedral containing the tombs 
of two Georgian princes, the archbishop's palace and the 
monastery of the Trinity; (2) the Byelogorod or White Town, 
containing the administrative offices and the bazaars; and (3) 
the suburbs, where most of the population resides. The buildings 
in the first two quarters are of stone, in the third of wood, irregu- 
larly arranged along unpaved, dirty streets. The city is the see 
of a Greek Catholic archbishop and of an Armenian archbishop, 
and contains a Lamaist monastery, as well as technical schools, 
an ichthyological museum, the Peter museum, with ethno- 
graphical, archaeological and natural history collections, a 
botanical garden, an ecclesiastical seminary, and good squares 
and public gardens, one of which is adorned with a statue (1884) 
of Alexander II. Vineyards surround the city. Astrakhan was 
anciently the capital of a Tatar state, and stood some 7 m. 
farther north. After this was destroyed by the Mongol prince 
Timur the Great in 1395, the existing city was built. The Tatars 
were expelled about 1554 by Ivan IV. of Russia. In 1569 the 
city was besieged by the Turks, but they were defeated with 
great slaughter by the Russians. In 1670 it was seized by the 
rebel Stenka Razin; early in the following century Peter the 
Great constructed here a shipbuilding yard and made Astrakhan 
the base for his hostilities against Persia, and later in the same 
century Catherine II. accorded the city important industrial 
privileges. In 1702, 1718 and 1767, it suffered severely from 
fires; in 17 19 was plundered by the Persians; and in 1830 the 
cholera swept away a large number of its people. In the middle 
ages the city was known also as Jitarkhan and Ginterkhan. 
Pop. (1867) 47,839; (1900) 121,580. Eight miles above Astra- 
khan, on the right bank of the Volga, are the ruins of two ancient 
cities superimposed one upon the other. In the upper, which 
may represent the city of Balanjar (Balansar, Belenjer), have 
been found gold and silver coins struck by Mongol rulers, as well 
as ornaments in the same metals. The older and scantier 
underlying ruins are supposed to be those of the once large and 
prosperous city of Itil or Atel (Etel, Idl) of the Arab geographers, 
a residence of the khan of the Khazars, destroyed by the Russians 
in 969- (P. A. K.) 

ASTROLABE (from Gr. acrpov, star, and \a@uv, to take), an 
instrument used n«t only for stellar, but for solar and lunar 
altitude-taking. The principle of the astrolabe is explained in 
fig. 2. There were two kinds, — spherical and planispheric. 

Fig. 2. — Principle of the Astrolabe. If a 
solid circle be fixed in any one position and 
a tube be pivoted on its centre so as to move; 
and if the line C D be drawn upon the circle 
pointing towards any object Q in the heavens 
which lies in the plane of the circle, by turn- 
ing the tube A B towards any other object 
P in the plane of the circle, the angle BOD will be the angle sub- 
tended by the two objects P and Q at the eye. 

The earliest forms were " armillae " and spherical. Gradually, 
from Eratosthenes to Tycho, Hipparchus playing the most 
important part among ancient astronomers, the complex astro- 
labe was evolved, large specimens being among the chief observa- 





tory instruments of the 15th, 16th and even 17th centuries; 
while small ones were in use among travellers and learned men, 
not only for astronomical, but for astrological and topographical 
purposes. Nearly every one of the modern instruments used for 
the observations of physical astronomy is a part of the perfected 
astrolabe. A collection of circles such as is the armillary sphere, 
if each circle were fitted with a view-tube, might be considered 
a complete astrolabe. Tycho's armillae were astrolabes. In 
fact the modern equatorial, and the altitude and azimuth circle 
are astrolabes in the strictest and oldest meaning of the term; 
and Tycho in one of his astrolabes came so near the modern 
equatorial that it may be taken as the first of the kind. 

The two forms of the planispheric astrolabe most widely 
known and used in the 15th, 16th and even 17th centuries were: 
(1) the portable astrolabe shown in 
fig. 1 (Plate). This originated in 
the East, and was in early use 
in India, Persia and Arabia, and 
was introduced into Europe by 
the Arabs, who had perfected it 
— perhaps as early as a.d. 700. 
It combines the planisphere and 
armillae of Hipparchus and 
others, and the theodolite of 
Theon, and was usually of brass, 
varying in diameter from a 
couple of inches to a foot or 
more. It was used for taking the 

altitudes of sun, moon and From Exercises, by T. Blundeville. 
stars; for calculating latitude; Fig. 3. — Mariner's Astrolabe, 

for determining the points of the a.d. 1594. Made of brass, or of 

compass, and time; for ascertain- heavv w , ood: . it varied in size 

V • i_ -. 1 ^ • o ' rom a few inches to 1 ft. in 

ing heights of mountains, &c; di ame ter. 

and for construction of horo- 
scopes. The instrument was a marvel of convenience and 
ingenuity, and was called " the mathematical jewel." Never- 
theless it passed out of use, because incapable of any great 
precision. 

(2) The mariner's astrolabe, fig. 3, was adapted from that of 
astronomers by Martin Behaim, c. 1480. This was the instru- 
ment used by Columbus. With the tables of the sun's declina- 
tion then available, he could calculate his latitude by meridian 
altitudes of the sun taken with his astrolabe. The mariner's 
astrolabe was superseded by John Hadley's quadrant of 1731. 

Authorities. — Chaucer, Treatise on the Astrolabe (Skeat's edition 
of Chaucer) ; J. J. Stoffler, Elucidatio Fabrice ususgue Astrolabii, 
&c. ; Thomas Blundeville, His Exercises (1594); F. Ritter, 
Astrolabium; W. H. Morley, Description of Astrolabe of Shah 
Husain; M. L. Huggins, " The Astrolabe " (Astrophysical Journal, 
1894); Penny Cyclopaedia, article "Astrolabe;" R. Grant, History 
of Physical Astronomy. (M. L. H.) 

ASTROLOGY, the ancient art or science of divining the fate 
and future of human beings from indications given by the posi- 
tions of the stars (sun, moon and planets). The belief in a 
connexion between the heavenly bodies and the life of man has 
played an important part in human history. For long ages 
astronomy and astrology (which might be called astromancy, 
on the same principle as " chiromancy ") were identified; and 
a distinction is made between " natural astrology," which pre- 
dicts the motions of the heavenly bodies, eclipses, &c, and 
" judicial astrology," which studies the influence of the stars on 
human destiny. Isidore of Seville (d. 636) is one of the first to 
distinguish between astronomy and astrology; nor did astronomy 
begin to rid itself of astrology till the 16th century, when, with 
the system of Copernicus, the conviction that the earth itself is 
one of the heavenly bodies was finally established. The study of 
astromancy and the belief in it, as part of astronomy, is found 
in a developed form among the ancient Babylonians, and 
directly or indirectly through the Babylonians spread to other 
nations. It came to Greece about the middle of the 4th century 
B.C., and reached Rome before the opening of the Christian 
era. In India and China astronomy and astrology are largely re- 
flections of Greek theories and speculations; and similarly with 



79 6 



ASI>ROL0GY 



the introduction of Greek culture into Egypt, both astronomy 
and astrology were actively cultivated in the region of the Nile 
during the Hellenistic and Roman periods. Astrology was 
further developed by the Arabs from the 7th to the 13th century, 
and in the Europe of the 14th and 15th centuries astrologers 
were dominating influences at court. 

Even up to the present day men of intellectual eminence like 
Dr Richard Garnett have convinced themselves that astromancy 
has a foundation of truth, just as there are still believers in 
chiromancy or other forms of divination. Dr Garnett (" A. G. 
Trent ") insisted indeed that it was a. mistake to confuse astrology 
with fortune- telling, and maintained that it was a "physical 
science just as much as geology," depending like them on 
ascertained facts, and grossly misrepresented by being connected 
with magic. Dr Garnett himself looked upon the study of bio- 
graphy in relation to the casting of horoscopes as an empirical 
investigation, but it is difficult in practice to keep the distinction 
clear, to judge by present-day text-books such as those of Dr 
Wilde (Primer of Astrology, &c). Dr Wilde insists on there being 
" nothing incongruous with the laws of nature in the theory 
that the sun, moon and stars influence men's physical bodies 
and conditions, seeing that man is made up of a physical part 
of the earth." There is an obvious tendency, however, for 
astromancy to be employed, like palmistry, as a means of 
imposing on the ignorant and credulous. How far the more 
serious claim is likely to be revived in connexion with the 
renewal of research into the " occult " sciences generally, it is 
still too early to speculate; and it has to be recognized that 
such a point of view is opposed to the generally established 
belief that astrology is either mere superstition or absolute 
imposture, and that its former vogue was due either to deception 
or to the tyranny of an unscientific environment. But if the 
progress of physical science has not prevented the rehabilitation 
of much of ancient alchemy by the later researches into chemical 
change, and if psychology now finds a place for explanations of 
spiritualism and witchcraft which involve the admission of the 
empirical facts under a new theory (as in the case of the divining- 
rod, &c), it is at least conceivable that some new synthesis 
might once more justify part at all events of ancient and medieval 
astromancy, to the extent of admitting the empirical facts where 
provable, and substituting for the supposed influence of the stars 
as such, some deeper theory which would be consistent with an 
application to other forms of prophecy, and thus might recon- 
cile the possibility of dipping into futurity with certain inter- 
relations of the universe, different indeed from those assumed 
by astrological theory, but underlying and explaining it. If 
this is ever accomplished it will need the patient investigation 
of a number of empirical observations by competent students 
unbiassed by any parti pris — a difficult set of conditions to 
obtain; and even then no definite results may be achieved. 

The history of astrology can now be traced back to ancient 
Babylonia, and indeed to the earliest phases of Babylonian 
history, i.e. to about 3000 B.C. In Babylonia as well as in Assyria 
as**a direct offshoot of Babylonian culture (or as we might also 
term it '" Euphratean " culture), astrology takes its place in the 
official cult as one of the two chief means at the disposal of the 
priests (who were called bare or " inspectors ") for ascertaining 
the will and intention of the gods, the other being through the 
inspection of the liver of the sacrificial animal (see Omen). Just 
as this latter method of divination rested on a well-defined theory, 
to wit, that the liver was the seat of the soul of the animal and 
that the deity in accepting the sacrifice identified himself with 
the animal, whose " soul " was thus placed in complete accord 
with that of the god and therefore reflected the mind and will 
of the god, so astrology is based on a theory of divine government 
of the world, which in contrast to " liver " divination assumes 
at the start a more scientific or pseudo-scientific aspect. This 
theory must be taken into consideration as a factor in accounting 
for the persistent hold which even at the present day astrology 
still maintains on many minds. Starting with the indisputable 
fact that man's life and happiness are largely dependent upon 
phenomena in the heavens, that the fertility of the soil is de- 



pendent upon the sun shining in the heavens as well as upon the 
rains that come from heaven, that on the other hand the mischief 
and damage done by storms and inundations, to both of which 
the Euphratean Valley was almost regularly subject, were to be 
traced likewise to the heavens, the conclusion was drawn that 
all the great gods had their seats in the heavens. In that early 
age of culture known as the "nomadic" stage, which under 
normal conditions precedes the " agricultural " stage, the moon 
cult is even more prominent than sun worship, and with the 
moon and sun cults thus furnished by the " popular " faith it 
was a natural step for the priests, who correspond to the " scien- 
tists " of a later day, to perfect a theory of a complete accord 
between phenomena observed in the heavens and occurrences on 
earth. 

If moon and sun, whose regular movements conveyed to the 
more intelligent minds the conception of the reign of law and 
order in the universe as against the more popular notion of 
chance and caprice, were divine powers, the same held good 
of the planets, whose movements, though more difficult to 
follow, yet in the course of time came to be at least partially 
understood. ; Of the planets five were recognized— Jupiter, 
Venus, Saturn, Mercury and Mars — to name them in the order 
in which they appear in the older cuneiform literature; in later 
texts Mercury and Saturn change places. These five planets 
were identified with the great gods of the pantheon as follows:— 
Jupiter with Marduk {q.v.), Venus with the goddess Ishtar (q.v.), 
Saturn with Ninib (q.v.), Mercury with Nebo (q.v.), and Mars 
with Nergal (q.v.). The movements of the sun, moon and five 
planets were regarded as representing the activity of the five 
gods in question, together with the moon-god Sin (q.v.) and the 
sun-god Shamash (q.v.), in preparing the occurrences on earth. 
If, therefore, one could correctly read and interpret the activity 
of these powers, one knew what the gods were aiming to bring 
about. The Babylonian priests accordingly applied themselves 
to the task of perfecting a system of interpretation of the pheno- 
mena to be observed in the heavens, and it was natural that the 
system was extended, from the moon, sun and five planets to the 
more prominent and recognizable fixed stars. That system in- 
volved not merely the movements of the moon, sun and planets, 
but. the observation of their relatiye position to one another and 
to all kinds of peculiarities noted at any point in the course of 
their movements: in the case of the moon, for instance, the 
exact appearance of the new crescent, its position in the heavens, 
the conditions at conjunction and opposition, the appearance 
of the horns, the halo frequently seen with the new moon, 
which was compared to a " cap," the ring round the full moon, 
which was called a "stall " (i.e. " enclosure "), and more of the 
like. To all these phenomena some significance was attached;, 
and this significance was naturally intensified in the case of 
such a striking phenomenon as an eclipse of the moon. Applying 
the same method of careful observation to the sun and planets, 
and later to some of the constellations and to many of the fixed 
stars, it will be apparent that the body of observations noted 
must have grown in the course of time to large and indeed to 
enormous proportions, and correspondingly the interpretations 
assigned to the nearly endless variations in the phenomena thus 
observed. The interpretations themselves were based (as in the 
case of divination through the liver) chiefly on two factors:—'- 
(1) on the recollection or on written records of what in the past 
had taken place when the phenomenon or phenomena in ques- 
tion had been observed, and (2) association of ideas— involving 
sometimes merely a play upon words — in connexion with the 
phenomenon or phenomena observed. Thus if on a certain 
occasion the rise of the hew moon in a cloudy sky was followed 
by victory over an enemy or by abundant rain, the sign in 
question was thus proved to be a favourable one and its recur- 
rence would be regarded as a good omen, though the prognostica- 
tion would not necessarily be limited to the one or the other of 
those occurrences, but might be extended to apply to other 
circumstances. On the other hand, the appearance of the new 
moon earlier than was expected was regarded as an unfavour- 
able omen — prognosticating in one case defeat, in another death 



ASTROLOGY 



797 



among cattle, in a third bad crops— not necessarily because 
these events actually took place after such a phenomenon, but 
by an application of the general principle resting upon association 
of ideas whereby anything premature would suggest an un- 
favourable occurrence. A thin halo seen above the new moon 
was pictured as a cap, and the association between this and the 
symbol of royalty, which was a conical-shaped cap, led to 
interpreting the phenomenon as an indication that the ruler 
would have a successful reign. In this way a mass of traditional 
interpretation of all kinds of observed phenomena was gathered, 
and once gathered became a guide to the priests for all times. 

Astrology in this its earliest stage is, however, marked by two 
characteristic limitations. In the first place, the movements 
and position of the heavenly bodies point to such occurrences 
as are of public import and affect the general welfare. The 
individual's interests are not in any way involved, and we must 
descend many centuries and pass beyond the confines of Baby- 
lonia and Assyria before we reach that phase which in medi- 
eval and modern astrology is almost exclusively dwelt upon — 
genethliology or the individual horoscope. In Babylonia and 
Assyria the cult centred largely and indeed almost exclusively 
in the public welfare and the person of the king, because 
upon his well-being and favour with the gods the fortunes of 
the country were dependent in accordance with the ancient 
conception of kingship (see J. G. Frazer, The Early History of 
Kingship). To some extent, the individual came in for his 
share in the incantations and in the purification ritual through 
which one might hope to rid oneself of the power of the demons 
and of other evil spirits, but outside of this the important aim 
of the priests was to secure for the general benefit the favour of 
the gods, or, as a means of preparing oneself for what the future 
had in store, to ascertain in time whether that favour would be 
granted in any particular instance or would be continued in the 
future. Hence in " liver " divination, as in astrology, the in- 
terpretations of the signs noted all have reference to public 
affairs and events and not to the individual's needs or desires. 
In the second place, the astronomical knowledge presupposed 
and accompanying early Babylonian astrology is essentially of 
an empirical character. While in a general way the reign of law 
and order in the movements of the heavenly bodies was recog- 
nized, and indeed must have exercised an influence at an early 
period in leading to the rise of a methodical divination that was 
certainly of a much higher order than the examination of an 
animal's liver, yet the importance that was laid upon the endless 
variations in the form of the phenomena and the equally numerous 
apparent deviations from what were regarded as normal condi- 
tions, prevented for a long time the rise of any serious study of 
astronomy beyond what was needed for the purely practical 
purposes that the priests as " inspectors " of the heavens (as 
they were also the " inspectors " of the sacrificial livers) had in 
mind. True, we have, probably as early as the days of Kham- 
murabi, i.e. c. 2000 B.C., the combinations of prominent groups 
of stars with outlines of pictures fantastically put together, but 
there is no evidence that prior to 700 B.C. more than a number 
of the constellations of our zodiac had become part of the 
current astronomy. The theory of the ecliptic as representing 
the course of the sun through the year, divided among twelve 
constellations with a measurement of 30 to each division, is 
also of Babylonian origin, as has now been definitely proved; 
but it does not appear to have been perfected until after the fall 
of the Babylonian empire in 539 B.C. Similarly, the other 
accomplishments of Babylonian astronomers, such as their 
system or rather systems of moon calculations and the drawing 
up of planetary tablets, belong to this late period, so that the 
golden age of Babylonian astronomy belongs not to the remote 
past, as was until recently supposed, but to the Seleucid period, 
i.e. after the advent of the Greeks in the Euphrates Valley. 
From certain expressions used in astrological texts that are 
earlier than the 7th century B.C. it would appear, indeed, that 
the beginnings at least of the calculation of sun and moon 
edipses belong to the earlier period, but here, too, the chief 
work accomplished was after 400 b.c, and the defectiveness of 



early Babylonian astronomy may be gathered from the fact that 
as late as the 6th century B.C. an error of almost an entire month 
was made by the Babylonian astronomers in the attempt to 
determine through calculation the beginning of a certain year. 

The researches of Bouche-Leclercq, Cumont and Boll have 
enabled us to fix with a considerable degree of definiteness the 
middle of the 4th century B.C. as the period when Babylonian 
astrology began its triumphal march to the west, invading the 
domain of Greek and Roman culture and destined to exercise 
a strong hold on all nations and groups — more particularly in 
Egypt — that came within the sphere of Greek and Roman 
influence. It is rather significant that this spread of astrology 
should have been concomitant with the intellectual impulse that 
led to the rise of a genuine scientific phase of astronomy in 
Babylonia itself, which must have weakened to some extent 
the hold that astrology had on the priests and the people. The 
advent of the Persians, bringing with them a conception of religion 
of a far higher order than Babylonian-Assyrian polytheism (see 
Zoroaster), must also have acted as a disintegrating factor 
in leading to the decline of the old faith in the Euphrates 
Valley, and we thus have the interesting though not entirely 
exceptional phenomenon of a great civilization bequeathing as 
a legacy to posterity a superstition instead of a real achievement. 
"Chaldaean wisdom" became among Greeks and Romans the 
synonym of divination through the planets and stars, and it is 
not surprising that in the course of time to be known as a 
" Chaldaean " carried with it frequently the suspicion of char- 
latanry and of more or less wilful deception. The spread : of 
astrology beyond Babylonia is thus concomitant with the rise 
of a truly scientific astronomy in Babylonia itself, which in turn 
is due to the intellectual impulse afforded by the contact with 
new forms of culture from both the East and the West. 

In the hands of the Greeks and of the later Egyptians both 
astrology and astronomy were carried far beyond the limits 
attained by the Babylonians, and it is indeed a matter of surprise 
to observe the harmonious combination of the two fields-— a 
harmony that seems to grow more complete with each age, and 
that is not broken until we reach the threshold of modern science 
in the 16th century. To the Greek astronomer Hipparchus 
belongs the credit of the discovery (c. 130 B.C.) of the theory of 
the precession of the equinoxes, for a knowledge of which among 
the Babylonians we find no definite proof; but such a : signal 
advance in pure science did not prevent the Greeks from develop- 
ing in a most elaborate manner the theory of the influence of the 
planets upon the fate of the individual. The endeavour to trace 
the horoscope of the individual from the position of the planet s 
and stars at the time of birth (or, as was attempted by other* 
astrologers, at the time of conception) represents the most 
significant contribution of the Greeks to astrology. The system 
was carried to such a degree of perfection that later ages made 
but few additions of an essential character to the genethliology 
or drawing up of the individual horoscope by the Greek astro- 
logers. The system was taken up almost bodily by the Arab 
astronomers, it was embodied in the Kabbalistic lore of Jews and 
Christians, and through these and other channels came to be the 
substance of the astrology of the middle ages, forming, as aheady 
pointed out, under the designation of "judicial astrology," a 
pseudo-science which was placed on a perfect footing of equality 
with " natural astrology " or the more genuine science of the 
study of the motions and phenomena of the heavenly bodies. 

Partly in further development of views unfolded in Babylonia, 
but chiefly under Greek influences, the scope of astrology was 
enlarged until it was brought into connexion with practically all 
of the known sciences, botany, chemistry, zoology, mineralogy, 
anatomy and medicine. Colours, metals, stones, plants, drugs 
and animal life of all kinds were associated with the planets; and 
placed under their tutelage. In the system that passes under the, 
name of Ptolemy, Saturn is associated with grey, Jupiter with 
white, Mars with red, Venus with yellow, while Mercury, occupy- 
ing a peculiar place in Greek as it did in Babylonian astrology 
(where it was at one time designated as the planet par excel' 
/«nce),'Was supposed to vary its colour according to changing 



798 



ASTROLOGY 



circumstances. The sun was associated with gold, the moon with 
silver, Jupiter with electrum, Saturn with lead, Venus with copper, 
and so on, while the continued influence of astrological motives 
is to be seen in the association of quicksilver, upon its discovery 
at a comparatively late period, with Mercury, because of its 
changeable character as a solid and a liquid. In the same way 
stones were connected with both the planets and the months; 
plants, by diverse association of ideas, were connected with the 
planets, and animals likewise were placed under the guidance 
and protection of one or other of the heavenly bodies. By this 
curious process of combination the entire realm of the natural 
sciences was translated into the language of astrology with the 
single avowed purpose of seeing in all phenomena signs indicative 
of what the future had in store. The fate of the individual, as 
that feature of the future which had a supreme interest, led to 
the association of the planets with parts of the body. Here, too, 
we find various systems devised, in part representing the views 
of different schools, in part reflecting advancing conceptions 
regarding the functions of the organs in man and animals. In 
one system the seat of Mercury, representing divine intelligence as 
the source of all knowledge — a view that reverts to Babylonia 
where Nebo (corresponding to Mercury) was regarded as the 
divine power to whom all wisdom is due- — was placed in the liver 
as the primeval seat of the soul (see Omen), whereas in other 
systems this distinction was assigned to Jupiter or to Venus. 
Saturn, taking in Greek astrology the place at the head of the 
planets which among the Babylonians was accorded to Jupiter- 
Marduk, was given a place in the brain, which in later times was 
looked upon as the centre of soul-life; Venus, as the planet of 
the passion of love, was supposed to reign supreme over the 
genital organs, the belly and the lower limbs; Mars, as the 
violent planet, is associated with the bile, as well as with the 
blood and kidneys. Again, the right ear is associated with 
Saturn, the left ear with Mars, the right eye in the case of the male 
with the sun and the left eye with the moon, while in the case 
of the female it was just the reverse. From the planets the same 
association of ideas was applied to the constellations of the 
zodiac, which in later phases of astrology are placed on a par 
with the planets themselves, so far as their importance for the 
individual horoscope is concerned. The fate of the individual 
in this combination of planets with the zodiac was made 
dependent not merely upon the planet which happened to be 
rising at the time of birth or of conception, but also upon its 
local relationship to a special sign or to certain signs of the zodiac. 
The zodiac was regarded as the prototype of the human body, 
the different parts of which all had their corresponding section 
in the zodiac itself. The head was placed in the first sign of the 
zodiac — the Ram ; and the feet in the last sign — the Fishes. 
Between these two extremes the other parts and organs of the 
body were distributed among the remaining signs of the zodiac, 
the neck being assigned to the Bull, the shoulders and arms to 
the Gemini (or twins), the breast to Cancer, the flanks to Leo, 
the bladder to Virgo, the buttocks to the Balance, the pubis to 
the Scorpion, the thighs to Sagittarius, the knees to Capricorn, 
and the limbs to Aquarius. Not content with this, we find the 
late Egyptian astrologers setting up a correspondence between 
the thirty-six decani recognized by them and the human body, 
which is thus divided into thirty-six parts; to each part a god 
was assigned as a controlling force. With human anatomy thus 
connected with the planets, with constellations, and with single 
stars, medicine became an integral part of astrology, or, 
as we might also put it, astrology became the handmaid of 
medicine. Diseases and distrubances of the ordinary functions 
of the organs were attributed to the influence of planets or 
explained as due to conditions observed in a constellation or in 
the position of a star; and an interesting survival of this bond 
between astrology and medicine is to be seen in the. use up to 
the present time of the sign of Jupiter . QJ., which still heads 
medicinal prescriptions, while, on the other hand, the influence 
of planetary lore appears in the assignment of the days of the 
week to the planets, beginning with Sunday, assigned to the sun, 
and ending with Saturday, the day of Saturn. Passing on into 



still later periods, Saturn's day was associated with the Jewish 
sabbath, Sunday with the Lord's Day, Tuesday with Tiw, the 
god of war, corresponding to Mars of the Romans and to the 
Nergal of the Babylonians. Wednesday was assigned to the 
planet Mercury, the equivalent of the Germanic god Woden; 
Thursday to Jupiter, the equivalent of Thor; and Friday to 
Friga, the goddess of love, who is represented by Venus among 
the Romans and among the Babylonians by Ishtar. Astrological 
considerations likewise already regulated in ancient Babylonia 
the distinction of lucky and unlucky days, which passing down 
to the Greeks and Romans (dies fasti and nefasti) found a striking 
expression in Hesiod's Works and Days. Among the Arabs 
similar associations of lucky and unlucky days directly connected 
with the influence of the planets prevailed through all times, 
Tuesday and Wednesday, for instance, being regarded as the 
days for blood-letting, because Tuesday was connected with 
Mars, the lord of war and blood, and Wednesday with Mercury, 
the planet of humours. Even in modern times travellers relate 
how, when an auspicious day has been proclaimed by the astro- 
logers, the streets of Bagdad may be seen running with blood 
from the barbers' shops. 

It is unnecessary here to give a detailed analysis of the methods 
of judicial astrology as an art, or directions for the casting of a 
horoscope, or " nativity," i.e. a map of the heavens at the hour 
of birth, showing, according to the Ephemeris, the position of 
the heavenly bodies, from which their influence may be deduced. 
Each of the twelve signs of the zodiac (g.v.) is credited with its 
own characteristics and influence, and is the controlling sign of 
its " house of life." The sign exactly rising at the moment of 
birth is called the ascendant. The benevolent or malignant 
influence of each planet, together with the sun and moon, is 
modified by the sign it inhabits at the nativity ; thus Jupiter 
in one house may indicate riches, fame in another, beauty in 
another, and Saturn similarly poverty, obscurity or deformity. 
The calculation is affected by the " aspects," i.e. according as 
the planets are near or far as regards one another (in conjunction, 
in semi-sextile, semi-square, sextile, quintile, square, trine, 
sesqui-quadrate, bi-quintile, opposition or parallel acclination). 
Disastrous signs predominate over auspicious, and the various 
effects are combined in a very elaborate and complicated manner. 

Judicial astrology, as a form of divination, is a concomitant 
of natural astrology, in its purer astronomical aspect, but mingled 
with what is now considered an unscientific and superstitious 
view of world-forces. In the Janua aurea reserata quatuor 
linguarum (1643) of J. A. Comenius we find the following 
definition:—" Astronomus siderum meatus sen motus considerat: 
Astrologus eorundem efficaciam, influxum, et ejfectum." Kepler 
was more cautious in his opinion; he spoke of astronomy as 
the wise mother, and astrology as the foolish daughter, but he 
added that the existence of the daughter was necessary to the 
life of the mother. Tycho Brahe and Gassendi both began with 
astrology, and it was only after pursuing the false science, and 
finding it wanting, that Gassendi devoted himself to astronomy. 
In their numerous allusions to the subtle mercury, which the one 
makes when treating of a means of measuring time by the efflux 
of the metal, and the other in a treatise on the transit of the 
planet, we see traces of the school in which they served their first 
apprenticeship. Huygens, moreover, in his great posthumous 
work, Cosmotheoros, sen de terris coelestibus, shows himself a 
more exact observer of astrological symbols than Kircher him- 
self in his Iter exstaticum. Huygens contends that between the 
inhabitants of different planets there need not be any greater 
difference than exists between men of different types on the earth. 
" There are on the earth," continues this rational interpreter 
of the astrologers and chiromancers, " men of cold temperament 
who would thrive in Saturn, which is the farthest planet from 
the sun, and there are other spirits warm and ardent enough 
to live in Venus." 

Those were indeed strange times, according to modern ideas, 
when astrologers were dominant by the terror they inspired, 
and sometimes by the martydom they endured when their pre- 
dictions were either too true or too false. Faith, to borrow their 



ASTROLOGY 



799 



own language, was banished to Virgo, and rarely shed her 
influence on men. Cardan (1501-1576), for instance, hated 
Luther, and so changed his birthday in order to give him an 
unfavourable horoscope. In Cardan's times, as in those of 
Augustus, it was a common practice for men to conceal the day 
and hour of their birth, till, like Augustus, they found a com- 
plaisant astrologer. But, as a general rule, medieval and Renais- 
sance astrologers did not give themselves the trouble of reading 
the stars, but contented themselves with telling fortunes by 
faces. They practised chiromancy (see Palmistry), and relied 
on afterwards drawing a horoscope to suit. As physiognomists 
(see Physiognomy) their talent was undoubted, and according to 
Vanini there was no need to mount to the house-top to cast a 
nativity. " Yes," he says, " I can read his face; by his hair 
and his forehead it is easy to guess that the sun at his birth 
was in the sign of Libra and near Venus. Nay, his complexion 
shows that Venus touches Libra. By the rules of astrology he 
could not lie." 

A few salient facts may be added concerning the astrologers 
and their predictions, remarkable either for their fulfilment or 
for the ruin and confusion they brought upon their authors. We 
may begin with one taken from Bacon's Essay 0} Prophecies: — 
" When I was in France, I heard from one Dr Pena, that the 
queen mother, who was given to curious arts, caused the king 
her husband's nativitie to be calculated, under a false name; 
and the astrologer gave a judgment, that he should be killed in 
a duell; at which the queene laughed, thinking her husband to 
be above challenges and duels; but he was slaine, upon a course 
at tilt, the splinters of the staffe of Mongomery going in at his 
bever." A favourite topic of the astrologers of all countries has 
been the immediate end of the world. As early as 11 86 the 
earth had escaped one threatened cataclysm of the astrologers. 
This did not prevent Stoffler from predicting a universal deluge 
for the year 1524 — a year, as it turned out, distinguished for 
drought. His aspect of the heavens told him that in that year 
three planets would meet in the aqueous sign of Pisces. The 
prediction was believed far and wide, and President Aurial, at 
Toulouse, built himself a Noah's ark — a curious realization, in 
fact, of Chaucer's merry invention in the Miller's Tale. 

Tycho Brahe was from his fifteenth year devoted to astrology, 
and adjoining his observatory at Uranienburg the astronomer- 
royal of Denmark had a laboratory built in order to study 
alchemy, and it was only a few years before his death that he 
finally abandoned astrology. We may here notice one very 
remarkable prediction of the master of Kepler. That he had 
carefully studied the comet of 1577 as an astronomer, we may 
gather from his adducing the very small parallax of this comet 
as disproving the assertion ' of the Aristotelians that a solid 
sphere enveloped the heavens. But besides this, we find him 
in his character of astrologer drawing a singular prediction from 
the appearance of this comet. It announced, he tells us, that in 
the north, in Finland, there should be born a prince who should 
lay waste Germany and vanish in 1632. Gustavus Adolphus, 
it is well known, was born in Finland, overran Germany, and died 
in 1632. The fulfilment of the details of this prophecy suggests 
that Tycho Brahe had some basis of reason for his prediction. 
Born in Denmark of a noble Swedish family, a politician, as were 
all his contemporaries of distinction, Tycho, though no conjuror, 
could foresee the advent of some great northern hero. Moreover, 
he was doubtless well acquainted with a very ancient tradition, 
that heroes generally came from the northern frontiers of their 
native land, where they are hardened and tempered by the 
threefold struggle they wage with soil, climate and barbarian 
neighbours. 

Kepler explained the double movement of the earth by the 
rotation of the sun. At one time the sun presented its friendly 
side, which attracted one planet, sometimes its adverse side, 
which repelled it. He also peopled the planets with souls and 
genii. He was led to his three great laws by musical analogies, 
just as William Herschel afterwards passed from music to 
astronomy. Kepler, who in his youth made almanacs, and once 
prophesied a hard winter, which came to pass, could not help 



putting an astrological interpretation on the disappearance of 
the brilliant star of 1572, which Tycho had observed. Theodore 
Beza thought that this star, which in December 1573 equalled 
Jupiter in brilliancy, predicted the second coming of Christ. 
Astronomers were only then beginning to study variable and 
periodic stars, and disturbances in that part of the heavens, 
which had till then, on the authority of Aristotle, been regarded 
as incorruptible, combined with the troubles of the times, must 
have given a new stimulus to belief in the signs in heaven. 
Montaigne (Essais, lib. i. chap, x.) relates a singular episode 
in the history of astrology. Charles V. and Francis I., who both 
bid for the friendship of the infamous Aretino, surnamed the 
divine, both likewise engaged astrologers to fight their battles. 
In Italy those who prophesied the ruin of France were sure to be 
listened to. These prophecies affected the public funds much 
as telegrams do nowadays. " At Rome," Montaigne tells us, " a 
large sum of money was lost on the Change by this prognostica- 
tion of our ruin." The marquis of Saluces, notwithstanding his 
gratitude to Francis I. for the many favours he had received, 
including his marquisate, of which the brother was despoiled 
for his benefit, was led in 1536 to betray his country, being scared 
by the glorious prophecies of the ultimate success of Charles V. 
which were then rife. The influence of the Medici made astro- 
logers popular in France. Richelieu, on whose council was 
Jacques Gaffarel (1601-1681), the last of the Kabbalists, did not 
despise astrology as an engine of government. At the birth of 
Louis XIV. a certain Morin de Villefranche was placed behind 
a curtain to cast the nativity of the future autocrat. A genera- 
tion back the astrologer would not have been hidden behind a 
curtain, but have taken precedence of the doctor. La Bruyere 
dares not pronounce against such beliefs, " for there are per- 
plexing facts affirmed by grave men who were eye-witnesses." 
In England William Lilly and Robert Fludd were both dressed 
in a little brief authority. The latter gives us elaborate rules 
for the detection of a thief, and tells us that he has had personal 
experience of their efficacy. " If the lord of the sixth house is 
found in the second house, or in company with the lord of the 
second house, the thief is one of the family. If Mercury is in 
the sign of the Scorpion he will be bald, &c." Francis Bacon 
abuses the astrologers of his day no less than the alchemists, but 
he does so because he has visions of a reformed astrology and a 
reformed alchemy. Sir Thomas Browne, too, while he denies 
the capacity of the astrologers of his day, does not venture to 
dispute the reality of the science. The idea of the souls of men 
passing at death to the stars, the blessedness of their particular 
sphere being assigned them according to their deserts (the 
metempsychosis of J. Reynaud), may be regarded as a survival 
of religious astrology, which, even as late as Descartes's day, 
assigned to the angels the task of moving the planets and the stars. 
Joseph de Maistre believed in comets as messengers of divine 
justice, and in animated planets, and declared that divination 
by astrology is not an absolutely chimerical science. Lastly, 
we may mention a few distinguished men who ran counter to 
their age in denying stellar influences. Aristarchus of Samos, 
Martianus Capella (the precursor of Copernicus), Cicero, Favo- 
rinus, Sextus Empiricus, Juvenal, and in a later age Savonarola 
and Pico della Mirandola, and La Fontaine, a contemporary of 
the neutral La Bruyere, were all pronounced opponents of 
astrology. 

In England Swift may fairly claim the credit of having given 
the death-blow to astrology by his famous squib, entitled 
Prediction for the Year 1708, by Isaac Bickerstajf, Esq. He begins, 
by professing profound belief in the art, and next points out the 
vagueness and the absurdities of the philomaths. He then, in 
the happiest vein of parody, proceeds to show them a more 
excellent way:—" My first prediction is but a trifle, yet 1 
mention it to show how ignorant these sottish pretenders to 
astrology are in their own concerns: it refers to Partridge the 
almanac-maker. I have consulted the star of his nativity by 
my own rules, and find he will infallibly die upon the 29th of 
March next about eleven at night of a raging fever. Therefore 
I advise him to consider of it and settle his affairs in time." 



8oo 



ASTRONOMY 



[GENERAL 



Then followed a letter to a person of quality giving a full and 
particular account of the death of Partridge on the very day 
and nearly at the hour mentioned. In vain the wretched 
astrologer protested that he was alive, got a literary friend to 
write a pamphlet to prove it, and published his almanac for 1709. 
Swift, in his reply, abused him for his want of manners in giving 
a gentleman the lie, answered his arguments seriatim, and 
declared that the evidence of the publication of another almanac 
was wholly irrelevant, " for Gadbury, Poor Robin, Dove and 
Way do yearly publish their almanacs, though several of them 
have been dead since before the Revolution." Nevertheless a 
field is found even to this day for almanacs of a similar type, 
and for popular belief in them. 

To astrological politics we owe the theory of heaven-sent rulers, 
instruments in the hands of Providence, and saviours of society. 
Napoleon, as well as Wallenstein, believed in his star. Many 
passages in the older English poets are unintelligible without 
some knowledge of astrology. Chaucer wrote a treatise on the 
astrolabe; Milton constantly refers to planetary influences; 
in Shakespeare's King Lear, Gloucester and Edmund represent 
respectively the old and the new faith. We still contemplate and 
consider; we still speak of men as jovial, saturnine or mercurial; 
we still talk of the ascendancy of genius, or a disastrous defeat. 
In French heur, malheur, heureux, malheureux, are all derived 
from the Latin augurium; the expression ni sous une mauvaise 
itoile, born under an evil star, corresponds (with the change of 
Hoile into astre) to the word malotru, in Provencal malastrue; 
and son itoile pdlit, his star grows pale, belongs to the same class 
of illusions. The Latin ex augurio appears in the Italian sciagura, 
sciagurato, softened into sciaura, sciawato, wretchedness, 
wretched. The influence of a particular planet has also left 
traces in various languages; but the French and English jovial 
and the English saturnine correspond rather to the gods who 
served as types in chiromancy than to the planets which bear 
the same names. In the case of the expressions bien or mal 
luni, well or ill mooned, avoir un quartier de lune dans la tite, to 
have the quarter of the moon in one's head, the German mond- 
siichtig and the English moonstruck or lunatic, the fundamental 
idea lies in the strange opinions formerly held about the moon. 

Bibliography.— For the history of astrology with its affinities to 
astronomy on the one hand, and to other forms of popular belief on 
the other, the following works out of a large number that might 
be mentioned are specially recommended: — A. Bouche-Leclercq, 
L'Astrologie grecque (Paris, 1899), with a full bibliography; Franz 
Boll, Sphaera (Leipzig, 1903) ; Franz Cumont, Catalogus Codicum 
Astrologorum Graecorum (Brussels, 1898; 7 parts published up to 
1909); Franz Boll, " Die Erforschung der antiken Astrologie " (in 
Neue Jahrbiicher fiir das klassische Altertum, Band xxi. Heft 2, pp. 
103-126) ; Franz Cumont, Les Religions orientates dans le paganisme 
romain (Paris, 1907) (ch. vii. " L'Astrologie et la magie '); Alfred 
Maury, La Magie et Vastrologie a I'antiquite et au moyen age (4th ed., 
Paris, 1877); R. C. Thompson, Reports of the Magicians and As- 
trologers of Nineveh and Babylon (2 vols., London, 1900) ; F. X. 
Kugler, Sternkunde und Sterndienst in Babel (Freiburg, 1907;— to 
be completed in 4 vols.); Ch. Virolleaud, L'Astrologie chaldeenne 
(Paris, 1905 — to be completed in 8 parts — transliteration and 
translations of cuneiform texts) ; Jastrow, Religion Babyloniens und 
Assyriens (Parts 13 and 14); also certain sections in Bouche- 
Leclercq, Histoire de la divination dans Vantiquili (Paris, 1879), 
vol. i. pp. 205-257; in Marcellin Berthelot, Les Origines de Valthimie 
(Paris, 1885), pp. 1-56; Ferd. Hofer, Histoire de I'astronomie (Paris, 
1846), pp. 1-90; in Rudolf Wolf, Geschichte der Astronomie (Munich, 
1877), ch. i. See also the article by Ernst Riess on Astrology in 
Pauly-Wissowa, Realencyclopadie der klassischen Altertumswissen- 
schaft, vol. ii. (Stuttgart, 1896). For modern and practical astro- 
logy the following works may be found useful in different ways: 
E. M. Bennett, Astrology (New York, 1894); J. M. Pfaff, Astrologie 
(Bamberg, 1816); G. Wilde, Chaldaean Astrology up to date (1901); 
R. Garnett (" A. G. Trent "), " The Soul and the Stars," in the 
University Magazine, 1880 (reprinted in Dobson and Wilde, Natal 
Astrology, 1893) < Abel Haatan, Traite d 'astrologie judiciaire (Paris, 
1825); Fomalhaut, Manuel d' astrologie spherique el judiciaire (Paris, 
1897)- (M. Ja.) 

ASTRONOMY (from Gr. h\arpov, a star, and ve/jtuv, to classify 
or arrange). The subject matter of astronomical science, con- 
sidered in its widest range, comprehends all the matter of the 
universe which lies outside the limit of the earth's atmosphere. 
The seeming anomaly of classifying as a single branch of science 



all that we know in a field so wide, while subdividing our know^ 
ledge of things on our own planet into an indefinite number of 
separate sciences, finds its explanation in the impossibility of 
subjecting the matter of the heavens to that experimental 
scrutiny which yields such rich results when applied to matter 
which we can handle at will. Astronomy is of necessity a science 
of observation in the pursuit of which experiment can directly 
play no part. It is the most ancient of the sciences because, 
before the era of experiment, it was the branch of knowledge 
which could be most easily systematized, while the relations of 
its phenomena to day and night, times and seasons, made some 
knowledge of the subject a necessity of social life. In recent 
times it is among the more progressive of the sciences, because 
the new and improved methods of research now at command 
have found in its cultivation a field of practically unlimited 
extent, in which the lines of research may ultimately lead to a 
comprehension of the universe impossible of attainment before 
our time. 

The field we have defined is divisible into at least two parts, 
that of Astronomy proper, or " Astrometry," which treats of 
the motions, mutual relations and dimensions of the heavenly 
bodies; and that of Astrophysics (q.v.), which treats of their 
physical constitution. While it is true that the instruments and 
methods of research in these two branches are quite different in 
their details, there is so much in common in the fundamental 
principles which underlie their application, that it is unprofitable 
to consider them as completely distinct sciences. 

Speaking in the most comprehensive way, and making an 
exception of the ethereal medium (see Aether), which, being 
capable of experimental study, is not included in the subject 
of astronomy, we may say that the great masses of matter which 
make up the universe are of two kinds: — (1) incandescent bodies, 
made visible to us by their own light; (2) dark bodies, revolving 
round them or round each other. These dark bodies are known 
to us in two ways: (a) by becoming visible through reflecting 
the light from incandescent bodies in their neighbourhood- (b) 
by their attraction upon such bodies. 

The incandescent bodies are of two classes: stars and nebulae. 
Among the stars our sun is to be included, as it has no properties 
which distinguish it from the great mass of stars except our 
proximity to it. The stars are supposed to be generally spherical, 
like the sun, in form, and to have fairly well-defined boundaries; 
while the nebulae are generally irregular in outline and have no 
well-defined limits. It is, however, probable that the one class 
runs into the other by imperceptible gradations. In the relation 
of the universe to us there is yet another separation of its bodies 
into two classes, one comprising the solar system, the other 
the remainder of the universe. The former consists of the sun 
and the bodies which move round it. Considered as a part of 
the universe, our solar system is insignificant in extent, though, 
for obvious reasons, great in practical importance to us, and in 
the facility with which we may gain knowledge relating to it. 

Referring to special articles, Solar System, Star, Sun, Moon, 
&c. for a description of the various parts of the universe, we 
confine ourselves, at present, to setting forth a few of the most 
general modern conceptions of the universe. As to extent, it 
may be said, in a general way, that while no definite limits can 
be set to the possible extent of the universe, or the distance of 
its farthest bodies, it seems probable, for reasons which will be 
given under Star, that the system to which the stars that we see 
belong, is of finite extent. 

As the incandescent bodies of the universe are visible by their 
own light, the problem of ascertaining their existence and 
position is mainly one of seeing, and our facilities for attacking 
it have constantly increased with the improvement of our optical 
appliances. But such is not the case with the dark bodies. 
Such a body can be made known to us only when in the neigh- 
bourhood of an incandescent body; and even then, unless its 
mass or its dimensions are considerable, it will evade all the 
scrutiny of our science. The question of the possible number 
and magnitude of such bodies is therefore one that does not 
admit of accurate investigation. We can do no more thari 



SPHERICAL] 



ASTRONOMY 



8o: 



balance vague estimates of probability. What we do know is 
that these bodies vary widely in size. Those known to be 
revolving round certain of the stars are far larger in proportion 
to their central bodies than our planets are in respect to the sun; 
for were it otherwise we should never be able to detect their 
existence. At the other extreme we know that innumerable 
swarms of minute bodies, probably little more than particles, 
move round the sun in orbits of every degree of eccentricity, 
making themselves known to us only in the exceptional cases 
when they strike the earth's atmosphere. They then appear 
to us as " shooting stars " (see Meteor). 

A general idea of the relation of the solar system to the universe 
may be gained by reflecting that the average distance between 
any two neighbouring stars is several thousand times the extent 
of the solar system. Between the orbit of Neptune and the 
nearest star known to us is an immense void in which no bodies 
are yet known to exist, except comets. But although these 
sometimes wander to distances considerably beyond the orbit 
of Neptune, it is probable that the extent of the void which 
separates our system from the nearest star is hundreds of times 
the distance of the farthest point to which a comet ever recedes. 

We may conclude this brief characterization of astronomy 
with a statement and classification of the principal lines on 
which astronomical researches are now pursued. The most 
comprehensive problem before the investigator is that of the 
constitution of the universe. It is known that, while infinite 
diversity is found among the bodies of the universe, there are 
also common characteristics throughout its whole extent. In 
a certain sense we may say that the universe now presents itself 
to the thinking astronomer, not as a heterogeneous collection 
of bodies, but as a unified whole. The number of stars is so vast 
that statistical methods can be applied to many of the characters 
which they exhibit — their spectra, their apparent and absolute 
luminosity, and their arrangement in space. Thus has arisen 
in recent times what we may regard as a third branch of astro- 
nomical science, known as Stellar Statistics. The development of 
this branch has infused life and interest into what might a few 
years ago have been regarded as the most lifeless mass of figures 
possible, expressing merely the positions and motions of innumer^ 
able individual stars, as determined by generations of astro- 
nomical observers. The development of this new branch requires 
great additions to this mass, the product of perhaps centuries 
of work on the older lines of the science. To the statistician of 
the stars, catalogues of spectra, magnitude, position and proper 
motions are of the same importance that census tables are to the 
student of humanity. The measurement of the speed with which 
the individual stars are moving towards or from our system is a 
work of such magnitude that what has yet been done is scarcely 
more than a beginning. The discovery by improved optical 
means, and especially by photography, of new bodies of our 
system so small that they evaded all scrutiny in former times, 
is still going on, but does not at present promise any important 
generalization, unless we regard as such the conclusion that our 
solar system is a more complex organism than was formerly 
supposed. 

One characteristic of astronomy which tends to make its 
progress slow and continuous arises out of the general fact that, 
except in the case of motions to or from us, which can be deter- 
mined by a single observation with the spectroscope, the motion 
of a heavenly body can be determined only by comparing its 
position at two different epochs. The interval required between 
these two epochs depends upon the speed of the motion. In the 
case of the greater number of the fixed stars this is so slow that 
centuries may have to elapse before motion can be deduced. 
Even in the case of the planets, the variations in the form and 
position of the orbits are so slow that long periods of observation 
are required for their correct determination. 

The process of development is also made slow and difficult by 
the great amount of labour involved in deriving the results of 
astronomical observations. When an astronomer has made an 
observation, it still has to be " reduced," and this commonly 
requires more labour than that involved in making it. But 

ii. 26 



even this labour may be small compared with that of the theo- 
retical astronomer, who, in the future, is to use the result as the 
raw material of his work. The computations required in such 
work are of extreme complexity, and the labour required is still 
further increased by the, fact that cases are rather exceptional in 
which the results reached by one generation will not have to be 
revised and reconstructed by another; processes which may 
involve the repetition of the entire work. We may, in fact, regard 
the fabric of astronomical science as a building in the construction 
of which no stone can be added without a readjustment of some 
of the stones on which it has to rest. Thus it comes about that 
the observer, the computer, and the mathematician have in astro- 
nomical science a practically Unlimited field for the exercise of 
their powers. 

In treating so comprehensive a subject we may naturally 
distinguish between what we know of the universe and the 
methods and processes by which that knowledge is acquired. 
The former may be termed general, and the latter practical, 
astronomy. When we descend more minutely into details we 
find these two branches of the subject to be connected by certain 
principles, the application of which relates to both subjects. 
Considering as general or descriptive astronomy a description of 
the universe as we now understand it, the other branches of the 
subject generally recognized are as follows: — 

Geometrical or Spherical Astronomy, by the principles of which 
the positions and the motions of the-heaveniy bodies are defined. 

Theoretical Astronomy, .which may be considered as an exten- 
sion of geometrical astronomy and includes the determination of 
the positions and motions of the heavenly bodies by combining 
mathematical theory with observation. Modern theoretical 
astronomy, taken in the most limited sense, is based upon 
Celestial Mechanics, the science by which, using purely deductive 
mechanical methods, the laws of motion oi the heavenly bodies 
are derived by deductive methods from their mutual gravitation 
towards each other. 

Practical Astronomy, which comprises a description of the 
instruments used in astronomical observation, and of the 
principles and methods underlying their application. 

Spherical ot Geometrical Astronomy. 

In astronomy, as in analytical geometry, the position of a 
point is defined by stating its distance and its direction from a 
point of reference taken as known. The numerical quantities by 
which the distance and direction, and therefore the position, are 
defined, are termed co-ordinates of the point. The latter are 
measured or defined with regard to a fixed system of lines and 
planes, which form the basis of the system. 

The following are the fundamental concepts of such a system. 

(0) An origin or point of reference. The points most generally 
taken for this purpose in astronomical practice are the following : — 

(1) The posrtiori of a point of observation on the earth's surface. 
We conceive its position to be that occupied by an observer. The 
position of a heavenly body is then defined by its direction and 
distance from the supposed observer. 

(2) The centre of the earth. This point, though it can never be 
occupied by an observer, is Used because the positions of the heavenly 
bodies in relation to it are more readily computed than they can be 
from a point on the earth's surface. 

(3) The centre of the sun. 

(4) In addition to these three most usual points, we may, of 
course, take the centre of a planet or that of a star in order to define 
the position of bodies in their respective neighbourhoods. 

Co-ordinates referred to a point of observation as the origin are 
termed " apparent," those referred to the centre of the earth are 
" geocentric," those referred to the centre of the sun, " heliocentric." 

(6) The next concept of the system is a fundamental pjane, 
regarded as fixed, passing through the origin. In connexion with it 
is an axis perpendicular to it, also passing through the origin. We 
may consider the axis and the plane as a single concept, the axis 
determining the plane, Or the plane the axis. The fundamental 
concepts of this class most in use are : — 

(1) When a point on the earth's surface is taken as the origin, 
the fundamental axis may be the direction of gravity at that point. 
This direction defines the vertical line. The fundamental plane 
which it determines is horizontal arid is termed the plane of the 
horizon. Such a plane is realized in the surface of a liquid, a basia 
of quicksilver, for example. 

II 



8o2 



ASTRONOMY 



[SPHERICAL 




(2) When the centre of the earth is taken as origin, the most 
natural fundamental axis is that of the earth's rotation. This axis 
cuts the earth's surface at the North and South Poles. The funda- 
mental plane perpendicular to it is the plane of the equator. This 
plane intersects the earth's surface in the terrestrial equator. Co- 
ordinates referred to this system are termed equatorial. A system 
of equatorial co-ordinates may also be used when the origin is on the 
earth's surface. The fundamental axis, instead of being the earth's 
axis itself, is then a line parallel to it, and the fundamental plane is 
the plane passing through the point, and parallel to the plane of the 
equator. 

(3) In the system of heliocentric co-ordinates, the plane in which 
the earth moves round the sun, which is the plane of the ecliptic, 
is taken as the fundamental one. The axis of the ecliptic is a line 
perpendicular to this plane. 

(c) The third concept necessary to complete the system is a fixed 
line passing through the origin, and lying in the fundamental plane. 
This line defines an initial direction from which other directions are 
counted. 

The geometrical concepts just defined are shown in fig. 1. Here O 
is the origin, whatever point it may be; OZ is the fundamental 
axis passing through it. In order to represent in the figure the 

position of the 
f u nda, mental 
plarie, we conceive 
a circle to be drawn 
round O, lying in 
that plane. This 
circle, projected in 
perspective as an 
ellipse, is shown in 

;m jt: , — el: X* he fi f u «- *?x » 

the fixed initial 
line by which 
- - x ,'' directions are to be 

**»...«,_, __--'' defined. 

** Now let P be 

Fig. 1. any point in space, 

say the centre of 
a heavenly body. Conceive a perpendicular PQ to be dropped from 
this point on the fundamental plane, meeting the latter in the 
point Q ; PQ will then be parallel to OZ. The co-ordinates of P will 
then be the following three quantities : — 

(1) The length of the line OP, or the distance of the body from the 
origin, which distance is called the radius vector of the body. 

(2) The angle XOQ which the projection of the radius vector upon 
the fundamental plane makes with the initial line OX. This angle 
is called the Longitude, Right Ascension or Azimuth of the body, in 
the various systems of co-ordinates. We may term it in a general 
way the longitudinal co-ordinate. 

(3) The angle QOP, which the radius vector makes with the 
fundamental plane. This we may call the latitudinal co-ordinate. 
Instead of it is frequently used the complementary angle ZOP, 
known as the polar distance of the body. Since ZOQ is a right angle, 
it follows that the sum of the polar distance and the latitudinal co- 
ordinates is always 90 . Either may be used for astronomical 
purposes. 

It is readily seen that the position of a heavenly body is completely 
defined when these co-ordinates are given. 

One of the systems of co-ordinates is familiar to every one, and 
may be used as a general illustration of the method. It is our system 
of defining the position of a point on the earth's surface by its latitude 
and longitude. Regarding O (fig. 1) as the centre of the earth, and 
P as a point on the earth's surface, a city for example, it will be seen 
that OZ being the earth's axis, the circle MN will be tlie equator. 
The initial line OX then passes through the foot of the perpendicular 
dropped from Greenwich upon the plane of the equator, and meets 
the surface at N. The angle QOP is the latitude of the place and 
the angle NOQ its longitude. The longitudes and latitudes thus 
defined are geocentric, and the latitude is slightly different from that 
in ordinary use for geographic purposes. The difference arises from 
the oblateness of the earth, and need not be considered here. 

The conception of the co-ordinates we have defined is facilitated 
by introducing that of the celestial sphere. This conception is 
embodied in our idea of the vault of heaven, or of the sky. Taking 
as origin the position of an observer, the direction of a heavenly 
body is defined by the point in which he sees it in the sky; that is 
to say, on the celestial sphere. Imagining, as we may well do, that 
the radius of this sphere is infinite — then every direction, whatever 
the origin, may be represented by a point on its surface. Take for 
example the vertical line which is embodied in the direction of the 
plumb line. This line, extended upwards, meets the celestial sphere 
in the zenith. The earth's axis, continued indefinitely upwards, 
meets the sphere in a point called the Celestial Pole. This point in 
our middle latitudes is between the zenith and the north horizon, 
near a certain star of the second magnitude familiarly known as the 
Pole Star. As the earth revolves from west to east the celestial 
sphere appears to us to revolve in the opposite direction, turning on 
the line joining the Celestial Poles as on a pivot. 

As we conceive of the sky, it does not consist of an entire sphere 



but only as a hemisphere bounded by the horizon. But we have no 
difficulty in extending the conception below the horizon, so that the 
earth with everything upon it is in the centre of a complete sphere. 
The two parts of this sphere are the visible hemisphere, which is 
above the horizon, and the invisible, which is below it. Then the 
plumb line not only defines the zenith as already shown, but in a 
downward direction it defines the nadir, which is the point of the 
sphere directly below our feet. On the side of this sphere opposite 
to the North Celestial is the South Pole, invisible in the Northern 
Terrestrial Hemisphere but visible in the Southern one. 

The relation of geocentric to apparent co-ordinates depends upon 
the latitude of the observer. The changes which the aspect of the 
heaven undergoes, as we travel North and South, are so well known 
that they need not be described in detail here; but a general state- 
ment of them will give a luminous idea of the geometrical co-ordinates 
we have described. Imagine an observer starting from the North 
Pole to travel towards the equator, carrying his zenith with him. 
When at the pole his zenith coincides with the celestial pole, and as 
the earth revolves on its axis, the heavenly bodies perform their 
apparent diurnal revolutions in horizontal circles round the zenith. 
As he travels South, his zenith moves along the celestial sphere, 
and the circles of diurnal rotation become oblique to the horizon. 
The obliquity continually increases until the observer reaches the 
equator. His zenith is then in the equator and the celestial poles are 
in the North and South horizon respectively. The circles in which 
the heavenly bodies appear to revolve are then vertical. Continuing 
his journey towards the south, the north celestial pole sinks below 
the horizon; the south celestial pole rises above it; or to speak 
more exactly, the zenith of the observer approaches that pole. The 
circles of diurnal revolution again become oblique. Finally, at the 
south pole the circles of diurnal revolution are again apparently 
horizontal, but are described in a direction apparently (but not 
really) the reverse of that near the north pole. The reader who will 
trace out these successive concepts and study the results of his 
changing positions will readily acquire the notions which it is our 
subject to define. 

We have next to point out the relation of the co-ordinates we 
have described to the annual motion of the earth around the sun. 
In consequence of this motion the sun appears to us to describe 
annually a great circle, called the ecliptic, round the celestial sphere, 
among the stars, with a nearly uniform motion, of somewhat less 
than i" in a day. Were the stars visible in the daytime in the 
immediate neighbourhood of the sun, this motion could be traced 
from day to day. The ecliptic intersects the celestial equator at 
two opposite points, the equinoxes, at an angle of 23 27'. The 
vernal equinox is taken as the initial point on the sphere from 
which co-ordinates are measured in the equatorial and ecliptic 
systems. Referring to fig. I , the initial line OX is defined as directed 
toward the vernal equinox, at which point it intersects the celestial 
sphere. 

The following is an enumeration of the co-ordinates which we 
have described in the three systems: — 

Apparent System. 

Latitudinal Co-ordinate; Altitude or Zenith Distance. 

Longitudinal ,, Azimuth. 

Equatorial System. 

Latitudinal Co-ordinate; Declination or Polar Distance. I 

Longitudinal ,, Right Ascension. 

Ecliptic System. 

Latitudinal Co-ordinate; Latitude or Ecliptic Polar Distance. 

Longitudinal ,, Longitude. 

Relation of the Diurnal Motion to Spherical Co-ordinates. — The 
vertical line at any place being the fundamental axis of the apparent 
system of co-ordinates, this system rotates with the earth, and so 
seems to us as fixed. The other two systems, including the vernal 
equinox, are fixed on the celestial sphere, and so seem to us to 
perform a diurnal revolution from east towards west. Regarding the 
period of the revolution as 24 hours, the apparent motion goes on 
at the rate of I5 q per hour. Here we have to make a distinction of 
fundamental importance between the diurnal motions of the sun 
and of the stars. Owing to the unceasing apparent motion of the 
sun toward the east, the interval between two passages of the same 
star over the meridian is nearly four minutes less than the interval 
between consecutive passages of the sun. The latter is the measure 
of the day as used in civil life. In astronomical practice is introduced 
a day, termed " sidereal," determined, not by the diurnal revolution 
of the sun, but of the stars. The year, which comprises 365-25 solar 
days, contains 366-25 sidereal days. The latter are divided into 
sidereal hours, minutes and seconds as the solar day is. The con- 
ception of a revolution through 360° in 24 hours is applicable to 
each case. The sun apparently moves at the rate of 15° in a solar 
hour; the stars at the rate of 15 in a sidereal hour. The latter 
motion leads to the use, in astronomical practice, of time instead of 
angle, as the unit in which the right ascensions are to be expressed. 
Considering the position of the vernal equinox, and also of a star 
on the celestial sphere, it will be seen that the interval between 
the transits of these two points across the meridian may be used 
to measure the right ascension of a star, since the latter amounts to 



THEORETICAL] 



ASTRONOMY 



803 



15° for every sidereal hour of this interval. For example, if the right 
ascension of a star is exactly 15 °, it will pass the meridian one sidereal 
hour after the vernal equinox. For the relations thus arising, and 
their practical applications, see Time, Measurement of. 

Theoretical Astronomy. 

Theoretical Astronomy is that branch of the science which, 
making use of the results of astronomical observations as they are 
supplied by the practical astronomer, investigates the motions of 
the heavenly bodies. In its most important features it is an 
offshoot of celestial mechanics, between which and theoretical 
astronomy no sharp dividing line can be drawn. While it is true 
that the one is concerned altogether with general theories, it is 
also true that these theories require developments and modifica- 
tions to apply them to the numberless problems of astronomy, 
which we may place in either class. 

Among the problems of theoretical astronomy we may assign the 
first place to the determination of orbits (q.v.), which is auxiliary to 
the prediction of the apparent motions of a planet, satellite or star. 
The computations involved in the process, while simple in some cases, 
are extremely complex in others. The orbit of a newly-discovered 
planet or comet may be computed from three complete observations 
by well-known methods in a single day. From the resulting elements 
of the orbit the positions of the body from day to day may be 
computed and tabulated in an ephemeris for the use of observers. 
But when definitive results as to the orbits are required, it is necessary 
to compute the perturbations produced by such of the major planets 
as have affected the motions of the body. With this complicated 
process is associated that of combining numerous observations with 
a view of obtaining the best definitive result. Speaking in a general 
way, we may say that computations pertaining to the orbital 
revolutions of double stars, as well as the bodies of our solar system, 
are to a greater or less extent of the classes we have described. The 
principal modification is that, up to the present time, stellar astronomy 
has not advanced so far that a computation of the perturbations in 
each case of a system of stars is either necessary or possible, except 
in exceptional cases. 

Celestial Mechanics. 

Celestial Mechanics is, strictly speaking, that branch of applied 
mathematics which, by deductive processes, derives the laws of 
motion of the heavenly bodies from their gravitation towards 
each other, or from the mutual action of the parts which form 
them. The science had its origin in the demonstration by Sir 
Isaac Newton that Kepler's three laws of planetary motion, and 
the law of gravitation, in the case of two bodies, could be mutually 
derived from each other. A body can move round the sun in an 
elliptic orbit having the sun in its focus, and describing equal 
areas in equal times, only under the influence of a force directed 
towards the sun, and varying inversely as the square of the 
distance from it. Conversely, assuming this law of attraction, it 
can be shown that the planets will move according to Kepler's 
laws. 

Thus celestial mechanics may be said to have begun with 
Newton's Principia. The development of the science by the 
successors of Newton, especially Laplace and Lagrange, may be 
classed among the most striking achievements of the human 
intellect. The precision with which the path of an eclipse is laid 
down years in advance cannot but imbue the minds of men with 
a high sense of the perfection reached by astronomical theories; 
and the discovery, by purely mathematical processes, of the 
changes which the orbits and motions of the planets are to 
undergo through future ages is more impressive the more fully 
one apprehends the nature of the problem. The purpose of the 
present article is to convey a general idea of the methods by which 
the results of celestial mechanics are reached, without entering 
into those technical details which can be followed only by a 
trained mathematician. It must be admitted that any intelligent 
comprehension of the subject requires at least a grasp of the 
fundamental conceptions of analytical geometry and the in- 
finitesimal calculus, such as only one with some training in these 
subjects can be expected to have. This being assumed, the hope 
of the writer is that the exposition will afford the student an 
insight into the theory which may facilitate his orientation, and 
convey to the general reader with a certain amount of mathe- 
matical training a clear idea of the methods by which conclusions 
relating to it are drawn. The non-mathematical reader may 



possibly be able to gain some general idea, though vague, of the 
significance of the subject. 

The fundamental hypothesis of the science assumes a system of 
6oaYes in motion, of" wni'cfi the sun ancf planets may 6e taften as 
examples, and of which each separate body is attracted toward all 
the others according to the law of Newton. The motion of each body 
is then expressed in the first place by Newton's three laws of motion 
(see Motion, Laws of, and Mechanics). The first step in the 
process shows in a striking way the perfection- of the analytic method. 
The conception of force is, so to speak, elimiitarted from the conditions 
of the problem, which is reduced to one of pure kinematics. At the 
outset, the position of each body, considered as a material particle, 
is defined by reference to a system of co-ordinate axes, and not by 
any verbal description. Differential equations which express the 
changes of the co-ordinates are then constructed. The process of 
discovering the laws of motion of the particle then consists in the 
integration of these equations. Such equations can be formed for a 
system of any number of bodies, but the process of integration in a 
rigorous form is possible only to a limited extent or in special cases. 
The problems to be treated are of two classes. In one, the bodies 
are regarded as material particles, no account being taken of their 
dimensions. The earth, for example, may be regarded as a particle 
attracted by another more massive particle, the sun. In the other 
class of problems, the relative motion of the different parts of the 
separate bodies is considered; for example, the rotation of the 
earth on its axis, and the consequences of the fact that those parts 
of a body which are nearer to another body are more strongly 
attracted by it. Beginning with the first branch of the subject, 
the fundamental ideas which it is our purpose to convey are em- 
bodied in the simple case of only two bodies, which we may call 
the sun and a planet. In this case the two bodies really revolve 
round their common centre of gravity ; but a very slight modification 
of the equations of motion reduces them to tne relative motion of 
the planet round the sun, regarding the moving centre of the latter 
as the origin of co-ordinates. The motion of this centre, which arises 
from the attraction of the planet on the sun, ne£d not be considered. 
In the actual problems of celestial mechanics three co-ordinates 
necessarily enter, leading to three differential equations and six 
equations of solution. But the general principles of the problem 
are completely exemplified with only two bodies, in which case the 
motion takes place in a fixed plane. By taking this plane, which is 
that of the orbit in which the planet performs its revolution, as the 
plane of xy, we have only two co-ordinates to consider. Let us use 
the following notation : 

x, y, the co-ordinates of the planet relative to. the sun as the origin. 
M , m, the masses of the attracting bodies, sun and planet, 
r, the distance apart of the two bodies, or the radius vector of m 
relative to M. This last quantity is analytically defined by the 
equation — 

r> = x>+y>. 
I, the time, reckoned from any epoch we choose. 
The differential equations which completely determine the 
changes in the co-ordinates x and y, or the motion of m relative to 
M, are: — 

d 2 x _ (M+m)x 

dP r s (1) 

d 2 y ( M-\-m)y 

df ~ r % 

These formulae are worthy of special attention. They are the 
expression in the language of mathematics of Newton's first two 
laws of motion. Their statement in this language may be regarded 
as perfect, because it completely and unambiguously expresses the 
naked phenomena of the motion. The equations do this without 
expressing any conception, such as that of force, not associated 
with the actual phenomena. Moreover, as a third advantage, these 
expressions are entirely free from those difficulties and ambiguities 
which are met with in every attempt to express the laws of motion 
in ordinary language. They afford yet another great advantage 
in that the derivation of the results requires only the analytic 
queries of the infinitesimal calculus.

The power and spirit of the analytic method will be appreciated 
by showing how it expresses the relations of motion as they were 
conceived geometrically by Newton and Kepler. It is quite evident 
that Kepler's laws do not in themselves enable us to determine the 
actual motion of the planets. We must have, in addition, in the 
case of each special planet, certain specific facts, viz. the axes and 
eccentricity of the ellipse, and the position of the plane in which it 
lies. Besides these, we must have given the position of the planet 
in the orbit at some specified moment. Having these data, the 
position of the planet at any other time may be geometrically 
constructed by Kepler's laws. The third law enables us to compute 
the time taken by the radius vector to sweep over the entire area of 
the orbit, which is identical with the time of revolution. The 
problem of constructing successive radii vectores, the angles of 
which are measured off from the radius vector of the body at the 
original given position, is then a geometric one, known as Kepler's 
problem. 

In the analytic process these specific data, called elements of the 



804 



ASTRONOMY 



[CELESTIAL MECHANICS 




Fig. 2 



orbit, appear as- arbitrary constants, introduced by, the process of 
integration. In a case like the present one, where there are two 
differential equations of the second order, there will be four such 
constants. The result of the integration is that the co-ordinates x 
and y and their derivatives as to the time, which express the position, 
direction of motion and speed of the planet at any moment, are found 
as functions of the four constants and of the time. Putting 

- a, b, c, d, 
for the constants, the general form of the solution will be 

x =fi(a,b,c,d,t) ■ . . . 

y=f 2 (a,b,c,d,t) ( 2 > 

From these may he derived by differentiation as to t the velocities 

tt *=j'i(a,b,c,d,t)=x' 

%=r*{a,b,c4,t)=? ' (3) 

The symbols x' and y' are used for brevity to mean the velocities 
expressed by the differentia) coefficients. The arbitrary constants, 
a, b, c and d, are the elements of the orbit, or any quantities from 
which these elements can be obtained. We note that, in the actual 
process of integration; no geometric construction need enter. 

Let us next consider the problem in another form. Conceive that 
instead of the orbit of the planet, there is given a position P (fig. 2), 
through which the planet passed at an assigned 
moment, with a given velocity, and in a given 
direction, represented by the arrowhead. Logi- 
cally these data completely determine the orbit 
in which the planet shall move, because there 
is only one such orbit passing through P, a 
planet moving in which would have the given 
speed. It follows that the elements of the 
orbit admit of determination when the co-ordi- 
nates of the planet at an assigned moment 
and their derivatives as to time are given. 
Analytically the elements are determined from 
these data by solving the four equations just given, regarding 
a, b, c and d as unknown quantities, and x, y, x', y' and t as given 
quantities. The solution of these equations would lead to expressions 
of the form 

a — <t>i(x,y,x',y',l) 

b = <h{x,y,x',y',t) (4) 

&c. &c. 

one for each of the elements. 

The general equations expressing the motion of a planet considered 
as a material particle round a centre of attraction lead to theorems 
the more interesting of which will now be enunciated. 

(1) The motion of such a planet may take place not only in an 
ellipse but in any curve of the second order; an ellipse, hyperbola, 
or parabola, the latter being the bounding curve between the other 
two. A body moving fn a parabola or hyperbola would recede 
indefinitely from its centre of motion and never return to it. The 
ellipse is therefore the only closed orbit. 

(2) The motion takes place in accord with 1 Kepler's laws, enun- 
ciated elsewhere. 

(3) Whewell's theorem: if a point R be taken at a distance from 
the sun equal to the major axis of the orbit of a planet and, there- 
fore, at double the mean distance of the planet, the speed of the 
latter at any point is equal to the speed which a body would acquire 
by falling from the point R to the actual position of the planet. 
The speed of the latter may, therefore, be expressed as a function of 
its radius vector at the moment and of the major axis of its orbit 
without introducing any other elements into the expression. Another 
corollary is that in the case of a body moving in a parabolic orbit 
the velocity at any moment is that which would be acquired by "the 
body in falling from an infinite distance to the place it occupies at 
the moment. 

(4)., If a number of bodies are projected from any point in space 
with the same velocity, but in various directions, and subjected 
only to the attraction of the sun, they will all return to the point 
of projection at the same moment, although theorbits in which they 
move may be ever so different. , 

(5) At each distance from the sun there is a certain velocity 
which a body would, have if it moved in a circular orbit at that 
distance. If projected with this velocity in any direction the point 
of projection will be at the end of the minor axis of the orbit, because 
this is the only point of an ellipse of which the distance from the focus 
is equal to the semi-major axis of the curve, and therefore the only 
point at which the distance of the body from the sun is equal to its 
mean distance. 

(6) The relation between the periodic time of a planet and its 
mean distance, approximately expressed by Kepler's third law, 
follows very simply from the laws of centrifugal force. It is an ele- 
mentary principle of mechanics that this force varies directly as 
the product of the distance of the moving body from the centre of 
motion into the square of its angular velocity. When bodies revolve 
at different distances around a centre, their velocities must be such 
fhat the centrifugal force of each shall be balanced by the attraction 
of the central mass, and therefore vary inversely as the square of the 



distance. If M is the central mass, n the angular velocity, and o the 
distance, the balance of the two forces is expressed by the equation 

a» 2 = Af/o 2 , 
whence a 3 w 2 = M, a constant. 

The periodic time varying inversely as n, this equation expresses 
Kepler's third law. This reasoning tacitly supposes the orbit to be 
a circle of radius a, and the mass of the planet to be negligible. 
The rigorous relation is expressed by a slight modification of the 
law. Putting M and m for the respective masses of the sun and 
planet, a for the semi-major axis of the orbit, and n for the mean 
angular motion in unit of time, the relation then is 
a s n 2 = M+m. 

What is noteworthy in this theorem is that this relation depends 
only on the sum of the masses. It follows, therefore, that were any 
portion of the mass of the sun taken from it, and added to the planet, 
the relation would be unchanged. Kepler's third law therefore 
expresses the fact that the mass of the sun is the same for all the 
planets, and deviates from the truth only to the extent that the 
masses of the latter differ from each other by quantities which are 
only a small fraction of the mass of the sun. 

Problem of Three Bodies. — As soon as the general law of gravitation 
was fully apprehended, it became evident that, owing to the attrac- 
tion of each planet upon all the others, the actual motion of the 
planets must deviate from their motion in an ellipse according to 
Kepler's laws. In the Principia Newton made several investigations 
to determine the effects of these actions; but the geometrical 
method which he employed could lead only to rude approximations. 
When the subject was taken up by the continental mathematicians, 
using the analytical method, the question naturally arose whether 
the motions of three bodies under their mutual attraction could not be 
determined with a degree of rigour approximating to that with which 
Newton had solved the problem of two bodies. Thus arose the cele- 
brated " problem of three bodies." Investigation soon showed that 
certain integrals expressing relations between the motions not only 
of three but of any number of bodies could be found. These were : — 

First, the law of the conservation of the centre of gravity. This 
expresses the general fact that whatever be the number of the bodies 
which act upon each other, their motions are so related that the 
centre of gravity of the entire system moves in a straight line with 
a constant velocity. This is expressed in three equations, one for 
each of the three rectangular co-ordinates. 

Secondly, the law of conservation of areas. This is an extension 
of Kepler's second law. Taking as the radius vector of each body 
the line from the body to the common centre of gravity of all, the 
sum of the produces formed by multiplying each area described, 
by the mass of the body, remains a constant. In the language of 
theoretical mechanics, the moment of momentum of the entire system 
is a constant quantity. This law is also expressed in three equations, 
one for each of the three planes on which the areas are projected. 

Thirdly, the entire vis viva of the system or, as it is -now called^ 
the energy, which is obtained by multiplying the mass of each body 
into half the square of its velocity, is equal to the sum of the quotients 
formed by dividing the product of every pair of the masses, taken 
two and two, by their distance apart, with the addition of a constant 
depending on the Original conditions of the system. In the languagfe 
Of algebra putting tm, m 2 , m s , &c. for the masses of the bodies, 
ri.2 ri.3 r 2 .s, &c. for their mutual distances apart; v u ,» 2 , i> 8 , &c., for 
the velocities with which they are moving at any moment; these 
quantities will continually satisfy the equation 



l(mivf+m i vl+ . 



, _ mim% , mim.3 . m^m^ . 
n.a. n.3 n.s 



. +a constant. 



The theorems of motion just cited are expressed by .seven integrals, 
or equations expressing a law that certain functions of the variables 
and of the time remain constant. It is remarkable that although 
the seven integrals were found almost from the beginning of the 
investigation, no others have since been added ; and indeed it has 
recently been shown that no others exist that can be expressed in 
an algebraic form. In the case of three bodies these dp not suffice 
completely to define the motion. In this case, the problem can be 
attacked only by methods of approximation, devised so as to meet 
the special conditions of each case. The special conditions which 
obtain in the solar system are such as to make the necessary ap- 
proximation theoretically possible however complex the process 
may be. These conditions are: — (1) The smallness of the masses 
of the planets in comparison with that of the sun, in consequence of 
which the orbit of each planet deviates but slightly from an ellipse 
during any one revolution; (2) the fact that the orbits of the planets 
are nearly circular, and the planes of their orbits but slightly inclined 
to each other. The result of these conditions is that all the quantities 
required admit of development in series proceeding according to 
the powers of the eccentricities and inclinations of the orbits, and 
the ratio of the masses of the several planets to the mass of the sun. 
Perturbations of the Planets. — Kepler's laws. do not completely 
express the motion of a planet around a central body, except when 
no force but the mutual attraction of the two bodies comes into play. 
When one or more other bodies form a part of the system, their action 
produces deviations from the elliptic motion, which are called 
perturbations. The problem of determining the perturbations of the 



CELESTIAL MECHANICS] 



ASTRONOMY 



805 



heavenly bodies is perhaps the moat complicated with which the 
mathematical astronomer has to grapple; and the forms under which 
it has to be studied are so numerous that they cannot be easily 
arranged under any one head. But there is one conception of 
perturbations of such generality and elegance that it forms the 
common base of all those methods of determining these deviations 
which have high scientific interest. This conception is embodied 
in the method of " variation of elements," originally due to J.;Lt 
Lagrange. The simplest method of presenting it starts with the 
second view of the elliptic motion already set forth. 

We have shown that, when the position of a planet and the 
direction and speed of its motion at a certain instant are given, 
the elements of the orbit can be determined. We have supposed 
this to be done at a certain point P of the orbit, the direction and 
speed being expressed by the variables x, y, x' and y'. Now, con- 
sider the values of these same variables expressing the, position of 
the planet at a second point Q, and the speed with which it passes 
that point. With this position and speed the elements of the orbit 
can again be determined. Since the orbit is unchanged so long as 
no disturbing force acts, it follows that the elements determined by, 
means of the two sets of values of the variables are in this case the 
same. In a word, although the position and speed of the planet and 
the direction of its motion are constantly changing, the values of 
the elements determined from these variables remain constant. 
This fact is fully expressed by the equations (4) where we have 
constants on one side of the equation equal to functions of the 
variables on the other. Functions of the variables possessing this 
property of remaining constant are termed integrals. 

Now let the planet be subjected to any force additional to that of 
the sun's attraction, — say to the attraction of another planet. 
To fix the ideas let us suppose that the additional attraction <is only 
an impulse received at the moment of passing the point P. The 
first effect will evidently be to change either the velocity or the direc- 
tion in which the planet is moving at the moment, or both. If, 
with the changed velocity we again compute the elements they 
will be different from the former elements. But, if the impulse is 
not repeated, these new elements will again remain invariable. If 
repeated, the second impulse will again change the elements, and so 
on indefinitely. It follows that, if we go on computing the elements 
a, b, c, d from the actual values of x, y, x' and y', at each moment 
when the planet is subject to the attraction of another body, they 
will no longer be invariable, but will slowly vary from day to day 
and year to year. These ever varying elements represent an ever 
varying elliptic orbit, — not an orbit which the planet actually 
describes through its whole course, but an ideal one in which, it is 
moving at each instant, and which continually adjusts itself to the 
actual motion of the planet at the instant. This is called the 
osculating orbit. 

The essential principle of Lagrange's elegant method consists in 
determining the variations of this osculating ellipse, the co-ordinates 
and velocities of the planet being ignored in the determination. 
This may be done because, since the elements and co-ordinates 
completely determine each other, we may concentrate our attention 
on either, ignoring the other. The reason for taking the elements 
as the variables is that they vary very slowly, a property which 
facilitates their determination, since the variations may be treated 
as small quantities, of which the squares and products may be 
neglected in a first solution. In a second solution the squares and 
products may be taken account of, and so on as far as necessary. 

If the problem is viewed from a synthetic point of view, the stages 
of its solution are as follows. We first conceive of the planets as 
moving in invariable elliptic orbits, and thus obtain approximate 
expressions for their positions at any moment. With these expres- 
sions we express their mutual action, or their pull upon each other 
at any and every moment. This pull determines the variations of 
the ideal elements. Knowing these variations it becomes possible 
to represent by integration the value of the elements as algebraic 
expressions containing the time, and the elements with which we 
started. But the variations thus determined will not be rigorously 
exact, because the pull from which they arise has been determined 
on the supposition that the planets are moving in unvarying orbits, 
whereas the actual pull depends on the actual position of the planets. 
Another approximation is, therefore, to be made, when necessary, by 
correcting the expression of the pull through taking account of the 
variations of the elements already determined, which will give a yet 
nearer approximation to the truth. In theory these successive ap- 
proximations may be carried as far as we please, but in practice the 
labour of executing each approximation is so great that we are 
obliged to stop when the solution is so near the truth that the out- 
standing error is less than that of the best observations. Even this 
degree of precision may be impracticable in the more complex cases. 

The results which are required to compare with observations are 
not merely the elements, but the co-ordinates. When the varying 
elements are known these are computed by the equations (2) because, 
from the nature of the algebraic relations, the slowly varying elements 
are continuously determined by the equations (4), which' express 
the same relations between the elements and the variables as do 
the equations (2) and (3). This method is, therefore, in form at least, 
completely rigorous. There are some cases in which it may be applied 
unchanged. But commonly it proves to be extremely long and 



cumbrous, and modifications have to be resorted to. • Of . these 
modifications the most valuable is one conceived by P, A. Hansen. 
A certain mean elliptic orbit, as near as possible to the actual varying 
orbit of the planet, is taken. In this orbit.a certain fictitious planet 
is supposed to move according to the law of elliptic motion./ Com-: 
paring the longitudes of the actual and the fictitious_ planet the 
former will sometimes be ahead of the latter and sometimes behind 
it. But in every case, if at a certaiii time /, the actual planet has a 
certain longitude, it is certain that at avery short interval dt before 
or after /, the fictitious planet will have this same longitude.' What 
Hansen's method does is to determine a correction dt such that, being 
applied to the actual time t, the longitude of the fictitious planet 
computed for the time t-\-dt, will give- the longitude of the true 
planet at the time t. By a number of ingenious devices Hansen 
developed methods by which dt could be determined. The computa- 
tions are, as a general rule, simpler, and the algebraic expressions 
less complex, than when the computations of the longitude itself 
are calculated. Although the longitude of the fictitious planet at 
the fictitious time is then equal to that of the true planet at the true 
time, their radii vectores will not be strictly equal. Hansen, therefore, 
shows how the radius vector is corrected so as to give that of the. 
true planet. 

In all that precedes we have considered only two variables as 
determining the position of the planet, the latter being supposed to 
move in a plane. Although this is true when there are any number 
of bodies moving in the same plane, the fact is that the planets 
move in slightly different planes. Hence the position of the plane of 
the orbit of each planet is continually changing in consequence of 
their mutual; action. The problem of determining the changes is, 
however, simpler than others in perturbations. The mgthod_ is 
again that of the variation of elements. The position and velocity 
being given in all three co-ordinates, a certain osculating plane is 
determined for each instant in which the planet is moving at that 
instant. This plane remains invariable so long as no third body acts ;• 
when it , does ■ act the position of the plane changes very slowly, 
continually rotating round the radius vector of the planet as an 
instantaneous axis of rotation. _ 

Secular and Periodic Variations. — When, following the preceding 
method, the variations of the elements are expressed in terms of the 
time, they are found to be of two classes, periodic and secular. The 
first depend on the mean longitudes of the planets, and always tend 
back to their original values when the planets return to their original 
positions in their orbits. The others are, at least through long 
periods of time, continually progressive. 

A luminous idea of the nature of these two classes of variation 
may be gained by conceiving of the motion of a ship, floatingipn an 
ocean affected, by a long ground swell. In consequence of the 
swell, the ship is continually pitching in a somewhat irregular way, 
the oscillations up and down being sometimes great and sometimes 
small. An observer on board of her would notice no motion except 
this. But, suppose the tide to be rising. Then; by continued 
observation, extended over an hour or more, it will be found that, 
in the general average, the ship is gradually rising, so that two 
different kinds of motion are superimposed on each other- . .. The 
effect. of the rising tide is in the nature of a secular variation, while 
the pitching is periodic. .„■.■.■■. 

But the analogy does not end here. If the progressive rise of the 
ship be watched for six hours or more, it will be found gradually, to 
cease and reverse its direction. That is to say, making abstraction 
of the pitching, the ship is slowly rising and falling in a total period 
of nearly twelve hours, while superimposed upon this slow motion is 
a more rapid motion due to the waves. It is thus with the motions 
of the planets going through their revolutions. Each orbit continu- 
ally changes its form and position, sometimes in one direction and 
sometimes in another. But when these changes are averaged 
through years and centuries it is found that the average orbit has a 
secular variation which, for a number of centuries, may appear as a 
very slow progressive change in one direction only. But when this 
change is more fully investigated} it is found to be really periodic, 
so, that after thousands, tens of thousands, or hundreds of thousands 
of years, its direction will be reversed and so on continually,, like the 
rising and falling tide. The orbits, thus present; themselves to us 
in the words of a distinguished writer as ' Great clocks of eternity 
which beat ages as ours beat seconds." 

The periodic variations can be represented algebraically as the 
resultant of a series of harmonic motions in the following way : 
Let L be an angle which is increasing uniformly with the time, and 
let n be its rate of increase. We put L for its value at the moment 
from which the time is reckoned. The general expressipn for the 
angle will then be 

lf — nt.+Lo..... 

Such an angle continually goes through the round of 360° in a 
definite period. For example, if the daily motion is 5°, and we 
take the day as the unit of time, the round will be completed in 
72 days, and the angle will continually go through the value which it 
had 72 days before. Let us now consider an equation of the form 
U = asin (nt-f-Li). ■ , 

The value of U will continually oscillate between the extreme 
values +0 and — a, going through a series of changes in the same 



8o6 



ASTRONOMY 



[CELESTIAL MECHANICS 



period in which the angle »<+Lo goes through a revolution. In this 
case the variation will be simply periodic. 

The value of any element of the planet's motion will generally be 
represented by the sum of an infinite series of such periodic quantities, 
having different periods. For example 

U = o sin (nt+Lo)+b sin (mt+Li)+c sin (fe<+L 2 ) &c. 
In this case the motion of U, while still periodic, is seemingly 
irrcjfa^r, being much like that of a pitching ship, which has no one 
unvarying period. 

In the problems of celestial mechanics the angles within the 
parentheses are represented by sums or differences of multiples of 
the mean longitudes of the planets as they move round their orbits. 
If / be the mean longitude of the planet whose motion we are con- 
sidering, and /' that of the attracting planet affecting it, the periodic 
inequalities of the elements as well as of the co-ordinates of the 
attracted planet, may be represented by an infinite series of terms 
like the following: — 

a sin (/'-/) +6 sin (2l'-l)+c sin (/'-2/)+&c. 
Here the coefficients of / and /' may separately take all integral 
values, though as a general rule the coefficients a, b, c, &c. diminish 
rapidly when these coefficients become large, so that only small 
values have to be considered. 

The most interesting kind of periodic inequalities are those known 
as " terms of long period." A general idea both of their nature and 
of their cause will be gained by taking as a special case one celebrated 
in the history of the subject — the great inequality between Jupiter 
and Saturn. We begin by showing what the actual fact is in the case 

of these two planets. Let 
fig. 3 represent the two 
orbits, the sun being at 
C. _ We know that the 
period of Jupiter is nearly 
twelve years, and that of 
Saturn a little less than 
thirty years. It will be 
seen that these numbers 
are nearly in the ratio of 
2 to 5. It follows that 
the motions of the mean 
longitudes are nearly in 
the same proportion re- 
versed. The annual 
motion of Jupiter is 
nearly 30°, that of Saturn 
a little more than 12°. 
Let us now consider the 
effect of this relation upon 
the configurations and 
relations of the two 
planets. Let the line CJ represent the common direction of the 
two planets from the sun when they are in conjunction, and let us 
follow the motions until they again come into conjunction. This 
will occur along a line CRi, making an angle of nearly 240 with CJ. 
At this point Saturn will have moved 240 and Jupiter an entire 
revolution +240°, making 6oo°. These two motions, it will be seen, 
are in the proportion 5 : 2. The next conjunction will take place 
along CSi, and the third after the initial one will again take place 
near the original position JQ, Jupiter having made five revolutions 
and Saturn two. 

The result of these repetitions is that, during a number of revolu- 
tions, the special mutual actions of the two planets at these three 
points of their orbits repeat themselves, while the actions corres- 
ponding to the three intermediate arcs are wanting. Thus it happens 
that if the mutual actions are balanced through a period of a few 
revolutions only there is a small residuum of forces corresponding 
to the three regions in question, which repeats itself in the same way, 
and which, if it continued indefinitely, would entirely change the 
forms of the two orbits. But the actual mean motions deviate 
slightly from the ratio 2 :"5, and we have next to show how this 
deviation results in an ultimate balancing of the forces. The annual 
mean motions, with the corresponding combinations, are as follows : — 

Jupiter:— n = 30°-349043 
Saturn: — »' = i2 -221133 
2» = 6o -69809 
5«' = 6i -10567 
5n'-2»= o -40758 

If we make a more accurate computation of the conjunctions from 
these data, we shall find that, in the general mean, the consecutive 
conjunctions take place when each planet has moved through an 
entire number of revolutions-)-242-7 9 . It follows that the third 
conjunction instead of occurring exactly along the line CQi occurs 
along CQ», making an angle of nearly 8 with CQi. The successive 
conjunctions following will be along CR 2 , CSj, CQa, &c, the law of 
progression being obvious. 

The balancing of the series of forces will not be complete until the 
respective triplets of conjunctions have filled up the entire space 
between them. This will occur when the angle whose annual motion 
is $n' — 2n has gone through 360 °. From the preceding value of 




Fig. 3. 




$n' — 2n we see that this will require a little more than 883 years. 
The result of the continued action of the two planets upon each other 
is that during half of this period the motion of one planet is constantly 
retarded and of the other constantly accelerated, while during the 
other half the effects are reversed. There is thus in the case of each 
planet an oscillation of the mean longitude which increases it and 
then diminishes it to its original value at the end of the period of 
883 years. 

The longitudes, latitudes and radii vectores of a planet, being 
algebraically expressed as the sum of an infinite periodic series of 
the kind we have been describing, it follows that the problem of 
finding their co-ordinates at any moment is solved by computing 
these expressions. This is facilitated by the construction of tables 
by means of which the co-ordinates can be computed at any time. 
Such tables are used in the offices of the national Ephemerides to 
construct ephemerides of the several planets, showing their exact 
positions in the sky from day to day. 

We pass now to the second branch of celestial mechanics viz. that 
in which the planets are no longer considered as particles, but as 
rotating bodies of which the dimensions are to be taken into account. 
Such a body, in free space, not acted on by any force except the 
attraction of its several parts, will go on rotating for ever in an 
invariable direction. But, in consequence of the centrifugal force 
generated by the rotation, it assumes a spheroidal form, the equatorial 
regions bulging out. Such a form we all know to be that of the 
earth and of the planets rotating on their axes. Let us study the 
effect of this deviation from the spherical form upon the attraction 
exercised by a distant body. 

We begin with the special case of the earth as acted upon by the 
sun and moon. Let fig. 4 represent a section of the earth through its 
axis AB, ECQ being a diameter of the equator. Let the dotted 
lines show the direction of the distant 
attracting body. The point E, being 
more distant than C, will be attracted /^\ 

with less force, while Q will be attracted / c> 
with a greater force than will the centre 
C. Were the force equal on every point . 
of the earth it would have no influence 
on its rotation, but would simply draw p IG , 4. 

its whole mass toward the attracting 

body. It is therefore only the difference of the forces on different 
parts of the earth that affects the rotation. 

Let us, therefore, divide the attracting forces at each point into 
two parts, one the average force, whicn we may call F, and which 
for our purpose may be regarded as equal to the force acting at C ; 
the others the residual forces which we must superimpose upon the 
average force F in order that the combination may be equal to the 
actual force. It is clear that at Q this residual force as represented 
by the arrow will be in the same direction as the actual force. But 
at E, since the actual force is less than F, the residual force must 
tend to diminish F, and must, therefore, act toward the right, as 
shown by the arrow. These residual forces tend to make the whole 
earth turn round the centre C in a clockwise direction. If nothing 
modified this tendency the result would be to bring the points 
E and Q into the dotted lines of the attraction. In other words the 
equator would be drawn into coincidence with the ecliptic. Here, 
however, the same action comes into play, which keeps a rotating top 
from falling over. (See Gyroscope and Mechanics.) For the same 
reason as in the case of the gyroscope the actual motion of the earth's 
axis is at right angles to the line joining the earth and the attracting 
centre, and without going into the details of the mathematical 
processes involved, we may say that the ultimate mean effect will 
be to cause the pole P of the earth to move at right angles to the 
circle joining it to the pole of the ecliptic. Were the position of the 
latter invariable, the celestial pole would move round it in a circle. 
Actually the curve in which it moves is nearly a circle; but the 
distance varies slightly owing to the minute secular variation in the 
position of the ecliptic, caused by the action of the planets. This 
motion of the celestial pole results in a corresponding revolution of 
the equinox around the celestial sphere. The rate of motion is 
slightly variable from century to century owing to the secular 
motion of the plane of the ecliptic. Its period, with the present 
rate of motion, would be about 26,000 years, but the actual period 
is slightly indeterminate from the cause just mentioned. 

The residual force just described is not limited to the case of an 
ellipsoidal body. It will be seen that the reasoning applies to the 
case of any one body or system of bodies, the dimensions of which 
are not regarded as infinitely small compared with the distance of 
the attracting body. In all such cases the residual forces virtually 
tend to draw those portions of the body nearest the attracting 
centre toward the latter, and those opposite the attracting centre 
away from it. Thus we have a tide-producing force tending to de- 
form the body, the action of which is of the same nature as the force 
producing precession. It is of interest to note that, very approxi- 
mately, this deforming force varies inversely as the cube of the 
distance of the attracting body. 

The action of the sun upon the satellites of the several planets 
and the effects of this action are of the same general nature. For 
the same reason that the residual forces virtually act in opposite 
directions upon the nearer and more distant portions of a planet 



PRACTICAL] 



ASTRONOMY 



807 



they will virtually act in the case of a satellite. When the latter is 
between its primary and the sun, the attraction of the latter tends to 
draw the satellite away from the primary. When the satellite is in 
the opposite direction from the sun, the same action tends to draw 
the primary away from the satellite. In both cases, relative to the 
primary, the action is the same. When the satellite is in quadrature 
the convergence of the lines of attraction toward the centre of the 
sun tends to bring the two bodies together. When the orbit of the 
satellite is inclined to that of the primary planet round the sun, the 
action brings about a change in the plane of the orbit represented by 
a rotation round an axis perpendicular to the plane of the orbit of 
the primary. If we conceive a pole to each of these orbits, deter- 
mined by the points in which lines perpendicular to their planes 
intersect the celestial sphere, the pole of the satellite orbit will 
revolve around the pole of the planetary orbit precisely as the pole 
of the earth does around the pole of the ecliptic, the inclination of the 
two orbits remaining unchanged. 

If a planet rotates on its axis so rapidly as to have a considerable 
ellipticity, and if it has satellites revolving very near the plane of the 
equator, the combined actions of the sun and of the equatorial 
protuberances may be such that the whole system will rotate almost 
as if the planes of revolution of the satellites were solidly fixed to 
the plane of the equator. This is the case with the seven inner 
satellites of Saturn. The orbits of these bodies have a large inclina- 
tion, nearly 27 , to the plane of the planet's orbit. The action of the 
sun alone would completely throw them out of these planes as each 
satellite orbit would rotate independently; but the effect of the 
mutual action is to keep all of the planes in close coincidence with 
the plane of the planet's equator. 

Literature. — The modern methods of celestial mechanics may 
be considered to begin with Joseph Louis Lagrange, whose theory 
of the variation of elements is developed in his Mecanique analy- 
tique. The practical methods of computing perturbations of the 
planets and satellites were first exhaustively developed by Pierre 
Simon Laplace in his Mecanique celeste. The only attempt since 
the publication of this great work to develop the various theories 
involved on a uniform plan and mould them into a consistent whole 
is that of de Pontecoulant in ThSorie analytique du systeme du 
monde (1829-46, Paris). An approximation to such an attempt is that 
of F. F. Tisserand in his Traite de mecanique celeste (4 vols., Paris). 
This work contains a clear and excellent resume of the methods 
which have been devised by the leading investigators from the time 
of Lagrange until the present, and thus forms the most encyclopaedic 
treatise to which the student can refer. 

Works less comprehensive than this are necessarily confined to 
the elements of the subject, to the development of fundamental 
principles and general methods, or to details of special branches. 
An elementary treatise on the subject is F. R. Moulton's Intro- 
duction to Celestial Mechanics (London, 1902). Other works with 
the same general object are H. A. Resal, Mecanique celeste; and 
O. F. Dziobek, Theorie der Planetenbewegungen. The most com- 
plete and systematic development of the general principles of the 
subject, from the point of view of the modern mathematician, is 
found in J. H. Poincare, Les Methodes nouvelles de la mecanique 
celeste (3 vols., Paris, 1899, 1892, 1893). Of another work of 
Poincare, Lecons de mecanique celeste, the first volume appeared in 
1905. 

Practical Astronomy. 

Practical Astronomy, taken in its widest sense, treats of the 
instruments by which our knowledge of the heavenly bodies 
is acquired, the principles underlying their use, and the methods 
by which these principles are practically applied. Our know- 
ledge of these bodies is of necessity derived through the medium 
of the light which they emit; and it is the development and 
applications of the laws of light which have made possible the 
additions to our stock of such knowledge since the middle of the 
19th century. 

At the base of every system of astronomical observation is the law 
that, in the voids of space, a ray of light moves in a right line. The 
fundamental problem of practical astronomy is that of determining 
by measurement the co-ordinates of the heavenly bodies as already 
defined. Of the three co-ordinates,the radius vector does not admit 
of direct measurement, and must be inferred by a combination of 
indirect measurements and physical theories. The other two co- 
ordinates, which define the direction of a body, admit of direct 
measurement on principles applied in the construction and use of 
astronomical instruments. 

In the first system of co-ordinates already described the funda- 
mental axis is the vertical line or direction of gravity at the point 
of observation. This is not the direction of gravity proper, or of the 
earth's attraction, but the resultant of this attraction combined with 
the centrifugal force due to the earth's rotation on its axis. The 
most obvious method of realizing this direction is by the plumb-line. 
In our time, however, this appliance is replaced by either of two 
others, which admit o( much more precise application. These are 
the basin of mercury and the spirit-level. The surface of a liquid 
at rest is necessarily perpendicular to the direction of gravity, and 



therefore horizontal. Considered as a curved surface, concentric 
with the earth, a tangent plane to such a surface is the plane of the 
horizon. The problem of measuring from an axis perpendicular to 
this plane is solved on the principle that the incident and reflected 
rays of light make equal angles with the perpendicular to a reflecting 

I surface. It follows that if PO (fig. 5) is the direction of a ray, either 

from a heavenly body or from a terrestrial point, impinging at O upon 
the surface of quicksilver, and reflected in the direction OR, the 
vertical line is the bisector OZ, of the angle POR. If the point P 
is so adjusted over the quicksilver that the ray is reflected back 




ME 



]M 





Fig. 6. 

on its own path, P and R lying on the same line above O, then we 
know that the line PO is truly vertical. The zenith-distance of an 
object is the angle which the ray of light from it makes with the 
vertical direction thus defined. 

To show the principle involved in the spirit-level let MN (fig. 6) 
be the tube of such a level, fixed to an axis OZ on which it may 
revolve. If this axis is so adjusted that in the course of a revolution 
around it the bubble of the level undergoes no change of position, 
we know that the axis is truly vertical. Any slight deviation from 
verticality is shown by the motion of the bubble during the revolu- 
tion, which can be measured and allowed for. The level may not 
be actually attached to an axis, a revolution of 180° being effected 
round an imaginary vertical axis by turning the level end for end. 
The motion of the bubble then measures double the inclination of 
this imaginary axis, or the deviation of a cylinder on which the level 
may rest from horizontality. 

The problem of determining the zenith distance of a celestial 
object now reduces itself to that of measuring the angle between 
the direction of the object and the direction of the vertical line 
realized in one of these ways. This measurement is effected by a 
combination of two instruments, the telescope and the graduated 
circle. Let OF (fig. 7) be a section of the telescope, MN being its 



M 



..-O 



3* 



N 



Fig. 7. 

object glass. Let the parallel dotted lines represent rays of light 
emanating from the object to be observed, which, for our purpose, 
we regard as infinitely distant, a star for example. These rays come 
to a focus at a point F lying in the focal plane of the telescope. In 
this plane are a pair of cross threads or spider lines which, as the 
observer looks into the telescope; are seen as AB and CD (fig. 8). 
If the telescope is so pointed that the image of the star is seen in 
coincidence with the cross threads, as represented in fig. 8, then we 
know that the star is exactly in the 
line of sight of the telescope, defined 
as the line joining the centre of the 
object glass, and the point of inter- 
section of the cross threads. If the 
telescope is moved around so that the 
images of two distant points are 
successively brought into coincidence 
with the cross threads, we know that 
the angle between the directions of 
these points is equal to that through 
which the telescope has been turned. 
This angle is measured by means of a 



B 



D 

Fig. 8. 



graduated circle, rigidly 
attached" to the tube of the telescope in a plane parallel to the line 
of sight. When the telescope is turned in this plane, the angular 
motion of the line of sight is equal to that through which the circle 
has turned. 

Stripped of all unnecessary adjuncts, and reduced to a geometric 
form, the ideal method by which the zenith distance of a heavenly 
body is determined by the combination which we have described is 
as follows :— Let OP (fig. 9) be the direction of a celestial body at 
which a telescope, supplied with a graduating circle, is pointed. Let 
OZ be an axis, as nearly vertical as it can easily be set, round which 



8o8 



ASTRONOMY 



[HISTORY 




the entire instrument may revolve through 180 . After the image 
of the body is brought into coincidence with the cross threads, the 
instrument is turned through i8o c on the axis, which results in the 

line of sight of the telescope pointing 
in a certain direction OQ, determined 
by the condition QOZ = ZOP. The 
telescope is then a second time pointed 
at the object by being moved through 
the angle QOP. Either of the angles 
QOZ and ZOP is then one half that 
through which the telescope has been 
turned, which may be measured by 
a graduated circle, and which is the 
zenith distance of the object measured 
from the direction of the axis OZ. 
This axis may not be exactly vertical. 
Its deviation from the vertical line 
is determined by the motion of the 
bubble of a spirit-level rigidly 
attached either to the axis, or to the 
telescope. Applying this deviation 
to the measured arc, the true zenith 
distance of the body is found. 
When the basin of quicksilver is used, the telescope, either before 
or after being directed toward P, is pointed directly downwards, so 
that the observer mounting above it looks through it into the reflect- 
ing surface. He then adjusts the instrument so that the cross 
threads coincide with their images reflected from the surface of the 
quicksilver. The angular motion of the telescope in passing from this 
position to that when the celestial object is in the line of sight is the 
distance (ND) of the body from the nadir. Subtracting go° from 
(ND) gives the altitude; and subtracting (ND) from 180° gives the 
zenith distance. 

In the measurement of equatorial co-ordinates, the polar distance 
is determined in an analogous way. We determine the apparent 
position of an object near the pole on the celestial sphere at any 
moment, and again at another moment, twelve hours later, when, 
by the diurnal motion, it has made half a revolution. The angle 
through the celestial pole, between these two positions, is double 
the polar distance. The pole is the point midway between them. 
This being ascertained by one or more stars near it, may be used to 
determine by direct, measurements the polar distances of other 
bodies. 

The preceding methods apply mainly to.the latitudinal co-ordinate. 
To measure the difference between the longitudinal co-ordinates 
of two objects by means of a graduated circle the instruments must 
turn on an axis parallel to the principal axis of the system of co- 
ordinates, and the plane of the graduated circle must be at right 
angles to that axis, and, therefore, parallel to the principal co-ordinate 
plane. The telescope, in order that it may be pointed in any direc- 
tion, must admit of two motions, one round the principal axis, and 
the other round an axis at right angles to it. By these two motions 
the instrument may be pointed first at one of the objects and then 
at the other. The motion of the graduated circle in passing from 
one pointing to the other is the measure of the difference between 
the longitudinal co-ordinates of the two objects. 

In the equatorial system this co-ordinate (the right ascension) 
is measured in a different way, by making the rotating earth perform 
the function of a graduated circle. The unceasing -diurnal motion 
of the image of any heavenly body relative to the cross threads of a 
telescope makes a direct accurate measure of any co-ordinate except 
the declination almost impossible. Before the position of a star can 
be noted, it has passed away from the cross threads. This trouble- 
some result is utilized and made a means of measurement. Right 
ascensions are now determined, not by measuring the angle between 
one star and another, but, by noting the time between the transits 
of successive stars over the meridian. The difference between these 
times, when reduced to an angle, is the difference of the right ascen- 
sions of the stars. The principle is the same as that by which the 
distance between two stations may be determined by the time 
required for a train moving at a uniform known speed to pass from 
one station to the other. The uniform speed of the diurnal motion 
is 1 5° per hour. We have already mentioned that in astronomical 
practice right ascensions are expressed in time, so that no multi- 
plication by 15 is necessary. 

Measures made on the various systems which we have described 
give the apparent direction of a celestial object as seen by the 
observer. But this is not the true direction, because the ray of light 
from the object undergoes refraction in passing through the atmo- 
sphere. It is therefore necessary to correct the observation for this 
effect. This is one of the most troublesome problems in astronomy 
because, owing to fhe ever varying density of the atmosphere, 
arising from differences of temperature, and owing to the impossi- 
bility of determining the temperature .with entire precision at any 
other point than that occupied by the observer, the amount of 
refraction must always be more or less uncertain. The complexity 
of the problem will be seen by reflecting that the temperature of the 
air inside the telescope is not without its effect. This temperature 
may be and commonly is somewhat different from that of the observ- 
ing room, which, again, is commonly higher than the temperature of 



the air outside. The uncertainty thus arising in the amount of the 
refraction is least near the zenith, but increases more and more as the 
horizon is approached. 

The result of astronomical observations which is ordinarily wanted 
is not the direction of an object from the observer, but from the centre 
of the earth. Thus a reduction for parallax is required. Having 
effected this reduction, and computed the correction to be applied 
to the observation in order to eliminate all known errors to which 
the instrument is liable, the work of the practical astronomer is 
completed. 

The instruments used in astronomical research are described 
under their several names. The following are those most used in 
astrometry: — 

. The equatorial telescope (q.v.) is an instrument which can be 
directed to any point in the sky, and which derives its appellation 
from its being mounted on an axis parallel to that of the earth. 
By revolving on this axis it follows a star in its diurnal motion, so 
that the star is kept in the field of view notwithstanding that motion. 

Next in extent of use are the transit instrument and the meridian 
circle, which are commonly united in a single instrument, the transit 
circle {q.v.), known also as the meridian circle. This instrument 
moves only in the plane of the meridian on a horizontal east and 
west axis, and is used to determine the right ascensions and de- 
clinations of stars. These two instruments or combinations are a 
necessary part of the outfit of every important observatory. An 
adjunct of prime importance, which is necessary to their use, is an 
accurate clock, beating seconds. 

Use of Photography. — Before the development of photography, 
there was no possible way of making observations upon the heavenly 
bodies except by the eye. Since the middle of the 19th century the 
system of photographing the heavenly bodies has been introduced, 
step by step, so that it bids fair to supersede eye observations in 
many of the determinations of astronomy. (See Photography; 
Celestial.) 

The field of practical astronomy includes an extension which 
may be regarded as making astronomical science in a certain sense 
universal. The science is concerned with the heavenly bodies. 
The earth on which we live is, to all intents and purposes, one of 
these bodies, and, so far as its relations to the heavens are concerned, 
must be included in astronomy. The processes of measuring great 
portions of the earth, and of determining geographical positions, 
require both astronomical observations proper, and determinations 
made with instruments similar to those of astronomy. Hence geodesy 
may be regarded as a branch of practical astronomy. (S. N.) 

History of Astronomy. 

A practical acquaintance with the elements of astronomy is 
indispensable to the conduct of human life. Hence it is most 
widely diffused among uncivilized peoples, whose 
existence depends upon immediate and unvarying „ffh° 
submission to the dictates of external nature. Having science. 
no clocks, they regard instead the face of the sky; 
the stars serve them for almanacs; they hunt and fish, they 
sow and reap in correspondence with the recurrent order of 
celestial appearances. But these, to the untutored imagination', 
present a mystical, as well as a mechanical aspect; and barbaric 
familiarity with the heavens developed at an early age, through 
the promptings of superstition, into a fixed system of observation. 
In China, Egypt and Babylonia, strength and continuity were 
lent to this native tendency by the influence of a centralized 
authority; considerable proficiency was attained in the arts of 
observation; and from millennial stores of accumulated data, 
empirical rules were deduced by which the scope of prediction 
was widened and its accuracy enhanced. But no genuine science 
of astronomy was founded until the Greeks sublimed experience 
into theory. 

Already, in the third millennium B.C., equinoxes and solstices 
were determined in China by means of culminating stars. This 
is known from the orders promulgated by the emperor 
Yao about 2300 B.C., as recorded in the Shu Chung, ^tnO* 
a collection of documents antique in the time of aamy. 
Confucius (550-478 B.C.). And Yao was merely the 
renovator of a system long previously established. The Shu 
Chung further relates the tragic fate of the official astronomers, 
Hsi and Ho, put to death for neglecting to perform, the rites 
customary during an eclipse of the sun, identified by Professor 
S. E. Russell 1 with a partial obscuration visible in northern 
China 2136 B.C. The date cannot be far wrong, and it is by far 
the earliest assignable to an event of the kind. There is, however', 
no certainty that the Chinese were then capable of predicting 
1 The Observatory, Nos. 231-234, 1895. 



HISTORY] 



ASTRONOMY 



869 



edipses. They were, on the other hand, probably acquainted, 
a couple of millenniums before Meton gave it his name, with 
the nineteen-year cycle, by which solar and lunar years were 
harmonized; 1 they immemorially made observations in the 
meridian; regulated time by water-clocks, and used measuring 
instruments of the nature of armillary spheres and quadrants. 
In or near noo B.C., Chou Kung, an able mathematician, 
determined with surprising accuracy the obliquity of the ecliptic; 
but his attempts to estimate the sun's distance failed hopelessly 
as being grounded on belief in the flatness of the earth. From 
of old, in China, circles were divided into 365I parts, so that the 
sun described daily one Chinese degree; and the equator began 
to be employed as a line of reference, concurrently with the 
ecliptic, probably in the second century B.C. Both circles, too, 
were marked by star-groups more or less clearly designated and 
denned. Cometary records of a vague kind go back in China 
to 2296 B.C.; they are intelligible and trustworthy from 611 B.C. 
onward. Two instruments constructed at the time of Kublai 
Khan's accession in 1280 were still extant at Peking in 1881. 
They were provided with large graduated circles adapted for 
measurements of declination and right ascension, and prove 
the Chinese to have anticipated by at least three centuries some 
of Tycho Brahe's most important inventions. 2 The native 
astronomy was finally superseded in the 17th century by the 
scientific teachings of Jesuit missionaries from Europe. 

Astrolatry was, in Egypt, the prelude to astronomy. The 
stars were observed that they might be duly worshipped. The 
importance of their heliacal risings, or first visible 
Egyptian appearances at dawn, for the purposes both of practical 
nomy. life an d of ritual observance, caused them to be syste- 
matically noted; the length of the year was accurately 
fixed in connexion with the annually recurring Nile-flood; while 
the curiously precise orientation of the Pyramids affords a lasting 
demonstration of the high degree of technical skill in watching 
the heavens attained in the third millennium B.C. The con- 
stellational system in vogue among the Egyptians appears to 
have been essentially of native origin; but they contributed 
little or nothing to the genuine progress of astronomy. 

With the Babylonians the case was different, although their 
science lacked the vital principle 'of growth imparted to it by 
Baby- tne i r successors. From them the Greeks derived their 
Ionian first notions of astronomy. They copied the Baby- 
astro- Ionian asterisms, appropriated Babylonian knowledge 
aomy. | ^g p} ane t s an d their courses, and learned to predict 
eclipses by means of the "Saros." This is a cycle of 18 years 
11 days, or 223 lunations, discovered at an unknown epoch in 
Chaldaea, at the end of which the moon very nearly returns to 
her original position with regard as well to the sun as to her own 
nodes and perigee. There is no getting back to the beginning 
of astronomy by the shores of the Euphrates. Records dating 
from the reign of Sargon of Akkad (3800 B.C.) imply that even 
then the varying aspects of the sky had been long under expert 
observation. Thus early, there is reason to suppose, the star- 
groups with which we are now familiar began to be formed. 
They took shape most likely, not through one stroke of invention, 
but incidentally, as legends developed and astrological persua- 
sions became defined. 3 The zodiacal series in particular seem 
to have been reformed and reconstructed at wide intervals of 
time (see Zodiac). Virgo, for example, is referred by P. Jensen, 
on the ground of its harvesting associations, to the fourth 
millennium B.C., while Aries (according to F. K. Ginzel) was 
interpolated at a comparatively recent time. In the main, 
however, the constellations transmitted to the West from 
Babylonia by Aratus and Eudoxus must have been arranged 
very much in their present order about 2800 B.C. E. W. Maunder's 
argument to this effect is unanswerable. 4 For the space of the 

1 Observations of Comets, translated from the Chinese Annals by' 
John Williams, F.S.A. (1871). 

2 J. L. E. Dreyer, Proc. Roy. Irish Acad. vol. iii. No. 7' (December 
188 1 ). 

3 F. K. Ginzel, " Die astronomischen Kenntnisse der Babylonier," 
C. F. I.ehmann, Beitruge zur alten Geschichte, Heft i. p. 6 (1001). 

1 Knowledge and Scientific News, vol. i. pp. 2, 228. 



southern sky left blank of stellar emblazonments was necessarily 
centred on the pole; and since the pole shifts among the stars 
through the effects of precession by a known annual amount, 
the ascertainment of any former place for it virtually fixes the 
epoch. It may then be taken as certain that the heavens 
described by Aratus in 270 B.C. represented approximately 
observations made some 2500 years earlier in or near, north 
latitude 40 . 

In the course of ages,' Babylonian astronomy, purified from 
the astrological taint, adapted itself to meet the most refined 
needs of civil life. The decipherment and interpretation by the 
learned Jesuits, Fathers Epping and Strassmeier, of a number 
of clay tablets preserved in the British Museum, have" supplied 
detailed knowledge of the methods practised in Mesopotamia 
in the 2nd century B.C. 6 They show no trace of Greek influence', 
and were doubtless the improved outcome of an unbroken 
tradition. How protracted it had been, can be in a measure 
estimated from the length of the revolutionary cycles found for 
the planets. The Babylonian computers were not only aware 
that Venus returns in almost exactly eight years to a given 
starting-point in the sky, but they had established similar 
periodic relations in 46, 59, 79 and 83 years severally for Mercury, 
Saturn, Mars and Jupiter. They were accordingly able to fix 
in advance the approximate positions of these objects with 
reference to ecliptical stars which served as fiducial points for 
their determination. 'In the Ephemerides published year by 
year, the times of new moon were given, together with the 
calculated intervals to the first visibility of the crescent, from 
which the beginning of each month was reckoned; the dates 
and circumstances of solar and lunar eclipses were predicted; 
and due information was supplied as to the forthcoming heliacal 
risings and settings, conjunctions and oppositions of the planets; 
The Babylonians knew of the inequality in the dally motion of 
the sun, but misplaced by io° the perigee of his orbit. Their 
sidereal year was 4§ m too long, 6 and they kept the ecliptic 
stationary among the stars, making no allowance for the shifting 
of the equinoxes. The striking discovery, on the other hand; 
has been made by the Rev. F. X. Kugler 7 that the various 
periods underlying their lunar predictions were identical with 
those heretofore believed to have been independently arrived 
at by Hipparchus, who accordingly must be held to have 
borrowed from Chaldaea the lengths of the synodic, sidereal, 
anomalistic and draconitic months. 

A steady flow of knowledge from East to West began in the 7th 
century B.C. A Babylonian sage named Berossus founded a 
school about 640 B.C. in the island of Cos, and perhaps oreek 
counted Thales of Miletus' (c. 639-548) among his astro- 
pupils. ' The famous " eclipse of Thales " in 585 bTc. nomjt. 
has not, it is true, been authenticated by modern , & 

research 8 ; yet the story told by Herodotus appears to intimate 
that a knowledge of the Saros, and of the forecasting 
facilities connected with it, was possessed by the Ionian 
sage. Pythagoras of Samos (fl. 540-510 B.C.) learned on his travels 
in Egypt and the East to identify the morning and . 

evening stars, to recognize the obliquity of the ecliptic, goras. 
and to regard the earth as a sphere freely poised in 
space. The tenet of its axial movement was held by many of his 
followers — in an obscure form by Philolaus of Crotona after the 
middle of the 5th century B.C., and more explicitly by Ecphantus 
and Hicetas of Syracuse (4th century'B.c), and by Heraclides 
of Pontus. Heraclides, who became a disciple of ' 

Plato in 360 B.C., taught in addition that the sun, B4e&. 
while circulating round the earth, was the centre of 
revolution to Venus and Mercury. 9 A genuine heliocentric 
system, developed by Aristarchus of Samos (fl. 280-264 B.C.), 
was described by Archimedes in his Arenarius, only to be' set aside 

8 Astronomisches aus Babylon (Freiburg im Brejsgau, 1889). 

8 Ginzel, foe. cit. Heft ii. p. 204. 

7 Die babylonische Mondrechnung, p. 50 (1900). 
a S. Newcomb, Aslr. Nach. No. 3682; P. H. Cowell, Month. 
Notices Roy. Astr. Soc. lxv. 867. 

9 G. V. Schiaparelli, / Precursors del Copernico, pp. 23-28, Pubbl. 
del R. Osservatorio di Brera, No. iii. (1873). 



8io 



ASTRONOMY 



[HISTORY 



with disapproval. The long-lived conception of a series of 
crystal spheres, acting as the vehicles of the heavenly bodies, and 
attuned to divine harmonies, seems to have originated with 
Pythagoras himself. 

The first mathematical theory of celestial appearances was 
devised by Eudoxus of Cnidus (408-355 B.C.). 1 The problem he 
Eudoxus. attempted to solve was so to combine uniform circular 

movements as to produce the resultant effects actually 
observed. The sun and moon and the five planets were, with 
this end in view, accommodated each with a set of variously 
revolving spheres, to the total number of 27. The Eudoxian or 
" homocentric " system, after it had been further elaborated by 
Callippus and Aristotle, was modified by Apollonius of Perga 
(fl. 250-220 B.C.) into the hypothesis of deferents and epicycles, 
which held the field for 1800 years as the characteristic embodi- 
ment of Greek ideas in astronomy. Eudoxus further wrote two 
works descriptive of the heavens, the Enoptron and Phaenomena, 
which, substantially preserved in the Phaenomena of Aratus 
(fl. 270 B.C.), provided all the leading features of modern stellar 
nomenclature. 

Greek astronomy culminated in the school of Alexandria. 
It was, soon after its foundation, illustrated by the labours of 

Aristyllus and Timocharis (c. 320-260 B.C.), who 
Alex - ° constructed the first catalogue giving star-positions as 
madria. measured from a reference-point in the sky. This 

fundamental advance rendered inevitable the detection 
of precessional effects. Aristarchus of Samos observed at 
Alexandria 280-264 B.C. His treatise on the magnitudes and 

distances of the sun and moon, edited by John 
tarehus. Wallis in 1688, describes a theoretically valid method 

for determining the relative distances of the sun and 
moon by measuring the angle between their centres when half the 
lunar disk is illuminated; but the time of dichotomy being widely 
indeterminate, no useful result was thus obtainable. Aristarchus 
in fact concluded the sun to be not more than twenty times, 
while it is really four hundred times farther off than our satellite. 
His general conception of the universe was comprehensive 
beyond that of any of his predecessors. 

Eratosthenes (276-196 B.C.), a native of Cyrene, was summoned 
from Athens to Alexandria by Ptolemy Euergetes to take charge 

of the royal library. He invented, or improved 
theac*. armillary spheres, the chief implements of ancient 

astrometry, determined the obliquity of the ecliptic at 
23° 51' (a value 5' too great), and introduced an effective mode 
of arc-measurement. Knowing Alexandria and Syene to be 
situated 5000 stadia apart on the same meridian, he found the 
sun to be 7 1 2' south of the zenith at the northern extremity of 
this arc when it was vertically overhead at the southern extremity, 
and he hence inferred a value of 252,000 stadia for the entire 
circumference of the globe. This is a very close approximation 
to the truth, if the length of the unit emDloyed has been correctly 
assigned. 2 

Among the astronomers of antiquity, two great men stand out 
with unchallenged pre-eminence. Hipparchus and Ptolemy 

entertained the same large organic designs; they 
pJnhus worked on similar methods; and, as the outcome, 

their performances fitted so accurately together that 
between them they re-made celestial science. Hipparchus 
fixed the chief data of astronomy — the lengths of the tropical and 
sidereal years, of the various months, and of the synodic periods 
of the five planets; determined the obliquity of the ecliptic and 
of the moon's path, the place of the sun's apogee, the eccentricity 
of his orbit, and the moon's horizontal parallax; all with ap- 
proximate accuracy. His loans from Chaldaean experts appear, 
indeed, to have been numerous; but were doubtless independ- 
ently verified. His supreme merit, however, consisted in the 
establishment of astronomy on a sound geometrical basis. His 
acquaintance with trigonometry, a branch of science initiated by 

1 G. V. Schiaparelli, / Precursori del Copernico, pp. 23-28, Pubbl. 
del R. Osservatorio di Brera, No. ix. 

* Marie. Hist, des sciences, t. i. p. 79; P. Tannery, Hist, de Vastro- 
nomie ancienne, ch. v. p. 115. 



him, together with his invention of the planisphere, enabled him 
to solve a number of elementary problems; and he was thus led 
to bestow especial attention upon the position of the equinox, as 
being the common point of origin for measures both in right 
ascension and longitude. Its steady retrogression among the 
stars became manifest to him in 130 B.C., on comparing his own 
observations with those made by Timocharis a century and a 
half earlier; and he estimated at not less than 36" (the true value 
being 50") the annual amount of "precession." 

The choice made by Hipparchus of the geocentric theory of the 
universe decided the future of Greek astronomy. He further 
elaborated it by the introduction of " eccentrics," which 
accounted for the changes in orbital velocity of the sun and moon 
by a displacement of the earth, to a corresponding extent, from 
the centre of the circles they were assumed to describe. This 
gave the elliptic inequality known as the " equation of the 
centre," and no other was at that time obvious. He attempted 
no detailed discussion of planetary theory; but his catalogue of 
1080 stars, divided into six classes of brightness, or " magni- 
tudes," is one of the finest monuments of antique astronomy. 
It is substantially embodied in Ptolemy's Almagest (see 
Ptolemy). 

An interval of 250 years elapsed before the constructive 
labours ot Hipparchus obtained completion at Alexandria. 
His observations were largely, and somewhat arbi- pt i em y. 
trarily, employed by Ptolemy. Professor Newcomb, 
who has compiled an instructive table of the equinoxes severally 
observed by Hipparchus and Ptolemy, with their errors deduced 
from Leverrier's solar tables, finds palpable evidence that the 
discrepancies between the two series were artificially reconciled 
on the basis of a year 6 m too long, adopted by Ptolemy on trust 
from his predecessor. He nevertheless holds the process to have 
been one that implied no fraudulent intention. 

The Ptolemaic system was, in a geometrical sense, defensible; 
it harmonized fairly well with appearances, and physical reason- 
ings had not then been extended to the heavens. To the ignorant 
it was recommended by its conformity to crude common sense; 
to the learned, by the wealth of ingenuity expended in bringing 
it to perfection. The Almagest was the consummation of Greek 
astronomy. Ptolemy had no successor; he found only commen- 
tators, among the more noteworthy of whom were Theon of 
Alexandria (fl. a.d. 400) and his daughter Hypatia (370-415). 
With the capture of Alexandria by Omar in 641, the last glimmer 
of its scientific light became extinct, to be rekindled, a century and 
a half later, on the banks of the Tigris. The first Arabic transla- 
tion of the Almagest was made by order of Harun al-Rashid 
about the year 800; others followed, and the Caliph 
al-Mamun built in 829 a grand observatory at astm- 
Bagdad. Here Albumazar (805-885) watched the skies nomers. 
and cast horoscopes; here Tobit ben Korra (836- 
901) developed his long unquestioned, yet misleading theory of 
the "trepidation" of the equinoxes; Abd-ar-rahrnan al-Suf 
903-986) revised at first hand the catalogue of Ptolemy; 3 and 
Abulwefa (939-998), like al-Sufi, a native of Persia, made con- 
tinuous planetary observations, but did not (as alleged by 
L. Sedillot) anticipate Tycho Brahe's discovery of the moon's 
variation. Ibn Junis {c. 950-1008), although the scene of his 
activity was in Egypt, falls into line with the astronomers of 
Bagdad. He compiled the Hakimite Tables of the planets, and 
observed at Cairo, in 977 and 978, two solar eclipses which, as 
being the first recorded with scientific accuracy, 4 were made 
available in fixing the amount of lunar acceleration. Nasir 
ud-din (1201-1274) drew up the Ilkhanic Tables, and determined 
the constant of precession at 51". He directed an observatory 
established by Hulagu Khan (d. 1265) at Maraga in Persia, and 
equipped with a mural quadrant of 1 2 ft. radius, besides altitude 
and azimuth instruments. Ulugh Beg (1394-1449), a grandson 
of Tamerlane, was the illustrious personification of Tatar 

3 Published by H. C. Schjellerup in a French translation (St Peters- 
burg, 1874). 

4 Newcomb, Researches an the Motion of the Moon, Washington 
Observations for 1875, Appendix ii. p. 20. 



HISTORY] 



ASTRONOMY 



811 



Walther. 



astronomy. He founded about 1420 a splendid observatory at 
Samarkand, in which he re-determined nearly all Ptolemy's 
stars, while the Tables published by him held the primacy for 
two centuries. 1 

Arab astronomy, transported by the Moors to Spain, flourished 
temporarily at Cordova and Toledo. From the latter city the 

Toletan Tables, drawn up by Arzachel in 1080, took 
astro- their name; and there also the Alfonsine Tables, 
nomy, published in 1252, were prepared under the authority 

of Alphonso X. of Castile. Their appearance signalized 
the dawn of European science, and was nearly coincident with 
that of the Sphaera Mundi, a text-book of spherical astronomy, 

written by a Yorkshireman, John Holywood, known 
astro?*" as Sacro Bosco (d. 1256). It had an immense vogue, 
nomy. perpetuated by the printing-press in fifty-nine 

editions. In Germany, during the 15th century, a 
brilliant attempt was made to patch up the flaws in Ptolemaic 
doctrine. George Purbach (1423-1461) introduced into Europe 
Purbacb tne metrio< i of determining time by altitudes employed 

by Ibn Junis. He lectured with applause at Vienna 
from 1450; was joined there in 1452 by Regiomontanus (q.v.); 
and was on the point of starting for Rome to inspect a manuscript 
of the Almagest when he died suddenly at the age of thirty-eight. 
His teachings bore fruit in the work of Regiomontanus, and of 

Bernhard Walther of Nuremberg (1430-1504), who 

fitted up an observatory with clocks driven by 
weights, and developed many improvements in practical 
astronomy. 

Meantime, a radical reform was being prepared in Italy. 
Under the searchlights of the new learning, the dictatorship of 
Ptolemy appeared no more inevitable than that of Aristotle; 
advanced thinkers like Domenico Maria Novara (1454-1504) pro- 
mulgated sub rosa what were called Pythagorean opinions; and 

they were eagerly and fully appropriated by Nicolaus 
nfcusT Copernicus during his student-years (1496-1505) at 

Bologna and Padua. He laid the groundwork of 
his heliocentric theory between 1506 and 1512, and brought it 
to completion in De Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium (1543). 
The colossal task of remaking astronomy on an inverted design 
was, in this treatise, virtually accomplished. Its reasonings 
were solidly founded on the principle of the relativity of motion. 
A continuous shifting of the standpoint was in large measure 
substituted for the displacements of the objects viewed, which 
thus acquired a regularity and consistency heretofore lacking to 
them. In the new system, the sphere of the fixed stars no longer 
revolved diurnally, the earth rotating instead on an axis directed 
towards the celestial pole. The sun too remained stationary, 
while the planets, including our own globe, circulated round him. 
By this means, the planetary " retrogradations " were explained 
as simple perspective effects due to the combination of the earth's 
revolutions with those of her sister orbs. The retention, however, 
by Copernicus of the antique postulate of uniform circular motion 
impaired the perfection of his plan, since it involved a partial 
survival of the epicyclical machinery. Nor was it feasible, on 
this showing, to place the sun at the true centre of any of the 
planetary orbits; so that his ruling position in the midst of 
them was illusory. The reformed scheme was then by no means 
perfect. Its simplicity was only comparative; many out- 
standing anomalies compromised its harmonious working. 
Moreover, the absence of sensible parallaxes in the stellar 
heavens seemed inconsistent with its validity; and a niobile 
earth outraged deep-rooted prepossessions. Under these dis- 
advantageous circumstances, it is scarcely surprising that the 
heliocentric theory, while admired as a daring speculation, won 
its way slowly to acceptance as a truth. 

The Tabulae Prutenicae, calculated on Copernican principles 
by Erasmus Reinhold (1511-1553), appeared in 1551. Although 
they represented celestial movements far better than the 
Alfonsine Tables, large discrepancies were still apparent, and the 
desirability of testing the novel hypothesis upon which they 
were based by more refined observations prompted a reform of 
1 F. Baily, Memoirs Roy. Astr. Society, vol. xiii. p. 19. 



Kepler. 



methods, undertaken almost simultaneously by the landgrave 
William IV. of Hesse-Cassel (1532-1592), and by Tycho Brahe. 
The landgrave built at Cassel in 1 561 the first observa- 
tory with a revolving dome, and worked for some years tory ot 
at a star-catalogue finally left incomplete. Christoph cassel. 
Rothmann and Joost Burgi (1552-1632) became his 
assistants in 1577 and 1579 respectively; and through the skill 
of Burgi, time-determinations were made available for measuring 
right ascensions. At Cassel, too, the altitude and azimuth 
instrument is believed to have made its first appearance in 
Europe. 2 

Tycho's labours were both more strenuous and more effective. 
He perfected the art of pre-telescopic observation. His instru- 
ments were on a scale and of a type unknown since 
the days of Nasir ud-din. At Augsburg, in 1569, he Brahe. 
ordered the construction of a 19-ft. quadrant, and of a 
celestial globe 5 ft. in diameter; he substituted equatorial for 
zodiacal armillae, thus definitively establishing the system of 
measurements in right ascension and declination; and improved 
the graduation of circular arcs by adopting the method of 
" transversals." By these means, employed with consummate 
skill, he attained an unprecedented degree of accuracy, and as 
an incidental though valuable result, demonstrated the unreality 
of the supposed trepidation of the equinoxes. 

No more congruous arrangement could have been devised than 
the inheritance by Johann Kepler of the wealth of materials 
amassed by Tycho Brahe. The younger man's genius 
supplied what was wanting to his predecessor. Tycho's 
endowments were of the practical order; yet he had never 
designed his observations to be an end in themselves. He 
thought of them as means towards the end of ascertaining the 
true form of the universe. His range of ideas was, however, 
restricted; and the attempt embodied in his ground^plan of the 
solar system to revive the ephemeral theory of Heraclides failed 
to influence the development of thought. Kepler, on the 
contrary, was endowed with unlimited powers of speculation, 
but had no mechanical faculty. He found in Tycho's ample 
legacy of first-class data precisely what enabled him to try, 
by the touchstone of fact, the successive hypotheses that he 
imagined; and his untiring patience in comparing and calcu- 
lating the observations at his disposal was rewarded by a 
series of unique discoveries. He long adhered to the tradi- 
tional belief that all celestial revolutions must be performed 
equably in circles; but a laborious computation of seven re- 
corded oppositions of Mars at last persuaded him that the planet 
travelled in an ellipse, one focus of which was occupied by the sun. 
Pursuing the inquiry, he found that its velocity was uniform 
with respect to no single point within the orbit, but that the 
areas described, in equal times, by a line drawn from the sun to 
the planet were strictly equal. These two principles he extended, 
by direct proof, to the motion of the earth; and, by analogy, 
to that of the other planets. They were published in 1609 in 
De Motibus Stellae Martis. The announcement of the third of 
" Kepler's Laws " was made ten years later, in De Harmonice 
Mundi. It states that the squares of the periods of circulation 
round the sun of the several planets are in the same ratio as the 
cubes of their mean distances. This numerical proportion, as 
being a necessary consequence of the law of gravitation, must 
prevail in every system under its sway. It does in fact prevail 
among the satellite-families of our acquaintance, and presumably 
in stellar combinations as well. Kepler's ineradicable belief in 
the existence of some such congrui'ty was derived from the 
Pythagorean idea of an underlying harmony in nature; but his 
arduous efforts for its realization took a devious and fantastic 
course which seemed to give little promise of their surprising 
ultimate success. The outcome of his discoveries was, not only 
to perfect the geometrical plan of the solar system, but to en- 
hance very materially the predicting power of astronomy. The 
Rudolphine Tables (Ulm, 1627), computed by him from elliptic 
elements, retained authority for a century, and have in principle 
never been superseded. He was deterred from research into the 
2 J. L. E. Dreyer, Life of Tycho Brahe, p. 321. 



8l2 



ASTRONOMY 



[HISTORY 



orbital relations of comets, by his conviction of their perishable 
nature. He supposed their tails to result from the action of 
solar rays, which, in traversing their mass, bore off with them 
some of their subtler particles to form trains directed away from 
the sun. And through the process of waste thus set on foot; 
they finally dissolved into the aether, and expired " like spinning 
insects." (De Cometis; Opera, ed. Frisch, t. vii. p. 110.) This 
remarkable anticipation of the modern theory of light-pressure 
was suggested to him by his observations of the great comets 
of 1618. 

The formal astronomy of the ancients left Kepler unsatisfied. 
He aimed at finding out the cause as well as the mode of the 
planetary revolutions; and his demonstration that the planes 
in which they are described all pass through the sun was an 
important preliminary to a physical explanation of them. But 
his efforts to supply such an explanation were rendered futile 
by his imperfect apprehension of what motion is in itself. He 
had, it is true, a distinct conception of a force analogous to that 
of gravity, by which cognate bodies tended towards union. 
Misled, however, into identifying it with magnetism, he imagined 
circulation in the solar system to be maintained through the 
material compulsion of fibrous emanations from the sun, carried 
round by his axial rotation. Ignorance regarding the inertia of 
matter drove him to this expedient. The persistence of move- 
ment seemed to him to imply the persistence of a moving power. 
He did not recognize that motion and rest are equally natural, 
in the sense of requiring force for their alteration. Yet his 
rationale of the tides in De Motibus Stellae is not only memorable 
as an astonishing forecast of the principle of reciprocal attraction 
in the proportion of mass, but for its bold extension to the earth 
of the lunar sphere of influence. 

Galileo Galilei, Kepler's most eminent contemporary, took 
a foremost part in dissipating the obscurity that still hung over 
the very foundations of mechanical science. He had, indeed, 
precursors and co-operators. Michel Varo of Geneva wrote 
correctly in 1584 on the composition of forces; Simon Stevin 
of B ruges (1548- 1620) independently demonstrated the principle ; 
and G. B. Benedetti expounded in his Speculationum Liber 
(Turin, 1385) perfectly clear ideas as to the nature of accelerated 
motion, some years in advance of Galileo's dramatic experiments 
at Pisa. Yet they were never assimilated by Kepler; while, 
on the other hand, the laws of planetary circulation, he had 
enounced were strangely ignored by Galileo. The two lines of 
inquiry remained for some time apart. Had they at once been 
made to coalesce, the true nature of the force controlling celestial 
movements should have been quickly recognized. As it was, 
the importance of Kepler's generalizations was not fully appre- 
ciated until Sir Isaac Newton made them the corner-stone of his 
new cosmic edifice. 

Galileo's contributions to astronomy were of a different 
quality from Kepler's. They were easily intelligible to the general 
public; in a sense, they were obvious, since they 
could be verified by every possessor of one of the 
Dutch perspective-instruments, just then in course of wide and 
rapid distribution. And similar results to his were in fact 
independently obtained in various parts of Europe by Christopher 
Scheiner at Ingolstadt, by Johann Fabricius at Osteel in Fries- 
land, and by Thomas Harriot at Syon House, Isleworth. Galileo 
was nevertheless by far the ablest and most versatile of these 
early telescopic observers. His gifts of exposition were on a par 
with his gifts of discernment. What he saw, he rendered con- 
spicuous to the world. His sagacity was indeed sometimes at 
fault. He maintained with full conviction to the end of his life 
a grossly erroneous hypothesis of the; tides, early adopted from 
Andrea Caesalpino; the " triplicate "■ appearance of Saturn 
always remained an enigma to him; and in regarding comets 
as atmospheric emanations he lagged far behind Tycho Brahe; 
Yet he unquestionably ranks as the true founder of descriptive 
astronomy; while his splendid presentment of the laws of 
projectiles in his dialogue of the "New Sciences" (Leiden, 
1638) lent potent aid to the solid establishment of celestial 
mechanics. 



Galileo. 



The accumulation of facts does not in itself constitute science. 
Empirical knowledge scarcely deserves the name. Vere scire 
est per causas scire: Francis Bacon's prescient dream, arariia- 
however, of a living astronomy by which the physical tioaal 
laws governing terrestrial relations should be extended astro- 
to the highest heavens, had long to wait for realization. nomy. 
Kepler divined its possibility; but his thoughts, derailed (so 
to speak) by the false analogy of magnetism, brought Bacon. 
him no farther than to the rough draft of the 
scheme of vortices expounded in detail by Rene Descartes in 
his Principia Philosophiae (1644). And this was a Descartes 
cul-de-sac. The only practicable road struck aside 
from it. The true foundations of a mechanical theory of the 
heavens were laid by Kepler's discoveries, and by Galileo's 
dynamical demonstrations; its construction was facilitated by 
the development of mathematical methods. The invention 
of logarithms, the rise of analytical geometry, and the evolution 
of B. Cavalieri's " indivisibles " into the infinitesimal calculus, 
all accomplished during the 1 7th century , immeasurably widened 
the scope of exact astronomy. Gradually, too, the nature of 
the problem awaiting solution came to be apprehended. Jere- 
miah Horrocks had some intuition, previously to 1639, that the 
motion of the moon was controlled by the earth's gravity, and 
disturbed by the action of the sun. Ismael Bouillaud (1605- 
1694) stated in 1645 the fact of planetary circulation under the 
sway of a sun-force decreasing as the inverse square of the 
distance; and the inevitableness of this same "duplicate ratio" 
was separately perceived by Robert Hooke, Edmund Halley 
and Sir Christopher Wren before Newton's discovery s'ewton. 
had yet been made public. He was the only man of 
his generation who both recognized the law, and had power to 
demonstrate its validity. And, this was only a beginning. His 
complete achievement had a twofold aspect. It Consisted, 
first, in the! identification, by strict numerical comparisons, 
of terrestrial gravity with the mutual attraction of the heavenly 
bodies; secondly, in the following out of its mechanical con- 
sequences throughout the solar system. Gravitation was thus 
shown to be the sole influence governing the movements of planets 
and satellites; the figure of the rotating earth was successfully 
explained by . its action on the minuter particles of matter; 
tides and the precession of the equinpxes proved amenable to 
reasonings based on the same principle ; and it satisfactorily 
accounted as well for some of the chief lunar and planetary 
inequalities. Newton's investigations, however, were very far 
from being exhaustive. Colossal though his powers were, they 
had limits; and his work could not but remain un terminated, 
since it was by its nature interminable. Nor was it possible to 
provide it with what could . properly be called a sequel. Thp 
synthetic method employed by him was too unwieldy for common 
use. Yet no other was jusi then at hand. Mathematical 
analysis needed half a century of cultivation, before it was fully 
available for the arduous tasks reserved for it. They were 
accordingly taken up anew by a band of continental inquirers, 
primarily by three men of untiring energy and vivid Euler. 
genius, Leonhard Euler, Alexis Clairault, and Jean Clairault. 
le Rond d'Alembert, The first of the outstanding D b '££ m ~ 
gravitational problems with which they grappled 
was the unaccountably rapid advance of the lunar perigee. 
But the apparent anomaly disappeared under Euler's power- 
ful treatment in 1749, and his result was shortly afterwards 
still further assured by Clairault. The subject of planetary 
perturbations was next attacked. Euler devised in 1753 a 
new method, that of the ' variation of parameters," for their 
investigation, and applied it to unravel some of the earth's 
irregularities in a memoir crowned by the French Academy 
in 1756; while in 1757, Clairault estimated the masses of the 
moon and Venus by their respective disturbing effects upon 
terrestrial movements. But the most striking incident in the 
history of the verification of Newton's law was the return of 
Halley's comet to perihelion, on the 12th of March 1759, in 
approximate accordance with Clairault's calculation _o.f the 
delays due to the action of Jupiter and Saturn. Visual proof 



HISTORYj 



ASTRONOMY 



jft*3 



was thus, it might be said, afforded of the harmonious working 

of a single principle to the uttermost boundaries of the sun's 

dominion. 

These successes paved the way for the higher triumphs' of 

Joseph Louis Lagrange and of Pierre Simon Laplace. The 

subject of the lunar librations was treated by Lagrange 

^ ran ^ e - w ; t }j g rea t originality in an essay crowned by the Paris 

Academy of Sciences in 1764; and he filled up the lacunae in 
his theory of them in a memoir communicated to the Berlin 
Academy in 1780. He again won the prize of the Paris Academy 
in 1766 with an analytical discussion of the movements of 
Jupiter's satellites (Miscellanea, Turin Acad. t. iv.) ; and in 
the same year expanded Euler's adumbrated method of the 
variation of parameters into a highly effective engine of per- 
turbational research. It was especially adapted to the tracing 
out of " secular inequalities," or those depending upon changes 
in the orbital elements of the bodies affected by them, and hence 
progressing indefinitely with time ; and by its means, accordingly, 
the mechanical stability of the solar system was splendidly 
demonstrated through the successive efforts of Lagrange and 
Laplace. The proper share of each in bringing about this memor- 
able result is not easy to apportion, since they freely imparted 
and profited by one another's advances and improvements; 
it need only be said that the fundamental proposition of the 
invariability of the planetary major axes laid down with restric- 
tions by Laplace in 1773. was finally established by Lagrange 
in 1776; while Laplace in 1784 proved the subsistence of such 
a relation between the eccentricities of the planetary orbits on 
the one hand, and their inclinations on the other, that an increase 
of either element could, in any single case, proceed only to a 
very small extent. The system was thus shown, apart from 
unknown agencies of subversion, to be constructed for indefinite 
permanence. The prize of the Berlin Academy was, in 1780, 
adjudged to Lagrange for a treatise on the perturbations of 
comets; and he contributed to the Berlin Memoirs, 1781-1784, 
a set of five elaborate papers, embodying and unifying his 
perfected methods and their results. 

The crowning trophies of gravitational astronomy in the 18th 
century were Laplace's explanations of the " great inequality " 
of Jupiter and Saturn in 1784, and of the "secular 
acceleration " of the moon in 1 787. Both irregularities 
had been noted, a century earlier, by Edmund HaUey; both had, 
since that time, vainly exercised the ingenuity of the ablest 
mathematicians; both now almost simultaneously yielded their 
secret to the same fortunate inquirer. Johann Heinrich Lambert 
pointed out in 1773 that the motion of Saturn, from being 
retarded, had become accelerated. A periodic character was 
thus indicated for the disturbance; and Laplace assigned its 
true cause in the near approach to commensurability in the 
periods of the two planets, the cycle of disturbance completing 
itself in about 900 (more accurately 9295) years. The lunar 
acceleration, too, obtains ultimate compensation, though only 
after a vastly protracted term of years. The discovery, just 
one hundred years after the publication of Newton's Principia, 
of its dependence upon the slowly varying eccentricity of the 
earth's orbit signalized the removal of the last conspicuous 
obstacle to admitting the unqualified validity of the law of 
gravitation. Laplace's calculations, it is true, were inexact. 
An error, corrected by J. C. Adams in 1853, nearly doubled 
the value of the acceleration deducible from them; and served 
to conceal a discrepancy with observation which has since given 
occasion to much profound research (see Moon). 

The M&canique celeste, in which Laplace welded into a whole 
the items of knowledge accumulated by the labours of a century, 
has been termed the " Almagest of the 18th century " (Fourier). 
But imposing and complete though the monument appeared, it 
did not long hold possession of the field. Further developments 
ensued. The " method of least squares," by which the most 
probable result can be educed from a body of observational data, 
was published by Adrien Marie Legendre in 1806, by Carl 
Friedrich Gauss in his Theoria Motus (1809), which described also 
a mode of calculating the orbit of a planet from three complete 



Laplace. 



observations, afterwards turned to important account for the 
recapture of Geres, the first discovered asteroid (see Planets, 
Minor). Researches into rotational movement were facilitated 
by S. D. Poisson's application to them in 1809 of Lagrange's 
theory of the variation of constants; Philippe de Pontecoulant 
successfully used in 1829, for the prediction of the impending 
return of Halley's comet, a system of " mechanical quadratures " 
published by Lagrange in the Berlin Memoirs tor 1778; &ni in 
his Theorie analytique du systeme du monde (1846) he modified 
and refined general theories of the lunar and planetary revolu- 
tions. P. A. Hansen in 1829 (A sir. Nach. Nos. 166-168, 179) 
left the beaten track by choosing time as the sole variable, the 
orbital elements remaining constant. A. L. Cauchy published 
in 1842-1845! a method similarly cbnceived, though otherwise 
developed ; and the scope of analysis in determining the move- 
ments of the heavenly bodies has since ■ been perseveringly 
widened by the labours of Urbain J. J. Leverrier, J. C. Adams, 
S. Newcomb, G. W. Hill, E. W. Brown, H. Gylden, Charles 
Delaunay, F. Tisserand, H. Poincare and others too numerous to 
mention. Nor were these abstract investigations unaccompanied 
by concrete results. Sir George Airy detected in 183 1 an in- 
equality, periodic in 240 years, between Venus and the earth. 
Leverrier undertook in 1839, and concluded in 1876, the formid- 
able task of revising all the planetary theories and constructing 
from them improved tables. Not less comprehensive has been 
the work carried out by Professor Newcomb of raising toa higher 
grade of perfection, and reducing to a uniform standard, all the 
theories and constants of the solar system. His inquiries afford 
the assurance of a nearly exact conformity among its members to 
strict gravitational Jaw, only the moon and Mercury showing 
some slight, but so far unexplained, anomalies of movement. 
The discovery of Neptune in 1846 by Adams and Leverrier 
marked the first solution of the " inverse problem" of perturba- 
tions. That is to say, ascertained or ascertainable effects were 
made the starting-point instead of the goal of research. 

Observational astronomy, meanwhile, was advancing to 
some extent independently. The descriptive branch found its 
principle of development in the growing powers of : 
the telescope, and had little to do with mathe- ti\ 6 and 
matical theory; which* on the contrary, was closely practical 
allied, by relations of mutual helpfulness, with practical astrd- 
astronomy, or " astrometry." Meanwhile, the ele- " y ' 
mentary requirement of making visual acquaintance with the 
stellar heavens was met, as regards the unknown southern skies, 
when Johann Bayer published at Nuremberg in 1603 a 
celestial atlas depicting twelve new constellations' 
formed from the rude observations of navigators across the line. 
In the same work, the current mode of star-nomenclature by the 
letters of the Greek alphabet made its appearance. •_'■'' ■ ■ 
On the 7 th of November r63 1 Pierre Gassendi watched ■ 

at Paris the passage of Mercury across the sun. This was the 
first planetary transit observed. The next was that of Venus on 
the 24th of November (O.S.) 1639, of which Jeremiah 
Horrocks and William Crabtree were the sole spectators. 
The improvement of telescopes was prosecuted by Christiaan 
Huygens from 1655, and promptly led to his discoveries of the 
sixth Saturnian moon, of the true shape of the Satur- 
nian appendages, and of the multiple character of 
the " trapezium " of stars in the Orion nebula. William Gas- 
coigne's invention Of the filar micrometer and of the adapta- 
tion of telescopes to graduated instruments remained 
submerged for a quarteT of a century in consequence of 
his untimely death at Marston Moor (1644). Thelatter 
combination had also been ineffectually proposed in 1634 by Jean 
Baptiste Morin (1 583-1656); and both devices were recontrived 
at Paris about 1667, the micrometer by Adrien Auzout (d. 1691), 
telescopic sights (so-called) by Jean Picard (1620-1682), who 
simultaneously introduced the astronomical use of pendulum- 
clocks, constructed by Huygens eleven years previously. These 
improvements were ignored or rejected by Johann 
Hevelius of Danzig, the author of the last important y 't 3, 
star-catalogue based solely upon naked-eye determinations. 



Bayer. 



Huygens. 



Oas- 
coigne. 



814 



ASTRONOMY 



[HISTORY 



obaerva 
toty. 



Rooter. 



He, nevertheless, used telescopes to good purpose in his studies 
of lunar topography, and his designations for the chief mountain- 
chains and " seas " of the moon have never been superseded. 
He, moreover, threw out the suggestion (in his Cometographia, 
1668) that comets move round the sun in orbits of a parabolic 
form. 

The establishment, in 1671 and 1676 respectively, of the 
French and English national observatories at once typified and 

stimulated progress. The Paris institution, it is true, 
The Parts i ac ked unity of direction. No authoritative chief was 

assigned to it until 1771. G. D. Cassini, his son 

and his grandson were only primi inter pares. Claude 
Perrault's stately edifice was equally accessible to all the more 
eminent members of the Academy of Sciences; and researches 
were, more or less independently, carried on there by (among 
others) Philippedela Hire (i640-i7i8),G.F.Maraldi (1665-1729), 
and his nephew, J. D. Maraldi, Jean Picard, Huygens, Olaus 
Romer and Nicolas de Lacaille. Some of the best instruments 
then extant were mounted at the Paris observatory. G. D. 

Cassini brought from Rome a 17-ft. telescope by 
Cans'iai. ^. Campani, with which he discovered in 167 1 Iapetus, 

the ninth in distance of Saturn's family of satellites; 
Rhea was detected in 1672 with a glass by the same maker of 
34-ft. focus; the duplicity of the ring showed in 1675; and, in 
1684, two additional satellites were disclosed by a Campani 
telescope of 100 ft. Cassini, moreover, set up an altazimuth in 
1678, and employed from about 1682 a " parallactic machine," 
provided with clockwork to enable it to follow the diurnal motion. 
Both inventions have been ascribed to Olaus Romer, who used 
but did not claim them, and must have become familiar with 

their principles during the nine years (1672-1681) 

spent by him at the Paris observatory. Romer, on the 
other hand, deserves full credit for originating the transit-circle 
and the prime vertical instrument; and he earned undying 
fame by his discovery of the finite velocity of light, made at Paris 
in 1675 by comparing his observations of the eclipses of Jupiter's 
satellites at the conjunctions and oppositions of the planet. 

The organization of the Greenwich observatory differed 
widely from that adopted at Paris. There a fundamental scheme 

of practical amelioration was initiated by John 
Fiamsteed. pi ams t e ed, the first astronomer royal, and has never 
since been lost sight of. Its purpose is the attainment of so 
complete a power of prediction that the places of the sun, moon 
and planets may be assigned without noticeable error for an 
indefinite future time. Sidereal inquiries, as such, made no part 
of the original programme in which the stars figured merely as 
points of reference. But these points are not stationary. They 
have an apparent precessional movement, the exact amount 
of which can be arrived at only by prolonged and toilsome 
enquiries. They have besides " proper motions," detected in 
17 18 by E. Halley in a few cases, and since found to prevail 
universally. Further, James Bradley discovered in 1728 the 
annual shifting of the stars due to the aberration of light (see 
Aberration), and in 1748, the complicating effects upon pre- 
cession of the " nutation " of the earth's axis. Hence, the 
preparation of a catalogue recording the " mean " positions of 
a number of stars for a given epoch involves considerable pre- 
liminary labour; nor do those positions long continue to satisfy 
observation. They need, after a time, to be corrected, not only 
systematically for precession, but also empirically for proper 
motion. Before the stars can safely be employed as route-marks 
in the sky, their movements must accordingly be tabulated, and 
research into the method of such movements inevitably follows. 
We perceive then that the fundamental problems of sidereal 
science are closely linked up with the elementary and indispens- 
able procedures of celestial measurement. 

The history of the Greenwich observatory is one of strenuous 
efforts for refinement, stimulated by the growing stringency of 
theoretical necessities. Improved practice, again, reacted upon 
theory by bringing to notice residual errors, demanding the 
correction of formulae, or intimating neglected disturbances. 
Each increase of mechanical skill claims a corresponding gain in 



the subtlety of analysis; and vice versa. And this kind of 
interaction has gone on ever since Fiamsteed reluctantly 
furnished the "places of the moon," which enabled Newton to 
lay the foundations of lunar theory. 

Edmund Halley, the second astronomer royal, devoted most 
of his official attention to the moon. But his plan of attack was 
not happily chosen; he carried it out with deficient 
instrumental means; and his administration (1720- ey ' 

1742) remained comparatively barren. That of his successor, 
though shorter, was vastly more productive. James Bradley 
chose the most appropriate tasks, and executed them 
supremely well, with the indispensable aid of John n ey ' 
Bird (1709-1776), who constructed for him an 8-ft. quadrant 
of unsurpassed quality. Bradley's store of observations has 
accordingly proved invaluable. Those of 3222 stars, reduced 
by F. W. Bessel in 1818, and again with masterly insight by 
Dr A. Auwers in 1882, form the true basis of exact astronomy, 
and of our knowledge of proper motions. Those relating to the 
moon and planets, corrected by Sir George Airy, 1 840-1 846, 
form part of the standard materials for discussing theories of 
movement in the solar system. The fourth astronomer royal, 
Nathaniel Bliss, provided in two years a sequel of 
some value to Bradley's performance. Nevil Mas- 
kelyne, who succeeded him in 1764, set on foot, in 1767, the 
publication of the Nautical Almanac,, and about the same time 
had an achromatic telescope fitted to the Greenwich 
mural quadrant. The invention, perfected by John t, ae> 
Dollond in 1757, was long debarred from becoming 
effective by difficulties in the manufacture of glass, aggravated 
in England by a heavy excise duty levied t until 1845. More 
immediately efficacious was the innovation made by 
John Pond (astronomer royal, 1811-1836) of sub- 
stituting entire circles for quadrants. He further introduced, 
in 182 1, the method of duplicate observations by direct vision 
and by reflection, and by these means obtained results of very 
high precision. During Sir George Airy's long term of office 
(1836-1881) exact astronomy and the traditional 
purposes of the royal observatory were promoted 
with increased vigour, while the scope of research was at the 
same time memorably widened. Magnetic, meteorological, and 
spectroscopic departments were added to the establishment; 
electricity was employed, through the medium of the chrono- 
graph, for the registration of transits; and photography was 
resorted to for the daily automatic record of the sun's condition. 

Meanwhile, advances were being made in various parts of the 
continent of Europe. Peter Wargentin (171 7-1 783), secretary 
to the Swedish Academy of Sciences, made a special 
study of the Jovian system. James Bradley had geatia. 
described to the Royal Society on the 2nd of July 
1 7 19 the curious cyclical relations of the three inner satellites; 
and their period of 437 days was independently discovered by 
Wargentin, who based upon it in 1 746 a set of tables, superseded 
only by those of J. B. J. Delambre in 1792. Among the fruits 
of the strenuous career of Nicolas Louis de Lacaille 
were tables of the sun, in which terms depending upon 
planetary perturbations were, for the first time, introduced 
(1758); an extended acquaintance with the southern heavens; 
and a determination of the moon's parallax from observations 
made at opposite extremities of an arc of the meridian 85° 
in length. Tobias Mayer of Gottingen (1723-1762) 
originated the mode of adjusting transit-instruments Mayer. 
still in vogue; drew up a catalogue of nearly a thousand . 
zodiacal stars (published posthumously in 1775); and deduced 
the proper motions of eighty stars from a comparison of their 
places as given by Olaus Romer in 1706 with those obtained by 
himself in 1756. He executed besides a chart and forty drawings 
of the moon (published at Gottingen in 1881), and calculated 
lunar tables from a skilful development of Euler's theory, for 
which a reward of £3000 was in 1765 paid to his widow by the 
British government. They were published by the Board of 
Longitude, together with his solar tables, in 1770. The material 
interests of navigation were in these works primarily regarded; 



HISTORY] 



ASTRONOMY 



8 1 5 



but the imaginative side of knowledge had also potent repre- 
Lalande. sentatives during the latter half of the 18th century. 
In France, especially, the versatile activity of J. J. 
Lalande popularized the acquisitions of astronomy, and enforced 
its demands ; and he had a German counterpart in J. E. Bode. 

Between the time of Aristarchus and the opposition of Mars 
in 1672, no serious attempt was made to solve the problem of 
the sun's distance. In that year, however, Jean 
'ot'thc'* Richer at Cayenne and G. D. Cassini at Paris made 
tun. combined observations of the planet, which yielded 

a parallax for the sun of 0-5", corresponding to a mean 
radius for the terrestrial orbit of 87,000,000 m. This result, 
though widely inaccurate, came much nearer to the truth than 
any previously obtained ; and it instructively illustrated the 
feasibility of concerted astronomical queries at distant parts
of the earth. The way was thus prepared for availing to the full 
of the opportunities for a celestial survey offered by the transits 
of Venus in 1761 and 1769. They had been signalized by E. 
Halley in 17 16 ; they were later insisted upon by Lalande ; an 
enthusiasm for co-operation was evoked, and the globe, from 
Siberia to Otaheite, was studded with observing parties. The 
outcome, nevertheless, disappointed expectation. The instants 
of contact between the limbs of the sun and planet defied precise 
determination. Optical complications fatally impeded sharpness 
of vision, and the phenomena took place in a debateable border- 
land of uncertainty. J. F. Encke, it is true, derived from them 
in 1822-1824 what seemed an authentic parallax of S-S7", implying 
a distance of 95,370,000 m.; but the confidence it inspired was 
finally overthrown in 1854 by P. A. Hansen's announcement 
of its incompatibility with lunar theory. An appeal then lay 
to the 19th century pair of transits in 1874 and 1882; but no 
peremptory decision ensued ; observations were marred by the 
same optical evils as before. Their upshot, however, had lost 
its essential importance ; for a fresh series of investigations 
based on a variety of principles had already been started. 
Leverrier, in 1858, calculated a value of 8-95" for the solar 
parallax (equivalent to a distance of 91,000,000 m.) from the 
" parallactic inequality " of the moon ; Professor Newcomb, 
using other forms of the gravitational method, derived in 1895 
a parallax of 8- 76*. Again, since the constant of aberration 
defines the ratio between the velocity of light and the earth's 
orbital speed, the span of the terrestrial circuit, in other words, 
the distance of the sun, is immediately deducible from known 
values of the first two quantities. The rate of light-transmission 
was accordingly made the subject of an elaborate set of experi- 
ments by Professor Newcomb in 1880-1882 ; and the result, 
taken in connexion with the aberration-constant as determined 
at Pulkowa, yielded a solar parallax of 8-79", or a distance (in 
round numbers) of 93,000,000 m. But the direct or geometrical 
mode of attack has still the preference over any of the indirect 
plans. Sir David Gill derived a highly satisfactory value of 
8- 78' for the long-sought constant from the opposition of Mars 
in 1877, and from combined heliometer observations at five 
observatories in 1888-1889 of the minor planets Iris, Victoria 
and Sappho, the apparently definitive value of 8 -80" (equivalent 
distance, 92,874,000 m.). But an unlooked-for fresh opportunity 
was afforded by the discovery in 1898 of the singularly circum- 
stanced minor planet Eros, which occasionally approaches the 
earth more nearly than any other heavenly body except the moon. 
The opposition of November 1900, though only moderately 
favourable, could not be neglected; an international photographic 
campaign was organized at Paris with the aid of 58 observatories; 
and the voluminous collected data imply, so far as they have been 
discussed, a parallax for the sun a little greater than 8-8". 
(See also Parallax.) 

The first specimen of a reflecting telescope was constructed 
by Isaac Newton in 1668. It was of what is still called 

a^, " Newtonian " design, and had a speculum 2 in. in 

t /, e . " x diameter. Through the skill of John Hadley (1682- 

ccopes. 1743) and James Short of Edinburgh (17 10-1768) 

the instrument unfolded, in the ensuing century, some 

of its capabilities, which the labours of William Herschel 



enormously enhanced. Between 1 7 74 and 1 789 he built scores of 
specula of continually augmented size, up to a diameter 
of 4 ft., the optical excellence of which approved itself HerwahtL 
by a crowd of discoveries. Uranus (q.v.) was recognized 
by its disk on the 13th of March 1781 ; two of its satellites, 
Oberonand Titania, disclosed themselves on the nth of January 
1787 ; while with the giant 48-in. mirror, used on the " front- 
view " plan, Mimas and Enceladus, the innermost Saturnian 
moons, were brought to view on the 28th of August and the 
17th of September 1789. These were incidental trophies; 
Herschel's main object was the exploration of the sidereal 
heavens. The task, though novel and formidable, was executed 
with almost incredible success. Charles Messier (1730-1817) had 
catalogued in 1781 103 nebulae ; Herschel discovered 2500, 
laid down the lines of their classification, divined the laws of 
their distribution, and assigned their place in a scheme of develop- 
ment. The proof supplied by him in 1802 that coupled stars 
mutually circulate threw open a boundless field of research ; 
and he originated experimental inquiries into the construction 
of the heavens by systematically collecting and sifting stellar 
statistics. He, moreover, definitively established, in 1783, the 
fact and general direction of the sun's movement in space, and 
thus introduced an element of order into the maze of stellar 
proper motions. Sir John Herschel continued in the 
northern, and extended to the southern hemisphere, Herschel. 
his father's work. The third earl of Rosse mounted, 
at Parsonstown in [1845, a speculum 6 ft. in diameter, which 
afforded the first indications of the spiral structure shown in 
recent photographs to be the most prevalent char- 
acteristic of nebulae. Down to near the close of the jjosm. 
19th century, both the use and the improvement of 
reflectors were left mainly in British hands; but the gift of the 
" Crossley " instrument in 1895, to the Lick observatory, and 
its splendid subsequent performances in nebular photography, 
brought similar tools of research into extensive use among 
American astronomers ; and they are now, for many of the 
various purposes of astrophysics, strongly preferred to 
refractors. 

Acquaintance with the asteroidal family began as the '19th 
century opened. On the 1st of January 1801 Giuseppe Piazzi 
(1746-1826) discovered Ceres, at Palermo, while 
engaged in collecting materials for his star-catalogues, pimiit. 
A prolonged succession of similar events followed. 
But in the mode of detecting these swarming bodies, a typical 
change was made on the 22nd of December 1891, Max Wolt 
when Dr Max Wolf of Heidelberg photographically 
captured No. 323. Repetitions of the feat are now counted by 
the score. 

Practical astronomy was only secondarily concerned with 
the addition of Neptune, on the 23rd of September 1846, to the 
company of known planets ; but William Lassell's Lm e u. 
discovery of its satellite, on the 10th of October 
following, was a consequence of the perfect figure and high polish 
of his 2-ft. speculum. With the same instrument, he further 
detected, on the 19th of September 1848, Hyperion, the seventh 
of Saturn's attendants, and, on the 24th of October 1851, Ariel 
and Umbriel, the interior moons of Uranus. Simultaneously 
with Lassell, on the opposite shore of the Atlantic, 
W. C. Bond identified Hyperion ; and he perceived, 
on the 15th of November 1850, Saturn's dusky ring, independ- 
ently observed, a fortnight later, by W. R. Dawes, at Watering- 
bury in Kent. With the Washington 26-in. refractor, 
on the nth of August 1877, Professor Asaph Hall 
descried the moons of Mars, Deimos and Phobos ; and a minute 
light-speck, noticed by Professor E. E. Barnard in the close 
neighbourhood of Jupiter on the 9th of September Barnard. 
1892, proved representative of a small inner satellite, 
invisible with less perfect and powerful instruments than the 
Lick 36-in. achromatic. The Jovian system has been reinforced 
by three remote and extremely faint members, two ptrrla: 
photographed by Professor C. D. Perrine with the 
Crossley reflector in 1904-1905, and the third at Greenwich in 



Bond. 



Hall. 



8i6 



ASTRONOMY 



[HISTORY 



Comets. 



Meteors. 



1908; and a pair of Saturnian moons, designated Phoebe and 
Themis, were tracked out by Professor W. fL Picker- 
picktrint. ™8> m x ^9^ anc * ' r 9°5 respectively, amid the thicket 
of stars imprinted on negatives taken at Arequipa with 
th? Bruce 24-in. doublet lens. This raises to 26 the number of 
discovered satellites in the solar system. 

Cometary science has ramified in unexpected ways during the 
last hundred years. The establishment of a class of " short- 
period " comets by the computations of J. F. Encke 
in 1819, and of Wilhelm von Biela in"i826, led to the 
theory of their " capture " by the great planets, for which a 
solid mathematical basis was provided by H. Newton, F. Tisse- 
rand and O. Callandreau. An argument for the aboriginal 
connexion of comets with the solar system, founded by R. C. 
Carrington in i860 upon their participation in its translatory 
movement, was more fully developed by L. Fabry in 1893; and 
the close orbital relationships of cometary groups, accentuated 
by the pursuit of each other along nearly the same track by the 
comets of 1 843 , 1 880 and 1 88 2 , singularly illustrated the probable 
vicissitudes of their careers. The most remarkable event, 
however, in the recent history of cometary astronomy Was its 
assimilation to that of meteors;whieh took unquestion- 
able cosmical rank' as a consequence of the Leonid 
tempest of November 1833. The affinity of the two classes of 
objects . became known in 1866' through G. V. Schiaparelli's 
announcement that the orbit of the bright comet of 1862 agreed 
strictly with the elliptic ring formed by the circulating Perseid 
meteors; and three other cases of close coincidence were soort 
afterwards brought to light. Tebbutt's Comet in 1881 was the 
first tp be satisfactorily photographed. The study of such 
objects is now carried on mainly through the agency of the 
sensitive plate. The photographic registration of meteor-trails, 
too, has been lately attempted with partial success. The full 
realization of the method will doubtless provide adequate data 
for the detailed investigation of meteoric paths. 

The progress of science during the 19th century had no more 
distinctive feature than the rapid growth of sidereal astronomy 
(see Star). Its scope, wide as the universe, can be 
astronomy, compassed no otherwise than by statistical means, 
and the collection of materials for this purpose involves 
most arduous preliminary labour. The multitudinous enrol- 
ment, of stars was the first requisite. Only one " catalogue 
of precision" — Nevil Maskelyne's of 36 fundamental stars- 
was available in 1800. J. J. Lalande, however, 
lonns. ' published in 1801, in his Histoire cileste, the approxi- 
mate places of 47,390 from a reobservation of which 
the great Paris catalogue (1887-1892) has been compiled. A 
valuable catalogue of about 7600 stars was issued by Giuseppe 
Piazzi in 1814; Stephen Groombridge determined 4230 at 
Blackheath in 1806-1816; while through the joint and successive 
work of F. W. Bessel and W. A. Argelander, exact acquaintance 
was made with 90,000, a more general acquaintance with the 
324,000 stars recorded in the Bonn Durchmusterung (1859-1862). 
The southern hemisphere was subsequently reviewed on a similar 
duplicate plan by E. Schonfeld (1828-1891) at Bonn, by B. A. 
Gould and J. M. Thome at Cordoba. Moreover, the imposing 
catalogue set on foot in 1865 at thirteen observatories by the 
German astronomical society has recently been completed; and 
adjuncts to it have, from time to time, been provided in the 
publications of the royal observatories at Greenwich arid the 
Gape, of Good Hope, and of national, imperial and private 
establishments in the United States' and on the continent of 
Europe. But in the execution of these protracted undertakings, 
the human eye has been, to a large and increasing extent, super- 
seded by the camera. Photographic star-charting was begun 
by Sir David Gill in 1885, and the third and concluding volume 
of the Cape Photographic Durchmusterung appeared in 1900. It 
gives the co-ordinates of above 450,000 stars, measured by 
Professor J. C. Kapteyn at Groningen on plates taken by C. Ray 
Woods at the Cape observatory. And this comprehensive work 
was merely preparatory to the International Catalogue and 
Chart, the production of which was initiated by the resolutions 



of the Paris Photographic Congress of 1887. Eighteen observa- 
tories scattered north and south of the equator divided the sky 
among them; and the outcome of their combined queries
aimed at the production of a catalogue of at least 2,000,000 
strictly "determined stars, together with a colossal map in 22,000 
sheets, showing stars to the fourteenth magnitude, in numbers 
difficult ta estimate. (Sea Photography, Celestial.) 

The arrangement of the stars in space can be usefully dis- 
cussed only in connexion with their apparent light-power, or 
"magnitude." Photometric catalogues, accordingly, photo- 
form an indispensable part of stellar statistics; and metric 
their construction has been zealously prosecuted. «■'*■ 
The Harvard Photometry of 4260 lucid stars was ogues. 

issued by Professor E. C. Pickering in 1884, the Uranometria 
Nova Oxoniensis, giving the relative lustre of 2784 stars, by 
C. Pritchard in 1885. The instrument used at Harvard was a 
" meridian photometer," constructed on the principle of polariza- 
tion; while the " method of extinctions," by means of a wedge 
of neutral-tinted glass, served for the Oxford determinations. 
At Potsdam, some 17,000 stars have been measured by C. H. G. 
M filler and P. F. F. Rempf with a polarizing photometer; but 
by far the most comprehensive work of the kind is the Harvard 
Photometric Dwrchmusterung {1 901- 1903), embracing all stars 
to 7' 5 magnitude, and extended to the southern pole by measure- 
ments executed at Arequipa. The embarrassing subject of photo- 
graphic photometry has also been attacked by ProfessorPickering. 
The need is urgent of fixing a scale, and defining standards 
of actinic brightness; but it has not yet been successfully met. 

The investigation of double stars was carried on from 1819 
to 1850 with singular persistence and ability at Dorpat and 
Pulkowa by F. G. W. Struve, and by his son and 
successor, O. W. Struve. The high excellence of the stars. 
data collected by them was a combined result of their 
skill, and of the vast improvement in refracting telescopes 
due to the genius of Joseph Fraunhofer (1787-1826). Among 
the inheritors of his renown were Alvan Clark arid Alvan G. 
Clark of Cambridgeport, Massachusetts; and the superb defini- 
tion of their great achromatics rendered practicable the division 
of what might have been deemed impossibly close Star-pairs. 
These facilities were remarkably illustrated by Professor S. ;W. 
Burnham's record of discovery, which roused fresh enthusiasm 
for this line of inquiry by compelling recognition of the extra- 
ordinary profusion throughout the heavens of compound objects. 
Discoveries with the spectroscope have ratified and extended 
this conclusion. 

Only spurious star-parallaxes had claimed the attention of 
astronomers until F. W. Bessel announced, in December 1838, 
the perspective yearly shifting of 61 Cygni in an ellipse 
with a mean radius of about one-third of a second. 



Stellar 
parallax. 



Thomas Henderson (1 798-1844) had indeed measured 
the larger displacements of a Centauri at the Cape in 183 2-1833, 
but delayed until 1839 to publish his result; Out of several 
hundred stars since then examined, seventy or eighty have 
yielded fairly accurate, though very small parallaxes. But this 
amount of knowledge, however valuable in itself, is utterly 
inadequate to the needs of sidereal research; and various 
attempts have accordingly been made, chiefly by Professors 
J. C. Kapteyn and Simon Newcomb, to estimate, through the 
analysis of their proper motions, the "mean parallax " of stars 
assorted by magnitude. And the data thus arrived at are 
reassuringly self -consistent. A wide photographic survey, "by 
which parallaxes might be secured wholesale, has further been 
recommended "by Kapteyn; but is unlikely to be undertaken 
in the immediate future. 

The exhaustive ascertainment of stellar parallaxes, combined 
with the visible facts of stellar distribution, would enable us 
to build a perfect plan of the universe in three dimen- 
sions. Its perfection would, nevertheless, be under- motion*. 
mined by the mobility of all its constituent parts. 
Their configuration at a given instant supplies no information 
as to their configuration hereafter unless the mode and laws of 
their movements have been determined. Hence, one of the leading 



HISTORY] 



ASTRONOMY 



inducements to the construction of exact and comprehensive 
catalogues has been to elicit,. by comparisons of those for widely 
separated epochs, the proper motions of the stars enumerated 
in them. Little was known on the subject at the beginning of the 
19th century. William Herschel founded his determination in 
1783 of the sun's route in space upon the movements of thirteen 
stars; and he took into account those of only six in his second 
solution of the problem in 1805. But in 1837 Argelander 
employed 390 proper motions as materials for the treatment of 
the same subject; and L. Struve had at his disposal, in 1887, 
no less than 2800. From the re-observation of Lalande's stars, 
after the lapse of not far from a century, J. Bossert was enabled 
to deduce 2675 proper motions, published at Paris in four 
successive memoirs, 18S7-1902; and the sum-total of those 
ascertained probably now exceeds 6000. Yet this number, 
although it represents a portentous expenditure of labour, is 
insignificant compared with the multitude of the stellar throng; 
nor had any general tendency been discerned to regulate what 
seemed casual flittings until Professor Kapteyn, in 1904, adverted 
to the prevalence among all the brighter stars of opposite stream- 
flows towards two "vertices" situated in the Milky Way (see 
Star) . The assured general fact as regards the direction of stellar 
movements was that they included a common parallactic element 
due to the sun's translation. And it is by the consideration 
of this partial accordance in motion that the advance through 
space of the solar system has been ascertained. 

The apex of the sun's way was fixed by Professor Newcomb 
in 1898 at a point about 4° S. of the brilliant star Vega; but 
was shifted nearly 7 to the S.W. by J. C. Kapteyn's inquiry 
in 1 901; so that the range of uncertainty -. as to its position 
continues unsatisfactorily wide. The speed with which our 
system progresses is, on the other hand, fairly well known. 
It cannot differ much from 125 m. a second, the rate assigned 
to it by Professor W. W. Campbell in 1902. He employed in 
his discussion the radial velocities of 280 stars, spectroscopically 
determined; and the upshot signally exemplified the' community 
of interests between the rising science of astrophysics and the 

ancient science of astrometry. Their characteristic 
physics. purposes are, nevertheless, entirely different. The 

positions of the heavenly bodies in space,, arid the 
changes of those positions with time, constitute the primary 
subject of investigation by the elder school; while the new 
<!n«rf astronomy concerns itself chiefly with the individual 

analysis, peculiarities of suns and planets, with their chemistry, 

physical habitudes and modes of luminosity. Its 
distinctive method is spectrum analysis, the invention and 
development of which in the 19th century have fundamentally 
altered the purpose and prospects of celestial inquiries. 

A beam of sunlight admitted into a darkened room through 
a narrow aperture, and there dispersed into a vario-tinted band 
Wollastoa. by the interposition of a prism, is not absolutely 

continuous. Dr W. H. Wollaston made the experiment 
in 1802, and perceived the spaces of colour to be interrupted 
by seven obscure gaps, which took the shape of lines owing to 
his use of rectangular slit. He thus caught a preliminary 

glimpse of the " Fraunhofer lines," so called because 
hofer." Joseph Fraunhofer brought them into prominent 

notice by the diligence and insight of his labours upon 
them in 1814-1815. He mapped 324, chose out nine, which he 
designated by the letters of the alphabet, to be standards of 
measurement for the rest, and ascertained the coincidence in 
position between the double yellow ray derived from the flame 
of burning sodium and the pair of dark lines named by him " D " 
in the solar spectrum. There ensued forty-five years of groping 
for a law which should clear up the enigma of the solar reversals. 
Partial anticipations abounded. The vital heart of the matter 
was barely missed by W. A. Miller in 1845, by L. Foucault in 
1849, by A. J.Angstrom in 1853, by Balfour Stewart in 1858; 
while Sir George Stokes held the solution of the problem in the 
Kircbhoft. hollow of his hand from 1852 onward. But it was the 

synthetic genius of Gustav Kirchhoff which first gave 
unity to the scattered phenomena, and finally reconciled what was 



817 

elicited in the laboratory with what was observed in the sun. 
Onithe 15th of December 1859 he communicated to the Berlin 
Academy of Sciences the principle which bears his name. Its 
purport is that glowing vapours similarly circumstanced absorb 
the identical radiations which they emit. That is to say, they 
stop out just those sections of white light transmitted through 
them which form their own special luminous badges. Moreover, 
if the white light come from a source at a higher temperature 
than theirs, the sections, or lines, absorbed by them show dark 
against a continuous' background. And this is precisely the 
case with the sun. ' Kirchhoff's principle, accordingly, not only 
afforded a simple explanation of the Fraunhofer lines, but 
availed to found a far-reaching science of celestial chemistry. 
Thousands of the dark lines in the solar spectrum 
agree absolutely in wave-length with the bright rays ^f^' 3 ^ 7 
artificially obtained from known substances, and saa . 
appertaining to them individually. These substances 
must then exist near the sun. They are in fact suspended in a 
state of vapour between our eyes and the photosphere, the 
dazzling prismatic radiance of which they, to a minute extent, 
intercept, thus writing their signatures on the coloured scroll 
of dispersed sunshine. By persistent research, powerfully aided 
by the photographic camera and by the concave gratings invented 
by H. A. Rowland (1848-1901) in 1882, about forty terrestrial 
elements have been identified in the sun. Among them, iron, 
sodium, magnesium, calcium and hydrogen are conspicuous; 
but it would be rash to assert that any of, the seventy forms 
of matter provisionally enumerated in text-books are wholly 
absent from his composition. •.-.■■ > 

Solar physics has profited enormously by the abolition, of 
glare during total eclipses. That of the 8th of July 1842 was 
the first to be efficiently observed; and the luminous .-j^ ; 
appendages to the sun disclosed by it were such as ' ec mses, 
to excite startled attention. Their investigation has 
since been diligently prosecuted. The corona was, photographed 
at Konigsberg during the totality of the 28th of July 1851; 
similar records; of the red prominences, successively obMined 
by Father Angelo Secchi and Warren de la Rue, as? the shadow- 
track crossed Spain on the i8thof July i860; finally demonstrated 
their solar status. The Indian eclipse of the 1 8th of August 
1868 supplied knowledge of their spectrum, found to 1 include 
the yellow ray of an exotic gas named by Sir Norman Jjockyer 
" helium." It further suggested, to Lockyer and P.; Jans6en 
separately^ the spectroscopic method of observing these objects 
in daylight. Under cover of an eclipse visible in North America 
on the 7th of August 1869, the bright green line of the corona 
was discerned; and Professor C. A. Young caught the f flash 
spectrum" of the reversing layer, at the moment of second 
contact, at Xerez de la Frontera in Spain, oh the 22nd of December 
1870. .This significant but evanescent phenomenon,- 'which 
represents the direct emissions of a low-lying solar envelope, 
was photographed by William Shackleton on the occasipji Itf an 
eclipse in Novaya Zemlya on the 9th of August 1896; .antjUtt 
has since been abundantly registered by exposures made during 
the obscurations of r898> 1900, 1 901 and 1905.; A singular .and 
unlooked-for result of eclipse-work has been to include the 
corona within the scope of solar periodicity; Heinrich Schwabe 
established, in iSjr, the cyclical variation, in eleven years,! of 
spot-frequency; terrestrial magnetic disturbances manifestly 
obeyed the same law; and the peculiar winged aspect of :the 
corona disclosed by the eclipse of the 29th of July 1878, at an 
epoch of minimum sun-spots, intimated to A. C. Ranyard' a 
theory of coronal types, changing Concurrently with the fluctua- 
tions of spot-activity. This was amply verified at subsequent 
eclipses. : . 

The photography of prominences was, after some preliminary 
trials by C. A. Young and others, fully realized in 1891 by 
Professor George E. Hale at Chicago, and independr : : Promt- 
eritly by Henri Deslandres at Paris. The pictures were ncno 
taken, in both cases, with only one quality cf light,! fi boto ' 
the violet ray of calcium, the remaining superfluous &"'"'?• 
beams being eliminated by the agency of a double , sift. , The 



8i8 



ASTRONOMY 



[HISTORY 



last-named expedient had been described by Janssen in 1867. 
Hale devised on the same principle the " spectre-heliograph," 
an instrument by which the sun's disk can be photographed in 
calcium-light by imparting a rapid movement to its image 
relatively to the sensitive plate; and the method has proved 
in many ways fruitful. 

The likeness of the sun to the stars has been shown by the 
spectroscope to be profound and inherent. Yet the general 
agreement of solar and stellar chemistry does not 
spectra- exclude important diversities of detail. Fraunhofer 
scopy. was the pioneer in this branch. He observed, in 1823, 
dark lines in stellar spectra which Kirehhoff's discovery 
supplied the means of interpreting. The task, attempted by 
G. B. Donati in i860, was effectively taken in hand, two years 
later, by Angelo Secchi, William Huggins and Lewis M. Ruther- 
furd. There ensued a general classification of the stars by Secchi 
into four leading types, distinguished by diversities of spectral 
pattern; and the recognition by Huggins of a considerable 
number of terrestrial elements as present in stellar atmospheres. 
Nebular chemistry was initiated by the same investigator when, 
on the 29th of August 1864, he observed the bright-line spectrum 
of a planetary nebula in Draco. About seventy analogous 
objects, including that in the Sword of Orion, were found by him 
to give light of the same quality; and thus after seventy-three 
years, verification was brought to William Herschel's hypothesis 
of a "shining fluid" diffused through space, the possible raw 
material of stars. In 1874, Dr H. C. Vogel published a modifica- 
tion of Secchi's scheme of stellar diversities, and gave it organic 
meaning by connecting spectral differences with advance in 
" age." And in 1895, he set apart, as in the earliest stage of 
growth, a new class of " helium stars," supposed to develop 
successively into Sirian, solar, Antarian, or alternatively into 
carbon stars. 

On the 5th of August 1864, G. B. Donati analysed the light of 
a small comet into three bright bands. Sir William Huggins 
repeated the experiment on Winnecke's comet in 1868, 
^^|° obtained the same bands, and traced them to their 
origin from glowing carbon-vapour. A photograph of 
the spectrum of Tebbutt's comet, taken by him on the 24th 
of June 1 88 1, showed radiations of shorter wave-lengths but 
identical source, and in addition, a percentage of reflected solar 
light marked as such by the presence of some well-known 
Fraunhofer lines. Further experience has generalized these 
earlier results. The rule that comets yield carbon-spectra has 
scarcely any exceptions. The usual bands were, however, 
temporarily effaced in the two brilliant apparitions of 1882 by 
vivid rays of sodium and iron, emitted during the excitement of 
perihelion-passage. 

The adoption, by Sir William Huggins in 1876, of gelatine or 
dry plates in celestial photography was a change of decisive 
_ import. For it made long exposures possible; and 

/ospectro- on 'y w ' tn ' on 8 exposures could autographic impres- 
graphy. sions be secured of such faint objects as nebulae, tele- 
scopic comets, and the immense majority of stars, or 
of the dim ranges of stellar and nebular spectra. The first 
conspicuous triumph of the new " spectrographic " art thus 
established was the record by Huggins in 1879 of the dispersed 
light of several " white" or Sirian stars, in which the chief traits 
of absorption were the rhythmical series of hydrogen-lines, then 
memorably discovered. Again by Sir William Huggins, the 
spectrum of the Orion nebula was photographed on the 7th of 
March 1882; and the method has gradually become nearly ex- 
clusive in the study of nebular emanations. The "Draper 
Catalogue " of 10,351 stellar spectra was published by Professor 
E. C. Pickering in 1890. The materials for it were rapidly 
accumulated by the use of an objective prism, that is, of a prism 
placed in front of, instead of behind the object-lens, by which 
means the spectra of all the stars in the field, to the number often 
of many score, imprinted themselves simultaneously on the 
sensitive plate. The progress of this survey was marked by a 
number of important discoveries of " new " and variable stars 
and of spectroscopic binaries, mainly through the acumen of 



Mrs Williamina Paten Fleming of Harvard College in scrutinizing 
the negatives forming the data for the great catalogue. 

The principle that the refrangibility of light is altered by end- 
on motion was enunciated by Christian Doppler of Prague in 1842. 
The pitch of a steam-whistle quite obviously rises and 
falls as the engine to which it is attached approaches principle. 
and recedes from a stationary auditor; and light- 
pulses are modified like sound-waves by velocity in the line of 
sight. They are crowded together and therefore rendered shorter 
and more frequent by the advance of their source, but drawn 
apart and lengthened by its recession. These effects vary with 
the rate of motion, which they consequently serve to measure; 
and they are produced indifferently by movements of the 
spectator or of the light-source. But Doppler's idea that they 
might be detected by colour-change was entirely illusory. It 
would apply only if the spectrum had no infra-red and ultra- 
violet extensions. These, however, since they share the general 
lengthening or shortening of wave-length through motion, are 
thereby shifted, to a certain definite extent, into visibility, and 
so produce accurate chromatic compensation. Integrated light, 
accordingly, tells nothing about velocity; but analysed light 
does, when it includes bright or dark rays the normal positions of 
which are known. The distinction was pointed out by Hippoly te 
Fizeau in 1848. By comparison with their analogues in the 
laboratory it can be determined whether, in which direction, and 
how much, lines of recognized origin are displaced in the spectra 
of the heavenly bodies. This subtle mode of research was made 
available by Sir William Huggins in 1868. He employed it, with 
an outcome of striking promise, to measure the radial speed of 
some of the brighter stars. In the following year, Sir Norman 
Lockyer was enabled to prove, by its means, the extraordinary 
vehemence of chromospheric disturbances, the bright prominence- 
rays in his spectroscope betraying, through their opposite shift- 
ings, movements and counter-movements up to 120 m. a second; 
while its validity and refinement were, in 187 1, vouched for by 
H. C. Vogel's observations on the 9th of June 1871, of differences 
due to the sun's rotation in the refrangibility of Fraunhofer lines 
derived respectively from the east and west limbs. Stellar line- 
of-sight work, however, made no satisfactory progress until, in 
1888, Vogel changed the venue from the eye to the camera. A 
high degree of precision in measurement thus became attainable, 
and has since been fully attained. Not only the grosser facts 
concerning radial velocity, but variations in it so small as a mile, 
or less, per second, have been recorded and interpreted in terms 
of deep meaning. For the investigation of the general scheme 
of sidereal structure, the multiplication of results of the kind is 
indispensable. But as yet, the recessional or approaching move- 
ments of only a few hundred stars have been registered; and this 
store of information is scanty indeed compared with the needs of 
research. How the stars really move in space, and how the sun 
travels among them, can be ascertained only with the aid of 
materials collected by the spectrograph, which has now fortu- 
nately been brought to comply with the arduous conditions of 
exactitude requisite for collaboration with the transit instrument 
and its allies, the clock and chronograph. And here, to their 
great mutual advantage, the old and the new astronomies meet 
and join forces. 

Authorities.— R. Grant, History of Physical Astronomy (1852) ; 
Sir G. Cornewall Lewis, An Historical Survey of the Astronomy of 
the Ancients (1862); J. B. J. Delambre, Hist, de I'astr. ancienne; 
Hist, de I'astr. au moyen age; Hist, de I'astr. mederne; Hist, de 
I'astr. au XVIII' siecle; J. S. Bailly, Histoire de I'astronomie 
(5 vols., 1775-1787); J. F. Weidler, Historia Astronomiae (1741); 
J. H. Madler, Geschichte der Himmelskunde (1873); R. Wolf, 
Geschichte der Astronomie (1876); Handbuch der Astronomie (1890- 
1892); W. Whewell, Hist, of the Inductive Sciences; A. M. Clerke, 
Htst. of Astronomy during the 19th Century (4th ed., 1903); A. 
Berry, Hist, of Astronomy (1898) ; J. K. Schaubach, Geschichte der 
griechischen Astronomie bis auf Eratosthenes (1802); Th. H. Martin, 
" Memoire sur l'histoire des hypotheses astronomiques," MSmoires 
de I'Institut, t. xxx. (Paris, 1881); P. Tannery, Recherches sur 
l'histoire de V astronomie ancienne (1893) ; O. Gruppe, Die kosmischen 
Systeme der Griechen (1851); G. V. Schiaparelli, I Precursori del 
Copernico (1873); Le Sfere Omocentriche di Eudosso (1875); 
P. Jensen, Kosmologie der Babylonier (1890) ; F. X. Kugler, Die 



ASTROPALIA— ASTRUC 



819 



babylonische Mondrechnung (1900) ; J. Epping and J. N. Strass- 
meier, A stronomisches aus Babylon (1889); F. K. Ginzel, Die astro- 
nomischen Kenntnisse der Babylonier (1901) ; C. L. Ideler, Historische 
Untersuchungen iiber die astronomischen Beobachtungen der Alten 
(1806); Handbuch der math. Chronologie (2 vols., 1825-1826) ; 
Untersuchungen iiber den Ursprung der Sternnamen (1809) ; G. 
Costard, History of Astronomy (1767); J. Narrien, An Historical 
Account of the Origin and Progress of Astronomy (1833); J. L. E. 
Dreyer, Hist, of the Planetary Systems (1906) ; G. W. Hill, " Progress 
of Celestial Mechanics," The Observatory, vol. xix.(l896). (A.M.C.) 

ASTROPALIA (classical Astypalaea), an island, with good 
harbours, in the south part of the Aegean, situated in 36-5° N. 
arid immediately west of 26-5° E. It was colonized by Megara, 
and its constitution and buildings are known from numerous 
inscriptions. The Roman emperors recognized it as a free state, 
and in the middle ages it was called Stampalia, and belonged to 
the noble Venetian family of Quirini. It was taken by the Turks 
in the 16th century, and is now noted for its sponges. The 
customs and dress of the people, who speak a patois of romaic 
origin, are interesting. 

ASTROPHYSICS, the branch of astronomical science which 
treats of the physical constitution of the heavenly bodies. So 
long as these bodies could be known to men only as points or 
disks of light in the sky, no such science was possible. Even 
later, when the telescope was the only instrument of research, 
knowledge on this subject was confined to the appearances 
presented by the planets, supplemented by more or less probable 
inferences as to the nature of their surfaces. When, in the third 
quarter of the 19th century, spectrum analysis was applied to 
the light coming to us from the heavenly bodies, a new era in 
astronomical science was opened up of such importance that the 
body of knowledge revealed by this method has sometimes been 
termed the " new astronomy." The development of the method 
has been greatly assisted by photography, while the application 
of photometric measurements has been a powerful auxiliary in 
the work. It has thus come about that astrophysics owes its 
recent development, and its recognition as a distinct branch of 
astronomical science, to the combination of the processes involved 
in the three arts of spectroscopy, photography and photometry. 
The most general conclusions reached by this combination may 
be summed up as follows: — 

1. The heavenly bodies are composed of like matter with that 
which we find to make up our globe. The sun and stars are 
found to contain the more important elements with which 
chemistry has made us acquainted. Iron, calcium and hydrogen 
may be especially mentioned as three familiar chemical elements 
which enter largely into the constitution of all the matter of the 
heavens. It would be going too far to say that all the elements 
known to us exist in the sun or the stars; nor is the question 
whether the rarer ones can or cannot be found there of prime 
importance. The general fact of identity in the main constituents 
is the one of most fundamental importance. It would be going 
too far in the other direction to claim that all the elements 
which compose the heavenly bodies are found on the earth. 
There are many lines in the spectra of the stars, as well as of 
the nebulae, which are not certainly identified with those belong- 
ing to any elements known to our chemistry. The recent dis- 
coveries growing out of the investigation of newly discovered 
forms of radiation lead to the conclusion that the question of 
the forms of matter in the stars has far wider range than the 
simple question whether any given element is or is not found 
outside our earth. The question is rather that of the infinity 
of forms that matter may assume, including that most attenuated 
form found in the nebulae, which seem to be composed of matter 
more refined than even the atoms supposed to make up the matter 
around us. 

2. The second conclusion is that, as a general rule, the 
incandescent heavenly bodies are not masses of solid or liquid 
matter as formerly assumed, but mainly masses either of gas, 
or of substances gaseous in their nature, so compressed by the 
gravitation of their superincumbent parts toward a common 
centre that their properties combine those of the three forms of 
matter known to us. We have strong reason to believe that 
even the sun, though much denser than the general average of 



the stars, may possibly be characterized as gaseous rather than 
solid. Probabilities also seem to favour the view that this may, 
to a certain extent, be true of the four great planets of our 
system. The case of bodies like our earth and Mars, which <ire 
solid either superficially or throughout, is probably confined to 
the smaller bodies of the universe. 

3. A third characteristic which seems to belong to the great 
bodies of the universe is the very high temperature of their 
interior. With a modification to be mentioned presently, we 
may regard them as intensely hot bodies, probably at a tempera- 
ture higher than any we can produce by artificial means, of which 
the superficial portions have cooled off by radiation into space. 
A modification in this proposition which may hereafter be 
accepted involves an extension of our ideas of temperature, and 
leads us to regard the interior heat of the heavenly bodies as due 
to a form of molecular activity similar to that of which radium 
affords so remarkable an instance. This modification certainly 
avoids many difficulties connected with the question of the 
interior heat of the earth, sun, Jupiter and probably all the 
larger heavenly bodies. 

A limit is placed on our knowledge of astrophysics which, up. 
to the present time, we have found no means of overstepping. 
This is imposed upon us by the fact that it is only when mattei 
is in a gaseous form that the spectroscope can give us certain 
knowledge as to its physical condition. So long as bodies are 
in the solid state the light which they emit, though different in 
different substances, has no characteristic so precisely marked 
that detailed conclusions can be drawn as to the nature of the 
substance emitting it. Even in a liquid form, the spectrum of 
any kind of matter is less characteristic than that of gas. More- 
over, a gaseous body of uniform temperature, and so dense as 
to be non-transparent, does not radiate the characteristic 
spectrum of the gas of which it is composed. Precise conclusions 
are possible only when a gaseous body is transparent through 
and through, so that the gas emits its characteristic rays — of 
when the rays from an incandescent body of any kind pass 
through a gaseous envelope at a temperature lower than that of 
the body itself. In this case the revelations of the spectroscope 
relate only to the constitution of the gaseous envelepe, and not 
to the body below the envelope, from which the light emanates. 
The outcome of this drawback is that our knowledge of the 
chemical constitution of the stars and planets is still confined 
to their atmospheres, and that conclusions as to the constitution 
of the interior masses which form them must be drawn by other 
methods than the spectroscopic one. 

When the spectroscope was first applied in astronomy, it was 
hoped that the light reflected from living matter might be found 
to possess some property different from that found in light re- 
flected from non-living matter, and that we might thus detect 
the presence of life on the surface of a planet by a study of its 
spectrum; but no hope of this kind has bo far been realized. 

We have, in this brief view of the subject, referred mainly to 
the results of spectrum analysis. Growing out of, but beyond 
this method is the beginning of a great branch of research which 
may ultimately explain many heretofore enigmatical phenomena 
of nature. The discovery of radio-activity may, by explaining 
the interior heat of the great bodies of the universe, solve a 
difficulty which since the middle of the 19th century has been 
discussed by physicists and geologists — that of reconciling the 
long duration which geologists claim for the crust of the earth 
with the period during which physicists have deemed it possible 
that the sun should have radiated heat. Evidence is also 
accumulating to show that the sun and stars are radio-active 
bodies, and that emanations proceeding from the sun, and 
reaching the earth, have important relations to the phenomena 
of Terrestrial Magnetism and the Aurora. 

The subject of Astrophysics does not admit of so definite a sub- 
division as that of Astrometry. The conclusions which researches 
relating to it have so far reached are treated in the articles 
Star; Sun; Comet; Nebula; Aurora Polaris, &c. (S. N.) 

ASTRUC, JEAN (1684-1766), French physician and Biblical 
critic, was born on the 19th of March 1684 at Sauve, inLanguedoc. 



820 



ASTURA— -ASTURIAS 



He graduated in medicine at Montpellier in 1703, and in 17 10 
he was appointed to the chair of anatomy at Toulouse, which 
he retained till 1717, when he became professor of medicine 
at Montpellier. Subsequently he was appointed successively 
superintendent of the mineral waters of Languedoc (17 21), first 
physician to the king of Poland (1729), and regius professor 
of medicine at Paris (1731). He died on the 5th of May 1766 
at Paris. Of his numerous works, that on which his fame 
principally rests is the treatise entitled De Morbis Venereis libri 
sex, 1736. In addition to other medical works he published 
anonymously Conjectures sur les mimoires originaux dont il 
paralt que Moyse s'est servi pour composer le livre de la Genese, 
(1753), in which he pointed out that two main sources can be 
traced in the book of Genesis; and two' dissertations on the 
immateriality and immortality of the soul, 1755. 

See Hauck, Realencyk. f. prot. Theol., 1897, vol. ii. pp. 162-170. 

ASTURA, formerly an island, now a peninsula, on the coast 
of Latium, Italy, 7 m. S.E. of Antium, at the S.E. extremity 
of the Bay of Antium. The name also belongs to the river which 
flowed into the sea immediately to the S.E., at the mouth of 
which there was, according to Strabo, an anchorage. The 
medieval castle of the Frangipani, in which Conradin of Swabia 
vainly sought refuge after the battle of Tagliaeozza in 1268, 
is built upon the foundations of a very large villa, of opus re- 
ticulatum with later additions in brickwork, and with a small 
harbour attached to it on the south-east. Remains of buildings 
also exist behind the sand dunes, which possibly mark the line 
of the channel which separated the island from the mainland, 
and these may have belonged to the post-station on the Via 
Severiana. As far as can be seen at present, there are remains 
of only one villa on the island itself; 1 but along the coast a mile 
to the north-west a line of villas begins, which continues as far 
as Antium. To the south-east, on the other hand, remains are 
almost entirely absent, and this portion of the coast seems to 
have been as sparsely populated in Roman times as it is now. 
The island seems to have existed as such in the time of Pope 
Honorius III. Astura was the site of a favourite villa of Cicero, 
whither he retired on the death of his daughter Tullia in 45 B.C. 
It appears to have been unhealthy even in Roman times; accord- 
ing to Suetonius, both Augustus and Tiberius contracted here 
the illnesses which proved fatal to them. 

See T. Ashby, in MSlanges de V£.cole Francaise de Rome (1905), 
p. 207. (T. As.) 

ASTURIAS, an ancient province and principality of northern 
Spain, bounded on the N. by the Bay (of Biscay, E. by Old 
Castile, S. by Leon and W. by Galicia. Pop. (1900) 627,069; 
area, 4205 sq. m. By the division of Spain' in 1833, the province 
took the name of Oviedo, though not to the exclusion, in 
ordinary usage, of the older designation. A full description of 
its modern condition is therefore given under the heading 
Oviedo; the present article being confined to an account of 
its physical features, its history, and the resultant character 
of its inhabitants. Asturias consists of a portion of the northern 
slope of the Cantabrian Mountains,and is covered in all directions 
with offshoots from the main chain, by which it is almost com- 
pletely shut in on the south. The higher summits, which often 
reach a height of 7000-8000 ft., are usually covered with snow 
until July or August, and the whole region is one of the wildest 
and most picturesque parts of Spain. Until the first railway was 
opened, in the middle of the 19th century, few of the passes 
across the mountains were practicable for carriages, and most 
of them are difficult even for horses. A narrow strip of level 
moorland, covered with furze and rich in deposits of peat, coal 
and amber, stretches inland, from the edge of the sheer cliffs 
which line the coast, to the foot of the mountains. The province 
is watered by numerous streams and rivers, which have hollowed 
out deep valleys; but owing to the narrowness of the level 
tract, their courses are. short, rapid and subject to floods. The 
most important is the Nalon or Pravia, which receives the waters 
of the Caudal, the Trubia and the Narcea, and has a course 

1 Servius, in speaking of it as oppidum, must be. referring to the 
post-station. 



of 62 m.; after it rank the Navia and the Sella. The estuaries 
of these rivers are rarely navigable, and along the entire littoral, 
a distance of 130 m., the only important harbours are at Gij6n 
and Avil6s. 

, A country so rugged, and so isolated by land and sea, naturally 
served as the last refuge of the older races of Spain when hard 
pressed by successive invaders. Before the Roman conquest, 
the Iberian tribe of Astures had been able to maintain itself 
independent of the Carthaginians, and to extend its territory 
as far south as the Douro. It was famous for its wealth in horses 
and gold. About 25 B.C., the Romans subjugated the district 
south of the Cantabrians, to which they gave the name of 
Augustana. Their capital was Asturica Augusta, the modern 
Astorga, in Leon. The Warlike mountaineers of the northern 
districts, known as Transmon tana, never altogether abandoned 
their hostility to the Romans, whose rule was ended by the 
Visigothic conquest, late in the 5th century. In 713, two years 
after the defeat and death of Roderick, the last Visigothic king, 
all Spain, except Galicia and Asturias, fell into the, hands of the 
Moors. One of the surviving Christian leaders, Pelayo the Goth, 
took refuge with three hundred followers in the celebrated cave 
of Covadonga, or Cobadonga, near Cangas de Onis, and from this 
hiding-place undertook the Christian reconquest of Spain. The 
Asturians chose him as their king in 718, and although Galicia 
was lost in 734, the Moors proved unable to penetrate into the 
remoter fastnesses held by the levies of Pelayo. After his death 
in 737,the Asturians continued to offer the same heroic resistance, 
and ultimately enabled the people of Galicia, Leon and Castile to 
recover their liberty. The title of prince of Asturias, conferred 
on the heir-apparent to the crown of Spain, dates from 1388, 
when it was first bestowed on a Castilian prince. The title of 
count of Covadonga is assumed by the kings of Spain. In modern 
times Asturias formed a captaincy -general, divided into Asturias 
d'Oviedo, which corresponds with the limits of the ancient prin- 
cipality, and Asturias de Santillana, which now constitutes the 
western half of Santander. 

Owing to their almost entire immunity from any alien domina- 
tion except that of the Romans and Goths, the Asturians may 
perhaps be regarded as the purest representatives of the Iberian 
race; while their dialect (linguaje bable) is sometimes held to be 
closely akin to the parent speech from which modern Castilian is 
derived. It is free from Moorish idioms, and, like Galician and 
Portuguese it often retains the original Latin / which Castilian 
changes into h. In physique, the Asturians are like the Galicians, 
a people of hardy mountaineers and fishermen, finely built, but 
rarely handsome, and with none of the grace of the Castilian or 
Andalusian. Unlike the Galicians, however, they are remarkable 
for their keen spirit of independence, which has been fostered 
by centuries of isolation. Despite the harsh land-laws and 
grinding taxation which prevent them, with all their industry 
and thrift, from securing the freehold of the patch of ground 
cultivated by each peasant family, the Asturians regard them- 
selves as the aristocracy of Spain. This pride in their land, racfe 
and history they preserve even when, as often happens, they 
emigrate to other parts of the country or to South America, and 
earn their living as servants, water-carriers, or, in the case of 
the women, as nurses. They make admirable soldiers and sailors, 
but lack the enterprise and commercial aptitude of the Basques 
and Catalans; while they are differentiated from the inhabitants 
of central and southern Spain by their superior industry, and 
perhaps their lower standard of culture. It is, on the whole, 
true that by the exclusion of the Moors they lost their opportunity 
of playing any conspicuous part in the literary and artistic 
development of Spain. One class of the Asturians deserving 
special mention is that of the nomad cattle-drovers known as 
Baqueros or Vaqueros, who tend their herds on the mountains of 
Leitariegos in summer, and along the coast in winter; forming a 
separate caste, with distinctive customs, and rarely or never 
intermarrying with their neighbours. 

For the modern condition of the principality (including climate, 
fauna and flora), see S. Canals, Asturias: information sobre su 
presente estado (Madrid, 1900) ; and G, Casal, Memorias de histoxia 



ASTYAGES— ASYLUM 



821 



natural y medica de Asturias (Oviedo, 1900). For the history and 
antiquities, there is much that is valuable in Asturias monumental, 
epigrdfica y diplomatics &;c, by C. M. Vigil (Madrid, 1887) — folio, 
with maps and illustrations. See also F. de Aramburu y Zuloaga, 
Monografia de Asturias (Oviedo, 1899). 

ASTYAGES, the last king of the Median empire. In the 
inscriptions of Nabonidus the name is written Ishtuvegu (cylinder 
from Abu Habba V R 64, col. 1, 32; Annals, published by Pinches, 
Tr. Soc. Bibl. Arch. vii. col. 2, 2). According to Herodotus, he 
was the son of Cyaxares and reigned thirty-five years (584-550 
B.C.); his wife was Aryenis, the daughter of Alyattes of Lydi'a 
(Herod, i. 74) . About his reign we know little, as the narrative of 
Herodotus, which makes Cyrus the grandson of Astyages by his 
daughter Mandane, is merely a legend; the figure of Harpagus, 
who as general of the Median army betrays the king to Cyrus, 
alone seems to contain an historical element, as Harpagus and his 
family afterwards obtained a high position in the Persian empire. 
From the inscriptions of Nabonidus we learn that Cyrus, king of 
Anshan (Susiana), began war against him in 553 B.C.; in 550, 
when Astyages marched against Cyrus, his troops rebelled, and 
he was taken prisoner. Then Cyrus occupied and plundered 
Ecbatana. The captive king was treated fairly by Cyrus (Herod, 
i. 130), and according to Ctesias (Pers. 5, cf. Justin i. 6) made 
satrap of Hyrcania, where he was afterwards slain by Oebares 
against the will of Cyrus, who gave him a splendid funeral. 
Alexander Polyhistor and Abydenus in their excerpts from 
Berossus, which Eusebius (Chron. i. pp. 29 and 37) and Syncellus 
(p. 396) have preserved, give the name Astyages to the Median 
king who reigned in the time of the fall of Nineveh (606 B.C.), 
and became father-in-law of Nebuchadrezzar. This is evidently 
a mistake; the name ought to be Cyaxares (in the fragments of 
the Jewish history of Alexander Polyhistor, in Euseb. Praep. 
Ev. ix. 39, the name is converted into Astibaras, who, according 
to the unhistorical list of Ctesias, was the father of Astyages), and 
there is no reason to invent an earlier king Astyages I., as some 
modern authors have done. The Armenian historians render the 
name Astyages by Ashdahak, i.e. Azhi Dahaka (Zohak), the 
mythical king of the Iranian epics, who has nothing whatever to 
do with the historical king of the Medes. (Ed. M.) 

ASTYLAR (from Gr. A-, privative, and orOXos, a column)-, 
an architectural term given to a class of design in which neither 
columns nor pilasters are used for decorative purposes; thus the 
Ricardi and Strozzi palaces in Florence are astylar in their 
design, in contradistinction to Palladio's palaces at Vicenza, 
which are columnar. 

ASUNC16N (Nuestra Senora de la Asuncion), a city and 
port of Paraguay, and capital of the republic, on the left bank of 
the Paraguay river in 25° 16' 04" S., 57 42' 40" W., and 970 m. 
above Buenos Aires. Pop. (est. in 1900) 52,000. The port is 
connected with Buenos Aires and Montevideo by regular lines of 
river steamers, which are its only means of trade communication 
with the outer world, and with the inland town of Villa Rica 
(95 m.) by a railway worked by an English company. The city 
faces upon a curve in the river bank forming what is called the 
Bay of Asunci6n, and is built on a low sandy plain, rising to pretty 
hillsides overlooking the bay and the low, wooded country of 
the Chaco on the opposite shore. The general elevation is only 
253 ft. above sea-level. Asunci6n is laid out on a regular plan, the! 
credit for which is largely due to Dictator Francia; the principal 
streets are paved and lighted by gas and electricity; and telephone 
and street-car services are maintained. The climate is hot but 
healthful, the mean annual temperature being about, 72 F. 
The- city is the seat of a bishopric dating from 1547, and con- 
tains a large number of religious edifices. It has a national 
college and public library, but no great progress in education has 
been made. The most prominent edifice in the city is the palace 
begun by the younger Lopez, which is now occupied by a bank. 
There are some business edifices and residences of considerable 
architectural merit, but the greater part are small- and iricon- 
spicuous, a majority of the residences being thatched, mud- 
walled cabins. Considerable progress was made during the last 
two decades of the 19th century, however, notwithstanding 
misgovernment and the extreme poverty of the people. Asuncion 



was founded by Ayolas in 1535, and is the oldest permanent 
Spanish settlement on the La Plata. It was for a long time the 
seat of Spanish rule in this region, and later the scene of a bitter 
struggle between the church authorities and Jesuits. Soon after 
the declaration of independence in 1 811, the city fell under the 
despotic rule of Dr Francia, and then under that of the elder and 
younger Lopez, through which its development was greatly 
impeded. It was captured and plundered by the Brazilians in 
1869, and has been the theatre of several revolutionary outbreaks 
since then, one of which (1905) resulted in a blockade of several 
months' duration. (A. J. L.) 

ASVINS, in Hindu mythology, twin deities of light. Aftel 
Indra, Agni and Soma, they are the most prominent divinities 
in the Rig- Veda, and have more than fifty entire hymns addressed 
to them. Their exact attributes are obscure. They appear 
to be the spirits of dawn, the earliest bringers of light in the 
morning sky; they hasten on in the clouds before Dawn and 
prepare the way for her. In some hymns they are called sons 
of the sun; in others, children of the sky; in others, offspring of 
the ocean. They are youngest of the gods, bright lords of lustre, 
honey-hued. They are inseparable. The sole purpose of one 
hymn is to compare them with different twin objects, such as 
eyes, hands, feet and wings. They have a common wife, Surya. 
They are physicians, protectors of the weak and old, especially 
of elderly unmarried women. They are the friends of lovers, 
and bless marriages and make them fruitful. 

See A. A. Macdonell, Vedic Mythology (Strassburg, 1897). 

ASYLUM (from Gr. k-, privative, arid aVKtjf right'of seizure), 
a place of refuge. In ancient Greece, an asylum was an " inviol- 
able " refuge for persons fleeing from pursuit and in search of 
protection. In a general sense, all Greek temples' aiid altars 
were inviolable, that is> it was a religious crime to remove by 
force any person or thing once under the protection of a deity ^ 
But it was only in the case of a small number of temples that 
this protecting right of a deity was recognized with, common 
consent. Such were the sanctuaries of Zeus Lycaeus in Arcadia, 
of Poseidon in the island of Calauria, and of Apollo at Delos^ 
they were; however, numerous in Asia Minor. They guaranteed 
absolute security to the suppliant within their limits. The 
right of sanctuary, originally possessed by all temples;; appears 
to have become limited to a few in consequence of abuses of it. 
Asylums in this sense were peculiar to the Greeks. The asylum 
of Romulus (Livy i. 8), which was probably the altar of Veiovis, 
cannot be considered as such. Under Roman dominion, the 
rights of existing Greek sanctuaries were at first confirmed; but 
their number was considerably reduced by Tiberius. Under 
the Empire, the statues of the emperors and the eagles of the 
legions were made refuges against acts of violence. Generally 
speaking, the classes of persons who claimed the rights of asylum 
were slaves who had been maltreated by their masters, soldiers 
defeated and pursued hy the enemy, and criminals who feared 
a trial ot who had escaped before sentence was passed. (See 
treatises De Asylis Graecis, by Forster, 1847; Jaenisch, 1868; 
Barth, 1888.) ; ' 

With the establishment of Christianity, the custom of asylum 
or sanctuary (q.v.) became attached to the church or churchyard. 
In modern times the word asylum has come to mean an institu-i 
tion providing shelter dr refuge for any class- of afflicted or 
destitute persons, such as the blind, deaf and dumb, &e., but 
more particularly the insane. (See Insanity.) 

ASYLUM, RIGHT OF (Fr. droit d'asile; Ger. Asylrecht), in 
international law, the right which a state possesses^ by .virtue 
of the principle that every independent state is sole master 
within its boundaries, of allowing fugitives from another' country 
to enter or sojourn upon its territory. Extradition (q.v.) treaties 
are undertakings between states curtailing the exercise of the 
right of asylum in respect of refugees from justice, but the con- 
ditions therein laid down invariably show that nations regard 
the maintenance of this right of asylum' as intimately connected 
with their right of independent action, however weak as states 
they -may be, on their own soil. The neutral right to gtant 
asylum to belligerent forces is now governed by articles 57, /s8 



822 



ATACAMA— ATALANTA 



and 59 of the regulations annexed to the Hague Convention of 
the 29th of July 1899, relating to the Laws and Customs of 
War on Land. (See War.) (T. Ba.) 

ATACAMA, a province of northern Chile, bounded N. and S. 
respectively by the provinces of Antofagasta and Coquimbo, and 
extending from the Pacific coast E. to the Argentine boundary 
line. It has an area of 30,729 sq. m., lying in great part within 
the Atacama desert region (see below), and a population (1902) 
of 71,446. The silver and copper mines of the province are 
numerous, some of them ranking among the most productive 
known, but the majority are worked with limited capital and on 
a small scale. The silver ore was first discovered in 1832 by a 
shepherd at a place which bears his name, Juan Godoi. The 
nitrate and borax deposits are extensive and productive, and 
common salt is a natural product of large areas in the elevated 
desert regions of the Andes. The exports include copper and 
silver and their ores, nitrate of soda, borax, guano and other 
minerals in small quantities. The capital, Copiapo (est. pop. 
8991 in 1902), is situated on a small river of the same name 37 m. 
from the coast and 51 m. south-east. by rail from Caldera, the 
principal port of this great mining district. Before 1842, when 
guano began to attract notice as an exportable product, Atacama 
was considered as Bolivian territory, and Coquimbo the extreme 
northern province of Chile. In that year Chile decided to explore 
the desert coast, and in 1843 that part of the desert extending 
north to the 26th parallel was organized into the province of 
Atacama. 

ATACAMA, DESERT OF, an arid, barren and saline region of 
western South America, covering the greater part of the Chilean 
provinces of Atacama and Antofagasta, the Argentine territory 
of Los Andes, and the south-western corner of the Bolivian 
department of Potosf. The higher elevations are known as the 
Puna de Atacama, which is practically a continuation southward 
of the great puna region of Peru and Bolivia. It is a broken, 
mountainous region, volcanic in places, saline in others, and 
ranges from 7000 to 13,500 ft. in general elevation. Its cul- 
minating ridges are marked by an irregular line of peaks and 
extinct volcanoes extending north by east from about 28 S. 
into southern Bolivia. On the eastern side, occasional rainfalls 
occur and streams from the snow-clads peaks produce some slight 
displays of fertility, but the general aspect of the plateaus, which 
are dry and cold in winter and in summer are swept by rain- 
storms and covered by occasional tufts of coarse grass, is barren 
and forbidding. They are also broken by great saline lagoons 
and dry salt basins. This region forms the Argentine territory 
of Los Andes and is habitable in places. On the western slope 
the land descends gradually to the Pacific, being broken into great 
basins, or terraces, by mountainous ridges in its higher elevations, 
widening out into gently-sloping sandy plains below, famous 
for their nitrate deposits, and terminating on the coast with 
sharply-sloping bluffs, having an elevation of 800 to 1500 ft., 
and looking from the sea like a range of flat-topped hills. This 
desolate region, which is rainless and absolutely barren, and 
was considered worthless for three and a half centuries, is now 
a treasure-house of mineral wealth, abounding in copper, silver, 
lead, nickel, cobalt, iron, nitrates and borax. It is occupied 
by many mining settlements, and includes some of the most 
productive copper and silver mines of the world. 

See L. Darapsky, " Zur Geographie der Puna de Atacama," Zeits. 
Ges. Erdk. zu Berlin, 1899; G. E. Church, "South America: an 
Outline of its Physical Geography," Geographical Journal, 1901 ; 
John Ball, Notes of a Naturalist in South America (London, 1887); 
F. O'Driscoll, " A Journey to the North of the Argentine Republic," 
Geographical Journal, 1904. (A. J. L.) 

. ATACAMITE, a mineral found originally in the desert of 
Atacama, and named by D. de Gallizen in 1801. It is a cupric 
oxychloride, having the formula CuCl 2 .3Cu(OH) 2 , and crystalliz- 
ing in the orthorhombic system. Its hardness is about 3 and 
its specific gravity 3-7, while its colour presents various shades of 
green, usually dark. Atacamite is a comparatively rare mineral, 
formed in some cases by the action of sea-water on various 
copper-ores, and occurring also as a volcanic product on Vesuvian 
lavas. Some of the finest crystals have been yielded by the 



copper-mines of South Australia, especially at Wallaroo. It 
occurs also, with malachite, at Bembe, near Ambriz, in West 
Africa. From one of its localities in Chile, Los Remolinos, it 
was termed Remolinite by Brooke and Miller. Atacamite, in 
a pulverulent state, was formerly used as a pounce under the 
name of "Peruvian green sand," and was known in Chile as 
arsenillo. (F. W. R.*) 

ATAHUALLPA (atahu, Lat. virtus, and allpa, sweet), " the 
last of the Incas " (or Yncas) of Peru, was the son of the ruler 
Huayna Capac, by Pacha, the daughter of the conquered sove- 
reign of Quito. His brother Huascar succeeded Huayna Capac 
in 1527; for, as Atahuallpa was not descended on both sides 
from the line of Incas, Peruvian law considered him illegitimate. 
He obtained, however, the kingdom of Quito. A jealous feeling 
soon sprang up between him and Huascar, who insisted that 
Quito should be held as a dependent province of his empire. 
A civil war broke out between the brothers, and, about the time 
when the Spanish conqueror Pizarro was beginning to move 
inland from the town of San Miguel, Huascar had been defeated 
and thrown into prison, and Atahuallpa had become Inca. 
Pizarro set out in September 1532, and made for Caxamarca, 
where the Inca was. Messengers passed frequently between 
them, and the Spaniards on their march were hospitably received 
by the inhabitants. On the 15th of November, Pizarro entered 
Caxamarca, and sent his brother and Ferdinando de Soto to 
request an interview with the Inca. On the evening of the next 
day, Atahuallpa entered the great square of Caxamarca, accom- 
panied by some five or six thousand men, who were either un- 
armed or armed only with short clubs and slings concealed 
under their dresses. Pizarro's artillery and soldiers were planted 
in readiness in the streets opening off the square. The interview 
was carried on by the priest Vicente de Valverde, who addressed 
the Inca through an interpreter. He stated briefly and dog- 
matically the principal points of the Christian faith and the 
Roman Catholic policy, and concluded by calling upon Atahuallpa 
to become a Christian, obey the commands of the pope, give 
up the administration of his kingdom, and pay tribute to Charles 
V., to whom had been granted the conquest of these lands. 
To this extraordinary harangue, which from its own nature 
and the faults of the interpreter must have been completely 
unintelligible, the Inca at first returned a very temperate answer. 
He pointed out what seemed to him certain difficulties in the 
Christian religion, and declined to accept as monarch of his 
dominions this Charles, of whom he knew nothing. He then took 
a bible from the priest's hands, and, after looking at it, threw 
it violently from him, and began a more impassioned speech, 
in which he exposed the designs of the Spaniards, and upbraided 
them with the cruelties they had perpetrated. The priest 
retired, and Pizarro at once gave the signal for attack. The 
Spaniards rushed out suddenly, and the Peruvians, astonished 
and defenceless, were cut down in hundreds. Pizarro himself 
seized the Inca, and in endeavouring to preserve him alive, 
received, accidentally, on his hand the only wound inflicted 
that day on a Spaniard. Atahuallpa, thus treacherously cap* 
tured, offered an enormous sum of money as a ransom, and 
fulfilled his engagement; but Pizarro still detained him, until 
the Spaniards should have arrived in sufficient numbers to 
secure the country. While in captivity, Atahuallpa gave secret 
orders for the assassination of his brother Huascar, and also 
endeavoured to raise an army to expel the invaders. His plans 
were betrayed, and Pizarro at once brought him to trial. He 
was condemned to death, and, as being an idolater, to death 
by fire. Atahuallpa, however, professed himself a Christian, 
received baptism, and his sentence was then altered into death 
by strangulation (August 29, 1533). His body was afterwards 
burned, and the ashes conveyed to Quito. (See also Peru: 
History.) 

ATALANTA, in Greek legend, the name of two Greek heroines. 
(1) The Arcadian Atalanta was the daughter of Iasius or Iasion 
and Clymene. At her birth, she had been exposed on a hill, 
her father having expected a son. At first she was suckled by a 
she-bear, and then saved by huntsmen, among whom she grew 



ATARGATIS— ATCHISON 



823 



up to be skilled with the bow, swift, and fond of the chase, 
like the virgin goddess Artemis. At the Calydonian boar-hunt 
her arrows were the first to hit the monster, for which its head 
and hide were given her by Meleager. At the funeral games 
of Pelias, she wrestled with Peleus, and won. For a long time 
she remained true to Artemis and rejected all suitors, but 
Meilanion at last gained her love by his persistent devotion. 
She was the mother of Parthenopaeus, one of the Seven against 
Thebes (Apollodorus iii. 9 ; Hyginus, Fab. 99). (2) The 
Boeotian Atalanta was the daughter of Schoeneus. She was 
famed for her running, and would only consent to marry a suitor 
who could outstrip her in a race, the consequence of failure being 
death. Hippomenes, before starting, had obtained from Aphro- 
dite three golden apples, which he dropped at intervals, and 
Atalanta, stopping to pick them up, fell behind. Both were 
happy at the result; but forgetting to thank the goddess for 
the apples, they were led by her to a religious crime, and were 
transformed into lions by the goddess Cybele (Ovid, Metam. 
x. 560; Hyginus, Fab. 185). The characteristics of these 
two heroines (frequently confounded) point to their being 
secondary forms of the Arcadian Artemis. 

ATARGATIS, a Syrian deity, known to the Greeks by a 
shortened form of the name, Derketo (Strabo xvi. c. 785; Pliny, 
Nat. Hist. v. 23. 81), and as Dea Syria, or in one word Deasura 
(Lucian, de Dea Syria). She is generally described as the 
" fish-goddess." The name is a compound of two divine names; 
the first part is a form of the Himyaritic ' Athtar, the equivalent 
of the Old Testament Ashtoreth, the Phoenician Astarte (g.v.), 
with the feminine ending omitted (Assyr. Ishtar); the second 
is a Palmyrene name 'Athe (i.e. tempus opporlunum) , which 
occurs as part of many compounds. As a consequence of the 
first half of the name, Atargatis has frequently, though wrongly, 
been identified with Astarte. The two deities were, no doubt, 
of common origin, but their cults are historically distinct. In 
2 Mace. xii. 26 we find reference to an Atargateion or Atergateion 
(temple of Atargatis) at Canlion in Gilead (cf. 1 Mace. v. 43), 
but the home of the goddess was unquestionably not Palestine, 
but Syria proper, expecially at Hierapolis (q.v.), where she had 
a great temple. From Syria her worship extended to Greece, 
Italy and the furthest west. Lucian and Apuleius give descrip- 
tions of the beggar-priests who went round the great cities 
with an image of the goddess on an ass and collected money. 
The wide extension of the cult is attributable largely to Syrian 
merchants; thus we find traces of it in the great seaport 
towns; at Delos especially numerous inscriptions have been 
found bearing witness to its importance. Again we find the 
cult in Sicily, introduced, no doubt, by slaves and mercenary 
troops, who carried it even to the farthest northern limits of 
the Roman empire. In many cases, however, Atargatis and 
Astarte are fused to such an extent as to be indistinguishable. 
This fusion is exemplified by the Camion temple, which is 
probably identical with the famous temple of Astarte at Ash- 
taroth-Karnaim. 

Atargatis appears generally as. the wife of Hadad (Baal). 
They are the protecting deities of the community. Atargatis, 
in the capacity of iroXtoOxos, wears a mural crown, is the ancestor 
of the royal house, the founder of social and religious life, the 
goddess of generation and fertility (hence the prevalence of 
phallic emblems), and the inventor of useful appliances. Not 
unnaturally she is identified with the Greek Aphrodite. By the 
conjunction of these many functions, she becomes ultimately 
a great Nature-Goddess, analogous to Cybele and Rhea (see 
Cheat Mother of the Gods) ; in one aspect she typifies the 
function of water in producing life; in another, the universal 
mother-earth (Macrobius, Saturn, i. 23); in a third (influenced, 
no doubt, by Chaldaean astrology), the power of destiny. The 
legends are numerous and of an astrological character, intended 
to account for the Syrian dove-worship and abstinence from fish 
(see the story in Athenaeus viii. 37, where Atargatis is derived 
from orep TanSos," without Gatis," — a queen who is said to 
have forbidden the eating of fish). Thus Diodorus Siculus, 
usirig Ctesias, tells how she fell in love with a youth who was 



worshipping at the shrine of Aphrodite, and by him became the 
mother of Semiramis, the Assyrian queen, and how in shame 
she flung herself into a pool at Ascalon or Hierapolis and was 
changed into a fish (W. Robertson Smith in Eng. Hist. Rev. ii., 
1887). In another story she was hatched from an egg found 
by some fish in the Euphrates and by them thrust on the bank 
where it was hatched by a dove; out of gratitude she persuaded 
Jupiter to transfer the fish to the Zodiac (cf. Ovid, Fast, ii, 
459-474* Metam. V. 331). 

See articles s.v. in Herzog-Hauck, Realencyk. (1897), by W. Bau^ 
dissin; afid Pauly-Wissowa, Realencyc; Fr. Baethgen, Beitrdge zur 
Semit. Religiongesch. (1888); R. Pietschmann, Gesch. der Phonizier 
(1889). 

ATAULPHUS (the Latinized form of the Gothic Ataulf, 
" Father-wolf," from attd, father, and vulfs, wolf; mod. Germ. 
Adolf, Latinized as Adolphus, the form used by Gibbon for the 
subject of this article), king of the Goths (d. 415). On the death 
of Alaric (q.v.) his followers acclaimed his brother-in-law Ataul- 
phus as king. Iii 412 he quitted Italy and led his army across 
the Alps into Gaul. Here he fought against some of the usurpers 
who threatened the throne of Honorius; he made some sort of 
compact with that emperor and, in 414, he married his sister 
Placidia; who had been since the siege of Rome a captive in the 
camp of the Goths. The ex-emperor Attalus danced at the 
marriage festival, which was celebrated with great pomp at 
Narbonne. In 415 Ataulphus crossed the Pyrenees into Spain 
and died at Barcelona, being assassinated by a groom. The 
most important fact in his history is his confession, recorded by 
Orosius, that he saw the inability of his countrymen to rear a 
civilized or abiding kingdom, and that consequently his aim 
should be to build on Roman foundations and blend the two 
nations into one. 

ATAVISM (from Lat. atavus, a great-great-great-grandfather 
or ancestor), the term given in biology to the reproduction in a 
living person or animal of the characteristics of an ancestor more 
remote than its parents (see Heredity). Loosely used, it con- 
notes a reversion to an earlier type. Individuals reproduce 
unexpectedly the traits of earlier ancestors, and ethnologists 
and criminologists frequently explain by " atavism " the occur- 
rence of degenerate species of man; but the whole subject is 
complicated by other possible explanations of such phenomena, 
included in the scientific study of normal " variation." 

ATBARA (Bahr-el-Aswad, or Black River), the most northern 
affluent of the river Nile, N.E. Africa. It rises in Abyssinia to 
the' N.W. of Lake Tsana, unites its waters with a number of 
other rivers which also rise in the Abyssinian highlands, and 
flows north-west 800 m. till its junction at Ed Danier with the 
Nile (q.v.). The battle of the Atbara, fought near Nakheila, 
a place on the north bank of the river about 30 m. above Ed 
Damer r on the 8th of April 1898, between the khalifa's forces 
under Mahmud and Sir Herbert (afterwards Lord) Kitchener's 
Anglo-Egyptian army, resulted in the complete defeat of the 
Mahdists and the capture of. their leader, and paved the way for 
the decisive battle of Omdurman on the 2nd of September 
following (see Egypt: Military Operations}. 

ATCHISON, a city and the county-seat of Atchison county, 
Kansas, U.S.A., on the west bank of the Missouri river, which 
is navigable at this point but is utilized comparatively little for 
commerce. Pop. (1890) 13,963; (1900) 15,722, of whom 2508 
were of negro descent and 1308 were foreign-born; (-1910) 
16,429. Atchison is served by the Atchison, Topeka & Santa F6, 
the Chicago, Burlington & Quincy, the Chicago, Rock Island 
& Pacific, and the Missouri Pacific railways. The city is the seat 
of Midland College (Lutheran, 1887), St Benedict's College- 
(Roman Catholic, 1858) for boys, Mt. Scholastics Academy 
(Roman Catholic) for girls, and Western Theological Seminary 
(Evangelical-Lutheran, 1893); a state soldiers' orphans' home 
is also located here. Atchison's situation and transportation 
facilities make it an important supply-centre, its trade in grains 
and live-stock being particularly large; it has large railway 
machine shops, and its principal manufactures are flour, furniture, 
lumber, hardware and drugs. The value of the city's factory 



824 



ATE^ATHABASCA 



products increased from $2,093,469 in 1900 to $4,052,274 in 1905, 
or 93-6%. Atchison was founded in 1854 by pro-slavery 
partisans, and was named in honour of their leader, David Rice 
Atchison, a United States senator. The city was quickly sur- 
passed by Leavenworth in commercial importance, and during 
the Kansas struggle was never of great political importance. 
Its first city charter was granted in 1858. The Atchison Globe 
(established 1878) is one of the best-known of western papers. 

ATE, in Greek mythology, the personification of criminal 
folly, the daughter of Zeus and Eris (Strife). She misled even 
Zeus to take a hasty oath, whereby Heracles became subject to 
Eurystheus. Zeus thereupon cast her by the hair out of Olympus, 
, whither she did not return, but remained on earth, working evil 
and mischief (Iliad, xix. 91). She is followed by the Litae 
(Prayers), the old and crippled daughters of Zeus, who are able 
to repair the evil done by her (Iliad, ix. 502). In later times 
Ate is regarded as the avenger of sin (Sophocles, Antigone, 
614, 625). 

See J. Girard, Le Sentiment religieux en Grice (1869) ; J. F. Scherer, 
De Graecorum Ales Notione atque Indole (1858) ; E. Berch, Bedeutung 
der Ate bei Aeschylos (1876); C. Lehrs, Populdre Aufsalze aus dent 
Alterthum (1875) ; L. Schmidt, Die Ethik der alten Griechen (1882). 

ATELLA, an ancient Oscan town of Campania, 9 m. N. of 
Naples and 9 m. S. of Capua, on the road between the two. It 
was a member of the Campanian confederation, and shared the 
fortunes of Capua, but remained faithful to Hannibal for a 
longer time; the great part of the inhabitants, when they 
could no longer resist the Romans, were transferred by him to 
Thurii, and the town was reoccupied in 211 by the Romans, 
who settled the exiled inhabitants of Nuceria there. The fate 
of Atella at the end of the war, when the latter were able to 
return to their own city, is unknown. Cicero was in friendly 
relations with it, and exerted influence that it might retain its 
property in Gaul, so that it is obvious that it had then recovered 
municipal rights. The town is mainly famous as the cradle of 
early Roman comedy, the Fabulae Atellanae (see below). Some 
remains of the town still exist, including a tower of the city wall 
in brick. 

See J. Beloch, Campanien (2nd ed., Breslau, 1890), p. 379. 

ATELLANAE FABULAE (" Atellan fables "), the name of a 
sort of popular comedy amongst the ancient Romans. The 
name is derived from Atella, an Oscan town in Campania; for 
this reason, and from their being also called Osci ludi, it has been 
supposed that they were of Oscan origin and introduced at Rome 
after Campania had been deprived of its independence. It 
seems highly improbable that they were performed in the Oscan 
language. Mommsen, however, rejects their Oscan origin 
altogether; he regards them as purely Latin, the scene merely 
being laid at Atella to avoid causing offence by placing it at 
Rome or one of the Latin cities. These plays, or rather sketches, 
contained humorous descriptions of country as contrasted with 
town life, and found their subjects amongst the lower classes 
of the people. The subjects alone were decided upon before 
the performance began; the dialogue was improvised as it 
proceeded. The Atellanae contained certain stock characters, 
like the Italian harlequinades: Maccus (the fool), Bucco (fat- 
chaps), Pappus (daddy), Dossennus (sharper); monsters and 
bogeys like Manducus, Pytho, Lamia also made their appearance. 
The performers were the sons of Roman citizens, who did not 
lose their rights as citizens, and were allowed to serve in the 
army: professional actors were excluded. The simple prose 
dialogues were probably varied by songs in the rude Saturnian 
metre: the language was that of the common people, accom- 
panied by lively gesticulation and movements. They were 
characterized by coarseness and obscenity. In the time of Sulla 
a literary form was given to the Atellanae by Pomponius of 
Bononia and Novius, who made them regular written comedies. 
Living persons seem to have been attacked, and even the doings 
of the gods and heroes of mythology burlesqued. From this 
time the Atellanae were used as after-pieces and performed 
by professional actors. In 46 B.C. they were ousted by the 
mimes, but regained popularity during the reign of Tiberius 
(chiefly owing to a certain Mummius), until they were definitely 



superseded by and merged in the mimes. They held their 
ground in the small towns and villages of Italy during the last 
days of the empire; they probably lingered on into the middle 
ages, and were the origin of the Italian Commedie dell' arte. 

. The scanty fragments of Pomponius and Novius are collected in 
Ribbeck's Comicorum Romanorum Reliquiae; see also Munk, De 
Fabulis Atellanis (1840) ; and art. Latin Literature. 

ATESTE (mod. Este, q.v.), an ancient town of Venetia, at the 
southern foot of the Euganean hills, 43 ft. above sea-level; 
22m. S.W.of Patavium (Padua). The site was occupied in very 
early times, as the discoveries since 1882 show. Large cemeteries 
have been excavated, which show three different periods from 
the 8th century B.C. down to the Roman domination. In the 
first period (Italic) cremation burials closely approximating to 
the Villanova type are found; in the second 1 (Venetian) the 
tombs are constructed of blocks of stone, and situlae (bronze 
buckets), sometimes decorated with elaborate designs, are 
frequently used to contain the cinerary urns; in the third 
(Gallic), which begins during the 4th century B.C., though 
cremation continues, the tombs are much poorer, the ossuaries 
being of badly baked rough clay, and show traces of Gallic 
influence, and characteristics of the La-Tene civilization. The 
many important objects found in these excavations are preserved 
in the local museum. See G. Ghirardini in Notizie degli Scavi; 
Monumenti dei Lincei, ii. (1893) 161 seq., vii. (1897) 5 seq., x. 
(1901) 5 seq.; AM del Congresso Intemazionale di Scienze 
Storiche (Rome, 1904), v. '279 seq. Inscriptions show that the 
national language asserted its existence even after Ateste came 
into the hands of the Romans. When this occurred is not known; 
boundary stones of 135 B.C. exist, which divide the territory of 
Ateste from that of Patavium and of Vicetia, showing that the 
former extended from the middle of the Euganean hills to the 
Atesis (mod. Adige, from which Ateste no doubt took its name, 
and on which it once stood). After the battle of Actium, 
Augustus settled veterans from various of his legions in this 
territory, Ateste being thenceforth spoken of as a colony. It 
appears to have furnished many recruits, especially for the 
cohortes urbanae. It appears but little in history, though its 
importance is vouched for by numerous inscriptions, the majority 
of which belong to the early Empire. (T. As.) 

ATH, or Aath, an ancient town of ; the province of Hainaut, 
Belgium, situated on the left bank of the Dender. Pop. (1890) 
9868; (1904) 11,201. Formerly it was fortified, but after the 
change in the defensive system of Belgium in 1858 the fortress 
was dismantled and its ramparts superseded by boulevards. 
Owing to a fire caused by lightning its fine church of St Julien, 
dating from the 14th century, which had escaped serious injury 
during many wars, was destroyed in 1817 (since rebuilt). This 
left the Tour Burbant as its sole relic of the middle ages. This 
tower formed part of the donjon of the fortress erected by 
Baldwin IV., count of Hainaut, about the year 1150. Near Ath 
is the fine castle of Beloeil, the ancient seat of the princely 
family of Ligne. Ath is famous for its gild of archersj whose 
butts are erected on the plain of the Esplanade in the centre of 
the town. The town militia has the privilege of being armed 
with bows and crossbows. Ath is also well known in Hainaut 
for its annual f£te called le jour de ducasse — duedsse being the 
Walloon word for kermesse (fete) . On this occasion a procession 
escorting figures of two giants, Goliath, called locally Goyasse, ; 
and Samson, forms the chief feature of the celebration. The 
emperor Joseph II. stopped it for its " idolatrous " character, 
but this act was one of the causes of the Brabant revolution of 
1789. The procession, revived in 1790, was again stopped by 
the French republicans five years later, but was revived under 
the Empire, and has flourished ever since. 

ATHABASCA (Athdpescow) , or Elk, a river and lake Of the 
province of Alberta, Canada. The river rises in the Rocky 
Mountains near the Yellowhead Pass in 52 10' N; and 117 10' 
W., and flows north-east as far as Athabasca Landing, and thence 
north into Lake Athabasca. It is 740 m. long and has a number 
of important tributaries, including the McLeod, Pembina, Lesser 
1 This is by some authorities divided into two. 



ATHALARIC— ATHANASIUS 



825 



Slave, which drains the lake :of that name, and Clearwater. 
Athabasca lake is 195 m. long, west to east, from 20 to 32 m. wide, 
has an area of 3085 sq. m., and is 690 ft. above the sea. It dis- 
charges its waters northward by Slave river and the Mackenzie 
system to the Arctic Ocean. On its north shore the country is 
high and rocky; on the south, sandy and barren. Shallow- 
draught steamers navigate the lake and river, and Lesser 
Slave lake and river, with one interruption — at Grand Rapids 
near the mouth of the Clearwater river. 

ATHALARIC (516-534), king of the Ostrogoths, grandson of 
Theodoric, became king of the Ostrogoths in Italy on his grand- 
father's death (526). As he was only ten years old, the regency 
was assumed by his mother Amalasuntha (q.v.). The murmurs of 
the Gothic nobles procured for their young sovereign too early 
emancipation from the schoolroom. He drank heavily, and 
indulged in vicious excesses which ruined his constitution. He 
died on the 2nd of October 534. 

ATHALIAH, in the Bible, the daughter of Ahab, and wife of 
Jehoram, king of Judah. After the death of Ahaziah, her son, 
she usurped the throne and reigned for six years. She is said 
to have massacred all the members of the royal house of 
Judah (2 Kings xi. 1-3), but a similar atrocity is also ascribed 
to Jehu (2 Kings x. 12-14); with both notices contrast 2 Chron. 
xxi. 17. The sole survivor Joash was concealed in the temple by 
his aunt, Jehosheba, wife of the priest Jehoida (2 Chron. xxii. n). 
These organized a revolution in favour of Joash, and caused 
Athaliah and her adherents to be put to death (2 Kings xi.; 
2 Chron. xxii. 10-12, xxiii., xxiv. 7). 

The story of Athaliah forms the subject of one of Racine's 
best tragedies. It has been musically treated by Handel and 
Mendelssohn. 

ATHAMAS, in Greek mythology, king of the Minyae in 
Boeotian Orchomenus, son of Aeolus, king of Thessaly, or of 
Minyas. His first wife was Nephele, the cloud-goddess, by whom 
he had two children, Phrixus and Helle (see Argonauts). 
Athamas and his second wife Ino were said to have incurred the 
wrath of Hera, because Ino had brought up Dionysus, the son of 
her sister Semele, as a girl, to save his life. Athamas went mad, 
and slew one of his sons, Learchus; Ino, to escape the pursuit of 
her frenzied husband, threw herself into the sea with her other 
son Melicertes. Both were afterwards worshipped as marine 
divinities, Ino as Leucothea, Melicertes as Palaemon (Odyssey 
v. 333). Athamas, with the guilt of his son's murder upon him, 
was obliged to flee from Boeotia. He was ordered by the oracle to 
settle in a place where he should receive hospitality from wild 
beasts. This he found at Phthiotis in Thessaly, where he 
surprised some wolves eating sheep; on his approach they fled, 
leaving him the bones. Athamas, regarding this as the fulfilment 
of the oracle, settled there and married a third wife, Themisto. 
The spot was afterwards called the Athamanian plain (Apollo- 
dorus i. 9; Hyginus, Fab. 1-5; Ovid, Metam. iv. 416, Fasti, 
vi. 485; Valerius Flaccus i. 277). 

According to a local legend, Athamas was king of Halos in 
Phthiotis from the first (Schol. on Apoll. Rhorlius ii. 513). After 
his attempt on the life of Phrixus, which was supposed to have 
succeeded, the Phthiots were ordered to sacrifice him to Zeus 
Laphystius, in order to appease the anger of the gods. As he was 
on the point of being put to death, Cytissorus, a son of Phrixus, 
suddenly arrived from Aea with the news that Phrixus was still 
alive. Athamas's life was thus saved, but the wrath of the gods 
was unappeased, and pursued the family. It was ordained that 
the el'dest born of the race should not enter the council-chamber; 
if he did so, he was liable to be seized and sacrificed if detected 
(Herodotus vii. 197). The legend of Athamas is probably 
founded on a very old custom amongst the Minyae— the sacrifice 
of the first-born of the race of Athamas to Zeus Laphystius. 
The story formed the subject of lost tragedies by Aeschylus, 
Sophocles, Euripides and other Greek and Latin dramatists. 

ATHANAGILD (d. 547) became king of the Visigoths (in 
Spain) in 534, having invoked the aid of the emperor Justinian for 
his revolt against his predecessor Agila. Athanagild, when him- 
self king, vainly tried to oust his late allies from the footing which 



they had gained in Spain, nor were the Greeks finally expelled 
from Spain till seventy years later. Athanagild himself is chiefly 
remembered for the tragic fortunes of his daughters Brunechildis 
and Gavleswintha, who married two Frankish brother kings, 
Sigebert and Chilperic. Athanagild died ("peacefully," as the 
annalist remarks) in 547. , . 

ATHANARIC (d. 381), a ruler of the Visigoths from about 366 
to 380. He bore the title not of king but of judge, a title which 
may be compared with that of ealdorman among the Anglo- 
Saxon invaders of Britain. Athanaric waged, from 367 to 369, 
an unsuccessful war with the emperor Valens, and the peace by 
which the war was ended was ratified by the Roman and Gothic 
rulers meeting on a barge in mid-stream of the Danube. Athan- 
aric was a harsh and obstinate heathen, and his short reign was 
chiefly famous for his brutal persecution of his Christian fellow- 
countrymen. In 376 he was utterly defeated by the Huns, 
who a few years before had burst into Europe. The bulk of the 
Visigothic people sought refuge within the Empire in the region 
now known as Bulgaria, but Athanaric seems to have fled into 
Transylvania. Being attacked there by two Ostrogothic chiefs 
he also, in 381, sought the protection of the Roman emperor. 
Theodosius I. received him courteously, and he was profoundly 
impressed by the glories of Constantinople, but on the fifteenth 
day after his arrival he died, and was honoured by the emperor 
with a magnificent funeral. 

ATHANASIUS (293-373), bishop of Alexandria and saint, one 
of the most illustrious defenders of the Christian faith, was born 
probably at Alexandria. Of his family and of his early education 
nothing can be said to be known. According to the legend, the 
boy is said to have once baptized some of his playmates and 
thereupon to have been taken into his house by Bishop Alexander, 
who recognized the validity of this proceeding. It is' certain' 
that Athanasius was young when he took orders, and that he 
must soon have entered into close relations with his bishop, 
whom, after the outbreak of the Arian controversy, he accom-r 
panied as archdeacon to the council of Nicaea. In the sessions 
and discussions of the council he could take no part;' but in 
unofficial conferences he took sides vigorously, according to his 
own evidence, against the Arians, and was certainly not without 
influence. He had already, before the opening of the Council, 
defined his personal attitude towards the dogmatic problem in 
two essays, Against the Gentiles and On the Incarnation, without, 
however, any special relation to the Arian controversy.. 

The essay On the Incarnation is the locus classicus for the 
presentation of the teaching of the ancient church on the subject 
of salvation. In this the great idea that God himself had entered 
into humanity becomes dominant. The doom of death under 
which mankind had sighed since Adam's fall could only then be 
averted, when the immortal Word of God (A670S) assumed a 
mortal body, and, by yielding this to death for the: sake of ally 
abrogated once for all the law of death, of which the power had 
been spent on the body of the Lord. Thus was rendered possible 
the leading back of mankind to God, of which the sure pledge 
lies in the grace of the resurrection of Christ. Athanasius would 
hear of no questioning of this religious mystery. In the catch- 
word Homousios, which had been added to the creed at Nicaea, 
he too recognized the best formula for the expression of the 
mystery, although in his own writings he made but sparing use 
of it. He was in fact less concerned with the formula than with 
the content. Arians and Semi- Arians seemed to him to be 
pagans, who worship the creature, instead of the God who 
created all things, since they teach two gods, one having no 
beginning, the other having a beginning in Time and therefore 
of the same nature as the heathen gods, since, like them, he is a, 
creature. Athanasius has no terms for the definition of the 
Persons in the one "Divine" (to 1 diiov), which are in their 
substance one; and yet he is 1 certain that this "Divine" is riot 
a mere abstraction, but something truly personal: "They are 
One," so he wrote later in his Discourses against the Arians, 
" not as though the unity were toin into two parts, which outside 
the unity would be nothing, 'nor as though the unity bore two 
names, so that one and the same is at one time Father and then 



826 



ATHANASIUS 



his own Son, as the heretic Sabellius imagined. But they are 
two, for the Father is Father, and the Son is notithe same, but, 
again, the Son is Son, and not the Father himself. But their 
Nature ((j>vcns) is one, for the Begotten is not dissimilar (avd/wLOs) 
to the Begetter, but his image, and everything that is the 
Father's is also the Son's." 

Five months after the return from the council of Nicaea 
Bishop Alexander died; and on the 8th of February 326 
Athanasius, at the age of thirty-three, became his successor. 
The first years of his episcopate were tranquil ; then the storms 
in which the remainder of his life was passed began to gather 
round him. The council had by no means composed the divi- 
sions in the Church which the Arian controversy had provoked. 
Arius himself still lived, and his friend Eusebius of Nicomedia 
rapidly regained influence over the emperor Constantine. The 
result was a demand made by the emperor that Arius should be 
readmitted to communion. Athanasius stood firm, but many 
accusers soon rose up against one who was known to be under 
the frown of the imperial displeasure. He was charged with 
cruelty, even with sorcery and murder. It was reported that a 
bishop of the Meletian party (see Meletius) in the Thebaid, 
of the name of Arsenius, had been unlawfully put to death by 
him. He was easily able to clear himself of these charges ; but 
the hatred of his enemies was not relaxed, and in the summer of 
335 he was peremptorily ordered to appear at Tyre, where a 
council had been summoned to sit in judgment upon his conduct. 
There appeared plainly a predetermination to condemn him, 
and he fled from Tyre to Constantinople to appeal to the emperor 
himself. Refused at first a hearing, his perseverance was at 
length rewarded by the emperor's assent to his reasonable request 
that his accusers should be brought face to face with him in the 
imperial presence. Accordingly the leaders of the council, the 
most conspicuous of whom were Eusebius of Nicomedia and his 
namesake of Caesarea, were summoned to Constantinople. 
Here they did not attempt to repeat their old charges, but found 
a more effective weapon to their hands in a new charge of a 
political' kind — that Athanasius had threatened to stop the 
Alexandrian corn-ships bound for Constantinople. It is very 
difficult to understand how far there was truth in the persistent 
accusations made against the prince-bishop of Alexandria. 
Probably there was in the very greatness of his character and 
the extent of his popular influence a certain species of dominance 
which lent a colour of truth to some of the things said against 
him. On the present occasion his accusers succeeded at once in 
arousing the imperial jealousy. Without obtaining a hearing, 
he was banished at the end of 335 to Treves in Gaul. This was 
the first banishment of Athanasius, which lasted about one year 
and a half. It was brought to a close by the death of Constantine, 
and the accession as emperor of the West of Constantine II., 
who, in June 337, allowed Athanasius to retu-n to Alexandria. 

He reached his see on the 23rd of November 337, and, as he 
himself has told us, " the people ran in crowds to see his face; 
the churches were full of rejoicing; thanksgivings were every- 
where offered up ; the ministers and clergy thought the day 
the happiest in their lives." But this period of happiness was 
destined to be short-lived. His position as bishop of Alexandria 
placed him, not under his patron Constantine, but under Con- 
stantius, another son of the elder Constantine, who had succeeded 
to the throne of the East. He in his turn fell, as his father had 
done in later years, under the influence of Eusebius of Nicomedia, 
who in the latter half of 339 was transferred to the see of Con- 
stantinople, the new seat of the imperial court. A second 
expulsion of Athanasius was accordingly resolved upon. The old 
accusations against him were revived, and he was further charged 
with having set at naught the decision of a council. On the 
18th of March 339 the exarch of Egypt suddenly confronted 
Athanasius with an imperial edict, by which he was deposed 
and a Cappadocian named Gregory was nominated bishop in 
his place. On the following day, after tumultuous scenes, 
Athanasius fled, and four days later Gregory was installed by the 
aid of the soldiery. On the first opportunity, Athanasius went 
to Rome, to " lay his case before the church." A synod assembled 



at Rome in the autumn of 340, and the great council' — probably 
that which met at Sardica in 342 or 343, where the Orientals 
refused to meet the representatives of the Western church-^- 
declared him guiltless. This decision, however, had no immediate 
effect in favour of Athanasius. Constantius continued for some 
time implacable, and the bold action of the Western bishops 
only incited the Arian party in Alexandria to fresh severities. 
But the death of the intruder Gregory, on the 26th of June 345, 
opened up a way of reconciliation. Constantius decided to yield 
to the importunity of his brother Constans, who had succeeded 
Constantine II. in the West; and the result was the restoration 
of Athanasius for the second time, on the 21st of October 346. 
Again he returned to Alexandria amid the enthusiastic demon- 
strations of the populace, which is described by Gregory of 
Nazianzus, in his panegyric on Athanasius, as streaming forth 
like " another Nile " to meet him afar off as he approached the 
city. 

The six years of his residence in the West had given Athanasius 
the opportunity of displaying a momentous activity. He made 
long journeys in Italy, in Gaul, and as far as Belgium. Every- 
where he laboured for the Nicene faith, and the impression 
made by his personality was so great that to hold fast the 
orthodox faith and to defend Athanasius were for many people 
one and the same thing. This was shown when, after the death 
of the emperor Constans, Constantius became sole ruler of East 
and West. With the help of counsellors more subtle than 
discerning, the emperor, with the object of uniting the various 
parties in the Church at any cost, sought for the most colourless 
possible formula of belief, which he hoped to persuade all the 
bishops to accept.. As his efforts remained for years fruitless, 
he used force. " My will is your guiding-line," he exclaimed in 
the summer of 355 to the bishops who had assembled at Milan 
in response to his orders. A series of his most defiant opponents 
had to go into banishment, Liberius of Rome, Hilarius of Poitiers 
and Hosius of Corduba, the last-named once the confidant of 
Constantine and the actual originator of the Homousips, and 
now nearly a hundred years old. At length came the turn of 
Athanasius, now almost the sole upholder of the banner of the 
Nicene creed in the East. Several attempts to expel him failed 
owing to the attitude of the populace. On the night of the 8th- 
9th of February 356, however, when the bishop was holding the 
Vigils, soldiers and police broke into the church of Theonas. 
Athanasius himself has described the scene for us : "I was 
seated upon my chair, the deacon was about to read the psalm, 
the people to answer, ' For his mercy endureth for ever.' The 
solemn act was interrupted; a panic arose." The bishop, who 
was at first unwilling to save himself, until he knew that his 
faithful followers were in safety, succeeded in escaping, leaving 
the town and finding a hiding-place in the country. The solitudes 
of Upper Egypt, where numerous monasteries and hermitages had 
been planted, seem at this time to have been his chief shelter. 
In this case, benefit was repayed by benefit, for Athanasius during 
his episcopate had been a zealous promoter of asceticism and 
monachism. With Anthony the hermit and Pachomius the 
founder of monasteries, he had maintained personal relations, 
and the former he had commemorated in his Life of Anthony. 
During his exile his time was occupied in writing on behalf of 
his cause, and to this period belong some of his most important 
works, above all the great Orations or Discourses against the 
Arians, which furnish the best exposition of his theological 
principles. 

During his absence the see of Alexandria was left, without a 
pastor. It is true that George of Cappadocia had taken his 
place; but he could only maintain himself for a short while 
(February 35 7-October 358). The great majority of the popula- 
tion remained faithful to the exile. At length, in November 361, 
the way was opened to him for his return to his see by the death 
of Constantius. Julian, who succeeded to the imperial throne, 
professed himself indifferent to the contentions of the Church, 
and gave permission to the bishops exiled in the late reign, to 
return home. Among others, Athanasius availed himself of this 
permission, and in February 362 once more seated himself upon 



ATHAPASCAN— ATHEISM 



827 



his throne, amid the rejoicings of the people. He had begun his 
episcopal labours with renewed ardour, and assembled his bishops 
in Alexandria to decide various important questions, when an 
imperial mandate again — for the fourth time — drove him from 
his place of power. The faithful gathered around him weeping. 
" Be of good heart," he said, " it is but a cloud: it will pass." 
His forecast proved true; for within a few months Julian had 
closed his brief career of pagan revival. As early as September 
363, Athanasius was able to travel to Jovian, the new emperor, 
who had sent him a letter praising his Christian fidelity and 
encouraging him to resume his work. He returned to Alexandria 
on the 20th of February 364. With the emperor he continued 
to maintain friendly relations; but the period of repose was 
short. In the spring of 365, after the accession of Valens to the 
throne, troubles again arose. Athanasius was once more com- 
pelled to seek safety from his persecutors in concealment (October 
365), which lasted, however, only for four months. In February 
366 he resumed his episcopal labours, in which he henceforth 
remained undisturbed. On the 2nd of May 373, having con- 
secrated one of his presbyters as his successor, he died quietly 
in his own house. 

Athanasius was a man of action, but he also knew how to use 
his pen for the furtherance of his cause. He left a large number 
of writings, which cannot of course be compared with those of 
an Origen, a Basil, or a Gregory of Nyssa. Athanasius was no 
systematic theologian. All his treatises are occasional pieces, 
born of controversy and intended for controversial ends. The 
interest in abstract exposition of clearly formulated theological 
ideas is everywhere subordinate to the polemical purpose. But 
all these writings are instinct with a living personal faith, and 
serve for the defence of the cause; for it was not about words 
that he was contending. Even those who do not sympathize 
with the cause which Athanasius steadfastly defended cannot 
but admire his magnanimous and heroic character. If he was 
imperious in temper and inflexible in his conception of the 
Christian faith, he possessed a great heart and a great intellect, 
inspired with an enthusiastic devotion to Christ. As a theologian, 
his main distinction was his zealous advocacy of the essential 
divinity of Christ. Christianity in its Arian conception would 
have evaporated in a new polytheism. To have set a dam 
against this process with the whole force of a mighty personality 
constitutes the importance of Athanasius in the world's history. 
It is with good reason that the Church honours him as the 
" Great," and as the "Father of Orthodoxy." 

The best edition of the works of Athanasius is the so-called Maurine 
edition of Bernard de Montfaucon in 3 vols. (Paris, 1698) ; this was 
enlarged in the 3rd edition by Giustiniani (4 vols., Padua, I777)> and 
is printed in this form in Migne's Patrologia, vols, xxv.-xxviii. An 
English translation of selections, with excellent introductions to the 
several writings, was published by Archibald Robertson in the Library 
of the Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, second series, vol. 4 (Oxford 
and New York, 1892). There is no biography satisfactory from the 
modern point of view. Studies preliminary to such a biography 
began to be published by E. Schwartz in his essays, " Zur Geschichte 
des Athanasius " (in the Nachrichten der konighchen Gesellschaft der 
Wissenschaften zu Gottingen, 1904, &c). The life of Athanasius, 
however, is so completely intertwined with the history of his time 
that it is permissible to refer, for a knowledge of him, to the general 
descriptions which will be found at the close of the article Arius, Of 
the older literature, Tillemont's Memoires pour servir a. Vhistoire 
ecclesiastique des six premiers siecles, vols. vi. and viii., are still a mine 
of material for the historian. Of the newer literature the following 
deserve to be read: — Johann Adam Mohler, Athanasius der Grosse 
und die Kirche seiner Zeit, 2 vols. (2nd ed., Mainz, 1844); and 
Fr. Boehringer, " Arius und Athanasius," Die Kirche Christi und 
ihre Zeugen, vol. i. part 2 (2nd ed., Stuttgart, 1874). (G. K.) 

ATHAPASCAN, a widely distributed linguistic stock of North 
American Indians, the chief tribes included being the Chippe- 
wyan, Navajo, Apache, Jicarilla, Lipan, Hupa and Wailaki. 
The Athapascan family is geographically divided into Northern, 
Pacific and Southern. The Northern division (Tinneh or D6ne) 
is about Alaska, and the Yukon and Mackenzie rivers, — the 
eponymous " Athabasca " tribe living round Lake Athabasca, 
in the province of Alberta in Canada. The Pacific division 
covers a strip of territory, some 400 m. in length, from Oregon 



southwards into California. The Southern division includes 
Arizona and New Mexico, parts of Utah, Colorado, Kansas and 
Texas, and the northern part of Mexico. The typical tribes are 
those of the Northern division. 
See Handbook of American Indians (Washington, 1907). 

ATHARVA VEDA, the fourth book of the Vedas, the ancient 
scriptures of the Brahman religion. Like the other Vedas it is 
divided into Samhita, Brahmanas and Upanishads, representing 
the spiritual element and its magical and nationalistic develop- 
ment. The mantras or sayings composing the Samhita of the 
Atharva Veda differ from those of the other Vedas by being in 
the form of spells rather than prayers or hymns, and seem to 
indicate a stage of religion lower than that of the Rig Veda. 

ATHEISM (from Gr. d-, privative, and dibs, God), literally 
a system of belief which denies the existence of God. The 
term as generally used, however, is highly ambiguous. Its 
meaning varies (a) according to the various definitions of deity, 
and especially (6) according as it is (i.) deliberately adopted 
by a thinker as a description of his own theological standpoint, 
or (ii.) applied by one set of thinkers to their opponents. As 
to (a), it is obvious that atheism from the standpoint of the 
Christian is a very different conception as compared with 
atheism as understood by a Deist, a Positivist, a follower of 
Euhemerus or Herbert Spencer, or a Buddhist. But the ambi- 
guities arising from the points of view described in (b) are much 
more difficult both intellectually and in their practical social 
issues. Thus history shows how readily the term has been used 
in the most haphazard manner to describe even the most trivial 
divergence of opinion concerning points of dogma. In other 
words, " atheism " has been used generally by the orthodox 
adherents of one religion, or even of a single sect, for all beliefs 
which are different or even differently expressed. It is in fact 
in these cases, like " heterodoxy," a term of purely negative 
significance, and its intellectual value is of the slightest. The 
distinction between the terms " religion " and " magic " is, 
in a similar way, often due merely to rivalry between the 
adherents of two or more mutually exclusive religions brought 
together in the same community. When the psalmist declares 
that " the fool hath said in his heart, there is no God," he 
probably does not refer to theoretical denial, but to a practical 
disbelief in God's government of human affairs, shown in dis- 
obedience to moral laws. Socrates was charged with " not 
believing in the gods the city believes in." The cry of the heathen 
populace in the Roman empire against the Christians was 
" Away with the atheists! To the lions with the Christians!" 
The ground for the charge was probably the lack of idolatry 
in all Christian worship. Spinoza, for whom God alone existed, 
was persecuted as an atheist. A common designation of Knox 
was " the atheist," although it was to him " matter of satisfac- 
tion that our most holy religion is founded on faith, not on 
reason." 

In its most scientific and serious usage the term is applied 
to that state of mind which does not find deity (i.e. either one 
or many gods) in or above the physical universe. Thus it has 
been applied to certain primitive savages, who have been 
thought (e.g. by Lord Avebury in his Prehistoric Times) to have 
no religious belief; it is, however, the better opinion that there 
are no peoples who are entirely destitute of some rudimentary 
religious belief. In the second place, and most usually, it is 
applied to a purely intellectual, metaphysical disbelief in- the 
existence of any god, or of anything supernatural. In this con- 
nexion it is usual to distinguish three types of atheism :-^the 
dogmatic, which denies the existence of God positively; the 
sceptical, which distrusts the capacity of the human mind to 
discover the existence of God; and the critical, which doubts the 
validity of the theistic argument, the proofs for the existence 
of God. That the first type of atheism exists, in spite of the 
denials of those who favour the second or the third, may be 
proved by the utterances of men like Feuerbach, Flourens or 
Bradlaugh. "There is no God," says Feuerbach, "it is clear 
as the sun and as evident as the day that there is no God, and 
still more that there can be none." With greater passion 



828 



ATHELM— ATHENA 



Flourens declares " Our enemy is God. Hatred of God is the 
beginning of wisdom. If mankind would make true progress, 
it must be on the basis of atheism." Bradlaugh maintained 
against Holyoake that he would fight until men respected the 
name "atheist." The answer to dogmatic atheism, that it 
implies infinite knowledge, has been well stated in John Foster's 
Essays, and restated by Chalmers in his Natural Theology, and 
its force is recognized in Holyoake's careful qualification of the 
sense in which secularism accepts atheism, " always explaining 
the term atheist to mean ■■' not seeing God ' visually or inferen- 
tially, never suffering it to be taken for anti-theism, that is, hating 
God, denying God — as hating implies personal knowledge as 
the ground of dislike, and denying implies infinite knowledge 
as the ground of disproof." But dogmatic atheism is rare com- 
pared with the sceptical type, which is identical with agnosticism 
(q.v.) in so far as it denies the capacity of the mind of man to 
form any conception of God, but is different from it in so far as 
the agnostic merely holds his judgment in suspense, though, in 
practice, agnosticism is apt to result in an attitude towards religion 
which is hardly distinguishable from a passive and unaggressive 
atheism. The third or critical type may be illustrated by 
A CandidExaminationvf Theismhy "Physicus" (G.J. Romanes), 
in which the writer endeavours to estahlish the weakness of the 
proofs for the existence of God, and to substitute for theism 
Spencer's physical explanation of the universe, and yet admits 
how unsatisfying to himself the new position is. " When at 
times I think, as think at times I must, of the appalling contrast 
between the hallowed glory of that creed which once was mine, 
and the lonely mystery of existence as now I find it — at such 
times I shall ever feel it impossible to avoid the sharpest pang 
of which my nature is susceptible." 

Atheism has to meet the protest of the heart as well as the 
argument of the mind of mankind. It must be judged not only 
by theoretical but by practical arguments, in its relations either 
to the individual or to a society. Voltaire himself, speaking 
as a practical man rather than as a metaphysician, declared 
that if there were no God it would be necessary to invent one; 
and if the analysis is only carried far enough it will be found 
that those who deny the existence of God (in a conventional 
sense) are all the time setting up something in the nature of 
deity by way of an ideal of their own, while fighting over the 
meaning of a word or its conventional misapplication. 

ATHELM (d. 923), English churchman, is said to have been 
a monk of Glastonbury before his elevation in 909 to the see of 
Wells, of which he was the first occupant. In 914 he became 
archbishop of Canterbury. 

ATHELNEY, a slight eminence of small extent in the low 
level tract about the junction of the rivers Tone and Parrett in 
Somersetshire, England. It was formerly isolated by marshes 
and accessible only by boat or artificial causeway, and under 
these conditions it gained its historical fame as the retreat of 
King Alfred in 878-879 when he was unable to withstand the 
incursions of the Danes. After regaining his throne he founded 
a monastery here in gratitude for the retreat afforded him by 
the island; no traces of it exist above ground, but remains have 
been excavated. There was also found here, in 1693, the cele- 
brated Alfred jewel, bearing his name, and preserved in the 
Ashmolean Museum.at Oxford. An inscribed pillar commemorat- 
ing the king was set up in 1801. The name of Athelney signifies 
the Isle of Princes (A.S, ^Ethelingaea). Athelney is a railway 
station on a branch of the Great Western line. 

ATHENA (the Attic form of the Homeric Athene, also called 
Athenaia, Pallas Athene, Pallas), one of the most important 
goddesses in Greek mythology. With Zeus and Apollo, she 
farms a triad which represents the embodiment of all divine 
power. No satisfactory derivation of the name Athena has 
been given 1 ; Pallas, at first an epithet, but after Pindar used 

1 O. Gruppe (Grieckiscke Mythologie, ii. p. 1 194) thinks that it 
probably means " without mother's milk," either in an active or in 
a passive sense — ''' not giving suck," or " unsuckled," in her char- 
acter as the virgin goddess, or as springing from the head of Zeus. 
In support of this view he refers to Hesychius (fl^woc" yiXa) and 
a passage in Athenagoras (Legalio pro Christianis, 17), where it is 



by itself, may possibly be connected with 7raXXttKij (" maiden "). 
Athena has been variously described as the pure aether, the 
storm-cloud, the dawn, the twilight; but there is little evidence 
that she was regarded as representing any of the physical powers 
of nature, and it is better to endeavour to form an idea of her 
character and attributes from a consideration of her cult- 
epithets and ritual. According to the legend, her father Zeus 
swallowed his wife Metis (" counsel "), when pregnant with 
Athena, since he had been warned that his children by her 
might prove stronger than himself and dethrone him. Hephaes- 
tus (or Prometheus) subsequently split open his head with a 
hatchet, and Athena sprang forth fully armed, uttering a loud 
shout of victory (Hesiod, Theogony, 886; Pindar, Olympia, 
vii. 35). In Crete she was said to have issued from a cloud 
burst asunder by Zeus. According to Roscher, the manner, of 
her birth represents the storm-cloud split by lightning; Farnell 
{Culls of the Greek States, i. p. 285) sees in it an indication that, 
as the daughter of Metis, Athena was already invested with a 
mental and moral character, and explains the swallowing of 
Metis (for which compare the story of Cronus and his children) 
by the desire to attribute an extraordinary birth to one in whom 
masculine traitspredominated. Inanotheraccount(as T pirvykvtia.) 
she is the daughter of the river Triton, to which various localities 
were assigned, and wherever there was a river (or lake) of that 
name, the inhabitants claimed that she was born there. It is 
probable that the name originated in Boeotia (C. O. Muller, 
Geschichten hellenischer Stamme, i. pp. 351-357; but see Macan 
on Herodotus, iv. 180), whence it was conveyed by colonists 
to Cyrene and thence to Libya, where there was a river Triton. 
Here some local divinity, a daughter of Poseidon, connected 
with the water and also of a warlike character, was identified 
by the colonists with their own Athena. In any case, it is 
fairly certain that Tritogeneia means "water-born," although 
an old interpretation derived it from rpirot, a supposed Boeotian 
word meaning " head," which further points to the name having 
originated in Boeotia. Roscher suggests that the localization 
of her birthplace in the extreme west points to the western sea, 
the home of cloud and storm. 

In Homer Athena already appears as the goddess of counsel, 
of war, of female arts and industries, and the protectress of 
Greek cities, this last aspect of her character being the most 
important and pronounced. Hence she is called woXtos, 
TroXtoOxor, in many Greek states, and is frequently associated 
with Zeus TroXieiis. The most celebrated festival of the city- 
goddess was the Panathenaea at Athens and other places. 
Other titles of kindred meaning are apxriy'trii ("founder") 
and ravaxats, the protectress of the Achaean league. At Athens 
she presided over the phratries or clans, and was known as 
CLTa-rovpla. and (pparpla., and sacrifice was offered to her at the 
festival Apaturia. The title p-Jiryp, given her by the inhabitants 
of Elis, whose women, according to the legend, she had blessed 
with abundance of children, seems at variance with the generally- 
recognized conception of her as xapflewK ; but p.ijrqp may bear 
the same meaning as kov por po<£os, the fosterer of the young, 
in harmony with her aspect as protectress of civic and family 
life. At Alalcomenae, near the Tritonian lake in Boeotia, 
she was aXahjcontTrfts ("defender"). Her temple, which was 
pillaged by Sulla, contained an ivory image, which was said to 
have fallen from heaven. The inhabitants claimed that the 
goddess was born there and brought up by a local hero Alal- 
comeneus. Her images, called Palladia, which guarded the 
heights (cf. her epithets cbcpio, Kpavaia), represented her with 
shield uplifted, brandishing her spear to keep off the foe. The 
cult of Athena Itonia, whose earliest seat appears to have > been 
amongst the Thessalians, who used her name as a : battle-cry, 
made its Way to Coronea in Boeotia, where her sanctuary was 
the seat of the Pamboeotian confederacy., The meaning of 
Itonia is obscure: DUmmler connects it with irewves, the 
" willow-beds " on the banks of the river Coralios. (the river 

stated that Athena was sometimes called 'AflijXa 6r 'A817X17I For 
Pallas, he prefers the old etymology from jriXXw (to " shake "), rather 
in the sense of " earth-shaker " than " lance-brandisher." 



ATHENA 



829 



of the irlaiden, i.e. Athena); Jebb (on Bacchylides, fr. id. 2) 
suggests a derivation from Ikvai, the goddess of the "onset." 
At Thebes she was worshipped as Athena Onka or Onga, of 
equally uncertain derivation (possibly from 5yia>s, "a height "). 
Peculiar to Arcadia is the title Athena Alea, probably = " warder 
off of evil," although others explain it as=" warmth," and see 
in it an allusion to her physical nature as one of the powers of 
light. Farnell {Cults, p. 275) points out that at the same time 
she is certainly looked upon as in some way connected with 
the health-divinities, since in her temple she is grouped with 
Asclepius and Hygieia (see Hygieia). 

She already appears as the goddess of counsel (xoXityfoi'Xos) 
in the Iliad and in Hesiod. The Attic bouleutae took the oath 
by Athena Boulaia; at Sparta she was ayopaia, presiding over 
the popular assemblies in the market-place; in Arcadia Mxa-vim, 
the discoverer of devices. The epithet trpovoia (" forethought ") 
is due, according to Farnell, to a confusion with irpovaid, referring 
to a' statue of the goddess standing " before a shrine," and arose 
later (probably spreading from Delphi), some time after the 
Persian wars, in which she repelled a Persian attack on the 
temples " by divine forethought"; another legend attributes 
the narhe to her skill in assisting Leto at the birth of Apollo and 
Artemis. With this aspect of her character may be compared 
the Hesiodic legend, according to which she was the daughter 
Of Metis. Her connexion with the trial of Orestes, the introduc- 
tion of a milder form of punishment for justifiable homicide, 
and the institution of the court t6 hrl IlaXXaSiCj), show the 
important part played by her in the development of legal ideas. 
The protectress of cities was naturally also a goddess of war. 
As such she appears in Homer and Hesiod and in post-Homeric 
legend as the slayer of the Gorgon and taking part in the battle 
of the giants. On numerous monuments she is represented as 
dpeta, " the warlike," viKi7<£6pos, " bringer of victory," holding 
an image of Nike (q.v.) in her outstretched hand (for other 
similar epithets see Roscher's Lexikon) . She was also the goddess 
of the arts of war in general; otoix««i, she who draws up the 
ranks for battle, ^uxrrqpia, she who girds herself for the fray. 
Martial music (cp. 'Kdrjvr] (r&\iriy£, " trumpet ") and the Pyrrhic 
dance, in which she herself is said to have taken part to com- 
memorate the victory over the giants, and the building of 
war-ships were attributed to her. She instructed certain of 
her favourites in gymnastics and athletics, as a useful training 
for war. The epithets i7nria, xa^" / ""K) 6ajud<nx7ros, usually 
referred to her as goddess of war-horses, may perhaps be reminis- 
cences of an older religion in which the horse was sacred to her. 
As a war-goddess, she is the embodiment of prudent and 
intelligent tactics, entirely different from Ares, the personi- 
fication of brute force and rashness, who is fitly represented as 
suffering defeat at her hands. She is the patroness and pro- 
tectress of those heroes who are distinguished for their prudence 
and caution, and in the Trojan War she sides with the more 
civilized Greeks. 

The goddess of war develops into the goddess of peace and the 
pursuits connected with it. She is prominent as the promoter of 
agriculture in Attic legend. The Athenian hero Erechtheus 
(Erich thonius), originally an earth-god, is her foster-son, with 
whom she was honoured in the Erechtheum on the Acropolis. 
Her oldest priestesses, the dew-sisters — Aglauros, Herse, Pan- 
drosos — signify the fertilization of the earth by the dew, and 
were probably at one time identified with Athena, as surnames 
of whom both Aglauros and Pandrosos are found. The story 
of the voluntary sacrifice of the Attic maiden Aglauros on behalf 
of her country in time of war (commemorated by the ephebi 
taking the oath of loyalty to their country in her temple), and 
of the leap of the three sisters over the Acropolis rock (see 
Erechtheus), probably points to an old human sacrifice. 
Athena also gave the Athenians the olive-tree, which was 
supposed to have sprung from the bare soil of the Acropolis, 
when smitten by her spear, close to the horse (or spring of water) 
produced by the trident of Poseidon, to which he appealed in 
support of his claim to the lordship of Athens. She is also con- 
nected with Poseidon in the legend of Erechtheus, not as being 



in any way akin to the former in nature or character, but as 
indicating the contest between an oldand a new religion. This 
god, whose worship was introduced into Athens at a later date 
by the Ionian immigrants, was identified with Erechtheus- 
Erichthonius (for whose birth Athena was in a certain sense 
responsible), and thus was brought into connexion with the 
goddess, in order to effect a reconciliation of the two cults; 
Athena was said to have invented the plough, and to have 
taught men to tame horses and yoke oxen. Various arts were 
attributed to her — shipbuilding, the goldsmith's craft, fulling, 
shoemaking and other branches of industry. As early as Homer 
she takes especial interest in the occupations of women; she 
makes Hera's robe and her own peplus, and spinning and weaving 
are often called " the works of Athena." The custom of offering 
a beautifully woven peplus at the Panathenaic festival is con-' 
nected with her character as Ergane the goddess of industry. 1 
As patroness of the arts, she is associated with Hephaestus (one 
of her titles is 'H^awrria) and Prometheus, and in Boeotia she was 
regarded as the -inventress of the flute. According to Pindar, 
she imitated oh the flute the dismal wail of the two surviving 
Gorgons after the death of Medusa. The legend that Athena, 
observing in the water the distortion of her features ; caused by 
playing that instrument, flung it' away, probably indicates that 
the Boeotians whom the Athenians regarded with contempt, 
used the flute in their worship of the Boeotian Athena. The 
story of the slaying of Medusa by Athena, in which there is no 
certain evidence that she played a direct part, explained by 
Roscher as the scattering of the storm-cloud, probably arose 
from the fact that she is represented as wearing the Gorgon's 
head as a badge. 

As in the case of Aphrodite and Apollo, Roscher in his Lexikon 
deduces all the characteristics of Athena from a single conception 
—that of the goddess of the storm or the thunder-cloud (for a 
discussion of such attempts see Farnell, Cults, i. pp. 3, 263). 
There seems little reason for regarding her as a nature-'goddess 
at all, but rather as the presiding divinity of states and cities, 
of the arts and industries-^-in short, as the goddess of the whole 
intellectual side of human life. 

Except at Athens, little is known of the ceremonies or festivals 
which attended her worship. There we have the following. 
(1) The ceremony of the Three Sacred Ploughs, by which the 
signal for seed-time was given, apparently dating from a period 
when agriculture was one of the chief occupations of her 
worshippers. (2) The Procharisteria at the end of winter, at 
which thanks were offered for the germination of the seed. 
(3) The Scirophoria, with a procession from the Acropolis to 
the village of Skiron, in the height of summer, the priests who 
were to entreat her to keep off the summer heat walking under 
the shade of parasols (cr/cipoe) held over them; others, however, 
connect the name with crxTpos (" gypsum "), perhaps used for 
smearing the image of the goddess. (4) The Oschophoria, at the 
vintage season, with races among boys, and a procession, with 
songs in praise of Dionysus and Ariadne. (5) The Chalkeia (feast 
of smiths), at which the birth of Erechtheus and the invention 
of the plough were celebrated. (6) The Plynleria and Callynteria, 
at which her ancient image and peplus in the Erechtheum and 
the temple itself were cleaned, with a procession in which bunches 
of figs (frequently used in lustrations) were carried. (7) The 
Arrhephoria or Errephoria (perhaps = Ersephoria, "dew-bear- 
ing "), at which four girls, between seven and eleven years of 
age, selected from noble families, carried certain unknown 
sacred objects to and from the temple of Aphrodite " in the 
gardens " (see J. E. Harrison, Classical Review, April 1889). 
(8) The Panathenaea, at which the new robes for the image of 
the goddess were carried through the city, spread like a sail on 
a mast. The reliefs of the frieze of the cella of the Parthenon 
enable us to form an idea of the procession. Athletic games, 
open to all who traced their nationality to Athens, were part of 
this festival. Mention should also be made of the Argive 

'According to J. E. Harrison in Classical Review {June 1894), 
Athena Ergane is the goddess of the fruits of the field and the pro- 
creation of children. 



8 3 o 



ATHENAEUM^ATHENAGORAS 



ceremony, at which the xoanon (ancient wooden statue) of Athena 
was washed in the river Inachus, a symbol of her purification 
after the Gigantomachia. 

The usual attributes of Athena were the helmet, the aegis, 
the round shield with the head of Medusa in the centre, the lance, 
an olive branch, the owl, the cock and the snake. Of these the 
aegis, usually explained as a storm-cloud, is probably intended 
as a battle-charm, like the Gorgon's head on the shield and the 
faces on the shields of Chinese soldiers; the owl probably 
represents the form under which she was worshipped in primitive 
times, and subsequently became her favourite bird (the epithet 
yXcLVKonris, meaning "keen-eyed" in Homer, may have originally 
signified " owl-faced "); the snake, a common companion of the 
earth deities, probably refers to her connexion with Eijechtheus- 
Erichthonius. 

As to artistic representations of the goddess, we have first the 
rude figure which seems to be a copy of the Palladium; secondly, 
the still rude, but otherwise more interesting, figures of her, 
as e.g. when accompanying heroes, on the early, painted vases; 
and thirdly, the type of her as produced by Pheidias, from which 
little variation appears to have been made. Of his numerous 
statues of her, the three most celebrated were set up on the Acro- 
polis, (i) Athena Parthenos, in the Parthenon. It was, in ivory 
and gold, and 30 ft. high. She was represented standing, in a long 
tunic; on her head was a helmet, ornamented with sphinxes 
and griffins; on her breast was the aegis, fringed with serpents 
and the Gorgon's head in centre. In her right hand was a Nike 
or winged victory, while her left held a spear, which rested on a 
shield on which were represented the battles of the Amazons 
with the giants. (2) A colossal statue said to have been formed 
from the spoils taken at Marathon, the so-called Athena 
Promachos. (3) Athena Lemnia, so called because it had been 
dedicated by the Athenian cleruchies in Lemnos. In this she 
was represented without arms, as a brilliant type of virgin beauty. 
The two last statues were of bronze. From the time of Pheidias 
calm earnestness, self-conscious might, and clearness of intellect 
were the main characteristics of the goddess. The eyes, slightly 
cast down, betoken an attitude of though tfulness; the forehead 
is clear and open; the mouth indicates firmness and resolution. 
The whole suggests a masculine rather than a feminine form. 

From Greece the worship of Athena extended to Magna 
Graecia, where a number of temples were erected to her in various 
places. In Italy proper she was identified with Minerva (q.v.). 

See articles in Pauly-Wissowa's Realencyclopddie; W. H. Roscher's 
Lexikon der Mythologie ; Daremberg and Saglio's Dictionnaire des 
antiquites (s.v. "Minerva"); L. Preller, Griechische Mythologie; 
W. H. Roscher, " Die Grundbedeutung der Athene," in Nektar und 
Ambrosia (.1883); F. A. Voigt, " Beitrage zur Mythologie des Ares 
und Athena," in Leipziger Studien, iv. (1881); L. R. Farnell, The 
Cults of the Creek States, i. (1896); J. E. Harrison, Prolegomena to 
the Study of Greek Religion (1903), for the festivals especially; 
O. Gruppe, Griechische Mythologie, ii. (1907). In the article Greek 
Art, fig. 21 represents Athena in the act of striking a prostrate 
giant ; fig. 38 a statuette of Athena Parthenos, a replica of the work 
of Pheidias. (J. H. F.) 

ATHENAEUM, a name originally applied in ancient Greece 
('kBi\vau>v) to buildings dedicated to Athena, and specially used 
as the designation of a temple in Athens, where poets and men of 
learning were accustomed to meet and read their productions. 
The academy for the promotion of learning which the emperor 
Hadrian built (about a.d. 135) at Rome, near the Forum, was also 
called the Athenaeum. Poets and orators still met and discussed 
there, but regular courses of instruction were given by a staff of 
professors in rhetoric, jurisprudence, grammar and philosophy. 
The institution, later called Schola Romana, continued in high 
repute till the 5 th century. Similar academies were also founded 
in the provinces and at Constantinople by the emperor Theodosius 
II. In modern times the name has been applied to various 
academies, as those of Lyons and Marseilles, and the Dutch high 
schools; and it has become a very general designation for literary 
clubs. It is also familiar as the title of several literary periodicals, 
notably of the London literary weekly founded in 1828. 

ATHENAEUS, of Naucratis in Egypt, Greek rhetorician and 
grammarian, flourished about the end of the 2nd and the beginning 



of the 3rd century a.d. Suidas only tells us that he lived " in the 
times of Marcus "; but the contempt with which he speaks of 
Commodus (died 192) shows that he survived that emperor. 
Athenaeus himself states that he was the author of a treatise on 
the thratta — a kind of fish mentioned by Archippus and other 
comic poets — and of a history of the Syrian kings, both of which 
works are lost. We still possess the Deipnosophistae, which may 
mean dinner- table philosophers or authorities on banquets, in 
fifteen books. The first two books, and parts of the third, 
eleventh and fifteenth, are only extant in epitome, but otherwise 
we seem to possess the work entire. It is an immense store-house 
of miscellaneous information, chiefly on matters connected with 
the table, but also containing remarks on music, songs, dances, 
games, courtesans. It is full of quotations from writers whose 
works have not come down to us; nearly 800 writers and 2500 
separate writings are referred to by Athenaeus; and he boasts of 
having read 800 plays of the Middle Comedy alone. The plan of 
the Deipnosophistae is exceedingly cumbrous, and is badly carried 
out. It professes to be an account given by the author to his 
friend Timocrates of a banquet held at the house of Laurentius 
(or Larentius) , a scholar and wealthy patron of art. It is thus a 
dialogue within a dialogue, after the manner of Plato, but a 
conversation of sufficient length to occupy several days (though 
represented as taking place in one) could not be conveyed in a 
style similar fo the short conversatipns of Socrates. Among the 
twenty-nine guests are Galen and Ulpian, but they are all 
probably fictitious personages, and the majority take no part in 
the conversation. If Ulpian is identical with the famous, jurist, 
the Deipnosophistae must have been written after his death (228); 
but the jurist was murdered by the praetorian guards, whereas 
Ulpian in Athenaeus dies a natural death. The conversation 
ranges from the dishes before the guests to literary matters of 
every description, including points of grammar and criticism; 
and they are expected to bring with them extracts from the poets, 
which are read aloud and discussed at table. The whole is but a 
clumsy apparatus for displaying the varied and extensive reading 
of the author. As a work of art it can take but a low rank, but 
as a repertory of fragments and morsels of information it is 
invaluable. 

Editio princeps, Aldine, 1524; Casaubon, 1597-1600; Schweigr 
hauser, 1801-1807; Dindorf, 1827; Meineke, 1859-1867; Kaibel, 
1887-1890; English translation by Yonge in Bohn's Classical 
Library. 

ATHENAGORAS, a Christian apologist of the 2nd century a.d,, 
was, according to an emendator of the Paris Codex 451 of the 
nth century, a native of Athens. The only sources of informa- 
tion regarding him are a short notice by Philip of Side, in 
Pamphylia (c. a,d. 420), and the inscription on his principal work. 
Philip — or rather the compiler who made excerpts from him— 
says that he was at the head of an Alexandrian school (the 
catechetical), that he lived in the time of Hadrian and 
Antoninus, to whom he addressed his Apology, and that Clement 
of Alexandria was his pupil; but these statements are more than 
doubtful. The inscription on the work describes it as the " Em- 
bassy of Athenagoras, the Athenian, a philosopher and a Christian 
concerning the Christians, to the Emperors Marcus Aurelius 
Antoninus and Lucius Aurelius Commodus, &c." This state- 
ment has given rise to considerable discussion, but from it and 
internal evidence the date of the Apology (Upeapda irtpl Xpl- 
anavvv) may be fixed at about a.d. 177. Athenagoras is also the 
author of a discourse on the resurrection of the body, which is not 
authenticated otherwise than by the titles on the various manu- 
scripts. In the Apology, after contrasting the judicial treatment 
of Christians with that of other accused persons, he refutes the 
accusations brought against the Christians of atheism, eating 
human flesh and licentiousness, and in doing so takes occasion 
to make a vigorous and skilful attack on pagan polytheism and 
mythology. The discourse on the resurrection answers objections 
to the doctrine, and attempts to prove'its truth from considera- 
tions of God's purpose in the creation of man, His justice and the 
nature of man himself. Athenagoras is a powerful and clear 
writer, who strives to comprehend his opponents' views and is 



ATHENODORUS^-ATHENS 



831 



acquainted with the classical writers. He used the Apology 
of Justin, but hardly the works of Aristides or Tatian. His 
theology is strongly tinged with Platonism, and this may account 
for his falling into desuetude. His discussion of the Trinity has 
some points of speculative interest, but it is not sufficiently 
worked out; he regards the Son as the Reason or Wisdom of the 
Father, and the Spirit as a divine effluence. On some other 
points, as the nature of matter, the immortality of the soul and 
the principle of sin, his views are interesting. 

Editions. — J. C. Th. Eg. de Otto, Corpus Apol. Christ. Sacc. II. 
vol. vii. (Jena, 1857) ; E. Schwartz in Texle und Untersuchungen, 
iv. 2 (Leipzig, 1891). 

Translations. — Humphreys (London, 1714) ; B. P. Pratten 
{Ante-Nic. Fathers, Edinburgh, 1867). 

Literature. — A. Harnack, Gesch. der altchr. Litt. pp. 526-558, and 
similar works by O. Bardenhewer and A. Ehrhard; Herzog-Hauck, 
Realencyk.; G. Kriiger, Early Chr. Lit. p. 130 (where additional 
literature is cited). In 1559 and 1612 appeared in French a work 
on True and Perfect Love, purporting to be a translation from the 
Greek of Athenagoras ; it is a palpable forgery. 

ATHENODORUS, the name of two Stoic philosophers of the 
1st century B.C., who have frequently been confounded. 

1. Athenodorus Cananites (e. 74 b.c.-a.d. 7), so called 
from his birthplace Canana near Tarsus (not Cana in Cilicia nor 
Canna in Lycaonia), was the son of one Sandon, whose name 
indicates Tarsian descent, not Jewish as many have held. He 
was a personal friend of Strabo, from whom we derive our know- 
ledge of his life. He taught the young Octavian (afterwards 
Augustus) at Apollonia, and was a pupil of Posidonius at Rhodes. 
Subsequently he appears to have travelled in the East (Petra and 
Egypt) and to have made himself famous by lecturing in the 
great cities of the Mediterranean. Writing in 50 B.C., Cicero 
speaks of him with the highest respect (cf. Ep. ad. Att., xvi. 
11. 4, 14. 4), a fact which enables us to fix the date of his birth 
as not later than about 74. His influence, over Augustus was 
strong and lasting. He followed him to Rome in 44, and is said to 
have criticized him with the utmost candour, bidding him repeat 
the letters of the alphabet before acting on an angry impulse. 
In later years he was allowed by Augustus to return to Tarsus 
in order to remodel the constitution of the city after the 
degenerate democracy which had misgoverned it under Boethus. 
He succeeded {c. 15-10 B.C.) in setting up a timocratic oligarchy 
in the imperial interest (see Tarsus). Sir W. M. Ramsay is 
inclined to attribute to the influence of Athenodorus the striking 
resemblances which can be established between Seneca and Paul, 
the latter of whom must certainly have been acquainted with his 
teachings. According to Eusebius and Strabo he was a learned 
scientist for his day, and some attribute to him a history of 
Tarsus. He helped Cicero in the composition of the De OJjtciis. 
His works are not certainly known, and none are extant. (See 
Sir W. M. Ramsay in the Expositor, September 1906, pp. 268 ff.) 

2. Athenodorus Cordylion, also of Tarsus, was keeper of 
the library at Pergamum, and was an old man in 47 B.C. In his 
enthusiasm for Stoicism he used to cut out from Stoic writings 
passages which seemed to him unsatisfactory. He also settled 
in Rome, where he died in the house of the younger Cato. 

Among others of the name may be mentioned (3) Athenodorus 
of Teos, who played the cithara at the wedding ol Alexander the 
Great and Statira at Susa (324 B.C.) ; (4) a Greek physician of the 
1st century A.D., who wrote on epidemic diseases; and two sculptors, 
of whom (5) one executed the statues of Apollo and Zeus which the 
Spartans dedicated at Delphi after Aegospotami ; and (6) the other 
was a son of Alexander of Rhodes, whom he helped in the Laocoon 
group. 

ATHENRY, a market town of county Galway, Ireland, 14 m. 
inland (E.) from Galway on the Midland Great Western main 
line. Pop. (1901) 853. Its name is derived from Ath-na-riogh, 
the ford of kings; and it grew to importance after the Anglo- 
Norman invasion as the first town of the Burgs and Ber- 
minghams. The walls were erected in 121 1 and the castle in 
1238, and the remains of both are noteworthy. A Dominican 
monastery was founded with great magnificence by Myler de 
Bermingham in 1241, and was repaired by the Board of Works 
in 1893. Of the Franciscan monastery of 1464 little is left. 
The town returned two members to the Irish parliament from 



the time of Richard II. to the Union; but it never recovered 
from the wars of the Tudor period, culminating in a successful 
siege by Red Hugh O'Donnell in 1596. 

ATHENS ['Adfjvax, Athenae, modem colloquial Greek 'A&qva], 
the capital of the kingdom of Greece, situated in 23° 44' E- 
and 37 58' N., towards the southern end of the central and 
principal plain of Attica. The various theories with regard to 
the origin of the name are all somewhat unconvincing; it is 
conceivable that, with the other homonymous Greek towns, 
such as Athenae Diades in Euboea, 'Adfjvai may be connected 
etymologically with avdos, a flower (cf . Firenze, Florence) ; 
the patron goddess, Athena, was probably called after the place 
of her cult. 

I. Topography and Antiquities 

The Attic plain, to ireSiov, slopes gently towards the coast of 
the Saronic Gulf on the south-west; on the east it is overlooked 
by Mount Hymettus (3369 ft.) ; on the north-east by Pentelicus 
or Brilessus (3635 ft.) from which, in ancient and modern times, 
an immense quantity of the finest marble has been quarried; 
on the north-west by Parnes (4636 ft.), a continuation of the 
Boeotian Cithaeron, and on the west by Aegaleus (1532 ft.), 
which descends abruptly to the bay of Salamis. In the centre 
of the plain extends from north-east to south-west, a series of 
low heights, now known as Turcovuni, culminating towards the 
south in the sharply pointed Lycabettus (1112 ft.), now called 
Hagios Georgios from the monastery which crowns its summit. 
Lycabettus, the most prominent feature in the Athenian land- 
scape, directly overhung the ancient city, but was not included 
in its walls; its peculiar shape rendered it unsuitable for fortifica- 
tion. The Turcovuni ridge, probably the ancient Anchesmus, 
separates the valley of the Cephisus on the north-west from 
that of its confluent, the Ilissus, which skirted the ancient city 
on the south-west. The Cephisus, rising in Pentelicus, enters 
the sea at New Phalerum; in summer it dwindles to an in- 
significant stream, while the Ilissus, descending from Hymettus, 
is totally dry, probably owing to the destruction of the ancient 
forests on both mountains, and the consequent denudation of 
the soil. Separated from Lycabettus by a depression to the 
south-west, through which flows a brook, now a covered drain 
(probably to be identified with the Eridanus), stands the re- 
markable oblong rocky mass of the Acropolis (512 ft.), rising 
precipitously on all sides except the western; its summit was 
partially levelled in prehistoric times, and the flat area was 
subsequently enlarged by further cutting and by means of re- 
taining walls. Close to the Acropolis on the west is the lower 
rocky eminence of the Areopagus, "Apeios irayos (377 ft.), the seat 
of the famous council; the name (see also Areopagus) has been 
connected with Ares, whose temple stood on the northern side 
of the hill, but is more probably derived from the 'Apai or 
Eumenides, whose sanctuary was formed by a cleft in its north- 
eastern declivity. Farther west of the Acropolis are three eleva- 
tions; to the north-west the so-called " Hill of the Nymphs " 
(341 ft.), on which the modern Observatory stands; to the west 
the Pnyx, the meeting-place of the Athenian democracy (351 ft.), 
and to the south-west the loftier Museum Hill (482 ft.), still 
crowned with the remains of the monument of Philopappus. 
A cavity, a little to the west of the Observatory Hill, is generally 
supposed to be the ancient Barathron or place of execution. 
To the south-east of the Acropolis, beyond the narrow valley 
of the Ilissus, is the hill Ardettus (436 ft.). The distance from 
the Acropolis to the nearest point of the sea coast at Phalerum 
is a little over 3 m. 

The natural situation of Athens was such as to favour the 
growth of a powerful community. For the first requisites of a 
primitive settlement — food supply and defence — it influence 
afforded every advantage. The Attic plain, notwith- cfthegeo- 
standing the lightness of the soil, furnished an adequate graphical 
supply of cereals; olive and fig groves and vineyards pos 
were cultivated from the earliest times in the valley of 
the Cephisus, and pasturage for sheep and goats was abundant. 
The surrounding rampart of mountains was broken towards the 



832 



ATHENS 



[TOPOGRAPHY 



north-east by an open tract stretching between. Hymettus and 
Peatelicus towards Marathon, and was traversed by the passes of 
Decelea, Phyle and Daphne on the north and north-west, but 
the distance between these natural passages and the city was 
sufficient to obviate the danger of surprise by an invading land 
force. On the other hand Athens, like Corinth, Megara and 
Argos, was sufficiently far from the sea to enjoy security against 
the sudden descent of a hostile fleet. At the same time the 
relative proximity of three natural harbours, Peiraeus, Zea and 
Munychia, favoured the development of maritime commerce 
and of the sea power which formed the basis of Athenian hege- 
mony. The climate is temperate, but liable to sudden changes; 
the mean temperature is 63°-! F., the maximum (in July) oo°-oi, 
the minimum (in January) 3i°-55. The summer heat is moder- 
ated by the sea-breeze or by cool northerly winds from the 
mountains (especially in July and August). The clear, bracing 
air, according to ancient writers, fostered the intellectual and 
aesthetic character of the people and endowed them with mental 
and physical energy. For the architectural embellishment of 
the city the finest building material was procurable without 
difficulty and in abundance; Pentelicus forms a mass of white, 
transparent, blue-veined marble; another variety, somewhat 
similar in appearance, but generally of a bluer hue, was obtained 
from Hymettus. For ordinary purposes grey limestone was 
furnished by Lycabettus and the adjoining hills; limestone 
from the promontory of Acte (the co-called " poros " stone), 
and conglomerate, were also largely employed. For the ceramic 
art admirable material was at hand in the district north-west of 
the Acropolis. For sculpture and various architectural purposes 
white, fine-grained marble was brought from Paros and Naxos. 
The main drawback to the situation of the city lay in the in- 
sufficiency of its water-supply, which was supplemented by an 
aqueduct constructed in the time of the Peisistratids and by 
later water-courses dating from the Roman period. A great 
number of wells were also sunk and rain-water was stored in 
cisterns. 

For the purposes of scientific topography observation of the 
natural features and outlines is followed by exact investigation of 
the architectural structures or remnants, a process demanding 
high technical competence, acute judgment and practical ex- 
perience, as well as wide and accurate scholarship. The building 
material and the manner of its employment furnish evidence no 
less important than the character of the masonry, the design and 
Sources tne m °des of ornamentation. The testimony, afforded 
f,- by inscriptions is often of decisive importance, especially 

Athenian tnat °* commemorative or votive tablets or of boundary- 
topo- stones found in situ; the value of this evidence is, on 

tranhy tne ot her hand, sometimes neutralized owing to the former 
removal of building material already used and its in- 
corporation in later structures. Thus sepulchral inscriptions have 
been found on the Acropolis, though no burials took place there 
in ancient times. In the next place comes the evidence derived 
from the whole range of ancient literature and specially from de- 
scriptions of the city or its different localities. The earliest known 
description of Athens was that of Diodorus, 6 jrepnjYxqs, who lived 
in the second half of the 4th century B.C. Among his successors were 
Polemon of Ilium (beginning of 2nd century B.C.),whose great noaiiiKfi 
x«pt^-yi7«nsgaveaminuteaccountofthevotiveofferingson the Acropolis 
and the tombs on the Sacred Way; and Heliodorus (second half of 
the 2nd century) who wrote fifteen volumes on the monuments of 
Athens. Of these and other works of the earliest topographers only 
some fragments remain. In the period between a. d. 143 and 159 
Pausanias visited Athens at a time when the monuments of the great 
age were still in their perfection and the principal embellishments 
of the Roman period had already been completed. The first thirty 
chapters of his invaluable Description of Greece{irepi.i]-rq<ns -rijs 'EXXdSos) 
are devoted to Athens, its ports and environs. Pausanias makes 
no claim to exhaustiveness; he selected what was best worth 
noticing (tA dfujXoTwrara). His account, drawn up from notes 
taken in the main from personal observation, possesses an especial 
importance for topographical research, owing to his method of 
describing each object in the order in which he saw it during the 
course of his walks. His accuracy, which has been called in question 
by some scholars, has been remarkably vindicated by recent exca- 
vations at Athens and elsewhere. The list of ancient topographers 
closes with Pausanias. The literature of succeeding centuries fur- 
nishes only isolated references; the more important are found ; in 
the scholia on Aristophanes, the lexicons of Hesychius, Photius 
and others, and the Etymologicum Magnum. The notices of Athens 
during the earlier middle ages are scanty in the extreme. In 1395 
Niccolo da Mattoni, a pilgrim from the Holy Land, visited Athens 



and wrote a description of a portion of the city. Of the work of 
Cyriac of Ancona, written about 1456, only some fragments remain, 
which are well supplemented by the contemporaneous description 
of the capable observer known as the " Anonymus of Milan." Two 
treatises in Greek by unknown writers belong to the same period. 
The Dutchman Joannes Meursius (1,579-1639) wrote three dis- 
quisitions on Athenian topography. The conquest by Venice in 
1687 led to the publication of several works in that city, including 
the descriptions of De la Rue and Fanelli and the maps of Coronelh 
and others. The systematic study of Athenian topography was 
begun in the 17th century, by French residents at Athens, the consuls 
Giraud and Chataignier and the Capuchin monks. The visit of the 
French physician Jacques Spon and the Englishman, Sir George 
Wheler or Wheeler (1650-1723), fortunately took place before the 
catastrophe of the Parthenon in 1687; Spon's Voyage d'ltalie, de 
Dalmatie, de Grece et du Levant, which contained the first scientific 
description of the ruins of Athens, appeared in 1678;, Wheler's 
Journey into Greece, in 1682. A period of British activity in research 
followed in the 18th century. The monumental work of James 
Stuart and Nicholas Revett, who spent three years at Athens (1751- 
1754^, marked an epoch in the progress of Athenian topography and 
is still indispensable to its study, owing to the demolition of ancient 
buildings which began about the middle of the 1 8th century. To 
this period also belong the labours of Richard Pococke and Richard 
Dalton, Richard Chandler, E. D. Clarke and Edward Dodwell. 
The great work of W. M. Leake {Topography of Athens and the Demi, 
2nd ed., 1841) brought the descriptive literature to an end and in- 
augurated the period of modern scientific research, in which German 
archaeologists have played a distinguished part. 

Recent investigation has thrown a new and unexpected light on 
the art, the monuments and the topography of the ancient, city. 
Numerous and costly excavations have been carried out Recent 
by the Greek government and by native and foreign research. 
scientific societies, while accidental discoveries have been 
frequently made during the building of the modern town. The 
museums, enriched by a constant inflow of works of art and in- 
scriptions, have been carefully and scientifically arranged, and 
afford opportunities for systematic study denied to scholars of the 
past generation. Improved means of communication have enabled 
many acute observers to apply the test of scrutiny on the spot to 
theories and conclusions mainly based on literary evidence; five 
foreign schools of archaeology, directed by eminent scholars, lend 
valuable aid to students of all nationalities, and lectures are fre- 
quently delivered in the museums and on the more interesting and 
important sites. The native archaeologists of the present day hold 
a recognized position in the scientific world ; the patriotic sentiment 
of former timeSj which prompted their zeal but occasionally warped 
their judgment, has been merged in devotion to science for its own 
sake, and the supervision of excavations, as well as the control of 
the art-collections, is now in highly competent hands. Athens has 
thus become a centre of learning, a meeting-place for scholars and 
a basis for research in every part of the Greek world. The attention 
of many students has naturally been concentrated on the ancient 
city, the birthplace of European art and literature, and a great 
development of investigation and discussion in the special domain 
of Athenian archaeology has given birth to a voluminous literature. 
Many theories hitherto universally accepted have been called in 
question or proved to be unsound : the views of Leake, for instance, 
have been challenged on various points, though many of his con- 
clusions have been justified and confirmed. The supreme importance 
of a study of Greek antiquities on the spot, long understood by 
scholars in Europe and in America, has gradually come to be. recog- 
nized in England, where a close attention to ancient texts, not always 
adequately supplemented by a course of local study and observation, 
formerly fostered a peculiarly conservative attitude in regard to the 
problems of Greek archaeology. Since the foundation of the German 
Institute in 1874, Athenian topography has to a large extent become 
a speciality of German scholars, among whom Wilhelm Dorpfeld 
occupies a pre-eminent position owing to his great architectural 
attainments and unrivalled local knowledge. Many of his bold and 
novel theories have provoked strenuous opposition, while others 
have met with general acceptance, except among scholars of the 
more conservative type. 

Prehistoric Athens. — Numerous traces of the " Mycenaean " 
epoch have recently been brought to light in Athens and its 
neighbourhood. Among the monuments of this age 
discovered in the surrounding districts are the rock- c #fJ!./ 
hewn tombs of Spata, accidentally revealed by a 
landslip in 1877, and the domed sepulchre at Menidi, near 
the ancient Acharnae, excavated by Lolling in 1879. Other 
" Mycenaean " landmarks have been laid bare at Eleusis; 
Thoricus, Halae and Aphidna. These structures, however, are 
of comparatively minor importance in point of dimensions and 
decoration; they were apparently designed as places of sepulture 
I for local chieftains, whose domains were afterwards incorporated 
in the Athenian realm by the o-wooacr/ws (synoecism) attributed 



ANTIQUITIES] 



ATHENS 



833 



to Theseus. The situation of the Acropolis, dominating the 
surrounding plain and possessing easy communication with 
the sea, favoured the formation of a relatively powerful state — 
inferior, however, to Tiryns and Mycenae; the myths of Cecrops, 
Erechtheus and Theseus bear witness to the might of the princes 
who ruled in the Athenian citadel, and here we may naturally 
expect to find traces of massive fortifications resembling in some 
degree those of the great Argolid cities. Such in fact have been 
brought to light by the modern excavations on the Acropolis 
(1885-1889). Remains of primitive polygonal walls which un- 
doubtedly surrounded the entire area have been found at various 
points a little within the circuit of the existing parapet. The 
best-preserved portions are at the eastern extremity, at the 
northern side near the ancient " royal " exit, and at the south- 
western angle. The course of the walls can be traced with a few 
interruptions along the southern side. On the northern side are 
the foundations of a primitive tower and other remains, appar- 
ently of dwelling-houses, one of which may have been the xv/avos 
56/u>5 'Epex^^os mentioned by Homer (Od. vii. 81). Among the 
foundations were discovered fragments of " Mycenaean " pottery. 
The various approaches to the citadel on the northern side — 
the rock-cut flight of steps north-east of the Erechtheum {q.v.), 
the stairs leading to the well Clepsydra, and the intermediate 
passage supposed to have furnished access to the Persians — are 
all to be attributed to the primitive epoch. Two pieces of poly- 
gonal wall, one beneath the bastion of Nike Apteros, the other in 
a direct line between the Roman gateway and the door of the 
Propylaea, are all that remain of the primitive defences of the 
main entrance. 

These early fortifications of the Acropolis, ascribed to the 
primitive non-hellenic Pelasgi, must be distinguished from 
_ pi. the Pelasgicum Or Pelargicum, which was in all prob- 
tfcvm. ability an encircling wall, built round the base of the 
citadel and furnished with nine gates from which it 
derived the name of Enneapylon. Such a wall would be required 
to protect the clusters of dwellings around the Acropolis as well 
as the springs issuing from the rock, while the gates opening 
in various directions would give access to the surrounding 
pastures and gardens. This view, which is that of E. Curtius, 
alone harmonizes with the statement of Herodotus (vi. 137) that 
the wall was " around " (7r«p() the Acropolis, and that of Thucy- 
dides (ii. 17) that it was " beneath " (tixo) the fortress. Thus 
it would appear that the citadel had an outer and an inner line 
of defence in prehistoric times. The space enclosed by the outer 
wall was left unoccupied after the Persian wars in deference 
to an oracular response apparently dictated by military con- 
siderations, the maintenance of an open zone being desirable 
for the defence of the citadel. A portion of the outer wall has 
been recognized in a piece of primitive masonry discovered 
near the Odeum of Herodes Atticus; other traces will probably 
come to light when the northern and eastern slopes of the 
Acropolis have been completely explored. Leake, whom Frazer 
follows, assumed the Pelasgicum to be a fortified space at the 
western end of the Acropolis; this view necessitates the assump- 
tion that the nine gates were built one within the other, but 
early antiquity furnishes no instance of such a construction; 
Dorpfeld believes it to have extended from the grotto of Pan 
to the sacred precinct of Asclepius. The well-known passage 
of Lucian (Piscator, 47) cannot be regarded as decisive for any 
of the theories advanced, as any portion of the old enceinte 
dismantled by the Persians may have retained the name in later 
times. The Pelasgic wall enclosed the spring Clepsydra, beneath 
the north-western corner of the Acropolis, which furnished a water- 
supply to the defenders of the fortress. The spring, to which a 
staircase leads down, was once more included in a bastion during 
the War of Independence by the Greek chief Odysseus. 

To the " Pelasgic " era may perhaps be referred (with Curtius 
and Milchhofer) the immense double terrace on the north-eastern 

The Pnyx. slope of the Pnvx (395 ft - bv 2I2 )> tne upper portion 

of which is cut out of the rock, while the lower is 

enclosed by a semicircular wall of massive masonry; the theory 

of these scholars, however, that the whole precinct was a sanctuary 

11. 27 



of the Pelasgian Zeus cannot be regarded as proved, hof is it 
easy to abandon the generally received view that this was the 
scene of the popular assemblies of later times, notwithstanding 
the apparent unsuitability of the ground and the insufficiency 
of room for a large multitude. These difficulties are met by 
the assumption that the semicircular masonry formed the base 
of a retaining-wall which rose to a considerable height, supporting 
a theatre-like structure capable of seating many thousand 
persons. The masonry may be attributed to the 5th century; 
the chiselling of the immense blocks is not " Cyclopean." Pro- 
jecting from the upper platform at the centre of the chord of 
the semicircular area is a cube of rock, n ft. square and 5 ft. 
high, approached on either side by. a flight of steps leading to the 
top; this block, which Curtius supposes to have been the 
primitive altar of Zeus "T\f/i<rros, may be safely identified with 
the orators' bema, 6 \iOos iv rfj HvkvI (Aristoph. Pax, 680). 
Plutarch's statement that the Thirty Tyrants removed the 
bema so as to face the land instead of the sea is probably due to 
a misunderstanding. Other cubes of rock, apparently altars, 
exist in the neighbourhood. There can be little doubt that- the 
Pnyx was the seat of an ancient cult; the meetings of the 
Ecclesia were of a religious character and were preceded by a 
sacrifice to Zeus 'Ayopcuos; nor is it conceivable that, but for 
its sacred associations, a site would have been chosen so unsuit- 
able for the purposes of a popular assembly as to need the 
addition of a costly artificial auditorium. 

The Pnyx, the Hill of the Nymphs and the Museum Hill are 
covered with vestiges of early settlements which extend to a 
considerable distance towards the south-east in the «_:*. 
direction of Phalerum. They consist of chambers of dwellings 
various sizes, some of which were evidently human «'"' 
habitations, together with cisterns, channels, seats, tomla - 
steps, terraces and quadrangular tombs, all cut in the rock. 
This neighbourhood was held by Curtius to have been the site 
of the primeval rock city, upavaa. 7r6Xir (Aristoph. Ach. 75), 
anterior to the occupation of the Acropolis and afterwards 
abandoned for the later settlement. It seems inconceivable, 
however, that any other site should have been preferred by the 
primitive settlers to the Acropolis, which offered the greatest 
advantages for defence; the Pnyx, owing to its proximity 
to the centres of civic life, can never have been deserted, and 
that portion which lay within the city walls must have been 
fully occupied when Athens was crowded during the Pelopon- 
nesian War. Some of the rock chambers originally intended 
for tombs were afterwards converted, perhaps under pressure 
of necessity, into habitations, as in the case of the so-called 
" Prison of Socrates," which consists of three chambers horizon- 
tally excavated and a small round apartment of the " beehive " 
type. The remains on the Pnyx and its neighbourhood Cannot 
all be assigned to one epoch, the prehistoric age. The dwellings 
do not correspond in size or details with the undoubtedly pre- 
historic abodes on the Acropolis. In view of the ancient law 
which forbade burial within the city, the tombs within the 
circuit of the city walls must either be earlier than the time of 
Themistocles or several centuries later; in the similar rock- 
tombs on the neighbouring slopes of the Acropolis and Areopagus 
both Mycenaean and Dipylon pottery have been found. But 
the numerous vertically excavated tombs out-side the walls 
are of late date and belong for the most part to the Roman' 
period. 

The Areopagus is now a bare rock possessing few architectural 
traces. The legend of its occupation by the Amazons (Aeschylus, 
Eum. 681 seq.) may be taken as indicating its military ■' 
importance for an attack on the Acropolis; ^- e ArSopagu& 
Persians used it as a point d'appui for their assault. 
The seat of the old oligarchical council and court for homicide 
was probably on its eastern height. Here were the altar of Athena 
Areia and two stones, the \L8os "T/Jpews, on which the accuser, 
and the \Wos 'AvatSelas, on which the accused, took their 
stand. Beneath, at the north-eastern corner, is the cleft which 
formed the sanctuary of the Ze/xvaL, or Erinyes. There is 
no reason for disturbing the associations connected with this 

11 



«34 



ATHENS 



[ANTIQUITIES 



spot as the scene of St Paul's address to the Athenians (E. 
Gardner, Anc. Athens, p. 505). 

Hellenic Period. — While modern research has added consider- 
ably to our knowledge of prehistoric Athens, a still greater light 
has been thrown on the architecture and topography of the city 
in the earlier historic or " archaic " era, the subsequent age of 
Athenian greatness, and the period of decadence which set in with 
the Macedonian conquest; the first extends from the dawn of 
history to 480-479 B.C., when the city was destroyed by the 
Persians; the second, or classical, age closes in 322 B.C., when 
Athens lost its political independence after the Lamian War; 
the third, or Hellenistic, in 146 B.C., when the state fell under 
Roman protection. We must here group these important epochs 
together, as distinguished from the later period of Roman rule, 
and confine ourselves to a brief notice of their principal monu- 
ments and a record of the discoveries by which they have been 
illustrated in recent years. 

The earliest settlement on the Acropolis was doubtless soon 
increased by groups of dwellings at its base, inhabited by the 
dependents of the princes who ruled in the stronghold. 
in 'be Y These habitations would naturally in the first instance 
•'anhak" h e m close proximity to the western approach; after 
era. the building of the Pelasgicum they seem to have 

extended beyond its walls towards the south and south-west — 
towards the sea and the waters of the Ilissus. The district thus 
occupied sloped towards the sun and was sheltered by the 
Acropolis from the prevailing northerly winds. The Thesean 
synoecism led to the introduction of new cults and the foundation 
of new shrines partly on the Acropolis, partly in the inhabited 
district at its base both within and without the wall of the 
Pelasgiqum. Some of the shrines in this region are mentioned 
by Thucydides in a passage which is of capital importance for 
the topography of the city at this period (ii. 15). By degrees 
the inhabited area began to comprise the open ground to the 
north-west, the nearer portion of the later Ceramicus, or " potters' 
field " (afterwards divided by the walls of Themistocles into the 
Inner and Outer Ceramicus), and eventually extended to the 
north and east of the citadel, which, by the beginning of the 
5th century B.C., had become the centre of a circular or 
wheel-shaped city, ttoXios rpoxouhkos a/cpo Kapr/va (Oracle apud 
Herod, vii. 140). To this enlarged city was applied, probably 
about the second half of the 6th century, the special designation 
to cuttv, which afterwards distinguished Athens from its port, 
the Peiraeus; the Acropolis was already 17 iroXts (Thucyd. ii. 15). 
The city is supposed to have been surrounded by a wall before 
the time of Solon, the existence of which may be deduced from 
Thucydides' account of the assassination of Hipparchus (vi. 57), 
but no certain traces of such a wall have been discovered; 
the materials may have been removed to build the walls of 
Themistocles. 

The centre of commercial and civic life of the older group of 
communities, as of the greater city of the classical age, was the 
Agora or market. Here were the various public 
< 4_ ra< buildings, which, when the power of the princes on 
the citadel was transferred to the archons, formed the 
offices of the administrative magistracy. The site of the primitiv e 
Agora (dpxaia ayopa) was probably in the hollow between the 
Acropolis and the Pnyx, which formed a convenient meeting- 
place 'for the dwellers on the north and south sides of the fortress 
as well as for its inhabitants. In the time of the Peisistratids 
the Agora was enlarged so as to extend over the Inner Ceramicus 
on the north-west, apparently reaching the northern declivities 
of the Areopagus and the Acropolis on the south. After the 
Persian Wars the northern portion was used for commercial, 
the southern for political and ceremonial purposes. In the 
southern were the Orchestra, where the Dionysiac dances took 
place, and the famous statues of Harmodius and Aristogeiton 
by Antenor which were carried away by Xerxes; also the 
Metroum, or temple of the Mother of the Gods,the Bouleuterium, 
or council-chamber of the Five Hundred, the Prytaneum, the 
hearth of the combined communities, where the guests of the 
state dined, the temple of the Dioscuri, and the Tholus, or Skias, 



a circular stone-domed building in which the Prytaneis were 
maintained at the public expense; in the northern were the 
Leocorium, where Hipparchus was slain, the aroa fla<n\iK^, 
the famous aroa. iroidXri, where Zeno taught, and other struc- 
tures. The Agora was commonly described as the " Ceramicus," 
and Pausanias gives it this name; of the numerous buildings 
which he saw here scarcely a trace remains; their position, for 
the most part, is largely conjectural, and the exact boundaries 
of the Agora itself are uncertain. What are perhaps the remains 
of the aroa Pacri.Xi.Kri, in which the Archon Basileus held his 
court and the Areopagus Council sat in later times, were brought 
to light in the winter of 1897-1898, when excavations wpre 
carried out on the eastern slope of the " Theseum " hill. Here 
was found a rectangular structure resembling a temple, but with 
a side door to the north; it possessed a portico of six columns. 
The north slope of the Areopagus, where a number of early 
tombs were found, was also explored, and the limits of the 
Agora on the south and north-west were approximately ascer- 
tained. A portion of the main road leading from the Dipylon 
to the Agora was discovered. 

In 1892 Dorpfeld began a series of excavations in the district 
between the Acropolis and the Pnyx with the object of deter- 
mining the situation of the buildings described by 
Pausanias as existing in the neighbourhood of the Ennea- 
Agora, and more especially the position of the Ennea- crunus. 
crunus fountain. The Enneacrunus has hitherto 
been generally identified with the spring Callirrhoe in the bed of 
the Ilissus, a little to the south-east of the Olympieum; it is 
apparently, though not explicitly, placed by Thucydides (ii. 15) 
in proximity to that building, as well as the temple of Dionysus 
b> Xifivcus and other shrines, the temples of Zeus Olympius 
and of Ge and the Pythium, which he mentions as situated 
mainly to the south of the Acropolis. On the other hand, 
Pausanias (i. 14. 1), who never deviates without reason from the 
topographical order of his narrative, mentions the Enneacrunus 
in the midst of his description of certain buildings which were 
undoubtedly in the region of the Agora, and unless he is guilty 
of an unaccountable digression the Enneacrunus which he saw 
must have lain west of the Acropolis. It is now generally 
agreed that the Agora of classical times covered the low ground 
between the hill of the " Theseum," the Areopagus and the 
Pnyx; and Pausanias, in the course of his description, appears 
to have reached its southern end. The excavations revealed 
a main road of surprisingly narrow dimensions winding up from 
the Agora to the Acropolis. A little to the south-west of the 
point where the road turns towards the Propylaea was found a 
large rock-cut cistern or reservoir which Dorpfeld identifies with 
the Enneacrunus. The reservoir is supplied by a conduit of 
6th-century tiles connected with an early stone aqueduct, the 
course of which is traceable beneath the Dionysiac theatre and 
the royal garden in the direction of the Upper Ilissus. These 
elaborate waterworks were, according to Dorpfeld, constructed 
by the Peisistratids in order to increase the supply from the 
ancient spring Callirrhoe; the fountain was furnished with nine 
jets and henceforth known as Enneacrunus. This identification 
has been hotly contested by many scholars, and the question 
must still be regarded as undecided. An interesting confirmation 
of Dorpf eld's view is furnished by the map of Guillet and Coronelli, 
published in 1672, in which the Enneacrunus is depicted as a 
well with a stream of running water in the neighbourhood of the 
Pnyx. The fact that spring water is not now found in this 
locality is by no means fatal to the theory; recent engineering 
investigations have shown that much of the surface water of 
the Attic plain has sunk to a lower level. In front of the reservoir 
is a small open space towards which several roads converge; 
close by is a triangular enclosure of polygonal masonry, in which 
were found various relics relating to the worship of Dionysus, 
a very ancient wine-press (Xr)v6s) and the remains of a small 
temple. Built over this early precinct, which Dorpfeld identifies 
with the Dionysium iv XLuvms, or Lenaeum, is a basilica- 
shaped building of the Roman period, apparently sacred to 
Bacchus; in this was found an inscription containing the rules 



ANTIQUITIES] 



ATHENS 



835 



of the society of the Iobacchi. There is an obvious difficulty in 
assuming that \ifivai, in the sense of " marshes," existed in 
this confined area, but stagnant pools may still be seen here 
in winter. Dorpf eld's identification of the Dionysium, kv \i/xvaLs 
cannot be regarded as proved; his view that another Pythium 
and another Olympieum existed in this neighbourhood is still 
less probable; but the inconclusiveness of these theories does 
not necessarily invalidate his identification of the Enneacrunus, 
with regard to the position of which the language of Thucydides 
is far from clear. Another enclosure, a little to the south, is 
proved by an inscription to have been a sanctuary of the hitherto 
unknown hero Amynos, with whose cult those of Asclepius and 
the hero Dexion were here associated; under the name Dexion, 
the poet Sophocles is said to have been worshipped after his 
death. The whole district adjoining the Areopagus was found 
to have been thickly built over; the small, mean dwelling-houses 
intersected by narrow, crooked lanes convey a vivid idea of the 
contrast between the modest private residences and the great 
public structures of the ancient city. 

The age of the Peisistratids (560-511 B.C.) marked an era in 
the history of Athenian topography. The greatest of their 
The foundations, the temple of Olympian Zeus, will be 

Academy referred to later. Among the monuments of their 
and rule, in addition to the enlarged Agora and the 

Lyceum. j£ nneacrunuS) were the Academy and perhaps the 
Lyceum. The original name of the Academy may have been 
Hecademia, from Hecademus, an early proprietor (but see 
Academy, Greek) . The famous seat of the Platonic philosophy 
was a gymnasium enlarged as a public park by Cimon; it lay 
about a mile to the north-west of the Dipylon Gate, with which 
it was connected by a street bordered with tombs. The Lyceum, 
where Aristotle taught, was originally a sanctuary of Apollo 
Lyceius. Like the Academy, it was an enclosure with a gym- 
nasium and garden; it lay to the east of the city beyond the 
Diocharean Gate. 

Little was known of the buildings on the Acropolis in the 
pre-Persian period before the great excavations of 1885-1888, 
which rank among the most surprising achievements of 
modern research. The results of these queries, which were
conducted by the Archaeological Society under the direction of 
Kavvadias and Kawerau, must be summarized with the utmost 
_. brevity. The great deposits of sculpture and pottery 

Acropolis now unearthed, representing all that escaped from the 
before the ravages of the Persians and the burning of the ancient 
Persian shrines, afford a startling revelation of the development 
of Greek art in the 7th and 6th centuries. Numbers 
of statues — among them a series of draped and richly- 
coloured female figures — masterpieces of painted pottery, only 
equalled by the Attic vases found in Magna Grecia and Etruria, 
and numerous bronzes, were among the treasures of art now 
brought to light. All belong to the " archaic " epoch; only a 
few remains of the greater age were found, including some frag- 
ments of sculptures from the Parthenon and Erechtheum. We 
are principally concerned, however, with the results which add to 
our knowledge of the topography and architecture of the Acro- 
polis. The entire area of the summit was now thoroughly ex- 
plored, the excavations being carried down to the surface of the 
rock, which on the southern side was found to slope outwards to a 
depth of about 45 ft. In the lower strata were discovered the 
remnants of Cyclopean or prehistoric architecture already men- 
tioned. Of later date, perhaps, are the limestone polygonal 
retaining walls on the west front, which extended on either side 
of the early entrance. Of these a portion may probably be 
attributed to the Peisistratids, in whose time the Acropolis once 
more became the stronghold of a despotism. Its fortifications, 
though not increased, were apparently strengthened by the 
Tyrants. To its embellishment they probably contributed the 
older ornamental. entrance, facing south-west, the precursor of 
the greater structure of Mnesicles (see Propylaea) and the 
colonnade of the " Hecatompedon," or earlier temple of Athena, 
at this time the only large sacred edifice on the citadel. The 
aame was subsequently applied to the cella, or eastern chamber, 



of the Parthenon, which is exactly 100 ft. long, and also became 
a popular designation of the temple itself. 

The ancient Hecatompedon may in all probability be identified 
with an early temple, also 100 ft. long, the foundations of which 
were pointed out in 1885 by DSrpfeld on the ground 
immediately adjoining the south side of the Erech- temple ot 
theum. On this spot was apparently the primitive Athena. 
sanctuary of Athena, the rich temple (irluv vqos) of 
Homer (//. ii. 549), in which the cult of the goddess was associated 
with that of Erechtheus; the Homeric temple is identified by 
Furtwangler with the " compact house of Erechtheus " (Od. vii. 
81), which, he holds, was not a royal palace, but a place of wor- 
ship, and traces of it may perhaps be recognized in the fragments 
of prehistoric masonry enclosed by the existing foundations. 
The foundations seem to belong to the 7th century, except those 
of the colonnade, which was possibly added by Peisistratus. 
According to Dorpfeld, this was the " old temple " of Athena 
Polias, frequently mentioned in literature and inscriptions, in 
which was housed the most holy image (%6avov) of the goddess 
which fell from heaven; it was burnt, but not completely 
destroyed, during the Persian War, and some of its external 
decorations were afterwards built into the north wall of the 
Acropolis; it was subsequently restored, he thinks, with or 
without its colonnade — in the former case a portion of the 
peristyle must have been removed when the Erechtheum was 
built so as to make room for the porch of the maidens; the 
building was set on fire in 406 B.C. (Xen. Hell. i. 6. 1), and the 
conflagration is identical with that mentioned by Demosthenes 
(In Timocr. xxiv. 155); its " opisthodomos " served as the 
Athenian treasury in the 5th and 4th centuries; the temple is the 
dpX<xtos vews rrjs UoXiados mentioned by Strabo (ix. 16), 
and it was still standing in the time of Pausanias, who applies to 
it the same name (i. 27. 3). The conclusion that the foundations 
are those of an old temple burnt by the Persians has been generally 
accepted, but other portions of Dorpfeld's theory — more especi- 
ally his assumption that the temple was restored after the Persian 
War — have provoked much controversy. Thus J. G. Frazer 
maintains the hitherto current theory that the earlier temple of 
Athena and Erechtheus was on the site of the Erechtheum; 
that the Erechtheum inherited the name apx&los vews from its 
predecessor, and that the " opisthodomos " in which the treasures 
were kept was the west chamber of the Parthenon; Furtwangler 
and Milchhofer hold the strange view that the " opisthodomos " 
was a separate building at the east end of the Acropolis, while 
Penrose thinks the building discovered by*D6rpfeld was possibly 
the Cecropeum. E. Curtius and J. W. White, on the other hand, 
accept Dorpfeld's identification, but believe that only the 
western portion of the temple or opisthodomos was rebuilt after 
the Persian War. Admitting the identification, we may perhaps 
conclude that the temple was repaired in order to provide a 
temporary home for the venerated image and other sacred 
objects; no traces of a restoration exist, but the walls probably 
remained standing after the Persian conflagration. The removal 
of the ancient temple was undoubtedly intended when the 
Erechtheum was built, but superstition and popular feeling may 
have prevented its demolition and the removal of the %bo.vov to 
the new edifice. The temple consisted of an eastern cella with 
pronaos; behind this was the opisthodomos, divided into three 
chambers — possibly treasuries — with a portico at the western end. 
The peristyle, if we compare the measurements of the stylobate 
with those of the drums built into the wall of the Acropolis, may 
be concluded to have consisted of six Doric columns at the ends 
and twelve at the sides. In one of the pediments was a giganto- 
machy, of which some fragments have been recovered. 

In 1896 excavations with the object of exploring the whole 
northern and eastern slopes of the Acropolis were begun by 
Kavvadias. The pathway between the citadel and The 
the Areopagus was found to be so narrow that it is grottoes ot 
certain the Panathenaic procession cannot have taken Paa aad 
this route to the Acropolis. On the north-west rock p ° "' 
the caves known as the grottoes of Pan and Apollo were 
cleared out; these consist of a slight high-arched indentation 



8 3 6 



ATHENS 



[ANTIQUITIES 



Themis- 
tocles, 



immediately to the east of the Clepsydra and a double and 
somewhat deeper cavern a little farther to the east. In the first 
mentioned are a number of niches in which irivaices (votive 
tablets) were placed: some of these, inscribed with dedications to 
Apollo, have been discovered. The whole locality was the seat of 
the ancient cult of this deity, afterwards styled " Hypacraeus," 
with which was associated the legend of Cretisa and the birth 
of Ion. The worship of Pan was introduced after the Persian 
wars, in consequence of an apparition seen by Pheidippides, 
the Athenian courier, in the mountains of Arcadia. Another 
cave more to the west was revealed by the demolition of 
the bastion of Odysseus. To the east a much deeper and hitherto 
unknown cavern has been revealed, which Kawadias identifies 
with the grotto of Pan. Close to it are a series of steps hewn in 
the rock which connect with those discovered in 1886 within the 
Acropolis wall. Farther east is an underground passage leading 
eastward to a cave supposed to be the sanctuary of Aglaurus 
where the ephebi took the oath; with this passage is connected 
a secret staircase leading up through a cleft in the rock to the 
precinct of the Errephori on the Acropolis. It is conceivable 
that the priestesses employed this exit when descending on their 
mysterious errand. 

In the fifty years between the Persian and the Peloponnesian 
wars architecture and plastic art attained their highest perfection 

in Athens. The almost complete destruction of the 
classical buildings on the Acropolis and in the lower city, among 
period: them many temples and shrines which religious senti- 
'**^" so 'ment might otherwise have preserved, facilitated the 

realization of the magnificent architectural designs 

of Themistocles, Cimon and Pericles, while the rapid 
growth of the Athenian empire provided the state with the 
necessary means for the execution of these sumptuous projects. 
Of the great monuments of this epoch few traces remain except 
on the Acropolis. After the departure of the Persians the first 
necessity was the reconstruction of the defences of the city and 
the citadel. The walls of the city, now built under the direction 
of Themistocles, embraced a larger area than the previous 
circuit, with which they seem to have coincided at the Dipylon 
Gate on the north-west where the Sacred Way to Eleusis was 
joined by the principal carriage route to the Peiraeus and the 
roads to the Academy and Colonus. The other more important 
gates were the Peiraic and Melitan on the west; the Itonian on 
the south leading to Phalerum, the Diomean and Diocharean on 
the east, and the Acharnian on the north. The wall, which was 
strengthened with numerous towers, enclosed the quarters of 
Collytus on the north, Melite on the west, Limnae on the south- 
west and south, and Diomea on the east. The scanty traces 
which remain have not been systematically excavated except 
in the neighbourhood of the Dipylon; the discovery of sepulchral 
tablets built into the masonry illustrates the statement of 
Thucydides with regard to the employment of such material 
in the hasty construction of the walls. The circuit has been 
practically ascertained in its general lines, though not in details; 
it is given by Thucydides (ii. 13. 7) as 43 stades (about 
5! m.) exclusive of the portion between the points of junc- 
tion with the long walls extending to the Peiraeus, but the 
whole circumference cannot have exceeded 37 stades. Possibly 
Thucydides, who in the passage referred to is dealing with 
the question of defence, included a portion of the contiguous 
long walls in his measurement; this explanation derives 
probability from his underestimate of the length of the long 
walls. 

The design of connecting Athens with the Peiraeus by long 
parallel walls is ascribed by Plutarch to Themistocles. The 

" Long Walls " (to. /za/cpa rdxt, to. <rici\r]) consisted 

T "Long ° f W the " N ° rth Wal1 " ( ri P°f> aov r6 OC°S )- 0) the 

Walls." "Middle" or " South Wall" (to Slo. ixkaov reixos, Plato, 
Gorg. 555 e; t6 votlov tux *)', and (3) the "Phaleric 
Wall " (to Qa'KripiKdv reixos). The north and Phaleric walls 
were perhaps founded by Cimon, and were completed about 
4S7 B.C. in the early administration of Pericles; the middle wall 
was built about 445 B.C. The lines of the north and middle walls 



have been ascertained from the remnants still existing in the 
18th century and the scantier traces now visible. The north 
wall, leaving the city circuit at a point near the modern Observa- 
tory, ran from north-east to south-west near the present road 
to the Peiraeus, until it reached the Peiraeus walls a little to the 
east of their northernmost bend. The middle wall, beginning 
south of the Pnyx near the Melitan Gate, gradually approached 
the northern wall and, following a parallel course at an interval 
of 550 ft., diverged to the east near the modern New Phalerum 
and joined the Peiraeus walls on the height of Munychia where 
they turn inland from the sea. The course of the Phaleric wall 
has been much disputed. The widely-received view of Curtius 
that it ran to Cape Kolias (now Old Phalerum) on the east of 
the Phaleric bay is not accepted by recent topographers. The 
exigencies of the defensive system planned by Themistocles could 
only have been satisfied by a juncture of the Phaleric wall with 
that of the Peiraeus. The existence of any third wall, was denied 
by Leake, according to whose theory the southern parallel wall 
would be identical with the Phaleric. The language of Thucy- 
dides, however, seems decisive with regard to the existence of 
three walls. The Phaleric wall, branching from the city circuit 
at some point farther east than the middle or south wall, may 
have followed the ridge of the Sikelia heights, where some traces 
of fortifications remain, and then traversed the Phalerum plain 
till it reached the Peiraeus defences at a point a little to the 
north-west of their junction with the middle walL The Phaleric 
wall, proving indefensible, was abandoned towards the close of 
the Peloponnesian war; with the other two walls it was com- 
pletely destroyed after the surrender of the city, and was not 
rebuilt when they were restored by Conon in 393 B.C. The 
parallel walls fell into decay, during the Hellenistic period, and 
according to Strabo (ix. 396) were once more demolished by 
Sulla. 

The great advantages which the Peiraic promontory with its 
three natural harbours offered for purposes of defence and 
commerce were first recognized by Themistocles, in 
whose archonship (493 B.C.) the fortifications of the p e / raeus . 
Peiraeus were begun. Before his time the Athenians 
used as a port the roadstead of Phalerum at the north-eastern 
corner of Phalerum bay partly sheltered by Cape Kolias. As 
soon as the building of the city walls had been completed, 
Themistocles resumed the construction of the Peiraeus defences, 
which protected the larger harbour of Cantharus on the west 
and the smaller ports of Zea and Munychia (respectively south- 
west and south-east of the Munychia heights), terminating in 
moles at their entrances and enclosing the entire promontory on 
the land and sea sides except a portion of the south-west shore 
of the peninsula of Acte. The walls, built of finely compacted 
blocks, were about 10 ft. in thickness and upwards of 60 ft. in 
height, and were strengthened by towers. The town was laid 
out at great expense in straight, broad streets, intersecting each 
other at right angles, by the architect Hippodamus of Miletus 
in the time of Pericles. In the centre was the Agora of Hippo- 
damus; on the western margin of the Cantharus harbour 
extended the emporium, or Digma, the centre of commercial 
activity, flanked by a series of porticoes; at its northern end, 
near the entrance to the inner harbour, -was another Agora, on 
the site of the modern market-place, and near it the fmupa o-roa, 
the corn depot of the state. This inner and shallower harbour, 
perhaps the ko>4>6s Xipriv, was afterwards excluded from the 
town precinct by the walls of Conon, which traversing its opening 
on an embankment (to 81a n'eaov x&M a ) ran round the outer shore 
of the western promontory of Eetionea, previously enclosed, 
with some space to the north-west, by the wider circuit of 
Themistocles. In the harbours of Zea and Munychia traces may 
be seen of the remarkable series of galley-slips in which the 
Athenian fleet was built and repaired. The galley-slips around 
Zea were roofed by a row of gables supported by stone columns, 
each gable sheltering two triremes. Among the other noteworthy 
buildings of the Peiraeus were the arsenal (aKevodriKij) of Philo 
and the temples of Zeus Soter, the patron god of the sailors, of 
the Cnidian Artemis, built by Cimon, and of Artemis Munychia, 



ANTIQUITIES] 



ATHENS 



837 



situated near the fort on the Munychia height; traces of a temple 
of Asclepius, of two theatres and of a hippodrome remain. The 
fine marble lion of the classical period which stood at the mouth 
of the Cantharus harbour gave the Peiraeus its medieval and 
modern names of Porto Leone and Porto Draco; it was carried 
away to Venice by Morosini. 

In 1870 the Greek Archaeological Society undertook a series 
of excavations in the Outer Ceramicus, which had already been 
The partially explored by various scholars. The opera- 

Dipyioa tions, which were carried on at intervals till 1890, 
and Cera- resulted in the discovery of the Dipylon Gate, the 
micus. principal entrance of ancient Athens. The Dipylon 
consists of an outer and an inner gate separated by an oblong 
courtyard and flanked on either side by towers; the gates were 
themselves double, being each composed of two apertures 
intended for the incoming and outgoing traffic. An opening in 
the city wall a little to the south-west, supposed to have been 
the Sacred Gate (iepa Tri>\r)), was in all probability an outlet 
for the waters of the Eridanus. This stream, which has hitherto 
been regarded as the eastern branch of the Ilissus rising at 
Kaesariane, has been identified by Dorpfeld with a brook 
descending from the south slope of Lycabettus and conducted in 
an artificial channel to the north-western end of the city, where 
it made its exit through the walls, eventually joining the Ilissus. 
The channel was open in Greek times, but was afterwards covered 
by Roman arches; it appears to have served as the main drain 
of the city. Between this outlet and the Dipylon were found a 
boundary-stone, inscribed opos Kepap.eiKov, which remains in its 
place, and the foundations of a large rectangular building, 
possibly the Pompeium, which may have been a robing-room 
for the processions which passed this way. On either side of the 
Dipylon the walls of Themistocles, faced on the outside by a 
later wall, have been traced for a considerable distance. The 
excavation of the outlying cemetery revealed the unique " Street 
of the Tombs " and brought to light a great number of sepulchral 
monuments, many of which remain in situ. Especially note- 
worthy are the stelae (reliefs) representing scenes of leave-taking, 
which, though often of simple workmanship, are characterized 
by a touching dignity and restraint of feeling. In this neighbour- 
hood were found a great number of tombs containing vases of all 
periods, which furnish a marvellous record of the development 
of Attic ceramic art. A considerable portion of the district 
remains unexplored. 

The Acropolis had been dismantled as a fortress after the 
expulsion of Hippias; its defenders against the Persians found 
it necessary to erect a wooden barricade at its entrance. 
jjoHs otthe ^ ne fortifications were again demolished by the 
classical Persians, after whose departure the existing north 
period: its -wall was erected in the time of Themistocles; many 
tortifica- commnS) metopes and other fragments from the 
area. buildings destroyed by the Persians were built into it, 

possibly owing to haste, as in the case of the city walls, 
but more probably with the design of commemorating the 
great historic catastrophe, as the wall was visible from the 
Agora. The fine walls of the south and east sides were built by 
Cimon after the victory of the Eurymedon, 468 B.C.; they 
extend considerably beyond the old Pelasgic circuit, the inter- 
vening space being filled up with earth and the debris of the 
ruined buildings so as to increase the level space of the summit. 
On the northern side Cimon completed the wall of Themistocles 
at both ends and added to its height; the ground behind was 
levelled up on this side also, the platform of the Acropolis thus 
receiving its present shape and dimensions. The staircase leading 
down to the sanctuary of Aglaurus was enclosed in masonry. 
At the south-western corner, on the right of the approach to the 
old entrance, a bastion of early masonry was encased in a 
rectangular projection which formed a base for the temple of 
Nike. The great engineering works of Cimon provided a 
suitable area for the magnificent structures of the age of 
Pericles. 

The greater monuments of the classical epoch on the Acropolis 
are described in separate articles (see Parthenon, Erechtheum, 



Propylaea). Next in interest to these noble structures is the 
beautiful little temple of Athena Nike, wrongly designated Nike 
Apteros (Wingless Victory), standing on the bastion already 
mentioned; it was begun after 450 B.C. and was prob- <n, emonu . 
ably finished after the outbreak of the Peloponnesian meats oa 
War. The temple, which is entirely of Pentelic marble, the Aero- 
is amphiprostyle tetrastyle, with fluted Ionic columns, P "^ 
resting on a stylobate of three steps; its length is 27 ft., its 
breadth 185 ft., and its total height, from the apex of the pedi- 
ment to the bottom of the steps, 23 ft. The frieze, running round 
the entire building, represents on its eastern side a number of 
deities, on its northern and southern sides Greeks fighting with 
Persians, and on its western side Greeks fighting with Greeks. 
Before the east front was the altar of Athena Nike. The irregularly 
shaped precinct around the temple was enclosed by a balustrade 
about 3 ft. 2 in. in height, decorated on the outside with beautiful 
reliefs representing a number of winged Victories engaged in the 
worship of Athena. The elaborate treatment of the drapery 
enveloping these female figures suggests an approach to the 
mannerism of later times; this and other indications point to 
the probability that the balustrade was added in the latter years 
of the Peloponnesian War. The temple was still standing in 
1676; some eight years later it was demolished by the Turks, 
and its stones built into a bastion; on the removal of the bastion 
in 1835 the temple was successfully reconstructed by Ross with 
the employment of little new material. At either corner of the 
Propylaea entrance were equestrian statues dedicated by the 
Athenian knights; the bases with inscriptions have lately been 
recovered. From the inner exit of the Propylaea a passage led 
towards the east along the north side of the Parthenon; almost 
directly facing the entrance was the colossal bronze statue of 
Athena (afterwards called Athena Promachos) by Pheidias, 
probably set up by Cimon in commemoration of the Persian 
defeat. The statue, which was 30 ft. high, represented the god- 
dess as fully armed; the gleam of her helmet and spear could be 
seen by the mariners approaching from Cape Sunium (Pausanias 
i. 28). On both sides of the passage were numerous statues, 
among them that of Athena Hygei'a, set up by Pericles to 
commemorate the recovery of a favourite slave who was injured 
during the building of the Parthenon, a colossal bronze image 
of the wooden horse of Troy, and Myron's group of Marsyas with 
Athena throwing away her flute. Another statue by Myron, the 
famous Perseus, stood near the precinct of Artemis Brauronia. 
In this sacred enclosure, which lay between the south-eastern 
corner of the Propylaea and the wall of Cimon, no traces of a 
temple have been found. Adjoining it to the east are the 
remains of a large rectangular building, which was apparently 
fronted by a colonnade; this has been identified with the 
XaKicodriKTi, a storehouse of bronze implements and arms, which 
was formerly supposed to lie against the north wall near the 
Propylaea. Beyond the Parthenon, a little to the north-east, 
was the great altar of Athena, and near it the statue and altar 
of Zeus Polieus. With regard to the buildings on the east end of 
the Acropolis, where the present museums stand, no certainty 
exists; among the many statues here were those of Xanthippus, 
the father of Pericles, and of Anacreon. Immediately west of the 
Erechtheum is the Pandroseum or temenos of Pandrosos, Jthe 
daughter of Cecrops, the excavation of which has revealed no 
traces of the temple (vaos) seen here by Pausanias (i. 27). The 
site of this precinct, in which the sacred olive tree of Athena 
grew, has been almost certainly fixed by an inscription found in 
the bastion of Odysseus. At its north-western extremity is a 
platform of levelled rock which may have supported the altar of 
Zeus Hypsistus. Farther west, along the north wall of the Acro- 
polis, is the space probably occupied by the abode and playground 
of the Errephori. Between this precinct and the Propylaea were 
a number of statues, among them the celebrated heifer of Myron, 
and perhaps his Erechtheus; the Lemnian Athena of Pheidias, 
and his effigy of his friend Pericles. 

The reconstruction of the city after its demolition by the 
Persians was not carried out on the lines of a definite plan like 
that of the Peiraeus. The houses were hastily repaired, and the 



8 3 8 



ATHENS 



[ANTIQUITIES 



In the 

classical 

period. 



narrow, crooked streets remained; the influence of Themistocles, 
who aimed at transferring the capital to the Peiraeus, was 
The city probably directed against any costly scheme of restor- 
ation, except on the Acropolis. The period of Cimon's 
administration, however, especially the interval be- 
tween his victory on the Eurymedon and his ostracism 
(468-461 B.C.), was marked by great architectural activity in 
the lower city as well as on the citadel. To his time may be 
referred many of the buildings around the Agora (probably 
rebuilt on the former sites) and elsewhere, and the passage, or 
Spo/xos, from the Agora to the Dipylon flanked by long porticos. 
The Theseum or temple of Theseus, which lay to the east of the 
Agora near the Acropolis, was built by Cimon: here he deposited 
the bones of the national hero which he brought from Scyros 
about 470 B.C. The only building in the city which can with 
certainty be assigned to the administration of Pericles is the 
Odeum, beneath the southern declivity of the Acropolis, a 
structure mainly of wood, said to have been built in imitation 
of the tent of Xerxes: it was used for musical contests and the 



though not established, may be regarded as practically certain, 
notwithstanding the difficulty presented by the subjects of the 
sculptures, which bear no relation to Hephaestus. The temple 
is a Doric peripteral hexastyle in antis, with 13 columns at the 
sides; its length is 104 ft., its breadth 45I ft., its height, to the 
top of the pediment, 33 ft. The sculptures of the pediments 
have been completely lost, but their design has been ingeniously 
reconstructed by Sauer. The frieze of the entablature contains 
sculptures only in the metopes of the east front and in those 
of the sides immediately adjoining it; the frontal metopes 
represent the labours of Heracles, the lateral the exploits of 
Theseus. As in the Parthenon, there is a sculptured zophoros 
above the exterior of the cella walls; this, however, extends 
over the east and west fronts only and the east ends of the 
sides; the eastern zophoros represents a battle-scene with 
seated deities on either hand, the western a centauromachia. 
The temple is entirely of Pentelic marble, except the foundations 
and lowest step of the stylobate, which are of Peiraic stone, and 
the zophoros of the cella, which is in Parian marble. The 



■^'""'jSSii. \ 



THE ACROPOLIS 

Scale of Yards 
o 10 20 30 40 50 60 




-■•■ — ^*4r~0^?>s 

t Plnacotheca ^ S &c'<Z^a§* 

%. Roman Cistern &"*t ^ > ^%s*.-t;'; "^ 

3. Temple of Nike Apteros ^'(y ^So^-^/siSSsikv 

4. Pandroseum e * - ^C^Sk ■»"<*.. 

5. Erechtheum 

Cyfi/opaean 

6th. Century B.C. EEi 

5th &4th Century B.C. \ WSk 

Roman _ £<£j 

Afttt J H Mi.M1.luii , by prpiiMloii et tin Hglltnic 8oc ■■■"! P™f E-A CmrJptr 






^35 



*va£V. 



Asclepieum •^^■^Theatre of Dionysus^~^^^g^' Emeryw-uke 



rehearsal of plays. Of the various temples in which statues by 
Pheidias, Alcamenes and other great sculptors are known to 
have been placed, no traces have yet been discovered; excavation 
has not been possible in a large portion of the lower city, which 
has always been inhabited. The only extant structures of the 
classical period are the Hephaesteum, the Dionysiac theatre, 
and the choragic monument of Lysicrates. The remains of a 
small Ionic temple which were standing by the Ilissus in the 
time of Stuart have disappeared. 

The Hephaesteum, the so-called Theseum, is situated on a 
slight eminence, probably the Colonus Agoraeus, to the west 
The of the Agora. The best preserved Greek temple in 

Hephae- the world, it possesses no record of its origin; the 
steam or sty j e f ; ts scu lptures and architecture leads to the 
Theseum. conclus ; on tnat j t was built about the same time 
as the Parthenon; it seems to have been finished by 421 
B.C. It has been known as the Theseum since the middle 
ages, apparently because some of its sculptures represent the 
exploits of Theseus, but the Theseum was an earlier sanctuary 
on the east of the Agora (see above). The building has been 
supposed by Curtius, Wachsmuth and others to be the Heracleum 
in Melite, but its identification with the temple of Hephaestus 
and Athena seen in this neighbourhood by Pausanias (i. 14. 6), 



theatre 
and As* 
clepieum. 

and the 
Archaeo- 



preservation of the temple is due to its conversion into a church 
in the middle ages. 

The Dionysiac theatre, situated beneath the south side of the 
Acropolis, was partly hollowed out from its declivity. The 
representation of plays was perhaps transferred to The 
this spot from the early Orchestra in the Agora at the Dionysiac 
beginning of the 5th century B.C.; it afterwards 
superseded the Pnyx as the meeting-place of the 
Ecclesia. The site, which had been accurately deter- 
mined by Leake, was explored by Strack in 1862. 
researches subsequently undertaken by the Greek 
logical Society were concluded in 1879. It was not, however, 
till 1886 that traces of the original circular Greek orchestra were 
pointed out by Dorpfeld. The arrangements of the stage and 
orchestra as we now see them belong to Roman times; the 
cavea or auditorium dates from the administration of the orator 
Lycurgus (337-323 B.C.), and nothing is left of the theatre in 
which the plays of Sophocles were acted save a few small remnants 
of polygonal masonry. These, however, are sufficient to mark 
out the circuit of the ancient orchestra, on which the subsequently 
built proscenia encroached. The oldest stage-building was 
erected in the time of Lycurgus; it consisted of a rectangular 
hall with square projections (irapacKr]vi,a.) on either side; in 



ANTIQUITIES] 



ATHENS 



839 



of 
Lyslcrates. 



front of this was built in late Greek or early Roman times a 
stage with a row of columns which intruded upon the orchestra 
space; a later and larger stage, dating from the time of Nero, 
advanced still farther into the orchestra, and this was finally 
faced (probably in the 3rd century a.d.) by the " bema " of 
Phaedrus, a platform-wall decorated with earlier reliefs, the 
slabs of which were cut down to suit their new position. The 
remains of two temples of Dionysus have been found adjoining 
the stoa of the theatre, and an altar of the same god adorned 
with masks and festoons; the smaller and earlier temple probably 
dates from the 6th century B.C., the larger from the end of the 
5 th or the beginning of the 4th century. 

Immediately west of the theatre of Dionysus is the sacred 
precinct of Asclepius, which was excavated by the Archaeological 
Society in 1876-1878. Here were discovered the foundations 
of the celebrated Asclepieum, together with several inscriptions 
and a great number of votive reliefs offered by grateful invalids 
and valetudinarians to the god of healing. Many of the reliefs 
belong to the best period of Greek art. A Doric colonnade with 
a double row of columns was found to have extended along the 
base of the Acropolis for a distance of 54 yds.; behind it in a 
chamber hewn in the rock is the sacred well mentioned by 
Pausanias. The colonnade was a place of resort for the patients; 
a large building close beneath the rock was probably the abode 
of the priests. 

The beautiful choragic monument of Lysicrates, dedicated 
in the archonship of Euaenetus (335-334 B.C.) , is the only survivor 
The °^ a numDer 0I such structures which stood in the 

choragic " Street of the Tripods " to the east of the Dionysiac 
monument theatre, bearing the tripods given to the successful 
choragi at the Dionysiac festival. It owes its pre- 
servation to its former inclusion in a Capuchin convent. 
The monument consists of a small circular temple of Pentelic 
marble, 2 if ft. in height and 9 ft. in diameter, with six engaged 
Corinthian columns and a sculptured frieze, standing on a rect- 
angular base of Peiraic stone. The delicately carved convex 
roof, composed of a single block, was surmounted by the tripod. 
The spirited reliefs of the frieze represent the punishment 
of the Tyrrhenian pirates by Dionysus and their transforma- 
tion into dolphins. Another choragic monument was that of 
Thrasyllus, which faced a cave in the Acropolis rock above the 
Dionysiac theatre. A portion of another, that of Nicias, was 
used to make the late Roman gate of the Acropolis. In one 
of these monuments was the famous Satyr of Praxiteles. 

The Cynosarges, from earliest times a sanctuary of Heracles, 
later a celebrated gymnasium and the school of Antisthenes 
the Cynic, has hitherto been generally supposed to 
sarses. have occupied the site of the Monastery of the Asomati 
on the eastern slope of Lycabettus; its situation, 
however, has been fixed by Dorpfeld at a point a little to the 
south of the Olympieum, on the left bank of the Ilissus. Here 
a series of excavations, carried out by the British School in 
1896-1897 under the direction of Cecil Smith, revealed the 
foundations of an extensive Greek building, the outlines of which 
correspond with those of a gymnasium; it possessed a large 
bath or cistern, and was flanked on two sides by water-courses. 
An Ionic capital found here possibly belonged to the palaestra. 
The identification, however, cannot be regarded as certain in 
the absence of inscriptions. 

With the loss of political liberty the age of creative genius 
in Athenian architecture came to a close. The era of decadence, 
The °^ h°n° rar y statues and fulsome inscriptions, began. 

Hellenistic The embellishments which the city received during 
period: the Hellenistic and Roman periods were no longer the 
tAttai art; ' 3 ti c expression of the religious and political life of 
a great commonwealth; they were the tribute paid 
to the intellectual renown of Athens by foreign potentates or 
dilettanti, who desired to add their names to the list of its 
illustrious citizens and patrons. Among the first of these benefac- 
tions was the great gymnasium of Ptolemy, built in the neigh- 
bourhood of the Agora about 250 b.c. Successive princes of 
the dynasty of Pergamum interested themselves in the adorn- 



ment of the city: Attalus I. set up a number of bronze statues on 
the Acropolis; Eumenes II. built the long portico west of the 
Dionysiac theatre, which was excavated and identified in 1877; 
Attalus II. erected the magnificent Stoa near the Agora, the re- 
mains of which were completely laid bare in 1898-1902 and have 
been identified by an inscription. The Stoa consisted of a series 
of 21 chambers, probably shops, faced by a double colonnade, 
the outer columns being of the Doric order, the inner unfluted, 
with lotus-leaf capitals; it possessed an upper storey fronted 
with Ionic columns. 

The greatest monument, however, of the Hellenistic period 
is the colossal Olympieum or temple of Olympian Zeus, " unum 
in terris inchoatum pro magnitudine dei " (Livy 
xli. 20), the remains of which stand by the Ilissus p i eum , y 
to the south-east of the Acropolis. The foundations 
of a temple were laid on the site — probably that of an ancient 
sanctuary — by Peisistratus, but the building in its ultimate 
form was for the greater part constructed under the auspices 
of Antiochus IV. Epiphanes, king of Syria, by the Roman 
architect Cossutius in the interval between 174 b.c. and 164 B.C., 
the date of the death of Antiochus. The work was then suspended 
and its proposed resumption in the time of Augustus seems not 
to have been realized; finally, in a. d. 129, the temple was 
completed and dedicated by Hadrian, who set up a chrys- 
elephantine statue of Zeus in the cella. The substructure was 
excavated in 1883 by F. C. Penrose, who proved the correctness 
of .Dorpfeld's theory that the building was octostyle; its length 
was 318 ft., its breadth 132 ft. With the exception of the 
foundations and two lower steps of the stylobate, it was entirely 
of Pentelic marble, and possessed 104 Corinthian columns, 
56 ft. 7 in. in height, of which 48 stood in triple rows under the 
pediments and 56 in double rows at the sides; of these, 16 re- 
mained standing in 1852, when one was blown down by a storm. 
Fragments of Doric columns and foundations were discovered, 
probably intended for the temple begun by Peisistratus, the 
orientation of which differed slightly from that of the later 
structure. The peribolos, a large artificial platform supported 
by a retaining wall of squared Peiraic blocks with buttresses, 
was excavated in 1898 without important results; it is to be 
hoped that the stability of the columns has not been affected 
by the queries.

The Roman Period. — After 146 b.c. Athens and its territory 
were included in the Roman province of Achaea. Among the 
earlier buildings of this period is the Horologium The Han- 
oi Andronicus of Cyrrhus (the " Tower of the Winds"), logium of 
still standing near the eastern end of the Roman Agora. Androni- 
The building may belong to the 2nd or 1st century B.C. ; <PUS ' 
it is mentioned by Varro (De re rust. iii. 5. 17), and therefore 
cannot be of later date than 35 B.C. It is an octagonal marble 
structure, 42 ft. in height and 26 ft. in diameter; the eight sides, 
which face the points of the compass, are furnished with a 
frieze containing inartistic figures in relief representing the 
winds; below it, on the sides facing the sun, are the lines of a 
sun-dial. The building was surmounted by a weathercock in the 
form of a bronze Triton; it contained a water-clock to record the 
time when the sun was not shining. 

The capture and sack of Athens by Sulla (March 1, 86 B.C.) 
seems to have involved no great injury to its architectural 
monuments beyond the burning of the Odeum of Monu* 
Pericles; a portion of the city wall was razed, the ments of 
groves of the Academy and Lyceum were cut" down, the Roman 
and the Peiraeus, with its magnificent arsenal and other per ° ' 
great buildings, burnt to the ground. After this catastrophe 
the benefactors of Athens were for the most part Romans; the 
influence of Greek literature and art had begun to affect the 
conquering race. The New, or Roman, Agora to the north of 
the Acropolis, perhaps mainly an oil market, was constructed 
after the year 27 B.C. Its dimensions were practically determined 
by excavation in 1890-1891. It consisted of a large open rect- 
angular space surrounded by an Ionic colonnade into which opened 
a number of shops or storehouses. The eastern gate was adorned 
with four Ionic columns on the outside and two on the inside, the 



840 



ATHENS 



[MODERN 



western entrance being the well-known Doric portico of Athena 
Archegetis with an inscription recording its erection from 
donations of Julius Caesar and Augustus. The whole conclave 
may be compared with the enclosed bazaars or khans of Oriental 
cities which are usually locked at night. The Agrippeum, a 
covered theatre, derived its name from Vipsanius Agrippa, 
whose statue was set up, about 27 B.C., beneath the north wing 
of the Acropolis propylaea, on the high rectangular base still 
remaining. At the eastern end of the Acropolis a little circular 
temple of white marble with a peristyle of 9 Ionic columns 
was dedicated to Rome and Augustus; its foundations were dis- 
covered during the excavations of 1885-1888. The conspicuous 
monument which crowns the Museum Hill was erected as the 
mausoleum of Antiochus Philopappus of Commagene, grandson 
of Antiochus Epiphanes, in a.d. 114-116. Excavations carried 
out in 1898-1899 showed that the structure was nearly square; 
the only portion remaining is the slightly curved front, with three 
niches between Corinthian pilasters; in the central niche is 
the. statue of Philopappus. 

The emperor Hadrian was the most lavish of all the benefactors 
of Athens. Besides completing the gigantic Olympieum he 
Novae enlarged the circuit of the city walls to the east, 
Athenae: enclosing the area now covered by the royal and 
the build- public gardens and the Constitution Square. This was 
«nSw' the City of Hadrian (Hadrianapolis) or New Athens 

(Novae Athenae) ; a handsome suburb with numerous 
villas, baths and gardens; some traces remain of its walls, 
which, like those of Themistocles, were fortified with rect- 
angular towers. An ornamental entrance near the Olym- 
pieum, the existing Arch of Hadrian, marked the boundary 
between the new and the old cities. The arch is surmounted by a 
triple attic with Corinthian columns; the frieze above the key- 
stone bears, on the north-western side, the inscription cu5' e'icr' 
'AOijvai, Ojjcrecos 17 -wplv toXis, and on the south-eastern, oX5' &a' 
'ASpiavov /ecu oi>x' 9t7<t«o)s iroXis. One of the principal monuments 
of Hadrian's munificence was the sumptuous library, in all 
probability a vast rectangular enclosure, immediately north of 
the New Agora, the eastern side of which was explored in 1885- 
1886. A portion of its western front, adorned with monolith 
unfluted Corinthian columns, is still standing — the familiar 
" Stoa of Hadrian "; another well-preserved portion, with six 
pilasters, runs parallel to the west side of Aeolus Street. The 
interior consisted of a spacious court surrounded by a colonnade 
of 100 columns, into which five chambers opened at the eastern 
end. A portico of four fluted Corinthian columns on the western 
side formed the entrance to the quadrangle. This cloistered 
edifice may be identified with the library of Hadrian mentioned 
by Pausanias; the books were, perhaps, stored in a square 
building which occupied a portion of the central area. Strikingly 
similar in design and construction is a large quadrangular build- 
ing, the foundations of which were discovered by the British 
School near the presumed Cynosarges; this may perhaps be the 
Gymnasium of Hadrian, which Pausanias tells us also possessed 
100 columns. A Pantheon and temples of Hera and Zeus 
Panhellenius were likewise built by Hadrian; the aqueduct, 
which he began, was completed by Antoninus Pius (a.d. 138- 
161) ; it was repaired in 1861-1869 and is still in use. 

The Stadium, in which the Panathenaic Games were held, 
was first laid out by the orator Lycurgus about 330 B.C. It was 

an oblong structure filling a natural depression near 
stadium tne ^ e ^ bank of the Ilissus beneath the eastern de- 
and clivity of the Ardettus hill, the parallel sides and 

Odeum ot semicircular end, or <r<i>evhbvt), around the arena being 
Atttcu" partially excavated from the adjoining slopes. The 

immense building, however, which was restored in 
1896 and the following years, was that constructed in Pentelic 
marble about a.d. 143 by Tiberius Claudius Herodes Atticus, a 
wealthy Roman resident, whose benefactions to the city rivalled 
those of Hadrian. The seats, rising in tiers, as in a theatre, 
accommodated about 44,000 spectators; the arena was 670 ft. 
in length and 109 ft. in breadth. The Odeum, built beneath the 
south-west slope of the Acropolis after a.d. 161 by Herodes 



Atticus in memory of his wife Regilla, is comparatively well 
preserved; it was excavated in 1848 and in 1857-1858. The 
plan is that of the conventional Roman theatre; the semi- 
circular auditorium, which seated some 5000 persons, is, like 
that of the Dionysiac theatre, partly hollowed from the rock. 
The orchestra is paved with marble squares. The facade, in 
Peiraic stone, displays three storeys of arched windows. The 
whole building was covered with a cedar roof. The Stadium 
had been already completed and the Odeum had not yet been 
built when Pausanias visited Athens; these buildings were the 
last important additions to the architectural monuments of the 
ancient city. (J. D. B.) 

II. The Modern City 

At the conclusion of the Greek War of Independence, Athens 
was little more than a village of the Turkish type, the poorly 
built houses clustering on the northern and eastern slopes of 
the Acropolis. The narrow crooked lanes of this quarter still 
contrast with the straight, regularly laid-out streets of the modern 
city, which extends to the north-west, north and east of the 
ancient citadel. The greater commercial advantages offered 
by Nauplia, Corinth and Patras were outweighed by the historic 
claims of Athens in the choice of a capital for the newly founded 
kingdom, and the seat of government was transferred hither 
from Nauplia in 1833. The new town was, for the most part, 
laid out by the German architect Schaubert. It contains several 
squares and boulevards, a large public garden, and many hand- 
some public and private edifices. A great number of the public 
institutions owe their origin to the munificence of patriotic 
Greeks, among whom Andreas Syngros and George Averoff may 
be especially mentioned. The royal palace, designed by Friedrich 
von Gartner (1792-1847), is a tasteless structure; attached to 
it is a beautiful garden laid out by Queen Amalia, which contains 
a well-preserved mosaic floor of the Roman period. On the 
south-east is the newly built palace of the crown prince. The 
Academy, from designs by Theophil Hansen (1813-1891), is con- 
structed of Pentelic marble in the Ionic style: the colonnades 
and pediments are richly coloured and gilded, and may perhaps 
convey some idea of the ancient style of decoration. Close by is 
the university, with a colonnade adorned with paintings, and 
the Vallianean library with a handsome Doric portico of Pentelic 
marble. The observatory, which is connected with the uni- 
versity, stands on the summit of the Hill of the Nymphs; like 
the Academy, it was erected at the expense of a wealthy Greek, 
Baron Sina of Vienna. In the public garden is the Zappeion, a 
large building with a Corinthian portico, intended for the display 
of Greek industries; here also is a monument to Byron, erected 
in 1896. The Boule, or parliament-house, possesses a consider- 
able library. Other public buildings are the Polytechnic Institute, 
built by contributions from Greeks of Epirus, the theatre, the 
Arsakeion (a school for girls), the Varvakeion (a gymnasium), 
the military school (crxoXi) eve\iri5wv) , and several hospitals and 
orphanages. The cathedral, a large, modern structure, is devoid 
of architectural merit, but some of the smaller, ancient, Byzan- 
tine churches are singularly interesting and beautiful. Among 
private residences, the mansion built by Dr Schliemann, the 
discoverer of Troy, is the most noteworthy; its decorations are 
in the Pompeian style. 

The museums of Athens have steadily grown in importance 
with the progress of excavation. They are admirably arranged, 
and the remnants of ancient art which they contain 
have fortunately escaped injudicious restoration. 
The National Museum, founded in 1866, is especially rich in 
archaic sculptures and in sepulchral and votive reliefs. A copy 
of the Diadumenos of Polyclitus from Delos, and temple sculp- 
tures from Epidaurus and the Argive Heraeum, are among the 
more notable of its recent acquisitions. It also possesses the 
famous collection of prehistoric antiquities found by Schliemann 
at Tiryns and Mycenae, other " Mycenaean " objects discovered 
at Nauplia and in Attica, as well as the still earlier remains ex- 
cavated by Tsountas in the Cyclades and by the British School 
at Phylakopi in Melos; terra-cottas from Tanagra and Asia 



MODERN] 



ATHENS 



84.1 



Minor; bronzes from Olympia, Delphi and elsewhere, and 
numerous painted vases, among them the unequalled white 
lekythi from Athens and Eretria. The Epigraphical Museum 
contains an immense number of inscriptions arranged by H. G. 
Lolling and A. Wilhelm of the Austrian Institute. The Acropolis 
Museum (opened 1878) possesses a singularly interesting collec- 
tion of sculptures belonging to the " archaic " period of Greek 
art, all found on the Acropolis; here, too, are some fragments 
of the pedimental statues of the Parthenon and several reliefs 
from its frieze, as well as the slabs from the balustrade of the 
temple of Nike. The Polytechnic Institute contains a museum 
of interesting objects connected with modern Greek life and 
history. In the Academy is a valuable collection of coins 
superintended by Svoronos. Of the private collections those of 
Schliemann and Karapanos are the most interesting: the latter 
contains works of art and other objects from Dodona. There is 
a small museum of antiquities at the Peiraeus. 

Owing to the numbers and activity of its institutions, both 
native and foreign, for the prosecution of research and the 

encouragement of classical studies, Athens has become 
Scientific once more an international seat of learning. The 
tions. ' Greek Archaeological Society, founded in 1837, 

numbers some distinguished scholars among its 
members, and displays great activity in the conduct of excava- 
tions. Important researches at Epidaurus, Eleusis, Mycenae, 
Amyclae and Rhamnus may be numbered among its principal 
undertakings, in addition to the complete exploration of the 
Acropolis and a series of investigations in Athens and Attica. 
The French Ecole d'Athenes, founded in 1846, is under the 
scientific direction of the Academie des Inscriptions et Belles- 
lettres. Among its numerous enterprises have been the extensive 
and costly excavations at Delos and Delphi, which have yielded 
such remarkable results. The monuments of the Byzantine 
epoch have latterly occupied a prominent place in its investiga- 
tions. The German Archaeological Institute, founded in 1874, 
has carried out excavations at Thebes, Lesbos, Paros, Athens and 
elsewhere; it has also been associated in the great researches at 
Olympia, Pergamum and Troy, and in many other important 
undertakings. The British School, founded in 1886, has been 
unable, owing to insufficient endowment, to work on similar lines 
with the French and German institutions; it has, however, 
carried out extensive excavations at Megalopolis and in Melos, 
as well as researches at Abae, in Athens (presumed site of the 
Cynosarges), in Cyprus, at Naucratis and at Sparta. It has 
also participated in the exploration of Cnossus and other im- 
portant sites in Crete. The American School, founded in 1882, is 
supported by the principal universities of the United States. 
In addition to researches at Sicyon, Plataea, Eretria and else- 
where, it has undertaken two works of capital importance — the 
excavation of the Argive Heraeum and of ancient Corinth. 
An Austrian Archaeological Institute was founded in 1898. 

Notwithstanding certain disadvantages inherent in its situa- 
tion, the trade and manufactures of Athens have considerably 

increased in recent years. Industrial and commercial 
industry activity is mainly centred at the Peiraeus, where 
merce. & cloth and cotton mills, 45 cognac distilleries, 14 steam 

flour mills, 8 soap manufactories, 13 shipbuilding and 
engineering works, chair manufactories, dye works, chemical 
works, tanneries and a dynamite factory have been established. 
The shipbuilding and engineering trades are active and advan- 
cing. The export trade is, however, inconsiderable, as the 
produce of the local industries is mainly absorbed by home 
consumption. The principal exports are wine, cognac and 
marble from Pentelicus. As a place of import, the Peiraeus 
surpasses Patras, Syra and all the other Greek maritime towns, 
receiving about 53 % of all the merchandise brought into Greece. 
The principal imports are coal, grain, manufactured articles and 
articles of luxury. The total value of exports in 1904 was 
£459,565; of imports, £2,459,278. The number of ships entered 
and cleared in 1905 was 5020 with a tonnage of 5,796,590 
tons, of which 416, with a tonnage of 609,822 tons, were 
British. 



The Peiraeus, which had never revived since its destruction by 
the Romans in 86 B.C., was at the beginning of the 19th century 
a small fishing village known as Porto Leone. When 
Athens became the capital in 1833 the ancient name of peiraeus. 
its port was revived, and since that time piers and 
quays have been constructed, and spacious squares and broad 
regular streets have been laid out. The town now possesses an 
exchange, a large theatre, a gymnasium, a naval school, municipal 
buildings and several hospitals and charitable institutions erected 
by private munificence. The harbour, in which ships of all nations 
may be seen, as well as great numbers of the picturesque sailing 
craft engaged in the coasting trade, is somewhat difficult of 
access to larger vessels, but has been improved by the con- 
struction of new breakwaters and dry docks. The port and 
the capital are now connected by railway with Corinth and the 
principal towns of the Morea; the line opening up communi- 
cation with northern Greece and Thessaly, when its proposed 
connexion with the Continental railway system has been effected, 
will greatly enhance the importance of the Peiraeus, already one 
of the most flourishing commercial towns in the Levant. 

The population of Athens has rapidly increased. In 1834 it 
was below 5000; in 1870 it was 44,510; in 1879, 63,374; in 
1889, 107,251; in 1896, 111,486. The Peiraeus, which 
in 1834 possessed only a few hundred inhabitants, tion."' 
in 1879 possessed 21,618; in 1889, 34,327; in 1896, 
43,848. The total population of Athens in 1907 was 167,479 
and of Peiraeus 67,982. (J. D. B.) 

III. History 

1. The Prehistoric Period,. — The history of primitive Athens 
is involved in the same obscurity which enshrouds the early 
development of most of the Greek city-states. The Homeric 
poems scarcely mention Attica, and the legends, though numerous, 
are rarely of directrhistorical value. In the Minoan epoch Athens 
is proved by the archaeological remains to have been a petty 
kingdom scarcely more important than many other Attic com- 
munities, yet enjoying a more unbroken course of development 
than the leading states of that period. This accords with the 
cherished tradition which made the Athenians children of the 
soil, and free from admixture with conquering tribes. Many 
legends, however, and the later state organization, point to an 
immigration of an " Ionian " aristocracy in late Mycenaean days. 
These Ionian newcomers are almost certainly responsible for the 
absorption of the numerous independent communities of Attica 
into a central state of Athens under a powerful monarchy (see 
Theseus), for the introduction of new cults, and for the division 
of the people into four tribes whose names — Geleontes, Hopletes, 
Argadeis and Aegicoreis — recur in several true Ionian towns. 
This centralization of power (Synoecism) , to which many Greek 
peoples never attained, laid the first foundations of Athenian 
greatness. But in other respects the new constitution tended to 
arrest development. When the monarchy was supplanted in the 
usual Greek fashion by a hereditary nobility — a process accom- 
plished, according to tradition, between about 1000 and 683 
B.C. — -all power was appropriated by a privileged class of 
Eupatridae (q.v .) ; the Geomori and Demiurgi, who formed 
the bulk of the community, enjoyed no political rights. It was 
to their control over the machinery of law that the Eupatridae 
owed their predominance. The aristocratic council of the 
Areopagus (q.v.) constituted the chief criminal court, and 
nominated the magistrates, among whom the chief archon (q.v.) 
passed judgment in family suits, controlled admission to the 
genos or clan, and consequently the acquisition of the franchise. 
This system was further supported by religious prescriptions 
which the nobles retained as a corporate secret. Assisted no 
doubt by their judicial control, the Eupatridae also tended to 
become sole owners of the land, reducing the original freeholders 
or tenants to the position of serfs. During this period Athens 
seems to have made little use of her militia, commanded by the 
polemarch, or of her navy, which was raised in special local 
divisions known as Naucraries (see Naucrary); hence no 
military esprit de corps could arise to check the Eupatrid 



8 4 2 



ATHENS 



[HISTORY 



ascendancy. Nor did the commons obtain relief through any 
commercial or colonial enterprises such as those which alleviated 
social distress in many other Greek states. The first attack upon 
the aristocracy proceeded from a young noble named Cylon, who 
endeavoured to become tyrant about 630 B.C. The people helped 
to crush this movement; yet discontent must have been rife 
among them, for in 6?i the Eupatrids commissioned Draco (q.v.), 
a junior magistrate, to draft and publish a code of criminal law. 
This was a notable concession, by which the nobles lost that 
exclusive legal knowledge which had formed one of their main 
instruments of oppression. 

2. The Rise of Athens. — A still greater danger grew out of the 
widespread financial distress, which was steadily driving many 
of the agricultural population into slavery and threatened the 
entire state with ruin. After a protracted war with the neigh- 
bouring Megarians had accentuated the crisis the Eupatridae 
gave to one of their number, the celebrated Solon (q.v.), free 
power to remodel the whole state (594). By his economic 
legislation Solon placed Athenian agriculture once more upon 
a sound footing, and supplemented this source of wealth by 
encouraging commercial enterprise, thus laying the foundation 
of his country's material prosperity. His constitutional reforms 
proved less successful, for, although he put into the hands of 
the people various safeguards against oppression, he could not 
ensure their use in practice. After a period of disorder and 
party-feud among the nobles the new constitution was superseded 
in fact, if not in form, by the autocratic rule of Peisistratus (q.v.), 
and his sons Hippias and Hipparchus. The age of despotism, 
which lasted, with interruptions, from 560 to 510, was a period 
of great prosperity for Athens. The rulers fostered agriculture, 
stimulated commerce and industry (notably the famous Attic 
ceramics), adorned the city with public works and temples, 
and rendered it a centre of culture. Their vigorous foreign policy 
first made Athens an Aegean power and secured connexions with 
numerous mainland powers. Another result of the tyranny was the 
weakening of the undue influence of the nobles and the creation 
of a national Athenian spirit in place of the ancient clan-feeling. 

The equalization of classes was already far advanced when 
towards the end of the century a nobleman of the Alcmaeonid 
family, named Cleisthenes (q.v.), who had taken the chief part 
in the final expulsion of the tyrants, acquired ascendancy as 
leader of the commons. The constitution which he promulgated 
(508/7) gave expression to the change of political feeling by 
providing a national basis of franchise and providing a new 
state organization. By making effective the powers of the 
Ecclesia (Popular Assembly) the Boule (Council) and Heliaea, 
Cleisthenes became the true founder of Athenian democracy. 

This revolution was accompanied by a conflict with Sparta 
and other powers. But a spirit of harmony 'and energy now 
breathed within the nation, and in the ensuing wars Athens 
worsted powerful enemies like Thebes and Chalcis (506). A 
bolder stroke followed in 500, when a force was sent to support 
the Ionians in revolt against Persia and took part in the sack 
of Sardis. After the failure of this expedition the Athenians 
apparently became absorbed in a prolonged struggle with Aegina 
(q.v.). In 493 the imminent prospect of a Persian invasion 
brought into power men like Themistocles and Miltiades (qq.v.), 
to whose firmness and insight the Athenians largely owed their 
triumph in the great campaign of 490 against Persia. After a 
second political reaction, the prospect of a second Persian war, 
and the naval superiority of Aegina led to the assumption of a 
bolder policy. In 483 Themistocles overcame the opposition of 
Aristides (q.v.), and passed his famous measure providing for a 
large increase of the Athenian fleet. In the great invasion of 
480-479 the Athenians displayed an unflinching resolution which 
could not be shaken even by the evacuation and destruction of 
their native city. Though the traditional account of this war 
exaggerates the services of Athens as compared with the other 
champions of Greek independence, there can be no doubt that 
the ultimate victory was chiefly due to the numbers and efficiency 
of the Athenian fleet, and to the wise policy of her great statesman 
Themistocles (see Salamis, Plataea). 



3. Imperial Athens.— After the Persian retreat and the 
reoccupation of their city the Athenians continued the war with 
unabated vigour. Led by Aristides and Cimon they rendered 
such prominent service as to receive in return the formal leader- 
ship of the Greek allies and the presidency of the newly formed 
Delian League (q.v.). The ascendancy acquired in these years 
eventually raised Athens to the rank of an imperial state. For 
the moment it tended to impair the good relations which had 
subsisted between Athens and Sparta since the first days of the 
Persian peril. But so long as Cimon's influence prevailed the 
ideal of " peace at home and the complete humiliation of Persia " 
was steadily unheld. Similarly the internal policy of Athens 
continued to be shaped by the conservatives. The only notable 
innovations since the days of Cleisthenes had been the reduction 
of the archonship to a routine magistracy appointed partly by 
lot (487), and the rise of the ten elective strategi (generals) as 
chief executive officers (see Strategus). But the triumph of 
the navy in 480 and the great expansion of commerce and 
industry had definitely shifted the political centre of gravity 
from the yeoman class of moderate democrats to the more radical 
party usually stigmatized as the " sailor rabble." Though 
Themistocles soon lost his influence, his party eventually found 
a new leader in Ephialtes and after the failure of Cimon's foreign 
policy (see Cimon) triumphed over the conservatives. The year 
461 marks the reversal of Athenian policy at home and abroad. 
By cancelling the political power of the Areopagus and multi- 
plying the functions- of the popular law-courts, Ephialtes 
abolished the last checks upon the sovereignty of the commons. 
His successor, Pericles, who commonly ranked as the " completer 
of the democracy," merely developed the full democracy so as 
to secure its effectual as well as its theoretical supremacy. The 
foreign policy of Athens was now directed towards an almost 
reckless expansion (see Pericles). The unparalleled success of 
the Athenian arms at this period extended the bounds of empire 
to their farthest limits. Besides securing her Aegean possessions 
and her commerce by the defeat of Corinth and Aegina, her 
last rivals on sea, Athens acquired an extensive dominion in 
central Greece and for a time quite overshadowed the Spartan 
land-power. The rapid loss of the new conquests after 447 
proved that Athens lacked a sufficient land-army to defend 
permanently so extensive a frontier. Under the guidance of 
Pericles the Athenians renounced the unprofitable rivalry with 
Sparta and Persia, and devoted themselves to the consolidation 
and judicious extension of their maritime influence. 

The years of the supremacy of Pericles (443-429) are on the 
whole the most glorious in Athenian history. In actual extent 
of territory the empire had receded somewhat, but in point of 
security and organization it now stood at its height. The Delian 
confederacy lay completely under Athenian control, and the 
points of strategic importance were largely held by cleruchies 
(q.v.; see also Pericles) and garrisons. Out of a citizen body 
of over 5°;°°° freemen, reinforced by mercenaries and slaves, a 
superb fleet exceeding 300 sail and an army of 30,000 drilled 
soldiers could be mustered. The city itself, with its fortifications 
extending to the port of Peiraeus, was impregnable to a land 
attack. The commerce of Athens extended from Egypt and 
Colchis to Etruria and Carthage, and her manufactures, which 
attracted skilled operatives from many lands, found a ready sale 
all over the Mediterranean. With tolls, and the tribute of the 
Delian League, a fund of 9700 talents (£2,300,000) was amassed 
in the treasury. 

Yet the material prosperity of Athens under Pericles was 
less notable than her brilliant attainments in every field of 
culture. Her development since the Persian wars had been 
extremely rapid, but did not reach its climax till the latter part 
of the century. No city ever adorned herself with such an array 
of temples, public buildings and works of art as the Athens of 
Pericles and Pheidias. Her achievements in literature are hardly 
less great. The Attic drama of the period produced many great 
masterpieces, and the scientific thought of Europe in the depart- 
ments of logic, ethics, rhetoric and history mainly owes its origin 
to a new movement of Greek thought which was largely fostered 



HISTORY] 



ATHENS 



843 



by the patronage of Pericles himself. Besides producing 
numerous men of genius herself Athens attracted all the great 
intellects of Greece. The brilliant summary of the historian 
Thucydides in the famous Funeral Speech of Pericles (delivered 
in 430), in which the social life, the institutions and the culture 
of his country are set forth as a model, gives a substantially true 
picture of Athens in its greatest days. 

This brilliant epoch, however, was not without its darker side. 
The payment for public service which Pericles had introduced 
may have contributed to raise the general level of culture of the 
citizens, but it created a dangerous precedent and incurred the 
censure of notable Greek thinkers. Moreover, all this prosperity 
was obtained at the expense of the confederates, whom Athens 
exploited in a somewhat selfish and illiberal manner. In fact 
it was the cry of "tyrant city" which went furthest to rouse 
public opinion in Greece against Athens and to bring on the 
Peloponnesian War (q.v.) which ruined the Athenian empire 
(431-404). The issue of this conflict was determined less by any 
intrinsic superiority on the part of her enemies than by the 
blunders committed by a people unable to carry out a consistent 
foreign policy on its own initiative, and served since Pericles 
by none but selfish or short-sighted advisers. It speaks well for 
the patriotic devotion and discipline of her commons that 
Athens, weakened by plague and military disasters, should have 
withstood for so long the blows of her numerous enemies from 
without, and the damage inflicted by traitors within her walls 
(see Antiphon, Theramenes). 

4. The Fourth Century. — After the complete defeat of Athens 
by land and sea, it was felt that her former services on behalf 
of Greece and her high culture should exempt her from total 
ruin. Though stripped of her empire, Athens obtained very 
tolerable terms from her enemies. The democratic constitution, 
which had been supplanted for a while by a government of 
oligarchs, but was restored in 403 after the latter's misrule had 
brought about their own downfall (see Critias, Theramenes, 
Thrasybulus), henceforth stood unchallenged by the Greeks. 
Indeed the spread of democracy elsewhere increased the prestige 
of the Athenian administration, which had now reached a high 
pitch of efficiency. Athenian art and literature in the 4th century 
declined but slightly from their former standard; philosophy 
and oratory reached a standard which was never again equalled 
in antiquity and may still serve as a model. In the wars of the 
period Athens took a prominent part with a view to upholding 
the balance of power, joining the Corinthian League in 395, 
and assisting Thebes against Sparta after 378, Sparta against 
Thebes after 360. Her generals and admirals, Conon, Iphicrates, 
Chabrias, Timotheus, distinguished themselves by their military 
skill, and partially recovered their country's predominance in 
the Aegean, which found expression in the temporary renewal 
of the Delian League (q.v.). By the middle of the century Athens 
was again the leading power in Greece. When Philip of Macedon 
began to grow formidable she seemed called upon once more 
to champion the liberties of Greece. This ideal, when put 
forward by the consummate eloquence of Demosthenes and 
other orators, created great enthusiasm among the Athenians, 
who at times displayed all their old vigour in opposing Philip, 
notably in the decisive campaign of 338. But these outbursts 
of energy were too spasmodic, and popular opinion repeatedly 
veered back in favour of the peace-party. With her diminished 
resources Athens could not indeed hope to cope with the great 
Macedonian king; however much we may sympathize with the 
generous ambition of the patriots, we must admit that in the 
light of hard facts their conduct appears quixotic. 

5. The Hellenistic Period. — Philip and Alexander, who 
sincerely admired Athenian culture and courted a zealous 
co-operation against Persia, treated the conquered city with 
marked favour. But the people would not resign themselves 
to playing a secondary part, and watched for every opportunity 
to revolt. The outbreak headed by Athens after Alexander's 
death (323) led to a stubborn conflict with Macedonia. After 
his victory the regent Antipater punished Athens by the loss of 
her remaining dependencies, the proscription of her chief patriots, 



and the disfranchisement of 12,000 citizens. The Macedonian 
garrison which was henceforth stationed in Attic territory 
prevented the city from taking a prominent part in the wars 
of the Diadochi. Cassander placed Athens under the virtual 
autocracy of Demetrius of Phalerum (317-307), and after the 
temporary liberation by Demetrius Poliorcetes (306-300), 
secured his interests through a dictator named Lachares, who 
lost the place again to Poliorcetes after a siege (295). After a 
vain attempt to expel the garrison in 287, the Athenians regained 
their liberty while Macedonia was thrown into confusion by the 
Celts, and in 279 rendered good service against the invaders 
of the latter nation with a fleet off Thermopylae. When Anti- 
gonus Gonatas threatened to restore Macedonian power in 
Greece, the Athenians, supported perhaps by the king of Egypt, 
formed a large defensive coalition; but in the ensuing " Chrem- 
onidean War " (266-263) a naval defeat off Andros led to their 
surrender and the imposition of a Macedonian garrison. The 
latter was finally withdrawn in 229 by the good offices of Aratus 
(q.v.). At this period Athens was altogether overshadowed 
in material strength by the great Hellenistic monarchies and 
even by the new republican leagues of Greece; but she could 
still on occasion display great energy and patriotism. The 
prestige of her past history had now perhaps attained its zenith. 
Her democracy was respected by the Macedonian kings; the 
rulers of Egypt, Syria, and especially of Pergamum, courted her 
favour by handsome donations of edifices and works of art, 
to which the citizens replied by unbecoming flattery, even to 
the extent of creating new tribes named after their benefactors. 
If Athens lost her supremacy in the fields of science and scholar- 
ship to Alexandria, she became more than ever the home of 
philosophy, while Menander and the other poets of the New 
Comedy made Athenian life and manners known throughout the 
civilized world. 

6. Relations with the Roman Republic. — In 228 Athens 
entered into friendly intercourse with Rome, in whose interest 
she endured the desperate attacks of Philip V. of Macedonia 
(200-199). In return for help against King Perseus she ac- 
quired some new possessions, notably the great mart of Delos, 
which became an Athenian cleruchy (166). By her treacherous 
attack upon the frontier-town of Oropus (156) Athens indirectly 
brought about the conflict between Rome and the Achaean 
League which resulted in the eventual loss of Greek independence, 
but remained herself a free town with rights secured by treaty. 
In spite of the favours displayed by Rome, the more radical 
section of the people began to chafe at the loss of their inter- 
national importance. This discontent was skilfully fanned by 
Mithradates»the Great at the outset of his Roman campaigns. 
His emissary, the philosopher Aristion, induced the people to 
declare war against Rome and to place him in chief command. 
The town with its port stood a long siege against Sulla, but was 
stormed in 86. The conqueror allowed his soldiers to loot, but 
inflicted no permanent punishment upon the people. This 
war left Athens poverty-stricken and stripped of her commerce: 
her only importance now lay in the philosophical schools, which 
were frequented by many young Romans of note (Cicero, 
Atticus, Horace, &c). Greek became fashionable at Rome, and 
a visit to Athens a sort of pilgrimage for educated Romans 
(cf. Propertius iv. 21: "Magnum iter ad doctas proficisci 
cogor Athenas "). In the great civil wars Athens sided with 
Pompey and held out against Caesar's lieutenants, but received 
a free pardon " in consideration of her great dead." Similarly 
the triumvirs after Philippi condoned her enthusiasm for the 
cause of Brutus. Antony repeatedly made Athens his head- 
quarters and granted her several new possessions, including 
Eretria and Aegina — grants which Octavian subsequently 
revoked. 

7. The Roman Empire. — Under the new settlement Athens 
remained a free and sovereign city — a boon which she repaid 
by zealous Caesar-worship, for the favours bestowed upon her 
tended to pauperize her citizens and to foster their besetting 
sin of calculating flattery. Hadrian displayed his special 
fondness for the city by raising new buildings and relieving 



8 44 



ATHENS 



[HISTORY 



financial distress. He amended the constitution in some respects, 
and instituted a new national festival, the Panhellenica. In the 
period of the Antonines the endowment of professors out of the 
imperial treasury gave Athens a special status as a university 
town. Her whole energies seem henceforth devoted to academic 
pursuits; the military training of her youth was superseded 
by courses in philosophy and rhetoric; the chief organs of 
administration, the revived Areopagus and the senior Strategus, 
became as it were an education office. Save for an incursion 
by Goths in a.d. 267 and a temporary occupation by Alaric in 
395, Athens spent the remaining centuries of the ancient world 
in quiet prosperity. The rhetorical schools experienced a 
brilliant revival under Constantine and his successors, when 
Athens became the alma mater of many notable men, including 
Julian, Libanius, Basil and Gregory of Nazianzus, and in her 
professors owned the last representatives of a humane and 
moralized paganism. The freedom of teaching was first curtailed 
by Theodosius I.; the edict of Justinian (529), forbidding the 
study of philosophy, dealt the death-blow to ancient Athens. 

The authorities for the history of ancient Athens will mostly be 
found under Gref.ce : History, and the various biographies. The 
following books deal with special periods or subjects only: — (1) 
Early Athens: W. Warde Fowler, The City-State, ch. vi. (London, 
1893). (2) The fifth and fourth centuries: the "Constitution of Athens," 
ascribed to Xenophon ; W. Oncken, Athen und Hellas (Leipzig, 1865) ; 
U. v. Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Aus Kydathen (Berlin, 1880); 
L. Whibley, Political Parties at Athens (Cambridge, 1889) ; G. Gilbert, 
Beilrdge zur inneren Geschichte Athens (Leipzig, 1877) ; J. Beloch, 
Die attische Politik sett PeriM.es (Leipzig, 1884). (3) The Hellenistic 
and Roman periods: J. P. Mahaffy, Greek Life and Thought, from 
323 to 146 (London, 1887), chs. v., vi., xvii. ; A. Holm, Greek History 
(Eng. trans., London, 1898), iv. chs. vi. and xxiii. ; Wilamowitz- 
Moellendorff, Antigonos von Karystos (Berlin, 1881), pp. 178-291 ; 
W. Capes, University Life in Ancient Athens (London, 1877); A. 
Dumont, Essai sur I'Ephebie attique (Paris, 1875). (4) The Latin 
rule: G. Finlay, History of Greece (Oxford ed., 1877), vol. iv. ch. vi. 

(5) Constitutional History: The Aristotelian " Constitution of 
Athens"; U. v. Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Aristoteles und Athen 
(Berlin and Leipzig, 1893), vol. ii. ; G. Gilbert, Greek Constitutional 
Antiquities (Eng. trans., London, 1895), pp. 95-453; A. H. J. 
Greenidge, Handbook of Greek Constitutional History (Oxford, 1896), 
ch. vi. ; J. W. Headlam, Election by Lot at Athens (Cambridge, 1891). 

(6) Finance and statistics: A. Boeckh, The Public Economy of the 
Athenians (Eng. trans., London, 1828); Ed. Meyer, Forschungen 
zur alten Geschichte (Halle, 1899), vol. ii. pp. 149-195. (7) Inscrip- 
tions: Corpus Inscriptionum Atticarum, with supplements (Berlin, 
1873-1895). (8) Coins: B. V. Head, Historia Numorum (Oxford, 
1887), pp. 309-328. (M. O. B. C.) 

8. Byzantine Period. — The city now sank into the position 
of a provincial Byzantine town. Already it had been robbed 
of many of its works of art, among them the Athena Promachos 
and the Parthenos of Pheidias, for the adornment of Constanti- 
nople, and further spoliation took place when the church of St 
Sophia was built in a.d. 532. The Parthenon, the Erechtheum, 
the " Theseum " and other temples were converted into Christian 
churches and were thus preserved throughout the middle ages. 
The history of Athens for the next four centuries is almost a 
blank; the city is rarely mentioned by the Byzantine chronicles 
of this period. The emperor Constantine II. spent some months 
here in a.d. 662-663. In 869 the see of Athens became an arch- 
bishopric. In 90S Attica was ravaged by the Bulgarians under 
their tsar Samuel, but Athens escaped; after the defeat of 
Samuel at Belasitza (1014) the emperor Basil II., who blinded 
15,000 Bulgarian prisoners, came to Athens and celebrated 
his triumph by a thanksgiving service in the Parthenon (1018). 
From the Runic description on the marble lion of the PeiraeUs it 
has been inferred that Harold Hardraada and the Norsemen 
in the service of the Byzantine emperors captured the Peiraeus 
in 1040, but this conclusion is r.ot accepted by Gregorovius 
(bk. i. pp. 170-172). Like the rest of Greece, Athens suffered 
greatly from the rapacity of its Byzantine administrators. The 
letters of Acominatus, archbishop of Athens, towards the close 
of the 12th century, bewail the desolate condition of the city in 
language resembling that of Jeremiah in regard to Jerusalem. 

9. Period of Latin Rule: 1204-1458. — After the Latin con- 
quest of Constantinople in 1 204, Otho de la Roche was granted 
the lordship of Athens by Boniface of Montferrat, king of Thessa- 



lonica, with the title of Megaskyr {fikyas «iiptos = great lord). His 
nephew and successor, Guy I., obtained the title duke of Athens 
from Louis IX. of France in 1258. On the death of Guy II., 
last duke of the house of la Roche, in 1308, the duchy passed 
to his cousin, Walter of Brienne. He was expelled in 13 n by 
his Catalonian mercenaries; the mutineers bestowed the duchy 
" of Athens and Neopatras " on their leader, Roger Deslaur, and, 
in the following year, on Frederick of Aragon, king of Sicily. 
The Sicilian kings ruled Athens by viceroys till 1385, when the 
Florentine Nerio Acciajuoli, lord of Corinth, defeated the 
Catalonians and seized the city. Nerio, who received the title 
of duke from the king of Naples, founded a new dynasty. His 
palace was in the Propylaea; the lofty " Tower of the Franks," 
which adjoined the south wing of that building, was possibly 
built in his time. This interesting historical monument was 
demolished by the Greek authorities in 1874, notwithstanding 
the protests of Penrose, Freeman and other scholars. The 
Acciajuoli dynasty lasted till June 1458, when the Acropolis 
after a stubborn resistance was taken by the Turks under Omar, 
the general of the sultan Mahommed II., who had occupied the 
lower city in 1456. The sultan entered Athens in the following 
month; he was greatly struck by its ancient monuments and 
treated its inhabitants with comparative leniency. 

10. Period of Turkish Rule: 1458-1833. — After the Turkish 
conquest Athens disappeared from the eyes of Western civiliza- 
tion. The principal interest of the following centuries lies in 
the researches of successive travellers, who may be said to 
have rediscovered the city, and in the fate of its ancient monu- 
ments, several of which were still in fair preservation at the 
beginning of this period. The Parthenon was transformed 
into a mosque; the existing minaret at its south-western corner 
was built after 1466. The Propylaea served as the residence 
of the Turkish commandant and the Erechtheum as his harem. 
In 1466 the Venetians succeeded in occupying the city, but 
failed to take the Acropolis. About 1645 a powder magazine 
in the Propylaea was ignited by lightning and the upper portion 
of the structure was destroyed. Under Francesco Morosini 
the Venetians again attacked Athens in September 1687; a 
shot fired during the bombardment of the Acropolis caused a 
powder magazine in the Parthenon to explode, and the building 
was rent asunder. After capturing the Acropolis the Venetians 
employed material from its ancient edifices in repairing its walls. 
They withdrew in the following year, when the Turks set fire 
to the city. The central sculptures of the western pediment of 
the Parthenon, which Morosini intended to take to Venice, were 
unskilfully detached by his workmen, and falling to the ground 
were broken to pieces. Several ancient monuments were sacri- 
ficed to provide material for a new wall with which the Turks 
surrounded the city in 1778. 

During the 1 8th century many works of art, which still re- 
mained in situ, fell a prey to foreign collectors. The removal 
to London in 18 12 of most of the remaining sculptures of the 
Parthenon by Lord Elgin possibly rescued many of them from 
injury in the period of warfare which followed. In 18 21 the 
Greek insurgents surprised the city, and in 1822 captured the 
Acropolis. Athens again fell into the hands of the Turks in 1826, 
who bombarded and took the Acropolis in the following year; 
the Erechtheum suffered greatly, and the monument of Thra- 
syllus was destroyed. The Turks remained in possession of the 
Acropolis till 1833, when Athens was chosen as the capital of 
the newly established kingdom of Greece; since that date the 
history of the city forms part of that of modern Greece. (See 
Greece: History, modern.) 

General Bibliography. — W. M. Leake, Topography of Athens 
and the Demi (2nd ed., London, 1841); C. Wachsmuth, Die Stadt 
Athen im Alterthum (vol. i., Leipzig, 1874; vol. ii. part i., Leipzig, 
1890); E. Burnouf, La Ville et I'acropole d'Athenes aux diverses 
Spoques (Paris, 1877); F. C. Penrose, Principles of Athenian Archi- 
tecture (London, 1888) ; J. E. Harrison, Mythology and Monuments 
of Ancient Athens (London, 1890); E. Curtius and A. Milchhofer, 
Stadtgeschichte von Athen (Berlin, 1891) ; H. Hitzig and H. Bliimner, 
Pausanias (text and commentary; vol. i., Berlin, 1896); J. G. 
Frazer, Pausanias (translation and commentary; 6 vols., London, 
1898. The commentary on Pausanias' description of Athens, 



ATHENS— ATHERSTONE 



845 



contained in vol. ii. with supplementary notes in vol. v., is an invalu- 
able digest of recent researches) ; H. Omont, Athenes au XVII' siecle 
(Paris, 1898, with plans and views of the town and acropolis and 
drawings of the sculptures of the Parthenon) ; J. H. Middleton and 

E. A. Gardner, Plans and Drawings of Athenian Buildings (London, 
1900); E. A. Gardner, Ancient Athens (London, 1902); W. Judeich, 
Topographic von Athen (Munich, 1905 ; forming vol. iii. part ii. second 
half, in 3rd edition of I. von Miiller's Handbuch der klass. Altertums- 
wissenschafl). The history of excavations on the Acropolis is sum- 
marized in M. L. d'Ooge, Acropolis of Athens (1909); see also 
A. Botticher, Die Akropolis von Athen (Berlin, 1888); O. Jahn, 
Pausaniae descriptio arcis Athenarum (Bonn, 1900) ; A. Furtwangler, 
Masterpieces of Greek Sculpture (appendix; London, 1895); A. 
Milchhofer, Uber die alten Burgheiligtumer in Athen (Kiel, 1899). 
For the Parthenon, A. Michaelis, Der Parthenon (texts and plates, 
Leipzig, 1871); L. Magne, Le Parthenon (Paris, 1895); J. Durm, 
Der Zustand der antiken athenischen Bauwerken (Berlin, 1895) ; 

F. C. Penrose in Journal of Royal Institute of British Architects for 
1897; N. M. Balanos in 'E^jucpis -rijs KvPepvhatws (Athens, 
August 25, 1898). For the Dionysiac theatre, A. E. Haigh, The 
Attic Theatre (Oxford, 1889); W. Dorpfeld and E. Reisch, Das 
griechische Theater (Athens, 1896) ; Puchstein, Die grierhische Buhne 
(Berlin, 1901). For the " Theseum," B. Sauer, Das sogenannte 
Theseion (Leipzig, 1899). For the Peiraeus, E. I. Angelopoulos, 
Hepl JIctpaLcos /cat ru>v \ip.kvoiv avrov (Athens, 1898). For the 
Attic Demes, A. Milchhofer, Untersuchungen iiber die Demenordnung 
des Kleisthenes (in transactions of Berlin Academy, Berlin, 1892); 
Pauly-Wissowa, Realencyclopadie der class, Altertumswissenschaft 
(supplement, part i., article "Athenai"; Stuttgart, 1903). For 
the controversies respecting the Agora, the Enneacrunus and the 
topography of the town in general, see W. Dorpfeld, passim in 
Athenische Miltheilungen ; C. Wachsmuth, " Neue Beitrage zur 
Topographie von Athen," in Abhandlungen der sachsischen Gesell- 
schaft der Wissenschaflen (Leipzig, 1897). A. Milchhofer, " Zur 
Topographie von Athen," in Berlin, philol. Wochenschrift (1900), 
Nos. 9, 11, 12. For the Byzantine and medieval periods, William 
Miller, Latins in the Levant (London, 1908) ; F. Gregorovius, 
Geschichte der Stadt Athen im Mittelalter (2 vols., Stuttgart, 1889). 
Periodical Literature. Miltheilungen des kais. deutsch. arch. Instituts 
(Athens, from 1876); Bulletin de correspondance hellenique (Athens, 
from 1877) ; Papers of the American School (New York, 1882-1897) ; 
Annual of the British School (London, from 1894); Journal of 
Hellenic Studies (London, from 1880); American Journal of Archae- 
ology (New York, from 1885); Jahrbuch des kais. deutsch. arch. 
Instituts (Berlin, from 1886). The best maps are those in Die Karten 
von Attika, published with explanatory text by the German Ar- 
chaeological Institute (Berlin, 1881). See also Baedeker's Greece 
(London, 1895); Alurray's Greece and the Ionian Islands (London, 
1900); Guide Joanne, vol. i. Athlnes et ses environs (Paris, 1896); 
Meyer's Turkei und Griechenldnder (5th ed., 1901). (J. D. B.) 

ATHENS, a city and the county-seat of Clarke county, Georgia, 
U.S.A., in the N.E. part of the state, about 73 m. E. by N. of 
Atlanta. Pop. (1890) 8639; (1900) 10,245, °f whom 5190 
were negroes and only 114 were foreign-born; (1910, census) 
14,913. It is served by the Georgia, the Central of Georgia, the 
Southern, the Seaboard Air Line and the Gainesville Midland 
railways. Athens is an important educational centre. It was 
founded in 1801 as the seat of the university of Georgia, which 
had been chartered in 1785. Franklin College, the academic 
department of the university, was opened in 180 1, and afterwards 
the State College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts (the School 
of Science, 1872), the State Normal School (co-educational, 1891), 
the School of Pharmacy (1903), the University Summer School 
(1903), the School of Forestry (1906), and the Georgia State 
College of Agriculture (1906), also branches of the university, 
were established at Athens, and what had been the Lumpkin 
Law School (incorporated in 1859) became the law department 
of the university in 1867. Branches of the university not in 
Athens are: the North Georgia Agricultural College (established 
in 1871 ; became a part of the university in 1872), at Dahlonega; 
the medical department, at Augusta (1873; founded as the 
Georgia Medical College in 1829); the Georgia School of Tech- 
nology (1885), at Atlanta; the Georgia Normal and Industrial 
College for Girls (1889), at Milledgeville; and the Georgia 
Industrial College for Colored Youth (1890), near Savannah. 
At Athens also are several secondary schools, and the Lucy Cobb 
Institute (for girls), opened in 1858 and named in honour of a 
daughterof its founder, Gen. T. R. R. Cobb (1823-1862). The 
city has various manufactures, the most important being 
fertilizers, cotton goods, and cotton-seed oil and cake; the value 
of the total factory product in 1905 was $1,158,205, an increase 
of 70-9% in 'five years. Athens was chartered as a city in 1872. 



ATHENS, a village and the county-seat of Athens county, 
Ohio, U.S.A., in the township of Athens, on the Hocking river, 
about 76 m. E.S.E. of Columbus. Pop. (1890) 2620; (1900) 
3066; (1910) 5463; of the township (1910) 10,156. It 
is served by the Baltimore & Ohio Southwestern, the Toledo 
& Ohio Central (Ohio Central Lines), and the Hocking Valley 
railways. The village is built on rolling ground rising about 
70 ft. above the river (which nearly encircles it), and commands 
views of some of the most beautiful scenery in the state. There 
are several ancient mounds in the vicinity. Athens is the seat 
of Ohio University (co-educational), a state institution estab- 
lished in 1804, and having in 1908 a college of liberal arts, 
a state normal college (1902), a commercial college, a college 
of music and a state preparatory school. In 1908 the Univer- 
sity had 53 instructors and 1386 students. South of the village, 
and occupying a fine situation, is a state hospital for the insane. 
In the vicinity there are many coal mines, and among the manu- 
factures are bricks, furniture, veneered doors, and shirts. The 
municipality operates the water-works. When the Ohio Com- 
pany, through Manasseh Cutler, obtained from congress their 
land in what is now Ohio, it was arranged that the income from 
two townships was to be set aside " for the support of a literary 
institution." In 1795 the townships (Athens and Alexander.) 
were located and surveyed, and in 1800 Rufus Putnam and two 
other commissioners, appointed by the Territorial legislature, 
laid out a town, which was also called Athens. Settlers slowly 
came; the town became the county-seat in 1805, was incor- 
porated as a village in 1811, and was re-incorporated in 1828. 

ATHERSTONE, WILLIAM GUYBON (1813-1898), British 
geologist, one of the pioneers in South African geology, was 
born in 1813, in the district of Uitenhage, Cape Colony. Having 
qualified as M.D. he settled in early life as a medical practitioner 
at Grahamstown, subsequently becoming F.R.C.S. In 1839 
his interest was aroused in geology, and from that date he 
" devoted the leisure of a long and successful medical practice " 
to the pursuit of geological science. In 1857 he published an 
account of the rocks and fossils of Uitenhage (the latter described 
more fully by R. Tate, Quart. Journal Geol. Soc, 1867). He also 
obtained many fossil reptilia from the Karroo beds, and pre- 
sented specimens to the British Museum. These were described 
by Sir Richard Owen. Atherstone's identification in 1867 as a 
diamond of a crystal found at De Kalk near the junction of the 
Riet and Vaal rivers, led indirectly to the establishment of the 
great diamond industry of South Africa. He encouraged the 
workings at Jagersfontein, and he also called attention to the 
diamantiferous neck at Kimberley. He was one of the founders 
of the Geological Society of South Africa at Johannesburg in 
1895; and for some years previously he was a member of the 
Cape parliament. He died at Grahamstown, on the 26th of 
June 1898. 

See the obituary by T. Rupert Jones, Natural Science, vol. xiv. 
(January 1899). 

ATHERSTONE, a market-town in the Nuneaton parliamentary 
division of Warwickshire, England, 102J m. N.W. from London 
by the London & North-Western railway. Pop. (1901) 5248. 
It lies in the upper valley of the Anker, under well-wooded 
hills to the west, and is on the Roman Watling Street, and the 
Coventry canal. The once monastic church of St Mary is rebuilt, 
excepting the central tower and part of the chancel. The chief 
industry is hat-making. On the high ground to the west lie 
ruins of the Cistercian abbey of Merevale, founded in 1149; 
they include the gatehouse chapel, part of the refectory and 
other remains exhibiting beautiful details of the 14th century. 
Coal is worked at Baxterley, 3 m. west of Atherstone. 

Atherstone {Aderestone, Edridestone, Edrichestone) , though not 
mentioned in any pre-Conquest record, is of unquestionably ancient 
origin. A Saxon barrow was opened near the town in 1824. It is 
traversed by Watling Street, and portions of the ancient Roman 
road have been discovered in modern times. Atherstone is men- 
tioned in Domesday among the possessions of Countess Godiva, the 
widow of Leofric. In the reign of Henry III. it passed to the monks 
of Bee in Normandy, who in 1246 obtained the grant of an annual 
fair at the feast of the Nativity of the Virgin, and the next year of 
a market every Tuesday. This market became so much frequented 



8 4 6' 



ATHERTON— ATHLETIC SPORTS 



that in 13 19 a toll was levied upon all goods corning into the town, 
in order to defray the cost of the repair to the roads necessitated 
by the constant traffic, and in 1332 a similar toll was levied on all 
goods passing over the bridge called Feldenbrigge near Atherstone. 
The September fair and Tuesday markets are still continued. In 
the reign of Edward III. a house of Austin Friars was founded at 
Atherstone by Ralph Lord Basset of Drayton, which, however, 
never rose to much importance, and at its dissolution in 1536 was 
valued at 30 shillings and 3 pence only. 

ATHERTON, or Chowbent, an urban district in the Leigh 
parliamentary division of Lancashire, England, 13 m. W.N.W. 
of Manchester on the London & North- Western and Lancashire 
& Yorkshire railways. Pop. (1901) 16,211. The cotton factories 
are the principal source of industry; there are also ironworks 
and collieries. The manor was held by the local family of 
Atherton from John's reign to 1738, when it passed by marriage 
to Robert Gwillym, who assumed that name. In 1797 his 
eldest daughter and co-heiress married Thomas Powys, after- 
wards the second Lord Lilford. Up to 1891 the lord of the manor 
held a court-leet and court-baron annually in November, but 
in that year Lord Lilford sold to the local board the market 
tolls, stallages and pickages, and since this sale the courts have 
lapsed. The earliest manufactures were iron and cotton. Silk- 
weaving, formerly an extensive industry, has now almost 
entirely decayed. The first chapel or church was built in 1645. 
James Wood, who became Nonconformist minister in the chapel 
at Atherton in 1691, earned fame and the familiar title of 
" General " by raising a force from his congregation, uncouthly 
armed, to fight against the troops of the Pretender (17 15). 

ATHETOSIS (Gr. aderos, " without place "), the medical term 
applied to certain slow, purposeless, deliberate movements of 
the hands and feet. The fingers are separately flexed and 
extended, abducted and adducted in an entirely irregular way. 
The hands as a whole are also moved, and the arms, toes and feet 
may be affected. The condition is usually due to some lesion of 
the brain which has caused hemiplegia, and is especially common 
in childhood. It is occasionally congenital (so called), and is 
then due to some injury of the brain during birth. It is more 
usually associated with hemiplegia, in which condition there is 
first of all complete voluntary immobility of the parts affected: 
but later, as there is a return of a certain amount of power over 
the limbs affected, the slow rhythmic movements of athetosis 
are first noticed. This never develops, however, where there is 
no recovery of voluntary power. Its distribution is thus nearly 
always hemiplegic, and it is often associated with more or less 
mental impairment. The movements may or may not continue 
during sleep. They cannot be arrested for more than a moment 
by will power, and are aggravated by voluntary movements. 
The prognosis is unsatisfactory, as the condition usually con- 
tinues unchanged for years, though improvement occasionally 
occurs in slight cases, or even complete recovery. 

ATHIAS, JOSEPH (d. 1700), Jewish rabbi and printer, was 
born in Spain and settled in Amsterdam. His editions of the 
Hebrew Bible (1661, 1667) are noted for beauty of execution 
and the general correctness of the text. He also printed a 
Judaeo-German edition of the Bible in 1679, a year after the 
appearance of the edition by Uri Phoebus. 

ATHLETE (Gr. adXrjTris; Lat. athleta), in Greek and Roman 
antiquities, one who contended for a prize (S.6\ov) in the games; 
now a general term for any one excelling in physical strength. 
Originally denoting one who took part in musical, equestrian, 
gymnastic, or any other competitions, the name became re- 
stricted to the competitors in gymnastic contests, and, later, 
to the class of professional athletes. Whereas in earlier times 
competitors, who were often persons of good birth and position, 
entered the lists for glory, without any idea of material gain, 
the professional class, which arose as early as the 5 th century 
B.C., was chiefly recruited from the lower orders, with whom the 
better classes were unwilling to associate, and took up athletics 
entirely as a means of livelihood. Ancient philosophers, moralists 
and physicians were almost unanimous in condemning the pro- 
fession of athletics as injurious not only to the mind but also to 
the body. The attack made upon it by Euripides in the fragment 



of the Autolycus is well known. The training for the contests 
was very rigorous. The matter of diet was of great importance; 
this was prescribed by the aleiptes, whose duty it also was to 
anoint the athlete's body. At one time the principal food 
consisted of fresh cheese, dried figs and wheaten bread. After- 
wards meat was introduced, generally beef, or pork; but the 
bread and meat were taken separately, the former at breakfast, 
the latter at dinner. Except in wine, the quantity was unlimited, 
and the capacity of some of the heavy-weights must have been, 
if such stories as those about Milo are true, enormous. In 
addition to the ordinary gymnastic exercises of the palaestra, 
the athletes were instructed in carrying heavy loads, lifting 
weights, bending iron rods, striking at a suspended leather sack 
filled with sand or flour, taming bulls, &c. Boxers had to practise 
delving the ground, to strengthen their upper limbs. The com- 
petitions open to athletes were running, leaping, throwing the 
discus, wrestling, boxing and the pancratium, or combination 
of boxing and wrestling. Victory in this last was the highest 
achievement of an athlete, and was reserved only for men of 
extraordinary strength. The competitors were naked, having 
their bodies salved with oil. Boxers wore the caestus, a strap of 
leather round the wrists and forearms, with a piece of metal 
in the fist, which was sometimes employed with great barbarity. 
An athlete could begin his career as a boy in the contests set 
apart for boys. He could appear again as a youth against his 
equals, and though always unsuccessful, could go on competing 
till the age of thirty-five, when he was debarred, it being assumed 
that after this period of life he could not improve. The most 
celebrated of the Greek athletes whose names have been handed 
down are Milo of Crotona, Hipposthenes, Polydamas, Promachus 
and Glaucus. Cyrene, famous in the time of Pindar for its 
athletes, appears to have still maintained its reputation to at 
least the time of Alexander the Great; for in the British Museum 
are to be seen six prize vases carried off from the games at 
Athens by natives of that district. These vases, found in the 
tombs, probably, of the winners, are made of clay, and painted 
on one side with a representation of the contest in which they 
were won, and on the other side with a figure of Pallas Athena, 
with an inscription telling where they were gained, and in some 
cases adding the name of the eponymous magistrate of Athens, 
from which the exact year can be determined. 

Amongst the Romans athletic contests had no doubt taken 
place from the earliest times, but according to Livy (xxxix. 22) 
professional Greek athletes were first introduced at Rome by 
M. Fulvius Nobilior in 186 B.C. After the institution of the 
Actian games by Augustus, their popularity increased, until 
they finally supplanted the gladiators. In the time of the 
empire, gilds or unions of athletes were formed, each with a 
temple, treasury and exercise-ground of its own. The profession, 
although it ranked above that of a gladiator or an actor, was 
looked upon as derogatory to the dignity of a Roman, and it is 
a rare thing to find a Roman name amongst the athletes on in- 
scriptions. The system was entirely, and the athletes themselves 
nearly always, Greek. (See also Games, Classical.) 

Krause, Gymnastik und Agonistik der Hellenen (1841) ; Friedlander, 
Sitlengeschichte Roms, ii.; Reisch, in Pauly-Wissowa, Realencyc. 

ATHLETIC SPORTS. Various sports were cultivated many 
hundred years before the Christian era by the Egyptians and 
several Asiatic races, from whom the early Greeks undoubtedly 
adopted the elements of their athletic exercises (see Athlete), 
which reached their highest development in the Olympic games, 
and other periodical meetings of the kind (see Games, Classical). 
The original Celtic inhabitants of Great Britain were an athletic 
race, and the earliest monuments of Teutonic literature abound 
in records of athletic prowess. After the Norman conquest of 
England the nobles devoted themselves to the chase and to the 
joust, while the people had their games of ball, running at the 
quintain, fencing with club and buckler, wrestling- and other 
pastimes on green and river. The chroniclers of the succeeding 
centuries are for the most part silent concerning the sports of 
the folk, except such as were regarded as a training for war, as 
archery, while they love to record the prowess of the kings and 



ATHLETIC SPORTS 



847 



their courts. Thus it is told of Henry V. that he " was so swift 
a runner that he and two of his lords, without bow or other engine, 
would take a wild buck in a large park." Several romances of 
the middle ages, quoted by Strutt {Sports and Pastimes of the 
People of England), chronicle the fact that young men of good 
family were taught to run, leap, wrestle and joust. In spite of 
the general silence of the historians concerning the sports of the 
people, it is evident that they were indulged in very largely, 
since several English sovereigns found it necessary to curtail, 
and even prohibit, certain popular pastimes, on the ground that 
they seduced the people from the practice of archery. Thus 
Edward III. prohibited weight-putting by statute. Nevertheless 
a variety of this exercise, "casting of the barre," continued to 
be a popular pastime, and was afterwards one of the favourite 
sports of Henry VIII., who attained great proficiency at it. 
The prowess of the same monarch at throwing the hammer is a 
matter of history, and his reign seems to have been at a time of 
general athletic revival. We even find his secretary, Richard 
Pace, advising the sons of noblemen to practise their sports and 
" leave study and learning to the children of meaner people," 
and Sir William Forest, in his Poesye of Princeelye Practice, thus 
admonishes his high-born readers: — 

" In featis of maistries bestowe some diligence. 
Too ryde, runne, lepe, or caste by violence 
Stone, barre or plummett, or such other thinge, 
It not refuseth any prince or kynge." 

Mr Montague Shearman, to whose volume on Athletics in the 
Badminton series the reader is referred, notes that Sir Thomas 
Elyot, who wrote at about the same period, deprecated too much 
study and flogging for schoolboys, saying: "A discrete master 
may with as much or more ease both to himself and his scholler 
lead him to play at tennis or shoote." Elyot recommends the 
perusal of Galen's De sanitate tuenda, and suggests as suitable 
athletic exercises within doors " deambulations, labouryng with 
poyses made of ledde, lifting and throwing the heavy stone or 
barre, playing at tennis," and dwells upon " rennyng " as a 
"good exercise and laudable solace." It is probable that the 
disciples of the " new learning," who had become prominent 
in Sir Thomas's time, endeavoured to combat the influence of 
athletic exercises, their point of view being exemplified by the 
dictum of Roger Ascham, who, in his Toxophilus, declares that 
" running, leaping and quoiting be too vile for scholars." 

In the 16th century the great football match played annually 
at Chester was abolished in favour of a series of foot-races, which 
took place in the presence of the mayor. A list of the common 
sports of that time is contained in some verses by Randel Holme, 
a minstrel of the North country, and makes mention of throwing 
the sledge, jumping, " wrastling," stool-ball (cricket), running, 
pitching the bar, shooting, playing loggets, " nine holes or ten 
pins." " football by the shinnes," leap-frog, morris, shove-groat, 
leaping the bonfire, stow-ball (golf), and many other outdoor 
and indoor sports, some of them now obsolete. Shakespeare and 
the other Elizabethan poets abound in allusions to sport, which 
formed an important feature in school life and at every fair. 
The Stuart kings were warm encouragers of sport, the Basilikon 
Boron of James I., written for his son, containing a recom- 
mendation to the young prince to practise " running, leaping, 
wrestling, fencing, dancing, and playing at the caitch, or tennise, 
archerie, palle-malle, and such like other fair and pleasant field 
games." 

An extraordinary variety of sports has been popular in Great 
Britain with high and low for the past five centuries, no other 
country comparing with it in this respect. Nor have Ireland 
and Scotland lagged behind England in athletic prowess. Indeed, 
so far as history and legend record, Ireland boasts of by far the 
most ancient organized sports known, the Tailtin Games, or 
Lugnasad, traditionally established by Lugaid of the Long Arm, 
one of the gods of Dia and Ana, in honour of his foster-mother 
Tailti, some three thousand years ago. For many centuries these 
games, and others like them, were kept up in Ireland, and though 
the almost constant wars which harried the country finally 
destroyed their organization, yet the Irish have always been, 



and still are, a very important factor in British athletics, as well 
as in America and the colonies. 

The Scottish people have, like the Irish, ever delighted in feats 
of strength and skill, especially the Celtic highlanders, the 
character of whose country and mode of life have, however, 
prevented organized athletics from attaining the same prominence 
as in England. Nevertheless, the celebrated Highland games 
held at Braemar, Bridge of Allan, Luss, Aboyne and other places 
have served to bring into prominence many athletes of the first 
class, although the records, on account of the roughness of the 
grounds, have not generally vied with those made farther south. 

The Briton does not lose his love of sport upon leaving his 
native soil, and the development of athletics in the United 
States and the British colonies has kept step with that of the 
mother-land. Upon the continent of Europe sports have 
occupied a more or less prominent place in the life of the nations, 
but their development has been but an echo of that in Great 
Britain. A great advance, however, has been made since the 
institution of the modern Olympic games. 

About the year 1812 the Royal Military College at Sandhurst 
inaugurated regular athletic sports, but the example was not 
followed until about 1840, when Rugby, Eton, Harrow, Shrews- 
bury and the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich came to 
the front, the " Crick Run " at Rugby having been started in 
1837. At the two great English universities there were no 
organized sports of any kind until 1850, when Exeter College, 
Oxford, held a meeting; this example has been followed, one 
after the other, by the other colleges of both institutions. The 
first contest between Oxford and Cambridge occurred at Oxford 
in 1864, the programme consisting of eight events, of which four 
were won by each side. The same year saw the first contest of 
the Civil Servants, still an annual event. 

In 1866 the Amateur Athletic Club was formed in London for 
" gentlemen amateurs," most of its members being old university 
men. Its first championship meeting, held in that year, was the 
beginning of a series afterwards continued to the present day by 
the Amateur Athletic Association, founded in 1880, which has 
jurisdiction over British athletic sports. The most important 
individual English athletic organization is the London Athletic 
Club, which antedated the Amateur Athletic Club, and whose 
meetings have always been the most important events except 
the championships. 

In America a revival of interest in athletic sports took place 
about the year 1870. Ten years later was formed the National 
Association of Amateur Athletes of America, which, in 1888, 
became the Amateur Athletic Union. This body controls 
athletics throughout the United States, and is allied with the 
Canadian Amateur Athletic Association. It is supreme in 
matters of amateur status, records and licensing of meetings, 
and has control over the following branches of sport: basket- 
ball, billiards, boxing, fencing (in connexion with the Amateur 
Fencers' League of America), gymnastics, hand-ball (fives), 
running, jumping, walking, weight-putting (hammer, shot, 
discus, weights) , hurdle-racing, lacrosse, pole-vaulting, swimming, 
tugs-of-war and wrestling. The Amateur Athletic Union has 
eight sectional groups, and is allied with the Intercollegiate 
Association of Amateur Athletes of America (founded 1876) and 
the Western Intercollegiate Association. The first American 
intercollegiate athletic meeting took place at Saratoga in 1873, 
only three universities competing, though the next year there 
were eight and in 1875 thirteen. Professional athletes in America 
are confined almost entirely to base-ball, boxing, bicycling, 
wrestling and physical training. 

The Canadian athletic championships are held independently 
of the American. Annual championship meetings are also held 
in South Africa, New Zealand and the different states of Australia. 
For the Australasian championships New Zealand joins with 
Australia. 

The organization of university sports in America differs from 
that at Oxford and Cambridge, where there is no official control 
on the part of the university authorities, and where a man is 
eligible to represent his college or university while in residence. 



848 



ATHLETIC SPORTS 



In nearly all American universities and colleges athletic and other 
sports are under the general control of faculty committees, to 
which the undergraduate athletic committees are subordinate, 
and which have the power to forbid the participation of any 
student who has not attained a certain standard of scholarship. 
For some years prior to 1906 no student of an American university 
was allowed to represent his university in any sport for longer 
than four years. Early in that year, however, many of the 
most important institutions, including Harvard, Yale, Princeton 
and Pennsylvania, entered upon a new agreement, that only 
students who have been in residence one year should play in 
'varsity teams in any branch of athletics and that no student 
should play longer than three years. This, together with many 
other reformatory changes, was directly due to a widespread 
outcry against the growing roughness of play exhibited in 
American football, basket-ball, hockey and other sports, the too 
evident desire to win at all hazards, the extraordinary luxury of 
the training equipment, and the enormous gate-receipts of many 
of the large institutions — the Yale Athletic Association held a 
surplus of about $100,000 (£20,000) in December 1005, after 
deducting immense amounts for expenses. The new rule against 
the participation of freshmen in 'varsity sports was to discourage 
the practice of offering material advantages of different kinds to 
promising athletes, generally those at preparatory schools, to 
induce them to become students at certain universities. 

At the present day athletic sports are usually understood to 
consist of those events recognized in the championship pro- 
grammes of the different countries. Those in the competitions 
between Oxford and Cambridge are the 100 yards, 440 yards, 
880 yards, i-mile and 3-mile runs; 120 yards hurdle-race; 
high and long jumps; throwing the hammer; and putting the 
weight (shot). To the above list the English A. A. A. adds the 
4-mile and 10-mile runs; the 2-mile and 7-mile walking races; 
the 2-mile steeplechase; and the pole-vault. The American 
intercollegiate programme is identical with that of the Oxford- 
Cambridge meeting, except that a 2-mile run takes the place of 
the 3-mile, and the pole-vault is added. The American A.A.U. 
programme includes the 100 yards, 220 yards, 440 yards, 880 
yards, i-mile and 5-mile runs; 120 yards high-hurdle race; 
220 yards low-hurdle race; high and broad (long) jumps; throw- 
ing the hammer; throwing 56-lb weight; putting 16-ib shot; 
throwing the discus; and pole-vault. Of these the running 
contests are called " track athletics," and the rest " field " 
events. 

International athletic contests of any importance have, with 
the exception of the modern Olympic games, invariably taken 
place between Britons, Americans and Canadians, the conti- 
nental European countries having as yet produced few track or 
field athletes of the first class, although the interest in sports 
in general has greatly increased in Europe during the last ten 
years. In 1844 George Seward, an American professional runner, 
visited England and competed with success against the best 
athletes there; and in 1863 Louis Bennett, called "Deerfoot," a 
full-blooded Seneca Indian, repeated Seward's triumphs,establish- 
ing running records up to 12 miles. In 1878 the Canadian, 
C. C. Mclvor, champion sprinter of America, went to England, 
but failed to beat his British professional rivals. In 1881 
L. E. Myers of New York and E. E. Merrill of Boston competed 
successfully in England, Myers winning every short-distance 
championship except the 100-yards, and Merrill all the walking 
championships save the 7-miles. The same year W. C. Davies 
of England won the 5-mile championship of America, but, like 
several other British runners who have had success in America, 
he competed under the colours of an American club. In 1882 the 
famous English runner, W. G. George, ran against Myers in 
America in races of 1 mile, f mile and 5 jnile, winning over the 
first two distances. In 1884 Myers again went to England and 
made new British records over 500, 600, 800 and 1000 yards, 
and world's records over 5 mile and 1200 yards. The next year 
he won both the British j-mile and j-mile championships. The 
same year a team of Irish athletes, among them W. J. M. Barry, 
won several Canadian championships. In 1888 a team of the 



Manhattan Athletic Club, New York, competed in England with 
fair success, and during the same season an Irish team from 
the Gaelic Athletic Association visited America without much 
success. In 1890 a team from the Salford Harriers was invited to 
America by the Manhattan Athletic Club, but the evidently 
commercial character of the enterprise caused its failure. One 
of the Harriers, E. W. Parry, won the American steeplechase 
championship. The next year saw another visit to Europe 
of the Manhattan athletes, who had fair success in England and 
won every event at Paris. In 1895 the London Athletic Club 
team competed in New York against the New York Athletic 
Club, but lost every one of the eleven events, several new records 
being established. During the previous summer (1894) occurred 
the first of the international matches between British and 
American universities which still retain their place as the most 
interesting athletic event. In that contest, which took place at 
Queen's Club, London, Oxford beat Yale by 55 to 3! events. 
The next summer Cambridge, as the champion English university, 
visited America and was beaten by Yale (3 to 8). In 1899 both 
British universities competed at Queen's Club against the com- 
bined athletes of Harvard and Yale, who were beaten by the odd 
event. The return match took place between the same uni- 
versities at New York in the summer of 1901, the Americans 
winning 6 to 3 events. In 1904 Harvard and Yale beat Oxford 
and Cambridge at Queen's Club by the same score. 

Outside Great Britain and America the most important 
athletic events are undoubtedly the revived Olympic games. 
They were instituted by delegates from the different nations who 
met in Paris on the 16th of June 1894, principally at the instiga- 
tion of Baron Pierre de Coubertin, the result being the formation 
of an International Olympic Games Committee with Baron de 
Coubertin at its head, which resolved that games should be held 
every fourth year in a different country. The first modern 
Olympiad took place at Athens, 6th to 12th April 1896, in the 
ancient stadium, which was rebuilt through the liberality of a 
Greek merchant and seated about 45 ,000 people. The programme 
of events included the usual field and track sports, gymnastics, 
wrestling, pole-climbing, lawn tennis, fencing, rifle and revolver 
shooting, weight-lifting, swimming, the Marathon race and 
bicycle racing. Among the contestants were representatives of 
nearly every European nation, besides Americans and Australians. 
Great Britain took little direct interest in the occasion and was 
inadequately represented, but the United States sent five men 
from Boston and four from Princeton University, who, though 
none of them held American championships, succeeded in 
winning every event for which they were entered. The Marathon 
race of 42 kilometres (26 miles), commemorative of the famous 
run of the Greek messenger to Athens with the news of the 
victory of Marathon, was won by a Greek peasant. The second 
Olympiad was held in Paris in June 1900. Again Great Britain 
was poorly represented, but American athletes won eighteen 
of the twenty-four championship events. The third Olympiad 
was held at St Louis in the summer of 1904 in connexion with 
the Louisiana Purchase Exposition, its success being due in 
great measure to James E. Sullivan, the physical director of the 
Exposition, and Caspar Whitney, the president of the American 
Olympic Games Committee. The games were much more 
numerous than at the previous Olympiads, including sports of 
all kinds, handicaps, inter-club competitions, and contests for 
aborigines. In the track and field competitions the American 
athletes won every championship except weight-throwing 
(56 lb) and lifting the bar. The sports of the savages, among 
whom were American Indians, Africans of several tribes, Moros, 
Patagonians, Syrians, Ainus and Filipinos, were disappointing; 
their efforts in throwing the javelin, shooting with bow and 
arrow, weight-lifting, running and jumping, proving to be 
feeble compared with those of white races. The Americanized 
Indians made the best showing. 

The Greeks, however, were not altogether satisfied with the 
cosmopolitan character of the revival of these celebrated games 
of their ancestors, and resolved to give the revival a more 
definitely Hellenic stamp by intercalating an additional series, 



ATHLONE— ATHOLL 



849 



to take place at Athens, in the middle of the quadrennial period. 
Their action was justified by the success which attended the 
first of this additional series at Athens in 1906. This success 
may have been partly due to the personal interest taken in the 
games by the king and royal family of Greece, and to the presence 
of King Edward VII., Queen Alexandra, and the prince and 
princess of Wales; but to whatever cause it should be assigned 
it was generally acknowledged that neither in France nor in 
America had the games acquired the same prestige as those 
held on the classical soil of Greece. In 1906 the governments 
of Germany, France and the United States made considerable 
grants of money to defray the expenses of the competitors 
from those countries. These games aroused much more interest 
in England than the earlier ones in the series, but though upwards 
of fifty British competitors took part in the contests, they were 
by no means representative in all cases of the best British 
athletics. The American representatives were slightly less 
numerous, but they were more successful. It was noteworthy 
that no British or Americans took part in the rowing races in the 
Bay of Phalerum, nor in the tennis, football or shooting com- 
petitions. The Marathon race, by far the most important 
event in the games, was won in" 1906 by a British athlete, 
M. D. Sherring, a Canadian by birth. The Americans won a total 
of 75 p-izes, the British 39, and the Swedes and Greeks each 28. 

The games of the 4th Olympiad (1908) were held in London 
in connexion with the Franco-British Exhibition of that year. 
An immense sensation was caused by the finish for the Marathon 
race from Windsor Castle to the stadium in the Exhibition 
grounds in London. The first competitor to arrive was the 
Italian, Dorando Pietri, whose condition of physical collapse 
was such that, appearing to be on the point of death, he had to 
be assisted over the last few yards of the course. He was there- 
fore disqualified, and J. Hayes, an American, was adjudged the 
winner; a special prize was presented to the Italian by Queen 
Alexandra. In the whole series of contests the United Kingdom 
made 38 wins, the Americans 22, and the Swedes 7. In the 
Olympic games proper, British athletes, including two wins by 
colonials from Canada and Africa, scored 25 successes, and the 
Americans 18. In the track events 8 wins fell to the British, 
including two Colonials, and 6 to American athletes; but the 
latter gained complete supremacy in the field events, of which 
they won 9, while British competitors secured only two of minor 
importance. 

For records, &c, see the annual Sporting and Athletic Register; for 
the Olympic games see Theodore Andrea Cook's volume, published 
in connexion with the Olympiad of 1908. 

ATHLONE, a market-town of Co. Westmeath, Ireland, on 
both banks of the Shannon. Pop. of urban district (1901) 
6617. The urban district, under the Local Government (Ireland) 
Act 1900, is wholly in county Westmeath, but the same area is 
divided by the Shannon between the parliamentary divisions of 
South Westmeath and South Roscommon. Athlone is 78 m. 
W. from Dublin by the Midland Great Western railway, and 
is also served by a branch from Portarlington of the Great 
Southern & Western line, providing an alternative and some- 
what longer route from the capital. The main line of the 
former company continues W. to Galway, and a branch 
N.W. serves counties Roscommon and Mayo. The Shannon 
divides the town into two portions, known as the Leinster side 
(east), and the Connaught side (west), which are connected by a 
handsome bridge opened in 1844. There is a swivel railway 
bridge. The rapids of the Shannon at this point are obviated 
by means of a lock communication with a basin, which renders 
the navigation of the river practicable above the town. The 
steamers of the Shannon Development Company ply on the 
river, and some trade by water is carried on with Limerick, 
and with Dublin by the river and the Grand and Royal canals. 
Athlone is an important agricultural centre, and there are 
woollen factories. The salmon fishing both provides sport and 
is a source of commercial wealth. There are two parish churches, 
St Mary and St Peter, both erected early in the 19th century, 
of which the first has near it an isolated church tower of earlier 



date. There are three Roman Catholic chapels, a court-house 
and other public offices. Early remains include portions of the 
castle, of the town walls (1576), of the abbey of St Peter and of a 
Franciscan foundation. On several islands of the picturesque 
Lough Ree, to the north, are ecclesiastical and other remains. 

The military importance of Athlone dates from the erection 
of the castle and of a bridge over the river by John de Grey, 
bishop of Norwich and justiciar of Ireland, in 12 10. It became 
the seat of the presidency of Connaught under Elizabeth, and 
withstood a siege by the insurgents in 164 1. In the war of 
1688 the possession of Athlone was considered of the greatest 
importance, and it consequently sustained two sieges, the first 
by William III. in person, which failed, and the second by 
General Godart van Ginkel (q.v.), who, on the 30th of June 
1 69 1, in the face of the Irish, forded the river and took possession 
of the town, with the loss of only fifty men. Ginkel was sub- 
sequently created earl of Athlone, and his descendants held the 
title till it became extinct in 1844. In 1797 the town was 
strongly fortified on the Roscommon side, the works covering 
15 acres and containing two magazines, an ordnance store, an 
armoury with 15,000 stands of arms and barracks for 1500 men. 
The works are now dismantled. Athlone was incorporated by 
James I., and returned two members to the Irish parliament, 
and one member to the imperial parliament till 1885. 

ATHOL, a township of Worcester county, northern Massa- 
chusetts, U.S.A., having an area of 35 sq. m. Pop. (1900) 7061, 
of whom 986 were foreign-born; (1910 U.S. census) 8536. 
Its surface is irregular and hilly. The village of Athol is on 
Miller's river, and is served by the Boston & Albany and the 
Boston & Maine railways. The streams of the township furnish 
good water-power, and manufactures of varied character are 
its leading interests. Athol was first settled in 1735, and was 
incorporated as a township in 1762. It was named by its 
largest landowner Col. James Murray, after the ancestral home 
of the Murrays, dukes of Atholl. 

See L. B. Caswell, Athol, Mass., Past and Present (Athol, 1899). 

ATHOLL, EARLS AND DUKES OF. The Stewart line of the 
Scottish earls of Atholl, which ended with the 5th Stewart earl 
in 1595, the earldom reverting to the crown, had originated 
with Sir John Stewart of Balveny (d. 1512), who was created 
earl of Atholl about 1457 (new charter 1481). The 5th earl's 
daughter, Dorothea, married William Murray, earl of Tulli- 
bardine (cr. 1606), who in 1626 resigned his earldom in favour 
of Sir Patrick Murray, on condition of the revival of the earldom 
of Atholl in his wife and her descendants. The earldom thus 
passed to the Murray line, and John Murray, their only son 
(d. 1642), was accordingly acknowledged as earl of Atholl (the 
1st of the Murrays) in 1629. 

John Stewart, 4th earl of Atholl, in the Stewart line (d. 1579), 
son of John, 3rd earl, and of Grizel, daughter of Sir John Rattray, 
succeeded his father in 1542. He supported the government 
of the queen dowager, and in 1560 was one of the three nobles 
who voted in parliament against the Reformation and the 
Confession of Faith, and declared their adherence to Roman 
Catholicism. Subsequently, however, he joined the league 
against Huntly, whom with Murray and Morton he defeated 
at Corrichie in October 1562, and he supported the projected 
marriage of Elizabeth with Arran. On the arrival of Mary from 
France in 1561 he was appointed one of the twelve privy coun- 
cillors, and on account of his religion obtained a greater share 
of the queen's favour than either Murray or Maitland. He was 
one of the principal supporters of the marriage with Darnley, 
became the leader of the Roman Catholic nobles, and with 
Lennox obtained the chief power in the government, successfully 
protecting Mary and Darnley from Murray's attempts to regain 
his ascendancy by force of arms. According to Knox he openly 
attended mass in the queen's chapel, and was especially trusted 
by Mary in her project of reinstating Roman Catholicism. The 
fortress of Tantallon was placed in his keeping, and in 1565 he 
was made lieutenant of the north of Scotland. He is described 
the same year by the French ambassador as " tres grand catho- 
lique hardi et vaillant et remuant, comme 1'on diet, mais de nul 



8 5 o 



ATHOLL 



jugement et experience." He had no share in the murders of 
Rizzio or Darnley, and after the latter crime in 1567, he joined 
the Protestant lords against Mary, appeared as one of the leaders 
against her at Carberry Hill, and afterwards approved of her im- 
prisonment at Lochleven Castle. In July he was present at the 
coronation of James, and was included in the council of regency 
on Mary's abdication. He, however, was not present at Langside 
in May 1568, and in July became once more a supporter of Mary, 
voting for her divorce from Bothwell (1569). In March 1570 he 
signed with other lords the joint letter to Elizabeth asking for 
the queen's intercession and supporting Mary's claims, and was 
present at the convention held at Linlithgow in April in opposi- 
tion to the assembly of the king's party at Edinburgh. In 1574 
he was proceeded against as a Roman Catholic and threatened 
with excommunication, subsequently holding a conference with 
the ministers and being allowed till midsummer to overcome 
his scruples. He had failed in 1 57 2 to prevent Morton's appoint- 
ment to the regency, but in 1578 he succeeded with the earl of 
Argyll in driving him from office. On the 24th of March James 
took the government into his own hands and dissolved the 
regency, and Atholl and Argyll, to the exclusion of Morton, 
were made members of the council, while on the 29th Atholl 
was appointed lord chancellor. Subsequently, on the 24th of 
May, Morton succeeded in getting into Stirling Castle and in 
regaining his guardianship of James. Atholl and Argyll, who 
were now corresponding with Spain in hopes of assistance from 
that quarter, then advanced to Stirling with a force of 7000 men, 
when a compromise was arranged, the three earls being all 
included in the government. While on his way from a banquet 
held on the 20th of April 1579 on the occasion of the reconcilia- 
tion, Atholl was seized with sudden illness, and died on the 25th, 
not without strong suspicions of poison. He was buried at St 
Giles's cathedral in Edinburgh. He married (1) Elizabeth, 
daughter of George Gordon, 4th earl of Huntly, by whom he had 
two daughters, and (2) Margaret, daughter of Malcolm Fleming, 
3rd Lord Fleming, by whom, besides three daughters, he had 
John, 5th earl of Atholl, at whose death in 1595 the earldom 
in default of male heirs reverted to the crown. 

John Murray, 1st earl of Atholl in the Murray line (see above) , 
died in 1642. On the outbreak of the civil war he called out the 
men of Atholl for the king, and was imprisoned by the marquess 
of Argyll in Stirling Castle in 1640. 

John Murray, 2nd earl and 1st marquess of Atholl (1631-1703), 
son of the 1st earl and of Jean, daughter of Sir Duncan Campbell 
of Glenorchy, was born on the 2nd of May 1631. In 1650 he 
joined in the unsuccessful attempt to liberate Charles II. from 
the Covenanters, and in 1653 was the chief supporter of Glen- 
cairn's rising, but was obliged to surrender with his two regiments 
to Monk on the 2nd of September 1654. At the restoration 
Atholl was made a privy councillor for Scotland and sheriff of 
Fife, in 1661 lord justice-general of Scotland, in 1667 a commis- 
sioner for keeping the peace in the western Highlands, in 1670 
colonel of the king's horseguards, in 1671 a commissioner of the 
exchequer, and in 1672 keeper of the privy seal in Scotland and 
an extraordinary lord of session. In 1670 he became earl of 
Tullibardine by the death of his cousin James, 4th earl, and on 
the 7th of February 1676 he was created marquess of Atholl, 
earl of Tullibardine, viscount of Balquhidder, Lord Murray, 
Balvenie and Gask. He at first zealously supported Lauderdale's 
tyrannical policy, but after the raid of 1678, called the " Highland 
Host," in which Atholl was one of the chief leaders, he joined 
in the remonstrance to the king concerning the severities inflicted 
upon the Covenanters, and was deprived of his office of justice- 
general and passed over for the chancellorship in 1681. In 1679, 
however, he was present at the battle of Bothwell Brig; in July 
1680 he was made vice-admiral of Scotland, and in 168 1 president 
of parliament. In 1684 he was appointed lord-lieutenant of 
Argyll, and invaded the country, capturing the earl of Argyll 
after his return from abroad in June 1685 at Inchinnan. The 
excessive severities with which he was charged in this campaign 
were repudiated with some success by him after the Revolution. 1 
1 A. Lang, Hist, of Scotland, iii. 407. 



The same year he was reappointed lord privy seal, and in 1687 
was made a knight of the Thistle on the revival of the order. 
At the Revolution he wavered from one side to the other, showing 
no settled purpose but waiting upon the event, but finally in 
April 1689 wrote to William to declare his allegiance, and in May 
took part in the proclamation of William and Mary as king and 
queen at Edinburgh. But on the occasion of Dundee's insurrec- 
tion he retired to Bath to drink the waters, while the bulk of his 
followers joined Dundee and brought about in great measure 
the defeat of the government troops at Killiecrankie. He was 
then summoned from Bath to London and imprisoned during 
August. In 1690 he was implicated in the Montgomery plot and 
subsequently in further Jacobite intrigues. In June 1691 he 
received a pardon, and acted later for the government in the 
pacification of the Highlands. He died on the 6th of May 1703. 
He married Amelia, daughter of James Stanley, 7th earl of Derby 
(through whom the later dukes of Atholl acquired the sover- 
eignty of the Isle of Man), and had, besides one daughter, six 
sons, of whom John became 2nd marquess and 1st duke of Atholl; 
Charles was made 1st earl of Dunmore, and William married 
Margaret, daughter of Sir Robert Nairne, 1st Lord Nairne, 
becoming in her right 2nd Lord Nairne. 

JohnMtjrray, 2nd marquess and 1 st duke of Atholl ( 1 660-1 724), 
was born on the 24th of February 1660, and was styled during 
his father's lifetime Lord Murray, till 1696, when he was created 
earl of Tullibardine. He was a supporter of William and the 
Revolution in 1688, taking the oaths in September 1689, but was 
unable to prevent the majority of his clan, during his father's 
absence, from joining Dundee under the command of his brother 
James. In 1693 as one of the commissioners he showed great 
energy in the examination into the massacre of Glencoe and in 
bringing the crime home to its authors. In 1694 he obtained a 
regiment, in 1695 was made sheriff of Perth, in 1696 secretary 
of state, and from 1696 to 1698 was high commissioner. In the 
latter year, however, he threw up office and went into opposition. 
At the accession of Anne he was made a privy councillor, and in 
1703 lord privy seal for Scotland. The same year he succeeded 
his father as 2nd marquess of Atholl, and on the 30th of June he 
was created duke of Atholl, marquess of Tullibardine, earl of 
Strathtay and Strathardle, Viscount Balquhidder, Glenalmond 
and Glenlyon, and Lord Murray, Balvenie and Gask. In 1704 
he was made a knight of the Thistle. In 1 703-1 704 an unsuccess- 
ful attempt was made by Simon, Lord Lovat, who used the duke 
of Queensberry as a tool, to implicate him in a Jacobite plot 
against Queen Anne; but the intrigue was disclosed by Robert 
Ferguson, and Atholl sent a memorial to the queen on the 
subject, which resulted in Queensberry's downfall. But he fell 
nevertheless into suspicion, and was deprived of office in October 
1705, subsequently becoming a strong antagonist of the govern- 
ment, and of the Hanoverian succession. He vehemently opposed 
the Union during the years 1705-1707, and entered into a project 
for resisting by force and for holding Stirling Castle with the aid 
of the Cameronians, but nevertheless did not refuse a compensa- 
tion of £1000. According to Lockhart, he could raise 6000 of 
the best men in the kingdom for the Jacobites. On the occasion, 
however, of the invasion of 1708 he took no part, on the score of 
illness, and was placed under arrest at Blair Castle. On the 
downfall of the Whigs and the advent of the Tories to power, 
Atholl returned to office, was chosen a representative peer in 
the Lords in 1710 and 1713, in 1712 was an extraordinary lord 
of session, from 1713 to 1714 was once more keeper of the privy 
seal, and from 1712 to 17 14 was high commissioner. On the 
accession of George I. he was again dismissed from office, but at 
the rebellion of 1715, while three of his sons joined the Jacobites, 
he remained faithful to the government, whom he assisted in 
various ways, on the 4th of June 1717 apprehending Robert 
Macgregor (Rob Roy), who, however, succeeded in escaping. 
He died on the 14th of November 1724. He married (1) 
Catherine, daughter of William Douglas, 3rd duke of Hamilton, 
by whom, besides one daughter, he had six sons, of whom John 
was killed at Malplaquet in 1709, William was marquess of 
Tullibardine, and James succeeded his father as 2nd duke on 



ATHOLL— ATHOS 



851 



account of the share taken by his elder brother in the rebellion; 
and (2) Mary, daughter of William, Lord Ross, by whom he had 
three sons and several daughters. 

The Atholl Chronicles have been privately printed by the 7th duke 
of Atholl (b. 1840). See also S. Cowan, Three Celtic Earldoms (1909). 

ATHOLL, or Athole, a district in the north of Perthshire, 
Scotland, covering an area of about 450 sq. m. It is bounded 
on the N. by Badenoch, on the N.E. by Braemar, on the E. by 
Forfarshire, on the S. by Breadalbane, on the W. and N.W. 
by Lochaber. The Highland railway bisects it diagonally from 
Dunkeld to the borders of Inverness-shire. It is traversed by 
the Grampian mountains and watered by the Tay, Tummel, 
Garry, Tilt, Bruar and other streams. Glen Garry and Glen 
Tilt are the chief glens, and Loch Rannoch and Loch Tummel 
the principal lakes. The population mainly centres around 
Dunkeld, Pitlochry and Blair Atholl. The only cultivable soil 
occurs in the valleys of the large rivers, but the deer-forest and 
the shootings on moor and mountain are among the most 
extensive in Scotland. It is said to have been named Athfotla 
(Atholl) after Fotla, son of the Pictish king Cruithne, and was 
under the rule of a Celtic mormaer (thane or earl) until the 
union of the Picts and Scots under Kenneth Macalpine in 843. 
The duke of Atholl's seats are Blair Castle and Dunkeld House. 
What is called Atholl brose is a compound, in equal parts, of 
whisky and honey (or oatmeal), which was first commonly used 
in the district for hoarseness and sore throat. 

ATHOS (Gr. "A710J' "Opos; Turk. Aineros; Ital. Monte Santo), 
the most eastern of the three peninsular promontories which 
extend, like the prongs of a trident, southwards from the 
coast of Macedonia (European Turkey) into the Aegean Sea; 
Before the 19th century the name Athos was usually confined 
to the terminal peak of the promontory, which was itself known 
by its ancient name, Acte. The peak rises like' a pyramid, with 
a steep summit of white marble, to a height of 6350 ft., and can 
be seen at sunset from the plain of Troy on the east, and the 
slopes of Olympus on the west. On the isthmus are distinct 
traces of the canal cut by Xerxes before his invasion of Greece 
in 480 B.C. The peninsula is remarkable for the beauty of its 
scenery, and derives a peculiar interest from its unique group of 
monastic communities with their medieval customs and institu- 
tions, their treasures of Byzantine art and rich collections of 
documents. It is about 40 m. in length, with a breadth varying 
from 4 to 7 m. ; its whole area belongs to the various monasteries. 
It was inhabited in the earliest times by a mixed Greek and 
Thracian population; of its five cities mentioned by Herodotus 
few traces remain; some inscriptions discovered on the sites 
were published by W. M. Leake (Travels in N. Greece, 1835, 
Hi. 140) and Kinch. The legends of the monks attribute the 
first religious settlements to the age of Constantine (274-337), 
but the hermitages are first mentioned in historical documents 
of the gth century. It is conjectured that the mountain was at 
an earlier period the abode of anchorites, whose numbers were 
increased by fugitives from the iconoclastic persecutions (726- 
842). The " coenobian " rule to which many of the monasteries 
still adhere was established by St Athanasius, the founder of the 
great monastery of Laura, in 969. Under a constitution approved 
by the emperor Constantine Monomachos in 1045, women and 
female animals were excluded from the holy mountain. In 
1060 the community was withdrawn from the authority of the 
patriarch of Constantinople, and a monastic republic was 
practically constituted. The taking of Constantinople by the 
Latins in 1204 brought persecution and pillage on the monks; 
this reminded them of earlier Saracenic invasions, and led them 
to appeal for protection to Pope Innocent III., who gave them 
a favourable reply. Under the Palaeologi (1260-1453) they 
recovered their prosperity, and were enriched by gifts from 
various sources. In the 14th century the peninsula became the 
chosen retreat of several of the emperors, and the monasteries 
were thrown into commotion by the famous dispute over the 
mystical Hesychasts. 

Owing to the timely submission of the monks to the Turks 
after the capture of Salonica (1430), their privileges were respected 



by successive sultans: a tribute is paid to the Turkish govern- 
ment, which is represented by a resident kaimakam, and the 
community is allowed to maintain a small police force. Under 
the present constitution, which dates from 1783, the general 
affairs of the commonwealth are entrusted to an assembly 
(crvva&s) of twenty members, one from each monastery; a 
committee of four members, chosen in turn, styled epistatae 
( £jtwt&t<m) , forms the executive. The president of the committee 
(o irpGiTos) is also the president of the assembly, which holds its 
sittings in the village of Karyes, the seat of government since 
the 10th century. The twenty monasteries, which all belong 
to the order of St Basil, are: Laura (^ AaCpa), founded in 963; 
Vatopedi (BaTovkdiov) , said to have been founded by the 
emperor Theodosius; Rossikon CPcjio-gikov), the Russian 
monastery of St Panteleimon; Chiliandari {XCKiavrdpiov: 
supposed to be derived from xiXioi av8pes or xtXia Xeofrdpia), 
founded by the Servian prince Stephen Nemanya (1159-1195); 
Iveron(i^ jxovi) t€iv 'Ifiripuv), founded by Iberians, or Georgians; 
Esphigmenu (tov 'Etr^ty pkvov: the name is derived from the con- 
fined situation of the monastery); Kutlumush (KovrXovfiovarj); 
Pandocratoros (tov UavTOKparopos) ; Philotheu ($iXo0£ou) ; 
Caracallu (tov Kapa/cdXXou) ; St Paul (rod ayiov ncu>X<w); 
St Denis (tov ayiov Aiovvcriov) ; St Gregory (tov ayiov 
Tpriyopiov); Simopetra (ZifioireTpa) ; Xeropotamu (tov 
SrjpoiroT&pov); St Xenophon (tov ayiov Sevo<j>SivTos); Dochiariu 
(Aox«<xpeiou); Constamonitu (KuvaTa/joviTov) ; Zographu 
(tov Zcoypd$oi>); and Stavronikitu (tov Sraupow/ctTou, the last 
built, founded in 1545). The "coenobian "monasteries (koivo- 
/3ia), each under the rule of an abbot (fiyov/ievos), are subjected 
to severe discipline; the brethren are clothed alike, take their 
meals (usually limited to bread and vegetables) in the refectory, 
and possess no private property. In the " idiorrhythmic " 
monasteries (ihvbppvB /ia) , which are governed by two or three 
annually elected wardens (IxiTpajroi), a less stringent rule 
prevails, and the monks are allowed to supplement the fare of 
the monastery from their private incomes. Dependent on the 
several monasteries are twelve sketae (o'Krjrai} or monastic 
settlements, some of considerable size, in which a still more 
ascetic mode of life prevails: there are, in addition, several 
farms (ixeroyia), and many hundred sanctuaries with adjoining 
habitations (xeXXta) and hermitages (aaicriTripia) . The monas- 
teries, with the exception of Rossikon (St Panteleimon) and the 
Serbo-Bulgarian Chiliandari and Zographu, are occupied ex- 
clusively by Greek monks. The large skete of St Andrew and 
some others belong to the Russians; there are also Rumanian 
and Georgian sketae. The great monastery of Rossikon, which 
is said to number about 3000 inmates, has been under a Russian 
abbot since 1875; it is regarded as one of the principal centres 
of the Russian politico-religious propaganda in the Levant. 
The tasteless style of its modern buildings is out of harmony with 
the quaint beauty of the other monasteries. Furnished with 
ample means, the Russian monks neglect no opportunity of 
adding to their possessions on the holy mountain; their encroach- 
ments are resisted by the Greek monks, whose wealth, however, 
was much diminished by the secularization of their estates in 
Rumania(i864). The population of the holy mountain numbers 
from 6000 to 7000; about 3000 are monks (/caXoyepot), the 
remainder being lay brothers (koct /uko'i.) . The monasteries, 
which are all fortified, generally consist of large quadrangles 
enclosing churches; standing amid rich foliage, they present a 
wonderfully picturesque appearance, especially when viewed 
from the sea. Their inmates, when not engaged in religious 
services, occupy themselves with husbandry, fishing and 
various handicrafts; the standard of intellectual culture is not 
high. A large academy, founded by the monks of Vatopedi in 
1749, for a time attracted students from all parts of the East, 
but eventually proved a failure, and is now in ruins. The 
muniment rooms of the monasteries contain a marvellous series 
of documents, including chrysobulls of various emperors and 
princes, sigilla of the patriarchs, typica, irades and other 
documents, the study of which will throw an important light 
on the political and ecclesiastical history and social life of the 



8 5 2 



ATHY— ATKINSON 



East from the middle of the ioth century. Up to comparatively 
recent times a priceless collection of classical manuscripts was 
preserved in the libraries; many of them were destroyed during 
the War of Greek Independence (1821-1829) by the Turks, who 
employed the parchments for the manufacture of cartridges; 
others fell a prey to the neglect or vandalism of the monks, who, 
it is said, used the material as bait in fishing; others have been 
sold to visitors, and a considerable number have been removed 
to Moscow and Paris. The library of Simopetra was destroyed 
by fire in 1891, and that of St Paul in 1905. There is now little 
hope of any important discovery of classical manuscripts. The 
codices remaining in the libraries are for the most part theological 
and ecclesiastical works. Of the Greek manuscripts, numbering 
about 11,000, 6618 have been catalogued by Professor Spyridion 
Lambros of Athens; his work, however, does not include the 
MSS. in some of the sketae, or those in the libraries of Laura and 
Vatopedi, of which catalogues (hitherto unpublished) have been 
prepared by resident monks. The canonic MSS. only of Vatopedi 
and Laura have been catalogued by Benessevich in the supple- 
ment to vol. ix. of the Bizantiyskiy Vremennik (St Petersburg, 
1904). The Slavonic and Georgian MSS. have not been cata- 
logued. Apart from the illuminated MSS., the mural paintings, 
the mosaics, and the goldsmith's work of Mount Athos are of 
infinite interest to the student of Byzantine art. The frescoes 
in general date from the 15th or 16th century: some are attri- 
buted by the monks to Panselinos, " the Raphael of Byzantine 
painting," who apparently flourished in the time of the Palaeologi. 
Most of them have been indifferently restored by local artists, 
who follow mechanically a kind of hieratic tradition, the principles 
of which are embodied in a work of iconography by the monk 
Dionysius, said to have been a pupil of Panselinos. The same 
spirit of conservatism is manifest in the architecture of the 
churches, which are all of the medieval Byzantine type. Some 
of the monasteries were seriously damaged by an earthquake 
in 1905. 

Authorities. — R. N. C. Curzon, Visits to Monasteries in the 
Levant (London, 1849); J. P. Fallmerayer, Fragmenta aus dem 
Orient (Stuttgart and Tubingen, 1845); V, Langlois, Le Mont Athos 
et ses monasteres, with a complete bibliography (Paris, 1867); 
Duchesne and Bayet, Memoire sur une mission en Macedoine et au 
Mont Athos (Paris, 1876) ; Texier and Pullan, Byzantine Architecture 
(London, 1864); H. Brockhaus, Die Kunst in den Athosklbstern 
(Leipzig, 1891); A. Riley, Athos, or the Mountain of the Monks 
(London, 1887); S. Lambros, Catalogue of the Greek Manuscripts 
on Mount Athos (2 vols., Cambridge, 1895 and 1900) ; M. I. Gedeon, 
o "A0ms (Constantinople, 1885); P. Meyer, " Beitrage zur Kennt- 
niss der neueren Geschichte und des gegenwartigen Zustandes der 
Athoskloster," in Zeitschrift filr Kirchengeschichte, 1 890 ; Die Hauptur- 
kundenfilr die Geschichte der Athoskloster (Leipzig, 1894) ; G. Millet, 
J. Pargoire and L. Petit, Recueil des inscriptions chretiennes de 
V Athos (Paris, 1904) ; H. Gelzer, Vom Heiligen Berge und aus 
Makedonien (Leipzig, 1904); K. Vlachu (Blachos), 'H Xtpabv-qaot rov 
'Ayiov'Opovs (Athens, 1903); G. Smurnakes, To "Aytop "Opos 'Apxtuo- 
XoTia opous 'A0u, (Athens, 1904). (J. D. B.) 

ATHY (pronounced Athy), a market- town of Co. Kildare, 
Ireland, in the south parliamentary division, 45 m. S.W. of 
Dublin on a branch of the Great Southern & Western railway. 
Pop. of urban district (1901) 3599. It is intersected by the 
river Barrow, which is here crossed by a bridge of five arches. 
The crossing of the river here was guarded and disputed from 
the earliest times, and', the name of the town is derived from 
a king of Munster killed here in the 2nd century. There are 
picturesque remains of Woodstock Castle of the 12th or 13th 
century, and White Castle built in 1506, and rebuilt in 1575 by 
a member of the family whose name it bears, and still occupied. 
Both were erected to defend the ford of the Barrow. There are 
also an old town gate, and an ancient cemetery with slight 
monastic remains. Previous to the Union Athy returned two 
members to the Irish parliament. The trade, chiefly in grain, 
is aided by excellent water communication, by a branch of the 
Grand Canal to Dublin, and by the river Barrow, navigable 
from here to Waterford harbour. 

ATl'NA, the name of three ancient towns of Italy. 

1. A town (mod. Atena) of Lucania, upon the Via Popillia, 
7 m. N. of Tegianum, towards which an ancient road leads, in 



the valley of the river now known as Diano. Its ancient import- 
ance is vouched for by its walls of rough cyclopean work, which 
may have had a total extent of some 2 m. (see G. Patroni in 
Notizie degli scavi, 1897, 112; 1901, 498). The date of these 
walls has not as yet been ascertained, recent excavations, which 
led to the discovery of a few tombs in which the earliest objects 
showing Greek influence may go back to the 7th century B.C., 
not having produced any decisive evidence on the point. To 
the Roman period belong the remains of an amphitheatre and 
numerous inscriptions. 

2. A town (mod. Atina) of the Volsci, 12 m. N. of Casinum, 
and about 14 m. E. of Arpinum, on a hill 1607 ft. above sea-level. 
The walls, of carefully worked polygonal blocks of stone, are 
still preserved in parts, and the modern town does not fill the 
whole area which they enclose. Cicero speaks of it as a prosperous 
country town, which had not as yet fallen into the hands of large 
proprietors; and inscriptions show that under the empire it was 
still flourishing. One of these last is a boundary stone relating 
to the assignation of lands in the time of the Gracchi, of which 
six other examples have been found in Campania and Lucania. 

3. A town of the Veneti, mentioned by Pliny, H. N. iii. 131. 
ATITLAN, or Santiago de Atitlan, a town in the department 

of Solola, Guatemala, on the southern shore of Lake Atitlan. 
Pop. (1905) about 9000, almost all Indians. Cotton-spinning 
is the chief industry. Lake Atitlan is 24 m. long and 10 m. 
broad, with 64 m. circumference. It occupies a crater more than 
1000 ft. deep and about 4700 ft. above sea-level. The peaks of 
the- Guatemala Cordillera rise round it, culminating near its 
southern end in the volcanoes of San Pedro (7000 ft.) and Atitlan 
(11,719 ft.). Although the lake is fed by many small mountain 
torrents, it has no visible outlet, but probably communicates 
by an underground channel with one of the rivers which drain 
the Cordillera. Mineral springs abound in the neighbourhood. 
The town of Solola (q.v.) is near the north shore of the lake. 

ATKINSON, EDWARD (1827-1905), American economist, 
was born at Brookline, Massachusetts, on the ioth of February 
1827. For many years he was engaged in managing various 
business enterprises, and became, in 1877, president of the 
Boston Manufacturers' Mutual Fire Insurance Company, a post 
which he held till his death. He was a strong controversialist 
and a prolific writer on such economic subjects as banking, 
railways, cotton manufacture, the tariff and free trade, and the 
money question. He was appointed in 1887 a special commissioner 
to report upon the status of bimetallism in Europe. He also 
made a special study of mill construction and fire prevention, 
and invented an improved cooking apparatus, called the 
" Aladdin oven." He was an active supporter of anti-imperial- 
ism. He died at Boston on the nth of December 1905. 

His principal works were Right Methods of Preventing Fires in 
Mills (1881); Distribution of Products (1885); Industrial Progress 
of the Nation (1889); Taxation and Work (1892); Science, of 
Nutrition (ioth ed., 1898). 

ATKINSON, SIR HARRY ALBERT (1831-1892), British 
colonial statesman, prime minister and speaker of the legislative 
council, New Zealand, was born at Chester in 1831, and in 1855 
emigrated to Taranaki, New Zealand, where he became a farmer. 
In i860 the Waitara war broke out, and from its outset Atkinscn, 
who had been selected as a captain of the New Plymouth Volun- 
teers, distinguished himself by his contempt for appearances 
and tradition, and by the practical skill, energy and courage 
which he showed in leading his Forest Rangers in the tiresome 
and lingering bush warfare of the next five years. For this work 
he was made a major of militia, and thanked by the government. 
Elected to the house of representatives in 1863, he joined Sir 
Frederick Weld's ministry at the end of November 1864 as 
minister of defence, and, during eleven months of office, was 
identified with the well-known " self-reliance " policy, a proposal 
to dispense with imperial regulars, and meet the Maori with 
colonials only. Parliament accepted this principle, but turned 
out the Weld ministry for other reasons. For four years Atkinson 
was out of parliament; in October 1873 he re-entered it, and 
a year later became minister of lands under Sir Julius Vogel, 



ATLANTA 



8-53 



Ten months later he was treasurer, and such was his aptitude 
for finance that, except during six months in 1876, he thence- 
forth held that post whenever his party was in power. From 
October 1874 to January 1891 Atkinson was only out of office 
for about five years. Three times he was premier, and he was 
always the most formidable debater and fighter in the ranks 
of the Conservative opponents of the growing Radical party 
which Sir George Grey, Sir Robert Stout and John Ballance led 
in succession. It was he who was mainly responsible for the 
abolition of the provinces into which the colony was divided 
from 1853 to 1876. He repealed the Ballance land-tax in 1879, 
and substituted a property-tax. He greatly reduced the cost 
of the public service in 1880, and again in 1888. In both these 
years he raised the customs duties, amongstother taxes, and 
gave them a quasi-protectionist character. In 1880 he struck 
10% off all public salaries and wages; in 1887 he reduced the 
salary of the governor by one-third, and the pay and number 
of ministers and members of parliament. By these resolute steps 
revenue was increased, expenditure checked, and the colony's 
finance reinstated. Atkinson was an advocate of compulsory 
national assurance, and the leasing as opposed to the selling of 
crown lands. Defeated in the general election of December 1890, 
he took the appointment of speaker of the legislative council. 
There, while leaving the council chamber after the sitting of the 
28th of June 1892, he was struck down by heart disease and 
died in a few minutes. Though brusque in manner and never 
popular, he was esteemed as a vigorous, upright and practical 
statesman. He was twice married, and had seven children, of 
whom three sons and a daughter survived him. (W. P. R.) 

ATLANTA, the capital and the largest city of Georgia, U.S.A., 
and the county-seat of Fulton county, situated at an altitude of 
1000-1175 ft., in the N.W. part of the state, near the Chatta- 
hoochee river. Pop. (i860) 9554; (1880) 37,409; (1890) 
65,533; (1900) 89,872, of whom 35,727 were negroes and 
2531 were foreign-born; (1910) 154,839. It is served by the 
Southern, the Central of Georgia, the Georgia, the Seaboard 
Air Line, the Nashville, Chattanooga & St Louis (which enters 
the city over the Western & Atlantic, one of its leased lines), 
the Louisville & Nashville, the Atlanta, Birmingham & Atlantic, 
and the Atlanta & West Point railways. These railway com- 
munications, and the situation of the city (on the Piedmont 
Plateau) on the water-parting between the streams flowing into 
the Atlantic Ocean and those flowing into the Gulf of Mexico, 
have given Atlanta its popular name, the " Gate City of the 
South." Atlanta was laid out in the form of a circle, the radius 
being if m. and the centre the old railway station, the Union 
Depot (the new station is called the Terminal); large additions 
have been made beyond this circle, including West End, Inman 
Park on the east, and North Atlanta. Among the best residence 
streets are Peachtree and West Peachtree streets to the north, 
and the older streets to the south of the business centre of the 
city — Washington Street, Whitehall, Pryor and Capitol Avenues. 
Among the principal office buildings are the Empire, the Equit- 
able, the Prudential, the Fourth National, the Austell, the 
Peters, the Century, the English-American and the Candler 
buildings; and there are many fine residences, particularly in 
Peachtree and Washington streets, Inman Park and Ponce de 
Leon Circle. Among prominent public buildings are the State 
Capitol (completed 1889), con tainingalaw library of about6s,ooo 
volumes and a collection of portraits of famous Georgians, the 
north-west front of the Capitol grounds containing an equestrian 
statue (unveiled in 1907) of John Brown Gordon (1832-1904), 
a distinguished Confederate general in the American Civil War 
and governor of Georgia in 1887-1890; the court house; the 
Carnegie library, in which the young men's library, organized 
in 1867, was merged in 1902; the post office building; and 
the Federal prison (about 4 m. south of the city). The principal 
parks are: the Piedmont (189 acres), the site of the Piedmont 
Exposition of 1887 and of the Cotton States and International 
Exposition of 1895; the Grant, given to the city by L. P. Grant, 
an Atlanta railroad builder, in 1882, and subsequently enlarged 
by the city (in its south-east comer is Fort Walker) ; the Lake- 



wood, 6 m. south of the city; and Ponce de Leon Park, owned 
by an electric railway company and having mineral springs and a 
fine baseball ground. Four miles south of the centre of Atlanta 
is Fort McPherson, an important United States military post, 
occupying a reservation of 40 acres and having barracks for the 
accommodation of 1000 men. In Oakland Cemetery is a large 
monument to Confederate soldiers; another monument in 
Oakland, " To the unknown Confederate Dead," is a reproduction 
of the Lion of Lucerne; in West View Cemetery (4 m. west 
of the city) is a memorial erected by the United Confederate 
Veterans. The city obtains its water-supply from the Chatta- 
hoochee river (above the mouth of Peachtree Creek), whence 
the water is pumped by four pumps, which have a daily capacity 
of 55,000,000 gallons. Atlanta is widely known for its public 
spirit and enterprise, to which the expositions of 1881, 1887 and 
1895 beSr witness. The air is bracing, largely because of the 
city's altitude/ the mean annual temperature is 6o-8° F. (winter 
44-1°, spring 60-5°, summer 77°, autumn 61-5°). 

Atlanta is an important educational centre. Its public-school 
system was organized in 187 1. Here are the Georgia School of 
Technology, founded in 1885 (opened 1888) as a branch of the 
university of Georgia; the Atlanta College of Physicians and 
Surgeons (established in 1898 by the union of the Atlanta 
Medical College, organized in 1855, and the Southern Medical 
College, organized in 1878); the Atlanta School of Medicine 
(1905); the Georgia College of Eclectic Medicine; the Atlanta 
Theological Seminary (1901, Congregational), the only theo- 
logical school of the denomination in the South in 1908; the 
Atlanta Dental College; the Southern College of Pharmacy 
(1903); Washington Seminary (1877) for girls; and the following 
institutions for negroes — Atlanta University, founded in 1869, 
which is one of the best institutions in the country for the higher 
■ education of negroes, standing particularly for " culture " 
education (as opposed to industrial training), which has done 
particularly good work in the department of sociology, under 
the direction of Prof. W. E. B. du Bois (b. 1868), one of the 
most prominent teachers of negro descent in the country, and 
which had in 1908 339 students; Clark University, founded in 
1870 by the Freedman's Aid and Southern Educational Society 
of the Methodist Episcopal Church; the Atlanta Baptist College, 
founded in 1867; Morris Brown College (African Methodist 
Episcopal, founded in 1882, and opened in 1885), which has 
college preparatory, scientific, academic, normal and mission- 
ary courses, correspondence courses in English and theology, 
an industrial department, and departments of law, theology 
(Turner Theological Seminary), nurse-training, music and art; 
the Gammon Theological Seminary (Methodist Episcopal, 
chartered in 1888), which has its buildings just outside the city 
limits; and the Spelman Seminary for women and girls (Baptist) 
opened in 1881 as the Atlanta Baptist Female Seminary — the 
present name being adopted in 1883 in honour of the parents 
of Mrs John D. Rockefeller — and incorporated in 1888. At 
Decatur (pop. 1418 in 1900), a residential suburb, 6 m. east-north- 
east of Atlanta, is the Agnes Scott College (1890) for white girls; 
connected with the college is a school of music, art and expres- 
sion, and an academy. 

The city's principal charitable institutions are the Grady 
Memorial hospital (opened in 1892), supported by the city and 
named in honour of Henry W. Grady; the Presbyterian hospital; 
the Baptist Tabernacle Infirmary; the Wesley Memorial 
hospital; St Joseph's infirmary; the Municipal hospital for 
contagious diseases; the Florence Crittenden home. Three 
miles south-east of the city is a (state) soldiers' home, for 
aged, infirm and disabled Confederate veterans. The Associated 
Charities of Atlanta was organized in 1905. 

The principal newspapers are the Constitution (morning), 
edited from 1880 until 1889 by Henry W. Grady (1851-1889), 1 
one of the most eloquent of Southern orators, who did much to 
promote the reconciliation of the North and the South after the 

1 Grady was succeeded as managing editor by Clark Howell 
(b. 1863); and Joel Chandler Harris was long a member of the 
editorial staff. 



854 



ATLANTA 



Civil War, and whose statue stands opposite the post office; 
the Journal (evening), of which Hoke Smith (b. 1855), a pro- 
minent political leader, secretary of the interior in President 
Cleveland's cabinet in 1 893-1896, and later governor of Georgia, 
was long the proprietor; and the Georgian (evening), founded 
in 1906 as a Prohibition organ. 

As regards commerce and manufactures, Atlanta ranks first 
among the cities of Georgia. In 1907 its whosesale and retail 
trade was estimated at $100,000,000. The city is said to receive 
two-fifths of the total freight delivered in the state of Georgia. 
From 1895 to 1907 the bank clearings increased from about 
$65,000,000 to about $260,000,000. In recognition of the city's 
financial strength, Atlanta has been designated by the secretary 
of the treasury as one of the cities whose bonds will be accepted 
as security for Federal deposits. Atlanta is the Southern head- 
quarters for a number of fire and life insurance companies, and 
is the third city of the United States in the amount of insurance 
business written and reported to resident agents, the annual 
premium receipts averaging about $10,000,000. It is an import- 
ant horse and mule market, and handles much tobacco. 

The development of manufactures has been especially notable. 
In 1880 the capital invested in manufacturing industries was 
approximately $2,468,000; in 1890 it was $9,508,962; in 1900 
it had increased to $16,045,156; and in 1905, when only estab- 
lishments under the " factory system " were counted in the 
census, to $21,631,162. In 1900 the total product was valued 
at $16,707,027, and the factory product at $14,418,834; and in 
1905 the factory product was valued at $25,745,650, an increase 
of 786% in five years. Among the products are cotton goods 
(the product value of which in 1905 was 14% of the total value 
of the city's manufactures), foundry and machine-shop products, 
lumber, patent medicines, confectionery, men's clothing, mat- 
tresses, spring-beds and other furniture. Since 1904 part of the. 
power utilized for manufacturing has been obtained from the 
Chattahoochee river, 15 m. from the city. There are many 
manufactories just outside the city limits. 

History. — Atlanta owes its origin to the development of 
pioneer railroads of Georgia. In 1836 the Western & Atlantic, 
the first road built into North Georgia, was chartered, and the 
present site of Atlanta was chosen as its southern terminal, 
which it reached in 1843, an d which was named " Terminus." 
The Georgia and the Central of Georgia then projected branches 
to Terminus in order to connect with the Western & Atlantic, 
and completed them in 1845 and 1846. The town charter of 
1843 changed the name to Marthasville, in honour of the daughter 
of Governor Wilson Lumpkin; and the city charter of 1847 
changed this to Atlanta. The population in 1850 was 2572; 
in i860, 9554. Manufacturing interests soon became important, 
and during the Civil War Atlanta was the seat of Confederate 
military factories and a depot of supplies. In 1864 it was 
the objective point of the first stage of General William T. 
Sherman's invasion of Georgia (see American Civil War), which 
is therefore generally known as the " Atlanta campaign." 

After the battles around Marietta (q.v.), and the crossing of 
the Chattahoochee river on the 8th and 9th of July, Sherman 
continued his advance against Atlanta. His plan of queries
was directed primarily to the seizure of the Decatur railway, 
by which the Confederate commander, General J. E. Johnston, 
might receive support from Virginia and the Carolinas. The 
three Union armies under Sherman's command, outnumbering 
the Confederates about 3 to 2, began their movement on the 
16th of July; the Army of the Cumberland (Gen. G..H. Thomas) 
on the right marching from Marietta by the fords of the Upper 
Chattahoochee on Atlanta, the Army of the Ohio (Gen. J. M. 
Schofield) in the centre, direct on Decatur, and the Army of the 
Tennessee (Gen. J. B. McPherson) still farther east towards 
Stone Mountain. At the moment of marching out to meet the 
enemy, Johnston was relieved of his command and was replaced 
by Gen. J. B. Hood (July 17). Hood at once prepared to attack 
Thomas as soon as that general should have crossed Peachtree 
Creek (6 m. north of the city) and thus isolated himself from Scho- 
field and McPherson. Sherman's confidence in Thomas and his 



troops was, however, justified. Hood's attack (battle of Peach- 
tree Creek, July 20) was everywhere repulsed, and Schofield 
and McPherson closed up at the greatest speed. Hood had to 
retire to Atlanta, with a loss of more than 4000 men, and the 
three Union armies gradually converged on the north and east 
sides of the city. But Hood, who had been put in command as a 
fighting general, was soon ready to attack afresh. This time 
he placed Gen. W. J. Hardee's corps, the largest of his army, 
to the south of Atlanta, facing the left flank of McPherson's 
army. As Hardee's attack rolled up the Union army from left 
to right, the remainder of the Confederate army was to issue 
from the Atlanta fortifications and join in the battle. Hardee 
opened his attack at noon on the 22nd of July (battle of Atlanta). 
The troops of the Army of the Tennessee were swiftly driven 
back, and their commander, McPherson, killed; but presently 
the Federals re-formed and a severe struggle ensued, in which 
most of Hood's army joined. The veterans of the Army of the 
Tennessee, led by Gen. J. A. Logan, offered a stubborn resistance, 
however, and Schofield's army now intervened. After prolonged 
attacks lasting to nightfall, Hood had once more to draw off, 
with about 10,000 men killed and wounded. The Confederates 
now abandoned all idea of regaining the Decatur line, and based 
themselves on Jonesboro' and the Macon railway. Sherman 
quickly realized this, and the Army of the Tennessee, now 
commanded by Gen. O. O. Howard, was counter-marched from 
left to right, until it formed up on the right of the Union line 
about Ezra Church (about 4 m. west of Atlanta). The railway 
from Chattanooga to Atlanta, destroyed by Johnston as he fell 
back in May and June, was now repaired and working up to 
Thomas's camps. Hood had meanwhile extended his entrench- 
ments southwards to cover the Macon railway, and Howard's 
movement led to another engagement (battle of Ezra Church, 
July 28) in which the XV. corps under Logan again bore the 
brunt of Hood's attack. The Confederates were once more 
unsuccessful, and the losses were so heavy that the " fighting " 
policy ordered by the Confederate government was counter- 
manded. Sherman's cavalry had hitherto failed to do serious 
damage to the railway, and the Federal general now proceeded 
to manoeuvre with his main body so as to cut off Hood from his 
Southern railway lines (August). Covered by Howard at Ezra 
Church, Schofield led this advance, but the new Confederate 
lines baffled him. A bombardment of the Atlanta fortifications 
was then begun, but it had no material result. Another cavalry 
raid effected but slight damage to the line, and Sherman now 
decided to take his whole force to the south side. This appar- 
ently dangerous movement (August 25) is a remarkable illustra- 
tion of Sherman's genius for war, and in fact succeeded com- 
pletely. Only a small force was left to guard the Chattanooga 
railway, and the Union forces, Howard on the right, Thomas in 
the centre, and Schofield on the left, reached the railway after 
some sharp fighting (action of Jonesboro', September 1). The 
defence of Atlanta was now hopeless; Hood's forces retreated 
southward the same evening, and on the 2nd of September the 
Union detachment left behind on the north side entered Atlanta 
unopposed. 

All citizens were now ordered to leave, the place was turned 
into a military camp, and when Sherman started on his " March 
to the Sea," on the 15th of November, a large part of the city 
was burned. Consequently the present city is a product of the 
post-bellum development of Georgia. The military government 
of Georgia was established here in 1865. In 1868 Atlanta was 
made the capital of the state. 

In 1881 an International Cotton Exposition was held in 
Atlanta. This was American, even local, in character; its 
inception was due to a desire to improve the cultivation and 
manufacture of cotton; but it brought to the notice of the 
whole country the industrial transformation wrought in the 
Southern states during the last quarter of the 19th century. 
In 1887 the Piedmont Exposition was held in Atlanta. The 
Cotton States and International Exposition, also held at Atlanta, 
in 1895, attracted widespread attention, and had exhibits from 
thirty-seven states and thirteen foreign countries. 



ATLANTIC— ATLANTIC OCEAN 



855 



ATLANTIC, a city and the county-seat of Cass county, Iowa, 
U.S.A., on East Nishnabatna river, about 80 m. W. by S. of 
Des Moines. Pop. (1890) 4351; (1900) S046; (1905, state 
census) 5180 (625 foreign-born); (1910) 4560. It is served by 
the Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific railway, and by an inter- 
urban electric line connecting with Elkhorn and Kimballton, 
and is the trade centre of a fine agricultural country; among 
its manufactures are machine-shop products, canned corn, flour, 
umbrellas, drugs and bricks. The municipality owns the water- 
works and electric-lighting plant. Atlantic was chartered as 
a city in 1869. 

ATLANTIC CITY, a city of Atlantic county, New Jersey, 
U.S.A., on the Atlantic Ocean, 58 m. S.E. of Philadelphia and 
137 m. S. by W. of New York. Pop. (1890) 13,055; (1900) 
27,838, of whom 6513 were of negro descent and 3189 were 
foreign-born; (1910 census) 46,150. It is served by the 
Atlantic City (Philadelphia & Reading) and the West Jersey & 
Seashore (Pennsylvania system) railways. Atlantic City is the 
largest and most popular all-the-year-round resort in the United 
States, and has numerous fine hotels. The city extends for 3 m. 
along a low sandy island (Absecon Beach), 10 m. long by f m. 
wide, separated from the mainland by a narrow strip of salt 
water and 4 or 5 m. of salt marshes, partly covered with water 
at highest storm tide. There are good bathing, boating, sailing, 
fishing and wild-fowl shooting. A " Board Walk " stretches 
along the beach for about 5 m. — the newest part of it is of 
concrete — and along or near this walk are the largest hotels, 
and numerous shops, and places of amusement; from the walk 
into the ocean extend several long piers. Other features of the 
place are the broad driveway (Atlantic Avenue) and an auto- 
mobile boulevard. There are several seaside sanitoriums and 
hospitals, including the Atlantic City hospital, the Mercer 
Memorial home, and the Children's Seashore home. On the 
north end of the beach is Absecon Lighthouse, 160 ft. high. 
The municipality owns the water-works. Oysters are dredged 
here and are shipped hence in large quantities. There was a 
settlement of fishermen on the island in the latter part of the 
18th century. In 1852 a movement was made to develop it as 
a seaside resort for Philadelphia, and after the completion of 
the Camden & Atlantic City railway in 1854 the growth of the 
place was rapid. A heavy loss occurred by fire on the 3rd of 
April 1902. 

ATLANTIC OCEAN, a belt of water, roughly of an S-shape, 
between the western coasts of Europe and Africa and the eastern 
coasts of North and South America. It extends 
northward to the Arctic Basin and southward to the 
Great Southern Ocean. For purposes of measurement the polar 
boundaries are taken to be the Arctic and Antarctic circles, 
although in discussing the configuration and circulation it is 
impossible to adhere strictly to these limits. The Atlantic 
Ocean consists of two characteristic divisions, the geographical 
equator forming a fairly satisfactory line of division into North 
and South Atlantic. The North Atlantic, by far the best-known 
of the main divisions of the hydrosphere, is remarkable for the 
immense length of its coast-line and for the large number of 
enclosed seas connected with it, including on the western side the 
Caribbean Sea and Gulf of Mexico, the Gulf of St Lawrence and 
Hudson Bay, and on the eastern side the Mediterranean and 
Black Sea, the North Sea and the Baltic. The North Atlantic 
is connected with the Arctic Basin by four main channels: (1) 
Hudson Strait, about 60 m. wide, communicating with the gulfs 
and straits of the North American Arctic archipelago; (2) 
Davis Strait, about 200 m. wide, leading to Baffin Bay; (3) 
Denmark Strait, between Greenland and Iceland, 130 m. wide; 
and (4) the " Norwegian Sea," about 400 m. wide, extending 
from Iceland to the Faeroe Islands, the Shetland Islands and 
the coast of Norway. The width of the North Atlantic in lat. 6o°, 
approximately where it breaks up into the branches just named, 
is nearly 2000 m.; in about lat. 50 N. the coasts of Ireland 
and Newfoundland approach to 1750 m.; the breadth then 
increases rapidly to lat. 40 N., and attains its maximum of 
4500 m. in lat. 25 N.; farther south the minimum breadth is 



Bxteat. 



reached between Africa and South America, Cape Palmas being 
only 1600 m. distant from Cape St Roque. In marked contrast 
to this, the South Atlantic is distinguished by great simplicity 
of coast-line; inland seas there are none, and it attains its 
greatest breadth as it merges with the Southern Ocean; in lat. 
35° S. the width is 3700 m. 

The total area of the North Atlantic, not counting inland seas 
connected with it, is, according to G. Karstens, 36,438,000 sq. 
kilometres, or 10,588,000 sq. m.; including the inland seas the 
area is 45,641,000 sq. kilometres or 13,262,000 sq. m. The area 
of the South Atlantic is 43,455,000 sq. kilometres, or 12,627,000 
sq. m. Although not the most extensive of the great oceans, 
the Atlantic has by far the largest drainage area. The " long 
slopes " of the continents on both sides are directed towards the 
Atlantic, which accordingly receives the waters of a large pro- 
portion of the great rivers of the world, including the St Lawrence, 
the Mississippi, the Orinoco, the Amazon, the rivers of the La 
Plata, the Congo, the Niger, the Loire, the Rhine, the Elbe and 
the great rivers of the Mediterranean and the Baltic. Sir J. 
Murray estimates the total area of land draining to the Atlantic 
to be 13,432,000 sq. m., or with the Arctic area nearly 20,000,000 
sq. m., nearly four times the area draining to the Pacific Ocean, 
and almost precisely four times the area draining to the Indian 
Ocean. Murray's calculations give the amount of precipitation 
received on this area at 15,800 cub. m. annually, and the river 
discharge from it at 3900 cub. m. 

The dominant feature of the relief of the Atlantic basin is a 
submarine ridge running from north to south from about lat. 
50 N. to lat. 40 S., almost exactly in the central 
line, and following the S-shape of the coasts. Over SeieA 
this ridge the average depth is about 1700 fathoms. 
Towards its northern end the ridge widens and rises to the plateau 
of the Azores, and in about 50 N. lat. it merges with the " Tele- 
graph Plateau," which extends across nearly the whole ocean 
from Ireland to Newfoundland. North of the fiftieth parallel 
the depths diminish towards the north-east, two long submarine 
ridges of volcanic origin extend north-eastwards to the south- 
west of Iceland and to the Faeroe Islands, and these, with their 
intervening valleys, end in a transverse ridge connecting Green- 
land, through Iceland and the Faeroe Islands, with North- 
western Scotland and the continental mass of Europe. The 
mean depth over this ridge is about 250 fathoms, and the maxi- 
mum depth nowhere reaches 500 fathoms. The main basin of the 
Atlantic is thus cut off from the Arctic basin, with which the 
area north of the ridge has complete deep-water communication. 
This intermediate region, which has Atlantic characteristics 
down to 300 fathoms, and at greater depths belongs more 
properly to the Arctic Sea, commonly receives the name of 
Norwegian Sea. On both sides of the central ridge deep troughs 
extend southwards from the Telegraph plateau to the Southern 
Ocean, the deep water coming close to the land all the way down 
on both sides. In these troughs the depth is seldom much less 
than 3000 fathoms, and this is exceeded in a series of patches 
to which Murray has given the name of " Deeps." In the eastern 
trough the Peake Deep lies off the Bay of Biscay in 20 W. long., 
Monaco Deep and Chun Deep off the north-west of Africa, 
Moseley Deep off the Cape Verde Islands, Krech Deep off the 
Liberian coast, and Buchanan Deep off the mouth of the Congo. 
The western trough extends northwards into Davis Strait, 
forming a depression in the Telegraph plateau; to the south of 
Newfoundland and Nova Scotia are Sigsbee Deep, Libbey Deep 
and Suhm Deep, each of small area; north-east of the Bahamas 
Nares Deep forms the largest and deepest depression in the 
Atlantic, in which a sounding of 4561 fathoms was obtained 
(70 m. north of Porto Rico) by the U.S. ship " Blake " in 
1883. Immediately to the south of Nares Deep lies the smaller 
Makarov Deep; and off the coast of South America are Tizard 
Deep and Havergal Deep. 

Before the Antarctic expeditions of 1903-1904 our knowledge 
of the form of the sea bottom south of 40 S. lat. was almost 
wholly derived from the soundings of the expedition of Sir J. C. 
Ross in the " Erebus " and " Terror " (1839-1843), and the 



8 5 6 



ATLANTIC OCEAN 



Islands. 



bathymetrical maps published were largely the result of deduc- 
tions based on one sounding taken by Ross in 68° 34' S. lat., 
12° 49' W. long., in which he recorded a depth exceeding 4000 
fathoms. The Scottish Antarctic expedition has shown this 
sounding to be erroneous; the "Scotia" obtained samples of 
bottom, in almost the same spot, from a depth of 2660 fathoms. 
Combining the results of recent soundings, Dr W. S. Bruce, the 
leader of the Scottish expedition, finds that there is a ridge 
" extending in a curve from Madagascar to Bouvet Island, and 
from Bouvet Island to the Sandwich group, whence there is a 
forked connexion through the South Orkneys to Graham's Land, 
and through South Georgia to the Falkland Islands and the 
South American continent." Again, the central ridge of the 
South Atlantic extends a thousand miles farther south than was 
supposed, joining the east and west ridge, just described, between 
the Bouvet Islands and the Sandwich group. 

The foundations of our knowledge of the relief of the Atlantic 
basin may be said to have been laid by the work of H.M.S. 
" Challenger " (1873-1876), and the German ship " Gazelle " 
(1874-1876), the French expedition in the " Travailleur " (1880), 
and the U.S. surveying vessel " Blake " (1877 and later). Large 
numbers of additional soundings have been made in recent years 
by cable ships, by the expeditions of H.S.H. the prince of Monaco, 
the German " Valdivia " expedition under Professor Chun (1898), 
and the combined Antarctic expeditions (1903-1904). 

The Atlantic Ocean contains a relatively small number of 
islands. The only continental groups, besides some islands in 
the Mediterranean, are Iceland, the British Isles, 
Newfoundland, the West Indies, and the Falklands, 
and the chief oceanic islands are the Azores, Madeira, the 
Canaries, the Cape Verde Islands, Ascension, St Helena, Tristan 
da Cunha and Bouvet Island. 

The mean depth of the North Atlantic is, according to G. 

Mean Karstens, 2047 fathoms. If we include the enclosed 

depth, and seas, the North Atlantic has a mean depth of 1800 

bottom fathoms. The South Atlantic has a mean depth of 
deposits. , , ,, 

2067 fathoms. 

The greater part of the bottom of the Atlantic is covered by 
a deposit of Globigerina ooze, roughly the area between 1000 and 
3000 fathoms, or about 60 % of the whole. At a depth of about 
3000 fathoms, i.e. in the " Deeps," the Globigerina ooze gradu- 
ally gives place to red clay. In the shallower tropical waters, 
especially on the central ridge, considerable areas are covered by 
Pteropod ooze, a deposit consisting largely of the shells of pelagic 
molluscs. Diatom ooze is the characteristic deposit in high 
southern latitudes. The terrigenous deposits consist of blue 
muds, red muds (abundant along the coast of Brazil, where the 
amount of organic matter present is insufficient to reduce the iron 
in the matter brought down by the great rivers to produce blue 
muds) , green muds and sands, and volcanic and coral detritus. 

The question of the origin of the Atlantic basin, like that of the 
other great divisions of the hydrosphere, is still unsettled. Most 
geologists include the Atlantic with the other oceans in the view 
they adopt as to its age; but E. Suess and M. Neumayr, while 
they regard the basin of the Pacific as of great antiquity, believe 
the Atlantic to date only from the Mesozoic age. Neumayr 
finds evidence of the existence of a continent between Africa 
and South America, which protruded into the central North 
Atlantic, in Jurassic times. F. Kossmat has shown that the 
Atlantic had substantially its present form during the Cretaceous 
period. 

In describing the mean distribution of temperature in the 
waters of the Atlantic it is necessary to treat the northern and 
Dlstrlbu- southern divisions separately. The heat equator, or 
tion of line of maximum mean surface temperature, starts 
tempera- f rom the African coast in about 5 N. lat., and closely 
follows that parallel to 40° W. long., where it bends 
northwards to the Caribbean Sea. North of this line, near which 
the temperature is a little over 80° F., the gradient trends some- 
what to the east of north, and the temperature is slightly higher 
on the western than on the eastern side until, in 45° N. lat., the 
isothermal of 60° F. runs nearly east and west. Beyond this 



Salinity. 



parallel the gradient is directed towards the north-west, and 
temperatures are much higher on the European than on the 
American side. From the surface to 500 fathoms the general 
form of the isothermals remains the same, except that instead 
of an equatorial maximum belt there is a focus of maximum 
temperature off the eastern coast of the United States. This 
focus occupies a larger area and becomes of greater relative 
intensity as the depth increases until, at 500 fathoms, it becomes 
an elongated belt extending right across the ocean in about 
30° N. lat. Below 500 fathoms the western centres of maximum ' 
disappear, and higher temperatures occur in the eastern Atlantic 
off the Iberian peninsula and north-western Africa down to at 
least 1000 fathoms; at still greater depths temperature gradually 
becomes more and more uniform. The communication between 
the Atlantic and Arctic basins being cut off, as already described, 
at a depth of about 300 fathoms, the temperatures in the Nor- 
wegian Sea below that level are essentially Arctic, usually below 
the freezing-point of fresh water, except where the distribution 
is modified by the surface circulation. The isothermals of mean 
surface temperature in the South Atlantic are in the lower 
latitudes of an c/5-shape, temperatures being higher on the 
American than on the African side. In latitudes south of 30° S. 
the curved form tends to disappear, the lines running more and 
more directly east and west. Below the surface a focus of maxi- 
mum temperature appears off the coast of South America in 
about 30° S. lat., and of minimum temperature north and north- 
east of this maximum. This distribution is most marked at 
about 300 fathoms, and disappears at 500 fathoms, beyond 
which depth the lines tend to become parallel and to run east 
and west, the gradient slowly diminishing. 

The Atlantic is by far the saltest of the great oceans. Its 
saltest waters are found at the surface in two belts, one extending 
east and west in the North Atlantic between 20 and 
30° N. lat., and another of almost equal salinity 
extending eastwards from the coast of South America in io° to 
20° S. lat. In the equatorial region between these belts the 
salinity is markedly less, especially in the eastern part. North 
of the North Atlantic maximum the waters become steadily 
fresher as latitude increases until the channels opening into the 
Arctic basin are reached. In all of these water of relatively 
high salinity usually appears for a long distance towards the 
north on the eastern side of the channel, while on the western 
side the water is Comparatively fresh; but great variations occur 
at different seasons and in different years. In the higher latitudes 
of the South Atlantic the salinity diminishes steadily and tends 
to be uniform from east to west, except near the southern 
extremity of South America, where the surface waters are very 
fresh. Our knowledge of the salinity of waters below the surface 
is as yet very defective, large areas being still unrepresented by 
a single observation. The chief facts already established are 
the greater saltness of the North Atlantic compared with the 
South Atlantic at all depths, and the low salinity at all depths 
in the eastern equatorial region, off the Gulf of Guinea. 

The wind circulation over the Atlantic is of a very definite 
character. In the South Atlantic the narrow land surfaces of 
Africa and South America produce comparatively little 
effect in disturbing the normal planetary circulation. ology. 
The tropical belt of high atmospheric pressure is very 
marked in winter; it is weaker during the summer months, and 
at that season the greater relative fall of pressure over the land 
cuts it off into an oval-shaped anticyclone, the centre of which 
rests on the coolest part of the sea surface in that latitude, near 
the Gulf of Guinea. South of this anticyclone, from about the 
latitude of the Cape, we find the region where, on account of 
the uninterrupted sea surface right round the globe, the planetary 
circulation is developed to the greatest extent known; the 
pressure gradient is steep, and the region is swept continuously 
by strong westerly winds — the " roaring forties." 

In the North Atlantic the distribution of pressure and resulting 
wind circulation are very largely modified by the enormous 
areas of land and frozen sea which surround the ocean on three 
sides. The tropical belt of high pressure persists all the year 



ATLANTIS 



857 



Currents. 



round, but the immense demand for air to supply the ascending 
currents over the heated land surfaces in summer causes the 
normal descending movement to be largely reinforced; hence the 
" North Altantic anticyclone" is much larger, and its circulation 
more vigorous, in summer than in winter. Again, during the 
winter months pressure is relatively high over North America, 
Western Eurasia and the Arctic regions; hence vast quantities 
of air are brought down to the surface, and circulation must be 
kept up by ascending currents over the ocean. The Atlantic 
anticyclone is, therefore, at its weakest in winter, and on its polar 
side the polar eddy becomes a trough of low pressure, extending 
roughly from Labrador to Iceland and Jan Mayen, and traversed 
by a constant succession of cyclones. The net effect of the 
surrounding land is, in fact, to reverse the seasonal variations 
of the planetary circulation, but without destroying its type. 
In the intermediate belt between the two high-pressure areas 
the meteorological equator remains permanently north of the 
geographical equator, moving between it and about n° N. lat. 
The part of this atmospheric circulation which is steadiest 
in its action is the trade winds, and this is, therefore, the most 
effective in producing drift movement of the surface waters. 
The trade winds give rise, in the region most exposed to their 
influence, to two westward-moving drifts — the equatorial 
currents, which are separated in parts of their course by currents 
moving in the opposite direction along the equatorial belt. 
These last may be of the nature of " reaction " currents; they 
are collectively known as the equatorial counter-current. On 
reaching the South American coast, the southern equatorial 
current splits into two parts at Cape St Roque: one branch, 
the Brazil current, is deflected southwards and follows 
the coast as a true stream current at least as far as 
the river Plate. The second branch proceeds north-westwards 
towards the West Indies, where it mingles with the waters of 
the northern equatorial; and the two drifts, blocked by the 
< -shape of the land, raise the level of the surface in the Gulf 
of Mexico, the Caribbean Sea, and in the whole area outside the 
West Indies. This congestion is relieved by what is probably 
the most rapid and most voluminous stream current in the world, 
the Gulf Stream, which runs along the coast of North America, 
separated from it by a narrow strip of cold water, the " cold 
wall," to a point off the south-east of Newfoundland. At this 
point the Gulf Stream water mixes with that from the Labrador 
current (see below), and a drift current eastwards is set up under 
the influence of the prevailing westerly winds: this is generally 
called the Gulf Stream drift. When the Gulf Stream drift 
approaches the eastern side of the Atlantic it splits into two 
parts, one going southwards along the north-west coast of Africa, 
the Canaries current, and another turning northwards and 
passing to the west of the British Isles. Most of the Canaries 
current re-enters the northern equatorial, but a certain proportion 
keeps to the African coast, unites with the equatorial return 
currents, and penetrates into the Gulf of Guinea. This last 
feature of the circulation is still somewhat obscure; it is probably 
to be accounted for by the fact that on this part of the coast the 
prevailing winds, although to a considerable extent monsoonal, 
are off-shore winds, blowing the surface-waters out to sea, and 
the place of the water thus removed is filled up by water derived 
either from lower levels or from " reaction " currents. 

The movements of the northern branch of the. Gulf Stream 
drift have been the object of more careful and more extended 
study than all the other currents of the ocean put together, 
except, perhaps, the Gulf Stream itself. The cruises of the 
" Porcupine " and " Lightning," which led directly to the 
despatch of the " Challenger " expedition, were altogether 
within its " sphere of influence "; so also was the great Nor- 
wegian Atlantic expedition. More recently, the area has been 
further explored by the German expedition in the ss. " National, " 
the Danish " Ingolf " expedition, and the minor expeditions 
of the " Michael Sars," " Jackal," " Research," &c, and since 
1902 it has been periodically examined by the International 
Council for the Study of the Sea. Much has also been done by 
the discussion of observations made on board vessels belonging 



to the mercantile marine of various countries. It may now 
be taken as generally admitted that the current referred to 
breaks into three main branches. The first passes northwards, 
most of it between the Faeroe and Shetland Islands, to the coast 
of Norway, and so on to the Arctic basin, which, as Nansen has 
shown, it fills to a great depth. The second, the Irminger 
stream, passes up the west side of Iceland; and the third goes 
up the Greenland side of Davis Strait to Baffin Bay. These 
branches are separated from one another at the surface by 
currents moving southwards: one passes east of Iceland; the 
second, the Greenland current, skirts the east coast of Greenland; 
and the third, the Labrador current already mentioned, follows 
the western side of Davis Strait. 

The development of the equatorial and the Brazil currents 
in the South Atlantic has already been described. On the polar 
side of the high-pressure area a west wind drift is under the 
control of the " roaring forties," and on reaching South Africa 
part of this is deflected and sent northwards along the west 
coast as the cold Benguella current which rejoins the equatorial. 
In the central parts of the two high-pressure areas there is 
practically no surface circulation. In the North Atlantic this 
region is covered by enormous banks of gulf-weed (Sargassum 
bucciferum), hence the name Sargasso Sea. .The Sargasso Sea 
is bounded, roughly, by the lines of 20°-3S° N. lat. and 4o°-75° 
W. long. 

The sub-surface circulation in the Atlantic may be regarded 
as consisting of two parts. Where, surface water is banked up 
against the land, as by the equatorial and Gulf Stream drift 
currents, it appears to penetrate to Very considerable depths; 
the escaping stream currents are at first of great vertical thickness 
and part of the water at their sources has a downward movement. 
In the case of the Gulf Stream, which is not much impeded by 
the land, this, descending motion is relatively slight, being 
perhaps largely due to the greater specific gravity of the water; 
it ceases to be perceptible beyond about 500 fathoms. On the 
European-African side the descending movement is more 
marked, partly because the coast-line is much more irregular 
and the northward current is deflected against it by the earth's 
rotation, and partly because of the outflow of salt water from 
the Mediterranean; here the movement is traceable to at least 
1000 fathoms. The northward movement of water across the 
Norwegian Sea extends down from the surface to the Iceland- 
Shetland ridge, where it is sharply cut off; the lower levels of 
the Norwegian Sea are filled with ice-cold Arctic water, close 
down to the ridge. The south-moving currents originating from 
melting ice are probably quite shallow. The second part of the 
circulation in the depth is the slow " creep " of water of very 
low temperature along the bottom. The North Atlantic being 
altogether cut off from the Arctic regions, and the vertical 
circulation being active, this movement is here practically 
non-existent; but in the South Atlantic, where communication 
with the Southern Ocean is perfectly open, Antarctic water can 
be traced to the equator and even beyond. 

The tides of the Atlantic Ocean are of great complexity. The 
tidal wave of the Southern Ocean, which sweeps uninterruptedly 
round the globe from east to west, generates a secondary wave 
between Africa and South America, which travels north at a 
rate dependent only on the depth of the ocean. With this " free " 
wave is combined a " forced " wave, generated, by the direct 
action of the sun and moon, within the Atlantic area itself. 
Nothing is known about the relative importance of these two 
waves. (H. N. D.) 

See also Ocean and Oceanography. 

ATLANTIS, Atalantis, or Atlantica, a legendary island 
in the Atlantic Ocean, first mentioned by Plato in the Timaeus. 
Plato describes how certain Egyptian priests, in a conversation 
with Solon, represented the island as a country larger than 
Asia Minor and Libya united, and situated just beyond the 
Pillars of Hercules (Straits of Gibraltar). Beyond it lay an 
archipelago of lesser islands. According to the priests, Atlantis 
had been a powerful kingdom nine thousand years before the 
birth of Solon, and its armies had overrun the lands which 



858 



ATLAS— ATLAS MOUNTAINS 



bordered the Mediterranean. Athens alone had withstood 
them with success. Finally the sea had overwhelmed Atlantis, 
and had thenceforward become unnavigable owing to the 
shoals which marked the spot. In the Critias Plato adds a 
history of the ideal commonwealth of Atlantis. It is impossible 
to decide how far this legend is due to Plato's invention, and 
how far it is based on facts of which no record remains. Medieval 
writers, for whom the tale was preserved by the Arabian geo- 
graphers, believed it true, and were fortified in their belief by 
numerous traditions of islands in the western sea, which offered 
various points of resemblance to Atlantis. Such in particular 
were the Greek Isles of the Blest, or Fortunate Islands, the 
Welsh Avalon, the Portuguese Antilia or Isle of Seven Cities, 
and St Brendan's island, the subject of many sagas in many 
languages. These, which are described in separate articles, 
helped to maintain the tradition of an earthly paradise which 
had become associated with the myth of Atlantis; and all 
except Avalon were marked in maps of the 14th and 15th 
centuries, and formed the object of voyages of discovery, in one 
case (St Brendan's island) until the 18th century. In early 
legends, of whatever nationality, they are almost invariably 
described in terms which closely resemble Homer's account of 
the island of the Phaeacians (Od. viii.) — a fact which may be 
an indication of their common origin in some folk-tale current 
among several races. Somewhat similar legends are those of 
the island of Brazil (q.v.), of Lyonnesse (q.v.), the sunken land 
off the Cornish coast, of the lost Breton city of Is, and of Mayda 
or Asmaide — the French Isle Verte and Portuguese Ilha Verde 
or " Green Island " — which appears in many folk-tales from 
Gibraltar to the Hebrides, and until 1853 was marked on English 
charts as a rock in 44° 48' N. and 26 10' W. After the Renais- 
sance, with its renewal of interest in Platonic studies, numerous 
attempts were made to rationalize the myth of Atlantis. The 
island was variously identified with America, Scandinavia, the 
Canaries and even Palestine ; ethnologists saw in its inhabitants 
the ancestors of the Guanchos, the Basques or the ancient 
Italians; and even in the 17th and 18th centuries the credibility 
of the whole legend was seriously debated, and sometimes 
admitted, even by Montaigne, Buffon and Voltaire. 

For the theory that Atlantis is to be identified with Crete in the 
Minoan period, see " The Lost Continent " in The Times (London) 
for the 19th of February 1909. See also " Dissertation sur l'Atlan- 
tide " in T. H. Martin's Htudes sur le Tim.ee (1841). 

ATLAS, in Greek mythology, the " endurer," a son of the 
Titan Iapetus and Clymene (or Asia), brother of Prometheus. 
Homer, in the Odyssey (i. 52) speaks of him as " one who knows 
the depths of the whole sea, and keeps the tall pillars which 
hold heaven and earth asunder." In the first instance he seems 
to have been a marine creation. The pillars which he supported 
were thought to rest in the sea, immediately beyond the most 
western horizon. But as the Greeks' knowledge of the west 
increased, the name of Atlas was transferred to a hill in the 
north-west of Africa. Later, he was represented as a king of that 
district, rich in flocks and herds, and owner of the garden of the 
Hesperides, who was turned into a rocky mountain when Perseus, 
to punish him for his inhospitality, showed him the Gorgon's 
head (Ovid, Metam. iv. 627). Finally, Atlas was explained as 
the name of a primitive astronomer, who was said to have made 
the first celestial globe (Diodorus iii. 60). He was the father of 
the Pleiades and Hyades; according to Homer, of Calypso. In 
works of art he is represented as carrying the heavens or the 
terrestrial globe. The Farnese statue of Atlas in the Naples 
museum is well known. 

The plural form Atlantes is the classical term in architecture 
for the male sculptured figures supporting a superstructure as 
in the baths at Pompeii, and in the temple at Agrigentum in 
Sicily. In 18th-century architecture half-figures of men with 
strong muscular development were used to support balconies 
<^ee Caryatides and Telamones). 

A figure of Atlas supporting the heavens is often found as a 
frontispiece in early collections of maps, and is said to have been 
first thus used by Mercator. The name is hence applied to a 



volume of maps (see Map), and similarly to a volume which 
contains a tabular conspectus of a subject, such as an atlas of 
ethnographical, subjects or anatomical plates. It is also used 
of a large size of drawing paper. 

The name " atlas," an Arabic word meaning " smooth," 
applied to a smooth cloth, is sometimes found in English, and 
is the usual German word, for " satin." 

ATLAS MOUNTAINS, the general name for the mountain 
chains running more or less parallel to the coast of North-west 
Africa. They extend from Cape Nun on the west to the Gulf 
of Gabes on the east, a distance of some 1500 m., traversing 
Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia. To their south lies the Saharan 
desert. The Atlas consist of many distinct ranges, but they can 
be roughly divided into two main chains: (1) the Maritime 
Atlas, i.e. the ranges overlooking the Mediterranean from Ceuta 
to Cape Bon; (2) the inner and more elevated ranges, which, 
starting from the Atlantic at Cape Ghir in Sus, run south of the 
coast ranges and are separated from them by high plateaus. 
This general disposition is seen most distinctly in eastern Morocco 
and Algeria. The western inner ranges are the most important 
of the whole system, and in the present article are described 
first as the Moroccan Ranges. The maritime Atlas and the inner 
ranges in Algeria and Tunisia are then treated under the heading 
Eastern Ranges. 

The Moroccan Ranges. — This section of the Atlas, known to 
the inhabitants of Morocco by its Berber name, Idraren Draren 
or the " Mountains of Mountains," consists of five distinct 
ranges, varying in length and height, but disposed more or less 
parallel to one another in a general direction from south-west 
to north-east, with a slight curvature towards the Sahara. 

1. The main range, that known as the Great Atlas, occupies 
a central position in the system, and is by far the longest and 
loftiest chain. It has an average height of over 11,000 ft,, 
whereas the loftiest peaks in Algeria do not exceed 8000 ft., 
and the highest in Tunisia are under 6000 ft. Towards the Dahra 
district at the north-east end the fall is gradual and continuous, 
but at the opposite extremity facing the Atlantic between Agadir 
and Mogador it is precipitous. Although only one or two peaks 
reach the line of perpetual snow, several of the loftiest summits 
are snowclad during the greater part of the year. The northern 
sides and tops of the lower heights are often covered with dense 
forests of oak, cork, pine, cedar and other trees, with walnuts 
up to the limit of irrigation. Their slopes enclose well-watered 
valleys of great fertility, in which the Berber tribes cultivate 
tiny irrigated fields, their houses clinging to the hill-sides. The 
southern flanks, being exposed to the hot dry winds of the Sahara, 
are generally destitute of vegetation. 

At several points the crest of the range has been deeply eroded 
by old glaciers and running waters, and thus have been formed 
a number of devious passes. The central section, culminating in 
Tizi n 'Tagharat or Tinzar, a peak estimated at 15,000 ft. high, 
maintains a mean altitude of 11,600 ft., and from this great mass 
of schists and sandstones a number of secondary ridges radiate 
in all directions, forming divides between the rivers Dra'a, Sus, 
Um-er-Rabia, Sebu, Mulwiya and Ghir, which flow respectively 
to the south-west, the west, north-west, north, north-east and 
south-east. All are swift and unnavigable, save perhaps for a 
few miles from their mouths. With the exception of the Dra'a, 
the streams rising on the side of the range facing the Sahara do 
not reach the sea, but form marshes or lagoons at one season, 
and at another are lost in the dry soil of the desert. 

For a distance of 100 m. the central section nowhere presents 
any passes accessible to caravans, but south-westward two gaps 
in the range afford communication between the Tansift and 
Sus basins, those respectively of Gindafi and Bibawan. A few 
summits in the extreme south-west in the neighbourhood of Cape 
Ghir still exceed 11,000 ft., and although the steadily rising 
ground from the coast and the prominence of nearer summits 
detract from the apparent height, this is on an average greater 
than that of the European Alps. The most imposing view is 
to be obtained from the plain of Marrakesh, only some 1000 ft. 
above sea-level, immediately north of the highest peaks. Besides 



ATLAS MOUNTAINS 



859 



huge masses of old schists and sandstones, the range contains 
extensive limestone, marble, diorite, basalt and porphyry forma- 
tions, while granite prevails on its southern slopes. The presence 
of enormous glaciers in the Ice Age is attested by the moraines 
at the Atlantic end, and by other indications farther east. The 
best-known passes are: (1) The Bibawan in the upper Wad Sus 
basin (4150 ft.); (2) the Ginda.fi, giving access from Marrakesh 
to Tarudant, rugged and difficult, but low; (3) the Tagharat, 
difficult and little used, leading to the Dra'a valley (11,484 ft.); 
(4) the Glawi (7600 ft.); (5) Tizi n 'Tilghemt (7250 ft.), leading 
to Tafilet (Tafila.lt) and the Wad Ghir. 

2. The lower portion of the Moroccan Atlas (sometimes called 
the Middle Atlas) , extending north-east and east from an 
undefined point to the north of the Great Atlas to near the 
frontier of Algeria, is crossed by the pass from Fez to Tafilalt. 
Both slopes are wooded, and its forests are the only parts of 
Morocco where the Hon still survives. From the north this 
range, which is only partly explored, presents a somewhat 
regular series of snowy crests. 

3. The Anti-Atlas or Jebel Saghru, also known as the Lesser 
Atlas, running parallel to and south of the central range, is one 
of the least elevated chains in the system, having a mean altitude 
of not more than 5000 ft., although some peaks and even passes 
exceed 6000 ft. At one point it is pierced by a gap scarcely five 
paces wide with walls of variegated marbles polished by the 
transport of goods. As to the relation of the Anti-Atlas to the 
Atlas proper at its western end nothing certain is known. 

The two more or less parallel ranges which complete the 
western system are less important: — (4) the Jebel Bani, south of 
the Anti-Atlas, a low, narrow rocky ridge with a height of 3000 ft. 
in its central parts; and (5) the Mountains of Ghaiata, north of 
the Middle Atlas, not a continuous range, but a series of broken 
mountain masses from 3000 to 3500 ft. high, to the south of Fez, 
Taza and Tlemcen. 

The Eastern Ranges. — The eastern division of the Atlas, which 
forms the backbone of Algeria and Tunisia, is adequately known 
with the exception of the small portion in Morocco forming the 
province of Er-Rif. The lesser range, nearer the sea, known to 
the French as the Maritime Atlas, calls for little detailed notice. 
From Ceuta, above which towers Jebel Miisa — about 2800 ft. — 
to Melilla, a distance of some 150 m., the Rif Mountains face 
the Mediterranean, and here, as along the whole coast eastward 
to Cape Bon, many rugged rocks rise boldly above the general 
level. In Algeria the Maritime Atlas has five chief ranges, 
several mountains rising over 5000 ft. The Jurjura range, 
extending through Kabylia from Algiers to Bougie, contains the 
peaks of Lalla Kedija (7542 ft.), the culminating point of the 
maritime chains, and Babor (6447 ft.). (See further Algeria.) 
The Mejerda range, which extends into Tunisia, has no heights 
exceeding 3700 ft. It was in these coast mountains of Algeria 
that the Romans quarried the celebrated Numidian marbles. 

The southern or main range of the Eastern division is known 
by the French as the Saharan Atlas. On its western extremity 
it is linked by secondary ranges to the mountain system of 
Morocco. The Saharan Atlas is essentially one chain, though 
known under different names: Jebel K'sur and Jebel Amur on 
the west, and Jebel Aures in the east. The central part, the 
Zab Mountains, is of lower elevation, the Saharan Atlas reaching 
its culminating point, Jebel Shellia (761 1 ft. above the sea), in 
the Aures. This range sends a branch northward which joins the 
Mejerda range of the Maritime Atlas, and another branch runs 
south by Gafsa to the Gulf of Gabes. Here Mount Sidi AH bu 
Musin reaches a height of 5700 ft., the highest point in Tunisia. 
In the 'Saharan Atlas the passes leading to or from the desert 
are numerous, and in most instances easy. Both in the east (at 
Batna) and the west (at Ain Sefra) the mountains are traversed 
by railways, which, starting from Mediterranean seaports, take 
the traveller into the Sahara. 

History and Exploration. — The name Atlas given to these 
mountains by Europeans — but never used by the native races — 
is derived from that of the mythical Greek god represented as 
carrying the globe on his shoulders, and applied to the high and 



distant mountains of the west, where Atlas was supposed to 
dwell. From time immemorial the Atlas have been the home 
of Berber races, and those living in the least accessible regions 
have retained a measure of independence throughout their 
recorded history. Thus some of the mountain districts of 
Kabylia had never been visited by Europeans until the French 
military expedition of 1857. But in general the Maritime range 
was well known to the Romans. The Jebel Amur was traversed 
by the column which seized El Aghuat in 1852, and from that 
time dates the survey of the mountains. 

The ancient caravan route from Mauretania to the western 
Sudan crossed the lower Moroccan Atlas by the pass of Tilghemt 
and passed through the oasis of Tafilalt, formerly known as 
Sajilmasa [" Sigilmassa "], on the east side of the Anti-Atlas. 
The Moroccan system was visited, and in some instances crossed, 
by various European travellers carried into slavery by the 
Salli rovers, and was traversed by Ren6 Caill6 in 1828 on his 
journey home from Timbuktu, but the first detailed exploration 
was made by Gerhard Rohlfs in 1861-1862. Previous to that 
almost the only special report was the misleading one of Lieut. 
Washington, attached to the British embassy of 1837, who from 
insufficient data estimated the height of Mount Tagharat, to 
which he gave the indefinite name of Miltsin (i.e. Mul et-Tizin, 
" Lord of the Peaks "), as 11,400 ft. instead of about 15,000 ft. 
In 1871 the first scientific expedition, consisting of Dr (after- 
wards Sir) J. D. Hooker, Mr John Ball and Mr G. Maw, explored 
the central part of the Great Atlas with the special object of 
investigating its flora and determining its relation to that of the 
mountains of Europe. They ascended by the Ait Mizan valley 
to the Tagharat pass (11,484 ft.), and by the Amsmiz valley to 
the summit of Jebel Tezah (11,972 ft.). In the Tagharat pass 
Mr Maw was the only one of the party who reached the water- 
shed; but from Jebel Tezah a good view was obtained south- 
ward across the great valley of the Sus to the Anti-Atlas, which 
appeared to be from 9000 to 10,000 ft. high. Dr Oskar Lenz 
in 1879-1880 surveyed a part of the Great Atlas north of Taru- 
dant, determined a pass south of High in the Anti-Atlas, and 
penetrated thence across the Sahara to Timbuktu. He was 
followed in 1883-1884 by Vicomte Ch. de Foucauld, whose ex- 
tensive itineraries include many districts that had never before 
been visited by any Europeans. Such were parts of the first and 
middle ranges, crossed once; three routes over the Great Atlas, 
which was, moreover, followed along both flanks for nearly its 
whole length; and six journeys across the An ti- Atlas, with 
a general survey of the foot of this range and several passages 
over the Jebel Bani. Then came Joseph Thomson, who explored 
some of the central parts, and made the highest ascent yet 
achieved, that of Mount Likimt, 13,150 ft., but broke little new 
ground, and failed to cross the main range (1888); and Walter 
B. Harris, who explored some of the southern slopes and crossed 
the Atlas at two points during his expedition to Tafilalt in 1894. 
In 1901 and again in 1905 the marquis deSegonzac, a Frenchman, 
made extensive journeys in the Moroccan ranges. He crossed 
the Great Atlas in its central section, explored its southern 
border, and, in part, the Middle and Anti-Atlas ranges, A 
member of his expeditions, de Flotte Rocquevaire, made a 
triangulation of part of the western portion of the main Atlas, 
his labours affording a basis for the co-ordination of the work 
of previous explorers. (See also Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia 
and Sahara.) 

Authorities. — Vicomte Ch. de Foucauld, Reconnaissance au Maroc 
1883-1884 (Paris, 1888, almost the sole authority for the geography 
of the Atlas; his book gives the result of careful surveys, and is 
illustrated with a good collection of maps and sketches) ; Hooker, 
Ball and Maw, Marocco and the Great Atlas (London, 1879, a most 
valuable contribution, always scientific and trustworthy, especially 
as to botany and geology); Joseph Thomson, Travels in the Atlas 
and Southern Morocco (London, 1889, valuable geographical and 
geological data) ; Louis Gentil, Mission de Segonzac, &c. (Paris, 1906; 
the author was geologist to the 1905 expedition) ; Gerhard Rohlfs, 
Adventures in Morocco (London, 1874); Walter B. Harris, Tafilet, 
a Journey of Exploration in the Atlas Mountains, &c. (London, 1895), 
full of valuable information; Budgett Meakin, The Land of the 
Moors (London, 1901), first and last chapters; Dr Oskar Lenz, 
Timbuktu: Reise durch Marokko, vol. i. (Leipzig, 1884). 



86o 



ATMOLYSIS— ATMOSPHERIC ELECTRICITY 



ATMOLYSIS (Gr. arjuos, vapour: 'Kiieiv, to loosen), a term 
invented by Thomas Graham to denote the separation of a 
mixture of gases by taking advantage of their different rates of 
diffusion through a porous septum or diaphragm (see Diffusion) . 

ATMOSPHERE (Gr. ar/ibs, vapour; <r<j>alpa, a sphere), the 
aeriform envelope encircling the earth; also the envelope of a 
particular gas or gases about any solid or liquid. Meteorological 
phenomena seated more directly in the atmosphere obtained 
early recognition; thus Hesiod, in his Works and Days, speculated 
on the origin of winds, ascribing them to the heating effects of 
the sun on the air. Ctesibius of Alexandria, Hero and others, 
founded the science of pneumatics on observations . on the 
physical properties of air. Anaximenes made air the primordial 
substance, and it was one of the Aristotelian elements. A direct 
proof of its material nature was given by Galileo, who weighed 
a copper ball containing compressed air. 

Before the development of pneumatic chemistry, air was 
regarded as a distinct chemical unit or element. The study of 
calcination and combustion during the 17 th and 18th centuries 
culminated in the discovery that air consists chiefly of a mix- 
ture of two gases, oxygen and nitiogen. Cavendish, Priestley, 
Lavoisier and others contributed to this result. Cavendish 
made many analyses: from more than 500 determinations of 
air in winter and summer, in wet and clear weather, and in town 
and country, he discerned the mean composition of the atmo- 
sphere to be, oxygen 20-833 % anf i nitrogen 79-167 % The 
same experimenter noticed the presence of an inert gas, in very 
minute amount ; this gas, afterwards investigated by Rayleigh 
and Ramsay, is.now named argon {q.v.). 

The constancy of composition shown by repeated analyses of 
atmospheric air led to the view that it was a chemical compound 
of nitrogen and oxygen; but there was no experimental con- 
firmation of this idea, and all observations tended to the view 
that it is simply a mechanical mixture. Thus, the gases are not 
present in simple multiples of their combining weights; atmo- 
spheric air results when oxygen and nitrogen are mixed in the 
prescribed ratio, the mixing being unattended by any manifesta- 
tion of energy, such as is invariably associated with a chemical 
action; the gases may be mechanically separated by atmolysis, 
i.e. by taking advantage of the different rates of diffusion of the 
two gases; the solubility of air in water corresponds with the 
" law of partial pressures," each gas being absorbed in amount 
proportional to its pressure and coefficient of absorption, and 
oxygen being much more soluble than nitrogen (in the ratio of 
•041 14 to -02035 a t o°); air expelled from water by boiling is 
always richer in oxygen. 

Various agencies are at work tending to modify the composition 
of the atmosphere, but these so neutralize each other as to leave 
it practically unaltered. Minute variations, however, do occur. 
Bunsen analysed fifteen examples of air collected at the same 
place at different times, and found the extreme range in the 
percentage of oxygen to be from 20-97 to 20-84. Regnault, 
from analyses of the air of Paris, obtained a variation of 20-999 
to 20913; country air varied from 20 903 to 21-000; while air 
taken from over the sea showed an extreme variation of 20-940 
to 20-850. Angus Smith determined London air to vary in 
oxygen content from 20-857 to 20-95, the air in parks and open 
spaces showing the higher percentage; Glasgow air showed 
similar results, varying from 20-887 in the streets to 20-929 in 
open spaces. 

In addition to nitrogen and oxygen, there are a number of 
other gases and vapours generally present in the atmosphere. 
Of these, argon and its allies were the last to be definitely isolated. 
Carbon dioxide is invariably present, as was inferred by Dr 
David Macbride (1726-1778) of Dublin in 1764, but in a pro- 
portion which is not absolutely constant; it tends to increase 
at night, and during dry winds and fogs, and it is greater in 
towns than in the country and on land than on the sea. Water 
vapour is always present; the amount is determined by instru- 
ments termed hygrometers (q.v.). Ozone (q.v.) occurs, in an 
amount supposed to be associated with the development of 
atmospheric electricity (lightning, &c); this amount varies 



with the seasons, being a maximum in spring, and decreasing 
through summer and autumn to a minimum in winter. Hydrogen 
dioxide occurs in a manner closely resembling ozone. Nitric 
acid and lower nitrogen oxides are present, being formed by 
electrical discharges, and by the oxidation of atmospheric 
ammonia by ozone. The amount of nitric acid varies from 
place to place; rain-water, collected in the country, has been 
found to contain an average of 0-5 parts in a million, but town 
rain-water contains more, the greater amounts being present 
in the more densely populated districts. Ammonia is also 
present, but in very varying amounts, ranging from 135 to o-i 
parts (calculated as carbonate) in a million parts of air. Ammonia 
is carried back to the soil by means of rain, and there plays an 
important part in providing nitrogenous matter which is after- 
wards assimilated by vegetable life. 

The average volume composition of the gases of the atmosphere 
may be represented (in parts per 10,000) as follows: — 



Oxygen . . . 


. 2065-94 


Ozone 


0-015 


Nitrogen 


. 7711-60 


Aqueous vapour 


140-00 


Argon (about) . 


79-00 


Nitric acid . 


0-08 


Carbon dioxide 


3-36 


Ammonia 


0-005 



In addition to these gases, there are always present in the 
atmosphere many micro-organisms or bacteria (see Bacteri- 
ology); another invariable constituent is dust (q.v.), which 
plays an important" part in meteorological phenomena. 

Reference should be made to the articles Barometer, Climate 
and Meteorology for the measurement and variation of the 
pressure of the atmosphere, and the discussion of other properties. 

ATMOSPHERIC ELECTRICITY. 1. It was not until the 
middle of the 18th century that experiments due to Benjamin 
Franklin showed that the electric phenomena of the atmosphere 
are not fundamentally different from those produced in the 
laboratory. . For the next century the rate of progress was slow, 
though the ideas of Volta in Italy and the instrumental devices of 
Sir Francis Ronalds in England merit recognition. The inven- 
tion of the portable electrometer and the water-dropping electro- 
graph by Lord Kelvin in the middle of the 19th century, and the 
greater defmiteness thus introduced into observational results, 
were notable events. Towards the end of the 19th century came 
the discovery made by W. Linss (6) 1 and by J. Elster and H. 
Geitel (7) that even the most perfectly insulated conductors lose 
their charge, and that this loss depends on atmospheric condi- 
tions. Hard on this came the recognition of the fact that freely 
charged positive and negative ions are always present in the 
atmosphere, and that a radioactive emanation can be collected. 
Whilst no small amount of observational work has been done in 
these new branches of atmospheric electricity, the science has 
still not developed to a considerable extent beyond preliminary 
stages. Observations have usually been limited to a portion of 
the year, or to a few hours of the day, whilst the results from 
different stations differ much in details. It is thus difficult to 
form a judgment as to what has most claim to acceptance as the 
general law, and what may be regarded as local or exceptional. 

2. Potential Gradient. — In dry weather the electric potential in 
the atmosphere is normally positive relative to the earth, and 
increases with the height. The existence of earth currents (q. v.) 
shows that the earth, strictly speaking, is not all at one potential, 
but the natural differences of potential between points on the 
earth's surface a mile apart are insignificant compared to the 
normal potential difference between the ea"rth and a point one 
foot above it. What is aimed at in ordinary observations of 
atmospheric potential is the measurement of the difference of 
potential between the earth and a point a given distance above it, 
or of the difference of potential betweeen two points in the same 
vertical line a given distance apart. Let a conductor, say a 
metallic sphere, be supported by a metal rod of negligible 
electric capacity whose other end is earthed. As the whole 
conductor must be at zero (i.e. the earth's) potential, there must 
be an induced charge on the sphere, producing at its centre a 
potential equal but of opposite sign to what would exist at the 
same spot in free air. This neglects any charge in the air 
1 See Authorities below. 



ATMOSPHERIC ELECTRICITY 



861 



displaced by the sphere, and assumes a statical state of condi- 
tions and that the conductor itself exerts no disturbing influence. 
Suppose now that the sphere's earth connexion is broken and 
that it is carried without loss of charge inside a building at zero 
potential. If its potential as observed there is -V (volts) , then 
the potential of the air at the spot occupied by the sphere was 
+ V. This method in one shape or another has been often 
employed. Suppose next that a fixed insulated conductor is 
somehow kept at the potential of the air at a given point, then the 
measurement of its potential is equivalent to a measurement of 
that of the air. This is the basis of a variety of methods. In the 
earliest the conductor was represented by long metal wires, 
supported by silk or other insulating material, and left to pick 
up the air's potential. The addition of sharp points was a step in 
advance; but the method hardly became a quantitative one 
until the sharp points were replaced by a flame (fuse, gas, lamp), 
or by a liquid jet breaking into drops. The matter leaving the 
conductor, whether the products of combustion or the drops of 
a liquid, supplies the means of securing equality of potential 
between the conductor and the air at the spot where the matter 
quits electrical connexion with the conductor. Of late years 
the function of the collector is discharged in some forms of 
apparatus by a salt of radium. Of flame collectors the two best 
known are Lord Kelvin's portable electrometer with a fuse, or 
F. Exner's gold leaf electroscope in conjunction with an oil lamp 
or gas flame. Of liquid collectors the representative is Lord 
Kelvin's water-dropping electrograph; while Benndorf's is the 
form of radium collector that has been most used. It cannot be 
said that any one form of collector is superior all round. Flame 
collectors blow out in high winds, whilst water-droppers are apt 
to get frozen in winter. At first sight the balance of advantages 
seems to lie with radium. But while gaseous products and even 
falling water are capable of modifying electrical conditions in 
their immediate neighbourhood, the " infection " produced by 
radium is more insidious, and other drawbacks present them- 
selves in practice. It requires a radium salt of high radioactivity 
to be at all comparable in effectiveness with a good water-dropper. 
Experiment 6y Fl Z/nJte (&/ indicated tAat a water-dropper • 



there are external buildings or trees sufficiently near to influence 
the potential. It is thus futile to compare the absolute voltages 
met with at two stations, unless allowance can be made for the 
influence of the environment. With a view to this, it has become 
increasingly common of late years to publish not the voltages 
actually observed, but values deduced from them for the 
potential gradient in the open in volts per metre. Observa- 
tions are made at a given height over level open ground near the 
observatory, and a comparison with the simultaneous results 
from the self-recording electrograph enables the records from the 
latter to be expressed as potential gradients in the open. In the 
case, however, of many observatories, especially as regards the 
older records, no data for reduction exist; further, the reduction 
to the open is at best only an approximation, the success attend- 
ing which probably varies considerably at different stations. 
This is one of the reasons why in the figures for the annual and 
diurnal variations in Tables I., II. and III., the potential has been 
expressed as percentages of its mean value for the year or the day. 
In most cases the environment of a collector is not absolutely 
invariable. If the shape of the equipotential surfaces near it is 
influenced by trees, shrubs or grass, their influence will vary 
throughout the year. In winter the varying depth of snow may 
exert an appreciable effect. There are sources of uncertainty 
in the instrument itself. Unless the insulation is perfect, the 
potential recorded falls short of that at the spot where the radium 
is placed or the water jet breaks. The action of the collector is 
opposed by the leakage through imperfect insulation, or natural 
dissipation, and this may introduce a fictitious element into the 
apparent annual or diurnal variation. The potentials that have 
to be dealt with are often hundreds and sometimes thousands of 
volts, and insulation troubles are more serious than is generally 
appreciated. When a water jet serves as collector, the pressure 
under which it issues should be practically constant. If the 
pressure alters as the water tank empties, a discontinuity occurs 
in the trace when the tank is refilled, and a fictitious element may 
be introduced into the diurnal variation. When rain or snow is 
falling, the potential frequently changes rapidly. These changes 
are often too rapid to 6e satisfactorily deaft wi'tA 6y an ordinary 



m 


Table I.- 


—Annual Variation Potential Gradient. 












Place and Period. 


Jan. 


Feb. 


March. 


April. 


May. 


June. 


July. 


Aug. 


Sept. 


Oct. 


Nov. 


Dec. 


Karasjok (10), 1903-1904 . 


143 


150 


137 


94 


74 


65 


70 


67 


67 


87 


120 


126 


Sodankyla (31), 1882-1883 . . 


94 


133 


148 


155 


186 


93 


53 


77 


47 


72 


71 


71 


Potsdam (9), 1904 .... 


167 


95 


118 


88 


93 


72 


73 


65 


97 


IOI 


108 


123 


Kew (12), 1898-1904 . . . 


127 


141 


113 


87 


77 


70 


61 


72 


76 


96 


126 


153 


Greenwich (13), 1893-1894, 1896 


no 


112 


127 


107 


83 


71 


76 


84 


83 


104 


104 


139 


Florence (14), 1883-1886 . . 


132 


no 


98 


84 


86 


81 


77 


90 


89 


99 


129 


125 


Perpignan (IS), 1886-1888 . . 


121 


112 


108 


89 


9i 


92 


89 


82 


74 


99 


122 


121 


Lisbon (16), 1884-1886 . . . 


104 


105 


104 


92 


9i 


93 


87 


92 


100 


99 


"5 


117 


Tokyo (17), 1897-1898,1900-1901 


165 


145 


117 


86 


62 


58 


4i 


59 


59 


97 


134 


176 


Batavia (18)(2 m.), 1887-1890 . 


97 


115 


155 


127 


129 


105 


79 


62 


69 


79 


90 


93 


(7-8 m.) 1890-1895 . 


100 


89 


103 


120 


98 


103 


85 


99 


73 


IOI 


117 


112 



having a number of fine holes, or having a fine jet under a con- 
siderable pressure, picks up the potential in about a tenth of the 
time required by the ordinary radium preparation protected by a 
glass tube. These fine jet droppers with a mixture of alcohol and 
water have proved very effective for balloon observations. 

3. Before considering observational data, it is expedient to 
mention various sources of uncertainty. Above the level plain of 
absolutely smooth surface, devoid of houses or vegetation, the 
equipotential surfaces under normal conditions would be strictly 
horizontal, and if we could determine the potential at one metre 
above the ground we should have a definite measure of the 
potential gradient at the earth's surface. The presence, how- 
ever, of apparatus or observers upsets the conditions, while above 
uneven ground or near a tree or a building the equipotential 
surfaces cease to be horizontal. In an ordinary climate a building 
seems to be practically at the earth's potential; near its walls the 
equipotential surfaces are highly inclined, and near the ridges 
they may lie very close together. The height of the walls in the 
various observatories, the height of the collectors, and the 
distance they project from the wall vary largely, and sometimes 



electrometer, and they sometimes leave hardly a trace on the 
photographic paper. Again rain dripping from exposed parts 
of the apparatus may materially affect the record. It is thus 
customary in calculating diurnal inequalities either to take no 
•account of days on which there is an appreciable rainfall, or else 
to form separate tables for " dry " or " fine " days and for " all " 
days. Speaking generally, the exclusion of days of rain and of 
negative potential comes pretty much to the same thing, and the 
presence or absence of negative potential is not infrequently 
the criterion by reference to which days are rejected or are 
accepted as normal. 

4. The potential gradient near the ground varies with the season 
of the year and the hour of the day, and is largely dependent on the 
weather conditions. It is thus difficult to form even a rough estimate 
of the mean value at any place unless hourly readings exist, extend- 
ing over the whole or the greater part of a year. It is even some- 
what precipitate to assume that a mean value deduced from a single 
year is fairly representative of average conditions. At Potsdam, 
G. Liideling (9) found for the mean value for 1904 in volts per metre 
242. At Karasjok in the extreme north of Norway G. C. Simpson (10) 
in 1903-1904 obtained 139. AtKrewsn}iinster!orl902P. B. Zdlss(U) 
gives 98. At Kew (12) the mean for individual years from 1898 to 



862 



ATMOSPHERIC ELECTRICITY 



1904 varied from 141 in 1900 to 179 in 1899, the mean from the 
seven yeais combined being 159. The large difference between 
the means obtained at Potsdam and Kremsmtinster, as compared 
to the comparative similarity between the results for Kew and 
Karasjok, suggests that the mean value of the potential gradient 
may be much more dependent on local conditions than on difference 
of latitude. 

At any single station potential gradient has a wide range of 
values. The largest positive and negative values recorded are met 
with during disturbed weather. During thunderstorms the record 
from an electrograph shows large sudden excursions, the trace usually 
going off the sheet with every flash of lightning when the thunder 
is near. Exactly what the potential changes amount to under such 
circumstances it is impossible to say; what the trace shows depends 
largely on the type of electrometer. Large rapid changes are also 
met with in the absence of thunder during heavy rain or snow fall. 



In England the largest values of a sufficiently steady character to 
be shown correctly by an ordinary electrograph occur during winter 
fogs. At such times gradients of +400 or +500 volts per metre are 
by no means unusual at Kew, and voltages of 700 or 800 are occa- 
sionally met with. 

5. Annual Variation. — Table I. gives the annual variation of the 
potential gradient at a number of stations arranged according to 
latitude, the mean value for the whole year being taken in each case 
as 100. Karasjok as already mentioned is in the extreme north of 
Norway (69 17' N.) ; Sodankyla was the Finnish station of the 
international polar year 1882-1883. At Batavia, which is near the 
equator (6° 11' S.) the annual variation seems somewhat irregular. 
Further, the results obtained with the water-dropper at two heights 
— viz. 2 and 7-8 metres — differ notably. At all the other stations 
the difference between summer and winter months is conspicuous. 
From the European data one would be disposed to conclude that 









Table II. 


— Diurnal Variation Potential Gradient. 










Station. 


Karasjok. 


Sodankyla. 


Kew (19, 12). 


Greenwich. 


Florence. 


Perpignan. 


Lisbon. 


Tokyo. 


Batavia. 


Cape 
Horn(20). 


Period. 


1903-4. 


1882-83. 


1862- 
1864. 


1898- 
1904- 


1893-96. 


1883-85. 


1886-88. 


1884-86. 


1897-98. 
1 900-1. 


1887- 
1890. 


1890- 
1895- 


1882-83. 


Days. 




All. 


All. 


Quiet. 


All. 


All. 


Fine. 


All. 


All. 


Dry. 


Dry. 


Pds. 


h 


5-5 


30 


3-5 


3-35 


3-0 




8-4 


3-0 


i-7 


2 


7-8 


3-5 


I 


2'5 


1-0 


1-3 


i-8 




1-5 


o-5 


2-0 






2-0 


Hour. 


























1 


83 


91 


87 


93 


97 


92 


78 


84 


IOI 


147 


125 


82 


2 


73 


85 


79 


88 


89 


83 


72 


80 


98 


141 


114 


73 


3 


66 


82 


74 


84 


87 


77 


71 


78 ' 


97 


135 


109 


85 


4 


63 


84 


72 


83 


86 


75 


72 


81 


99 


128 


102 


81 


5 


60 


89 


7i 


85 


86 


74 


77 


83 


121 


127 


IOI 


85 


6 


68 


91 


77 


93 


92 


82 


92 


92 


154 


137 


117 


95 


7 


81 


97 


92 


103 


100 


100 


107 


IOI 


167 


I5« 


H7 


106 


8 


87 


100 


106 


112 


102 


112 


114 


105 


149 


104 


119 


118 


9 


94 


98 


107 


"5 


100 


113 


in 


104 


117 


b 7 


82 


119 


10 


IOI 


102 


100 


112 


IOI 


107 


100 


104 


87 


42 


55 


123 


11 


99 


98 


90 


IOI 


96 


100 


96 


102 


70 


35 


46 


123 


Noon. 


i°3 


102 


92 


94 


97 


95 


99 


108 


61 


30 


43 


115 


1 


106 


105 


90 


89 


96 


92 


99 


in 


54 


30 


42 


112 


2 


108 


107 


91 


87 


94 


90 


97 


114 


49 


30 


43 


94 


3 


108 


108 


92 


88 


95 


89 


99 


109 


53 


33 


46 


89 


4 


109 


108 


98 


93 


97 


89 


105 


108 


61 


4i 


53 


88 


5 


no 


108 


108 


99 


102 


94 


"3 


108 


76 


67 


73 


84 


6 


119 


no 


121 


108 


108 


113 


126 


in 


95 


91 


108 


no 


7 


129 


102 


134 


115 


in 


121 


131 


116 


107 


120 


145 


107 


8 


136 


in 


139 


118 


"5 


129 


129 


114 


114. 


137 


155 


123 


9 


139 


in 


138 


119 


117 


132 


120 


109 


119 


146 


155 


112 


10 


133 


104 


128 


"5 


117 


127 


109 


102 


120 


148 


147 


99 


11 


121 


108 


113 


108 


in 


114 


97 


92 


119 


151 


143 


85 


12 


102 


93 


99 


99 


104 


100 


86 


85 


112 


147 


130 


98 













Table III- 


-Diurna 


Variation Potential Gradient. 












Station. 


Karasjok. 


Sodankyla. 


Kew. 


Greenwich. 


Bureau 
Central (21). 


Eiffel 
Tower(21) 


Perpignan (21). 


Batavia. 
(2 m.) 


Period. 


1903-4. 


1882-83. 


1 


898-1904. 


1894 and '96. 


1894-99. 


1896-98. 


1885-95- 


1887-90. 




Winter. 


Summer. 


Winter. 


Summer. 


Winter. 


Equinox. 


Summer. 


Winter. 


Summer. 


Winter. 


Summer. 


Summer. 


Winter. 


Summer. 


Winter. 


Summer. 


Hour. 
1 


76 


104 


90 


99 


91 


93 


96 


87 


no 


79 


102 


90 


72 


88 


145 


I49 


2 


66 


96 


79 


84 


86 


88 


90 


84 


IOI 


71 


92 


83 


67 


83 


139 


142 


3 


57 


89 


78 


90 


82 


85 


85 


7 6 


98 


70 


88 


79 


66 


81 


137 


135 


4 


55 


83 


74 


99 


81 


84 


84 


77 


96 


69 


84 


76 


67 


83 


131 


I27 


5 


5° 


79 


74 


m 


82 


87 


90 


78 


94 


75 


94 


78 


72 


92 


I32 


123 


6 


61 


83 


80 


114 


86 


97 


IOI 


82 


101 


83 


106 


87 


84 


107 


138 


136 


7 


78 


89 


86 


117 


95 


109 


113 


94 


107 


98 


118 


97 


104 


114 


166 


153 


8 


82 


93 


95 


122 


104 


118 


120 


97 


in 


in 


120 


103 


122 


108 


118 


92 


9 


90 


93 


91 


109 


in 


119 


119 


98 


102 


113 


106 


no 


126 


100 


74 


64 


10 


104 


93 


106 


IOI 


114 


no 


no 


102 


98 


in 


94 


109 


114 ' 


93 


43 


40 


11 


102 


92 


98 


97 


107 


95 


97 


103 


86 


108 


84 


107 


98 


90 


35 


36 


Noon. 


119 


90 


98 


100 


102 


86 


87 


107 


94 


106 


77 


104 


99 


95 


31 


3° 


1 


116 


94 


116 


97 


99 


81 


80 


107 


85 


112 


79 


107 


96 


93 


29 


33 


2 


118 


97 


"3 


97 


97 


80 


76 


109 


82 


112 


81 


no 


94 


90 


28 


32 


3 


119 


100 


121 


93 


99 


82 


76 


in 


78 


in 


78 


107 


95 


88 


24 


41 


4 


U5 


99 


in 


96 


103 


88 


80 


116 


81 


113 


80 


i°5 


102 


92 


3° 


49 


5 


120 


106 


105 


106 


108 


96 


87 


112 


93 


120 


85 


106 


115 


98 


60 


74 


6 


131 


104 


115 


92 


in 


109 


98 


114 


98 


124 


97 


109 


128 


no 


88 


94 ' 


7 


136 


no 


118 


102 


114 


120 


in 


117 


99 


124 


123 


113 


133 


122 


119 


122 


8 


134 


"3 


117 


106 


112 


124 


123 


113 


108 


116 


134 


no 


131 


127 


138 


135 


9 


137 


125 


115 


90 


in 


123 


129 


in 


118 


104 


13° 


109 


124 


125 


145 


147 


. 10 


125 


135 


112 


90 


108 


118 


125 


no 


124 


97 


122 


105 


in 


117 


148 


148 


11 


114 


126 


113 


103 


103 


109 


116 


102 


120 


90 


115 


IOI 


96 


108 


149 


152 


12 


96 


in 


95 


85 


96 


99 


105 


93 "6 


83 


108 


94 


83 


95 


148 


146 



ATMOSPHERIC ELECTRICITY 



863 



the variation throughout the year diminishes as one approaches the 
equator. It is decidedly less at Perpignan and Lisbon than at 
Potsdam, Kew and Greenwich, but nowhere is the seasonal difference 
more conspicuous than at Tokyo, which is south of Lisbon. 

At the temperate stations the maximum occurs near mid- winter; 
in the Arctic it seems deferred towards spring. 

6. Diurnal Variation. — Table II. gives the mean diurnal variation 
for the whole year at a number of stations arranged in order of 
latitude, the mean from the 2\ hourly values being taken as 100. 
The data are some from "all ' days, some from " quiet," " fine " 
or "dry" days. The height, h, and the distance from the wall, /, 
where the potential is measured are given in metres when known. 
In most cases two distinct maxima and minima occur in the 24 
hours. The principal maximum is usually found in the evening 
between 8 and 10 P.M., the principal minimum in the morning from 
3 to 5 A.M. At some stations the minimum in the afternoon is in- 
distinctly shown, but at Tokyo and Batavia it is much more con- 
spicuous than the morning minimum. 

7. In Table III. the diurnal inequality is shown for "winter" 
and " summer " respectively. In all cases the mean value for the 

24 hours is taken as 
100. By " summer " 
is meant April to Sep- 
tember at Sodankyla, 
Greenwich and Bata- 
via ; May to August at 
Kew, Bureau Central 
(Paris), Eiffel Tower 
and Perpignan ; and 
May to July at Karas- 
jok. " Winter " in- 
cludes October to 
March at Sodankyla, 
Greenwich and Bata- 
via ; November to 
February at Kew and 
Bureau Central; 

November to January 
at Karasjok, and 
December and Janu- 
ary at Perpignan. 
Mean results from 
March, April, Septem- 
ber and October at 
Kew are assigned to 
" Equinox." 

At Batavia the 
difference between 
winter and summer is 
comparatively "small. 
Elsewhere there is a 
tendencyforthe double 
period, usually so pro- 
minent in summer, to 
become less pro- 
nounced in winter, the 
afternoon minimum 
tending to disappear. 
Even in summer the double period is not prominent in the arctic 
climate of Karasjok or on the top of the Eiffel Tower. The diurnal 
variation in summer at the latter station is shown graphically in the 
top curve of fig. I. It presents a remarkable resemblance to the 
adjacent curve, which gives the diurnal variation at mid-winter at the 
Bureau Central. The resemblance between these curves is much 
closer than that between the Bureau Central's own winter and 
summer curves. All three Paris curves show three peaks, the first 
and third representing the ordinary forenoon and afternoon maxima. 
In summer at the Bureau Central the intermediate peak nearly dis- 
appears in the profound afternoon depression, but it is still recogniz- 
able. This three-peaked curve is not wholly peculiar to Paris, being 
seen, for instance, at Lisbon in summer. The December and June 



100 
Bureau Central 
Winter 

Bureau Central 

Summer 

100 



Kew 
December 100 




Kew 
Potential 100 



Kew 
Barometric 100 
Pressure 



curves for Kew are good examples of the ordinary nature of the differ- 
ence between midwinter and midsummer. The afternoon minimum at 
Kew gradually deepens as midsummer approaches. Simultaneously the 
forenoon maximum occurs earlier and the afternoon maximum later 
in the day. The two last curves in the diagram contrast the diurnal 
variation at Kew in potential gradient and in barometric pressure 
for the year as a whole. The somewhat remarkable resemblance 
between the diurnal variation for the two elements, first remarked on 
by J. D. Everett (19), is of interest in connexion with recent theoretical 
conclusions by J. P. Elster and H. F. K. Geitel and by H. Ebert. 

In the potential curves of the diagram the ordinates represent the 
hourly values expressed — as in Tables II. and III. — as percentages 
of the mean value for the day. If this be overlooked, a wrong im- 
pression may be derived as to the absolute amplitudes of the changes. 
The Kew curves, for instance, might suggest that the range (maximum 
less minimum hourly value) was larger in June than in December. 
In reality the December range was 82, the June only 57 volts; but 
the mean value of the potential was 243 in December as against ill 
in June. So again, in the case of the Paris curves, the absolute value 
of the diurnal range in summer was much greater for the Eiffel 
Tower than for the Bureau Central, but the mean voltage was 2150 
at the former station and only 134 at the latter. 

8. Fourier Coefficients. — Diurnal inequalities such as those of 
Tables II. and III. and intended to eliminate irregular changes, but 
they also to some extent eliminate regular changes if the hours of 
maxima and minima or the character of the diurnal variation alter 
throughout the year. The alteration that takes place in the regular 
diurnal inequality throughout the year is best seen by analysing it 
into a Fourier series of the type 

Cisin (t+ai)+Cisin (2/+a 2 )+c 3 sin (st+a^+d sin (4/4-04) + . . . 

where t denotes time counted from (local) midnight, c\, C2, £3, Ct, . . . 
are the amplitudes of the component harmonic waves of periods 
24, 12, 8 and 6 hours; a l} a?, a 3 , at, are the corresponding phase 
angles. One hour of time / is counted as 15 , and a delay of one hour 
in the time of maximum answers to a diminution of 15 in cj, of 30 
in 02, and so on. If oi,' say, varies much throughout the year, or 
if the ratios of Ci, c s , Ct, . . . to Ci, vary much, then a diurnal inequality 
derived from a whole year, or from a season composed of several 
months, represents a mean curve arising from the superposition of 
a number of curves, which differ in shape and in the positions of 
their maxima and minima. The result, if considered alone, in- 
evitably leads to an underestimate of the average amplitude of the 
regular diurnal variation. 

It is also desirable to have an idea of the size of the irregular 
changes which vary from one day to the next. On stormy days^ as 
already mentioned, the irregular changes hardly admit of satis- 
factory treatment. Even on the quietest days irregular changes 
are always numerous and often large. 

Table IV. aims at giving a summary of the several phenomena 
for a single station, Kew, on electrically quiet days. The first line 
gives the mean value of the potential gradient, the second the mean 
excess of the largest over the smallest hourly value on individual 
days. The hourly values are derived from smoothed curves, the 
object being to get the mean ordinate for a 60-minute period. If 
the actual crests of the excursions had been measured the figures 
in the second line would have been even larger. The third line gives 
the range of the regular diurnal inequality, the next four lines the 
amplitudes of the first four Fourier waves into which the regular 
diurnal inequality has been analysed. These mean values, ranges- 
and amplitudes are all measured in volts per metre (in the open). 
The last four lines of Table IV. give the phase angles of the first 
four Fourier waves. 

It will be noticed that the difference between the greatest and 
least hourly values is, in all but three winter months, actually 
larger than the mean value of the potential gradient for the day; 
it bears to the range of the regular diurnal inequality a ratio vary- 
ing from 2-0 in May to 3-6 in November. 

At midwinter the 24-hour term is the largest, but near midsummer 
it is small compared to the 12-hour term. The 24-hour term is very 
variable both as regards its amplitude and its phase angle (and so 



Table IV. — Absolute Potential Data at Kew (12). 





Jan. 


Feb. 


March. 


April. 


May. 


June. 


July. 


Aug. 


Sept. 


Oct. 


Nov. 


Dec. 


Mean Potential Gradient 
Mean of individual daily ranges 
Range in Diurnal inequality 

[ Cl 
jet 

Amplitudes of Fourier waves ] c 5 

ffll 

Jo, 

Phase angles 'of Fourier waves | a t 

la t 


201 
203 

73 
22 
21 

7 

2 


224 
218 

94 
22 

33 
10 

3 


180 

210 

83 

17 

34 
5 
5 


138 

164 

74 

13 

31 

5 

6 


123 

143 

71 

18 

22 

3 
4 


in 

132 

57 

9 

23 

1 

1 


98 
117 

55 
6 

24 
3 
4 


114 

129 

60 

6 

26 

2 

3 


121 

141 

54 

9 

23 

3 

4 


153 
196 

63 
7 

30 
6 
3 


200 

186 

52 

14 

17 

5 

2 


243 . 

213 

82 

30 

21 

7 

3 




206 

170 

11 

235 




204 
171 

9 

225 


O 

123 

186 

36 

307 


O 

72 

193 
96 

3H 


O 

86 
188 
100 
3H 




79 
183 
125 

277 




48 
185 
124 

293 


O 

142 
182 
107 
313 




154 

199 

16 

330 




192 

266 

18 

288 


e 

202 

212 

38 

238 


O 

208 

175 

36 

249 



86 4 



ATMOSPHERIC ELECTRICITY 



its hour of maximum). The 12-hour term is much less variable, 
especially as regards its phase angle; its amplitude shows distinct 
maxima near the equinoxes. That the 8-hour and 6-hour waves, 
though small near midsummer, represent more than mere accidental 
irregularities, seems a safe inference from the regularity apparent 
in the annual variation of their phase angles. 

9. Table V, gives some data for the 24-hour and 12-hour Fourier 
coefficients, which will serve to illustrate the diversity between 
different stations. In this table, unlike Table IV., amplitudes are 
all expressed as decimals of the mean value of the potential gradient 
for the corresponding season. " Winter " means generally the four 
midwinter, and " summer " the four midsummer, months; but at 
Karasjok three, and at Kremsmiinster six, months are included in 
each season. The results for the Sonnblick are derived from a 
comparatively small number of days in August and September. 
At Potsdam the data represent the arithmetic means derived 
from the Fourier analysis for the individual months comprising 
the season. The 1862-1864 data from Kew — due to J. D. 
Everett (19) — are based on "all" days; the others, except Karas- 
jok to some extent, represent electrically quiet days. The cause 
of the large difference between the two sets of data for ft at 

Table V. — Fourier Series Amplitudes and Phase Angles. 



nearly uniform for heights up to 30 to 40 metres above the ground. 
At great heights free balloons seem necessary. The balloon carries 
two collectors a given vertical distance apart. The potential differ- 
ence between the two is recorded, and the potential gradient is thus 
found. Some of the earliest balloon observations made the gradient 
increase with the height, but such a result is now regarded as 
abnormal. A balloon may leave the earth with a charge, or become 
charged through discharge of ballast. These possibilities may not 
have been sufficiently realized at first. Among the most important 
balloon observations are those by le Cadet (1) F. Linke (28) and 
H. Gerdien (29). The following are samples from a number of days' 
results, given in le Cadet's book, h is the height in metres, P the 
gradient in volts per metre. 

Ana o t8oi 5 * 82 4 830 1060 1255 1290 1745 1940 2080 2310 2520 
Aug. 9, I893 i p _, 7 43 4S 4I 42 34 25 21 18 16 



Place 




Period. 


Winter. 


Summer. 




ft. 


c 2 . 


. ■ al - 


a 2 . 


ft. 


c 2 . 


01. 


a 2 . 


Kew . 

Bureau Central 
Eiffel Tower 
Sonnblick (22) 
Karasjok . 
Kremsmiinster (23) 
Potsdam 




1862-64 

1 898- 1 904 

1894-98 

1896-98 

1902-3 

1903-4 

1902 

1904 


0-283 
•102 
•220 

•356 
■280 
•269 


0-160 
•103 
•104 

•144 
•117 

•IOI 




184 
206 

223 

189 
224 

194 




193 
I80 
206 

155 
194 

185 


0-127 
•079 
•130 

•133 
•208 

•165 
•166 
•096 


0-229 
•213 
•200 
•085 
•120 
•093 
■153 
•152 




III 
87 
95 
216 
178 
141 
241 
343 




179 
186 
197 
171 

H5 
144 
209 

185 



Kew is uncertain. The potential gradient is in all cases lower in 
summer than winter, and thus the reduction in ft in summer would 
appear even larger than in Table V. if the results were expressed in 
absolute measure. At Karasjok and Kremsmiinster the seasonal 
variation in ai seems comparatively small, but at Potsdam and the 
Bureau Central it is as large as at Kew. Also, whilst the winter 
values of a t are fairly similar at the several stations the summer 
values are widely different. Except at Karasjok, where the diurnal 
changes seem somewhat irregular, the relative amplitude of the 
12-hour term is considerably greater in summer than in winter. The 
values of a 2 at the various stations differ comparatively little, and 
show but little seasonal change. Thus the 12-hour term has a much 
greater uniformity than the 24-hour term. This possesses signifi- 
cance in connexion with the view, supported by A. B. Chauveau (21), 
F. Exner (24) and others, that the 12-hour term is largely if not 
entirely a local phenomenon, due to the action of the lower atmo- 
spheric strata, and tending to disappear even in summer at high 
altitudes. Exner attributes the double daily maximum, which is 
largely a consequence of the 12-hour wave, to a thin layer near the 
ground, which in the early afternoon absorbs the solar radiation of 
shortest wave length. This layer he believes specially characteristic 
of arid dusty regions, while comparatively non-existent in moist 
climates or where foliage is luxuriant. In support of his theory 
Exner states that he has found but little trace of the double maximum 
and minimum in Ceylon and elsewhere. C. Nordmann (25) describes 
some similar results which he obtained in Algeria during August and 
September 1905. His station, Philippeville, is close to the shores 
of the Mediterranean, and sea breezes persisted during the day. 
The diurnal variation showed only a single maximum and minimum, 
between 5 and 6 p. M. and 4 and 5 A. M. respectively. So again, a few 
days' observations on the top of Mont Blanc (4810 metres) by 
le Cadet (26) in August and September 1902, showed only a single 
period, with maximum between 3 and 4 P. M., and minimum about 
3 a.m. Chauveau points to the reduction in the 12-hour term as 
compared to the 24-hour term on the Eiffel Tower, and infers the 
practical disappearance of the former at no great height. The close 
approach in the values for ft in Table V. from the Bureau Central 
and the Eiffel Tower, and the reduction of c 2 at the latter station, are 
unquestionably significant facts; but the summer value for c 2 at 
Karasjok — a low level station — is nearly as small as that at the 
Eiffel Tower, and notably smaller than that at the Sonnblick (3100 
metres). Again, Kew is surrounded by a large park, not devoid of 
trees, and hardly the place where Exner's theory would suggest a 
large value for c 2 , and yet the summer value of c 2 at Kew is the 
largest in Table V. 

1 o. Observations on mountain tops generally show high potentials 
near the ground. This only means that the equipotential surfaces 
are crowded together, just as they are near the ridge of a house. 
To ascertain how the increase in the voltage varies as the height 
in the free atmosphere increases, it is necessary to employ kites 
or' balloons. At small heights Exner (27) has employed captive 
balloons, provided with a burning fuse, and carrying a wire con- 
nected with an electroscope on the ground. He found the gradient 



Sen 11 1807 - * IX 4° J 378 1630 1914 2370 2786 3136 3364 3912 4085 
aep.ii, i»97} p 43 3 g 33 25 22 2I lg lg I4 I3 

The ground value on the last occasion was 150. From observations 
during twelve balloon ascents, Linke concludes that below the 
1500-metre level there are numerous sources of disturbance, the 
gradient at any given height varying much 
from day to day and hour to hour ; but at 
greater heights there is much more uni- 
formity. At heights from 1500 to 6000 
metres his observations agreed well with 
the formula 

dV/dh = 34.—o-oo6h, 
V denoting the potential, h the height in 
metres. The formula makes the gradient 
diminish from 25 volts per metre at 1500 
metres height to 10 volts per metre at 
4000 metres. Linke's mean value for 
dVjdh at the ground was 125. Accepting 
Linke's formula, the potential at 4000 
metres is 43,750 volts higher than at 1500 
metres. If the mean of the gradients 
observed at the ground and at 1500 metres be taken as an approxi- 
mation to the mean value of the gradient throughout the lowest 1500 
metres of the atmosphere, we find for the potential at 1500 metres 
level 112,500 volts. Thus at 4000 metres the potential seems of 
the order of 150,000 volts. Bearing this in mind, one can readily 
imagine how close together the equipotential surfaces must lie 
near the summit of a high sharp mountain peak. 

11. At most stations a negative potential gradient is exceptional, 
unless during rain or thunder. During rain the potential is usually 
but not always negative, and frequent alternations of sign are not 
uncommon. In some localities, however, negative potential gradient 
is by no means uncommon, at least at some seasons, in the absence 
of rain. At Madras, Michie Smith (30) often observed negative 
potential during bright August and September days. The pheno- 
menon was quite common between 9-30 a.m. and noon during 
westerly winds, which at Madras are usually very dry and dusty. 
At Sodankyla, in 1882-1883, K. S. Lemstrom and F. C. Biese (31) 
found that out of 255 observed occurrences of negative potential, 
106 took place in the absence of rain or snow. The proportion of 
occurrences of negative potential under a clear sky was much above 
its average in autumn. At Sodankyla rain or snowfall was often 
unaccompanied by change of sign in the potential. At the polar 
station Godthaab (32) in 1882-1883, negative potential seemed some- 
times associated with aurora (see Aurora Polaris). 

Lenard, Elster and Geitel, and others have found the potential 
gradient negative near waterfalls, the influence sometimes extending 
to a considerable distance. Lenard (33) found that when pure water 
falls upon water the neighbouring air takes a, negative charge. 
Kelvin, Maclean and Gait (34) found the effect greatest in the air 
near the level of impact. A sensible effect remained, however, after 
the influence of splashing was eliminated. Kelvin, Maclean and Gait 
regard this property of falling water as an objection to the use of a 
water-dropper indoors, though not of practical importance when it 
is used out of doors. 

12. Elster and Geitel (35) have measured the charge carried by 
raindrops falling into an insulated vessel. Owing to observational 
difficulties, the exact measure of success attained is a little difficult 
to gauge, but it seems fairly certain that raindrops usually carry a. 
charge. Elster and Geitel found the sign of the charge often fluctuate 
repeatedly during a single rain storm, but it seemed more often than 
not opposite to that of the simultaneous potential gradient. Gerdien' 
has more recently repeated the experiments, employing an apparatus 
devised by him for the purpose. It has been found by C. T. R. 
Wilson (36) that a vessel in which freshly fallen rain or snow has been 
evaporated to dryness shows radioactive properties lasting for a 
few hours. The results obtained from equal weights of rain and snow 
seem of the same order. 

13. W. Linss (6) found that an insulated conductor charged either 
positively or negatively lost its charge in the free atmosphere ; the 
potential V after time / being connected with its initial value Vo 
by a formula of the type V = V e — al where a is constant. This was, 
confirmed by Elster and Geitel (7), whose form of dissipation appa- 
ratus has been employed in most recent work. The percentage of the 



ATMOSPHERIC ELECTRICITY 



865 



charge which is dissipated per minute is usually denoted by a + or 
o_ according to its sign. The mean of a + and c_ is usually de- 
noted by a+ or simply by a, while q is employed for the ratio a_/c + . 
Some observers when giving mean values take 2(a_/a+) as the 
mean value of q, while others take 2(a_)/2(a + ). The Elster and 
Geitel apparatus is furnished with' a cover, serving to protect the 
dissipator from the direct action of rain, wind or sunlight. It is 
usual to observe with this cover on, but some observers, e.g. 
A. Gockel, have made long series of observations without it. The 
loss of charge is due to more than one cause, and it is difficult to 
attribute an absolutely definite meaning even to 
results obtained with the cover on. Gockel (37) says 
that the results he obtained without the cover when 
divided by 3 are fairly comparable with those obtained 
under the usual conditions; but the appropriate 
divisor must vary to some extent with the climatic 
conditions. Thus results obtained for a + or a_ with- 
out the cover are of doubtful value for purposes 
of comparison with those found elsewhere with it on. 
In the case of q the uncertainty is much less. 

Table VI. gives the mean values of a± and q 
found at various places. The observations were 
usually confined to a few hours of the day, very 
commonly between 11 a.m. and 1 p.m., and in absence of in- 
formation as to the diurnal variation it is impossible to say how 
much this influences the results. The first eight stations lie inland; 
that at Seewalchen (38) was, however, adjacent to a large lake. The 
next five stations are on the coast or on islands. The final four 
are at high levels. In the cases where the observations were con- 
fined to a few months the representative nature of the results is 
more doubtful. 

On mountain summits q tends to be large, i.e. a negative charge is 
lost much faster than a positive charge. Apparently q has also a 
tendency to be large near the sea, but this phenomenon is not seen 
at Trieste. An exactly opposite phenomenon, it may be remarked, 
is seen near waterfalls, q becoming very small. Only Innsbruck 
and Mattsee give a mean value of q less than unity. Also, as later 
observations at Innsbruck give more normal values for g, some doubt 

Table VI. — Dissipation. Mean Values. 



Table VII. gives comparative results for winter (October to March) 
and summer at a few stations, the value for the season being the 
arithmetic mean from the individual months composing it. At 
Karasjok (10), Simpson observed thrice a day; the summer value 
there is nearly double the winter both for a + and a_. The Krems- 
munster (42) figures show a smaller but still distinct excess in the 
summer values. At Trieste (47), Mazelle's data from all days of the 
year show no decided seasonal change in a+ or a_ ; but when 
days on which the wind was high are excluded the summer value is 
decidedly the higher. At Freiburg (43), q seems decidedly larger in 

Table VII. — Dissipation. 



Place. 




Winter. 




Summer. 


a+ 


o_ 


a± 


2 


a + 


o_ 


°± 


S 


Karasjok 1903-1904 
Kremsmunster 1903 . 
Freiburg 

Trieste 1902-1903 
,, calm days 


2-28 

1-14 
0-56 


2-69 
1-30 

o-59 


2-49 

1-22 

o : 58 
o-35 


i-i8 
1-14 

i-57 
1-07 


4-38 
i-38 

o-55 


4-94 
1-56 

o-6i 


4-65 

1-47 

o : 58 
0-48 


I-I3 

I-I2 
1-26 

I-I3 



Place. 


Period. 


Season. 


Observer or 
Authority. 


a+ 


2 


Karasjok . . . . 


1903-4 


Year 


Simpson (10) 


3-57 


i-i5 


Wolfenbuttel 




Year 


Elster and Geitel(39) 


i-33 


1-05 


Potsdam . . . . 


1904 


Year 


Ludeling (40) 


1 -1.3 


1-33 , 


Kremsmunster 


1902 


Year 


Zeiss (41) 


1-32 


1-18 


,, .... 


1903 


Year 


Zolss (42) 


1-35 


i-i+ 


Freiburg .... 




Year 


Gockel (43) 




1-41 


Innsbruck .... 


1902 




Czermak (44) 


i-95 


0-94 


,, .... 


1905 


Jan. to June 


Defant (45) 


1-47 


1-17 


Mattsee (Salzburg) 


1905 


July to Sept. 


von Schweidler (46) 




0-99 


Seewalchen .... 


1904 


July to Sept. 


von Schweidler (38) 




1-18 


Trieste 


1902-3 


Year 


Mazelle (47) 


0-58 


1-09 


Misdroy 


1902 




Ludeling (40) 


1-09 


1-58 


Swinemiinde 


1904 


Aug. and Sept. 


Ludeling (40) 


1-23 


i-37 


Heligoland (sands) 


1903 


Summer 


Elster and Geitel (40) 


1-14 


1-71 


,, plateau 


It 


>t 


„ (40) 


3-o7 


1-50 


Juist (Island) 




»» 


„ (48) 


1-56 


1-56 


Atlantic and German Ocean 


1904 


August 


Boltzmann (49) 


I-8 3 


2-69 


Arosa (1800 m.) . 


1903 


Feb. to April 


Saake (SO) 


179 


1-22 


Rothhorn (2300 m.) . 


1903 


September 


Gockel (43) 




5'3i 


Sonnblick (3100 m.) . 


1903 


September 


Conrad (22) 




1-75 


Mont Blanc (4810 m.) 


1902 


September 


le Cadet (43) 




10-3 



may be felt as to the earlier observations there. The result for 
Mattsee seems less open to doubt, for the observer, von Schweidler, 
had obtained a normal value for q during the previous year at 
Seewalchen. Whilst the average q in at least the great majority of 
stations exceeds unity, individual observations making q less than 
unity are not rare. Thus in 1902 (51) the percentage of cases in which 
q fell short of I was 30 at Trieste, 33 at Vienna, and 35 at Krems- 
munster; at Innsbruck q was less than 1 on 58 days out of 98. 

In a long series of observations, individual values of q show 
usually a wide range. Thus during observations extending over 
more than a year, q varied from 0'i8 to 8-25 at Kremsmunster and 
from o-n to 3-00 at Trieste. The values of a + , a_ and a+ also 
show large variations. Thus at Trieste a+ varied from 0-12 to 4-07, 
and a_ from o-n to 3-87; at Vienna a + varied from 0-32 to 7-10, 
and a_ from 0-78 to 5-42; at Kremsmunster a+ varied from 0-14 
to 5-83- 

14. Annual Variation. — When observations are made at irregular 
hours, or at only one or two fixed hours, it is doubtful how repre- 
sentative they are. Results obtained at noon, for example, probably 
differ more from the mean value for the 24 hours at one season than 
at another. Most dissipation results are exposed to considerable 
uncertainty on these grounds. Also it requires a long series of 
years to give thoroughly representative results for any element, 
and few stations possess more than a year or two's dissipation data. 

11. 28 



winter than in summer; at Karasjok and Trieste the seasonal effect 
in q seems small and uncertain. 

15. Diurnal Variation. — P. B. Zolss (41, 42) has published dirunal 
variation data for Kremsmunster for more than one year, and 
independently for midsummer (May to August) and midwinter 
(December to February). His figures show a double daily period in 
both a + and a_, the principal maximum occurring about I or 
2 P.M. The two minima occur, the one from 5 to 7 A.M., the other 
from 7 to 8 P.M. ; they are nearly equal. Taking the figures answer- 
ing to the whole year, May 1903 to 1904, a + varied throughout the 
day from 0-82 to 1-35, and a_ from 0-85 to 1-47. At midsummer 
the extreme hourly values were 0-91 and 1-45 for a + , 0-94 arid I 60 
for o_. The corresponding figures at midwinter were 0-65 and 
1-19 for a + , o-6i and 1-43 for <z_. Zolss' data for q show also a 
double daily period, but the apparent range is small, and the hourly 

variation is somewhat irregular. At Karas- 
jok, Simpson found a + and <z_ both larger 
between noon and 1 p.m. than between 
either 8 and 9 a.m. or 6 and 7 P.M. The 6 
to 7 p.m. values were in general the smallest, 
especially in the case of a + ; the evening 
value for q on the average exceeded the 
values from the two earlier hours by 
some 7%. ■ 

Summer observations on mountains have 
shown diurnal variations very large and 
fairly regular, but widely different from 
those observed at lower levels. On the 
Rothhorn, Gockel (43) found a + particu- 
larly variable, the mean 7 A.M. value being 
4§ times that at 1 P.M. g (taken as 
2(a_/a + ) varied from 2-25 at 5 A.M. and 
2-52 at 9 p.m. to 7-82 at 3 p.m. and 8-35 at 
7 p.m. On the Sonnblick, in early Septem- 
ber, V. Conrad (22) found somewhat similar 
results for q, the principal maximum occur- 
ring at 1 P.M., with minima at 9 p.m. and 
6 a.m. ; the largest hourly value was, 
however, scarcely double the least. Conrad 
found a_ largest at 4 a.m. and least at 6 
p.m., the largest value being double the 
least ; a + was largest at 5 a.m. and least at 
2 p.m., the largest value being fully 2\ times 
the least. On Mont Blanc, le Cadet (43) found q largest from I to 3 
P.M., the value at either of these hours being more than double that 
at 1 1 a.m. On the Patscherkofel, H. .von Ficker and A. Defant (52), 
observing in December, found q largest from I to 2 P.M. and least 
between 11 A.M. and noon, but the largest value was only I J times 
the least. On mountains much seems to depend on whether there 
are rising or falling air currents, and results from a single season 
may not be fairly representative. 

16. Dissipation seems largely dependent on meteorological con- 
ditions, but the phenomena at different stations vary so much as to 
suggest that the connexion is largely indirect. At most stations a + 
and a_ both increase markedly as wind velocity rises. From the 
observations at Trieste in 1902-1903 E. Mazelle (47) deduced an 
increase of about 3% in a + for a rise of 1 km. per hour in wind 
velocity. The following are some of his figures, the velocity v being 
in kilometres per hour : — 



V 


to 4. 


20 to 24 


40 to 49. 


60 to 69. 


a 
1 


o-33 
I-I3 


0-64 
1-19 


1-03 

I-OO 


1-38 

0-96 



For velocities from o to 24 km. per hour q exceeded unity in 74 cases 
out of 100; but for velocities over 50 km. per hour g exceeded unity 



II 



866 



ATMOSPHERIC ELECTRICITY 



in only 40 cases out of loo. Simpson got similar results at Karasjok ; 
the rise in a + and a_ with increased wind velocity seemed, however, 
larger in winter than in summer. Simpson observed a fall in q for 
wind velocities exceeding 2 on Beaufort's scale. On the top of the 
Sonnblick, Conrad observed a slight increase of a± as the wind 
velocity increased up to 20 km. per hour, but for greater velocities 
up to 80 km. per hour no further decided rise was observed. 

At Karasjok, treating summer and winter independently, 
Simpson (10) found a + and a_ both increase in a nearly linear 
relation with temperature, from below -20° to + 15° C. For ex- 
ample, when the temperature was below -20° mean values were 
0-76 for a + and 091 for a_; for temperatures between -10° 
and -5° the corresponding means were 2-45 and 2-82; while for 
temperatures between +10° and +15 they were 4-68 and 5-23. 
Simpson found no certain temperature effect on the value of q. At 
Trieste, from 470 days when the wind velocity did not exceed 20 km. 
per hour, Mazelle (47) found somewhat analogous results for tem- 
peratures from 0° to 30° C. ; <i_, however, increased faster than 
a + , i.e. q increased with temperature. When he considered all 
days irrespective of wind velocity, Mazelle found the influence of 
temperature obliterated. On the Sonnblick, Conrad (22) found 
a± increase appreciably as temperature rose up to 4° or 5 C. ; but 
at higher temperatures a decrease set in. 

Observations on the Sonnblick agree with those at low-level 
stations in showing a diminution of dissipation with increase of 
relative humidity. The decrease is most marked as saturation 
approaches. At Trieste, for example, for relative humidities be- 
tween 90 and 100 the mean a± was less than half that for relative 
humidities under 40. With certain dry winds, notably Fohn winds 
in Austria and Switzerland, dissipation becomes very high. Thus at 
Innsbruck Defant (45) found the mean dissipation on days of Fohn 
fully thrice that on days without Fohn. The increase was largest 
for <z + , there being a fall of about 15% in q. In general, o + and 
a_ both tend to be less on cloudy than on bright days. At Kiel (53) 
and Trieste the average value of q is considerably less for wholly 
overcast days than for bright days. At several stations enjoying 
a wide prospect the dissipation has been observed to be specially 
high on days of great visibility when distant mountains can be 
recognized. It tends on the contrary to be low on days of fog or 
rain. 

The results obtained as to the relation between dissipation and 
barometric pressure are conflicting. At Kremsmiinster, Zolss (42) 
found dissipation vary with the absolute height of the barometer, 
a± having a mean value of 1-36 when pressure was below the normal, 
as against 1-20 on days when pressure was above the normal. He 
also found 0+ on the average about 10% larger when pressure was 
falling than when it was rising. On the Sonnblick, Conrad (22) 
found dissipation increase decidedly as the absolute barometric 
pressure was larger, and he found no difference between days of 
rising and falling barometer. At Trieste, Mazelle (47) found no 
certain connexion with absolute barometric pressure. Dissipation 
was .above the average when cyclonic conditions prevailed, but this 
seemed simply a consequence of the increased wind velocity. At 
Mattsee, E. R. von Schweidler (46) found no connexion between 
absolute barometric pressure and dissipation, also days of rising 
and falling pressure gave the same mean. At Kiel, K. Kaehler (53) 
found o + and a_ both greater with rising than with falling 
barometer. 

V. Conrad and M. Topolansky (54) have found a marked connexion 
at Vienna between dissipation and ozone. Regular observations 
were made of both elements. Days were grouped according to the 
intensity of colouring of ozone papers, o representing no visible 
effect, and 14 the darkest colour reached. The mean values of a + 
and a_ answering to 12 and 13 on the ozone scale were both about 
double the corresponding values answering to o and I on that scale. 

17. A charged body in air loses its charge in more than one way. 
The air, as is now known, has always present in it ions, some carrying 
a positive and others a negative charge, and those having the 
opposite sign to the charged body are attracted and tend to dis- 
charge it. The rate of loss of charge is thus largely dependent on the 
extent to which ions are present in the surrounding air. It depends, 
however, in addition on the natural mobility of the ions, and also on 
the opportunities for convection. Of late years many observations 
have been made of the ionic charges in air. The best-known appa- 
ratus for the purpose is that devised by Ebert. A cylinder condenser 
has its inner surface insulated and charged to a high positive or 
negative potential. Air is drawn by an aspirator between the sur- 
faces, and the ions having the opposite sign to the inner cylinder 
are deposited on it. The charge given up to the inner cylinder is 
known from its loss of potential. The volume of air from which the 
ions have been extracted being known, a measure is obtained of the 
total charge on the ions, whether positive or negative. The con- 
ditions must, of course, be such as to secure that no ions shall escape, 
otherwise there is an underestimate. I + is used to denote the charge 
on positive ions, I_ that on negative ions. The unit to which they 
are ordinarily referred is I electrostatic unit of electricity per cubic 
metre of air. For the ratio of the mean value of I + to the mean 
value of I_, the letter Q is employed by Gockel (55), who has made 
an unusually complete study of ionic charges at Freiburg. Numerous 
observations were also made by Simpson (10) — thrice a day — at 



Karasjok, and von Schweidler has made a good many observations 
about 3 P.M. at Mattsee (46) in 1905, and Seewalchen (38) in 1904. 
These will suffice to give a general idea of the mean values met with. 



Station. 


Authority. 


1+ 


I_ 


Q 


Freiburg .... 
Karasjok .... 
Mattsee .... 
Seewalchen 


Gockel 

Simpson 

von Schweidler 


o-34 
0-38 

o-35 
o-45 


0-24 

o-33 
0-29 
0-38 


1-41 

1-17 
119 
1-17 



Gockel's mean values of I + and Q would be reduced to 0-31 and 
1-38 respectively if his values for July — which appear abnormal — 
were omitted. I + and I_ both show a considerable range of values, 
even at the same place during the same season of the year. Thus 
at Seewalchen in the course of a month's observations at 3 P.M., I + 
varied from 0-31 to 067, and I_ from 0-17 to 0-67. 

There seems a fairly well marked annual variation in ionic contents, 
as the following figures will show. Summer and winter represent 
each six months and the results are arithmetic means of the monthly 
values. 





Freiburg. 


Karasjok. 




1+ 


I_ 


Q 


I + 


I_ 


Q 


Winter 
Summer . 


0-29 
0-39 


0-21 
0-28 


1-49 
1-34 


o-33 
0-44 


0-27 
o-39 


1-22 
I-I3 



If the exceptional July values at Freiburg were omitted, the 
summer values of 1+ and Q would become 0-33 and I -25 respectively. 

18. Diurnal Variation. — At Karasjok Simpson found the mean 
values of I + and I_ throughout the whole year much the same 
between noon and 1 P.M. as between 8 and 9 A.M. Observations 
between 6 and 7 p.m. gave means slightly lower than those from 
the earlier hours, but the difference was only about 5 % in 1+ and 
10 % in I_. The evening values of Q were on the whole the largest. 
At Freiburg, Gockel found I + and I_ decidedly larger in the early 
afternoon than in either the morning or the late evening hours. 
His greatest and least mean hourly values and the hours of their 
occurrence are as follows : — 



Winter. 




Summer. 


I + 


I 




1+ 


I 


_ 


Max. 
o-333 

2 P.M. 


Min. 
0-193 
7 P.M. 


Max. 
0-242 

2 P.M. 


Min. 
0-130 

8 P.M. 


Max. 
o-430 

4 P.M. 


Min. 

0-244 

9 to 

IO P.M. 


Max. 
0-333 

4 P.M. 


Min. 
0-192 
9 to 

IO P.M. 



Gockel did not observe between 10 p.m. and 7 A.M. 

19. Ionization seems to increase notably as temperature rises. 
Thus at Karasjok Simpson found for mean values : — 

Temp, less than -20° -10° to -5° . io° to 15 

I + =o-l8, I_ = o-i6 I + = o-36, I_ = o-30 I + = o-45, I_ = o-43 

Simpson found no clear influence of temperature on Q. Gockel; 
observed similar effects at Freiburg — though he seems doubtful 
whether the relationship is direct — but the influence of temperature 
on 1+ seemed reduced when the ground was covered with snow. 
Gockel found a diminution of ionization with rise of relative 
humidity. Thus for relative humidities between 40 and 50 mean 
values were 0-306 for I + and 0-219 f° r I-; whilst for relative 
humidities between 90 and 100 the corresponding means were re- 
spectively 0-222 and 0-134. At Karasjok, Simpson found a slight 
decrease in I_ as relative humidity increased, but no certain change 
in I+. Specially large values of I + and I_ have been observed 
at high levels in balloon ascents. Thus on the 1st of July 1901, 
at a height of 2400 metres, H. Gerdien (29) obtained o-86 for I + and 
1-09 for I_. 

20. In 1901 Elster and Geitel found that a radioactive emanation 
is present in the atmosphere. Their method of measuring the radio- 
activity is as follows (48) : A wire not exceeding I mm. in diameter, 
charged to a negative potential of at least 2000 volts, is supported 
between insulators in the open, usually at a height of about 2 metres. 
After two hours' exposure, it is wrapped round a frame supported 
in a given position relative to Elster and Geitel's dissipation appa- 
ratus, and the loss of charge is noted. This loss is proportional to 
the length of the wire. The radioactivity is denoted by A, and 
A=*l signifies that the potential of the dissipation apparatus fell 
I volt in an hour per metre of wire introduced. The loss of the 
dissipation body due to the natural ionization of the air is first 
allowed for. Suppose, for instance, that in the absence of the wire 
the potential falls from 264 to 255 volts in 15 minutes, whilst when 
the wire (10 metres long) is introduced it falls from 264 to 201 volts 
in 10 minutes, then 

10A = (264 — 201) x6 — (264— 255) X4 = 342 ; or A =34-2. 

The values obtained for A seem largely dependent on the station. 



ATMOSPHERIC ELECTRICITY 



867 



At Wolfenbiittel, a year's observations by Elster and Geitel (56) made 
A vary from 4 to 64, the mean being 20. In the island of Juist, off 
the Friesland coast, from three weeks' observations they obtained 
only 5-2 as the mean. On the other hand, at Altjoch, an Alpine 
station, from nine days' observations in July 1903 they obtained a 
mean of 137, the maximum being 224, and the minimum 92. At 
Freiburg, from 150 days' observations near noon in 1903-1904, 
Gockel (57) obtained a mean of 84, his extreme values being 10 and 
420. At Karasjok, observing several times throughout the day for 
a good many months, Simpson (10) obtained a mean of g^ and a 
maximum of 432. The same observer from four weeks' observations 
at Hammerfest got the considerably lower mean value 58, with a 
maximum of 252. At this station much lower values were found 
for A with sea breezes than with land breezes. Observing on the 
pier at Swinemtinde in August and September 1904, Liideling (40) 
obtained a mean value of 34. 

Elster and Geitel (58), having found air drawn from the soil highly 
radioactive, regard ground air as the source of the emanation in the 
atmosphere, and in this way account for the low values they obtained 
for A when observing on or near the sea. At Freiburg in winter 
Gockel (55) found A notably reduced when snow was on the ground, 
1+ being also reduced. When the ground was covered by snow 
the mean value of A was only 42, as compared with 81 when there 
was no snow. 

J. C. McLennan (59) observing near the foot of Niagara found A 
only about one-sixth as large as at Toronto. Similarly at Altjoch, 
Elster and Geitel (56) found A at the foot of a waterfall only about 
one-third of its normal value at a distance from the fall. 

21. Annual and Diurnal Variations. — At Wolfenbiittel, Elster 
and Geitel found A vary but little with the season. At Karasjok, 
on the contrary, Simpson found A much larger at midwinter — 
notwithstanding the presence of snow — than at midsummer. His 
mean value for November and December was 129, while his mean 
for May and June was only 47* He also found a marked diurnal 
variation, A being considerably greater between 3 and 5 a.m. or 
8-30 to 10-30 p.m. than between 10 A.M. and noon, or between 3 and 
5 P.M. 

At all seasons of the year Simpson found A rise notably with 
increase of relative humidity. Also, whilst the mere absolute 
height of the barometer seemed of little, if any, importance, he 
obtained larger values of A with a falling than with a rising 
barometer. This last result of course is favourable to Elster and 
Geitel's views as to the source of the emanation. . 

22. For a wire exposed under the conditions observed by Elster 
and Geite\ the emanation seems to be almost entirely derived from 
radium. Some part, however, seems to be derived from thorium, 
and H. A. Bumstead (60) finds that with longer exposure of the wire 
the relative importance of the thorium emanation increases. With 
three hours' exposure he found the thorium emanation only from 
3 to 5% of the whole, but with 12 hours' exposure the percentage 
of thorium emanation rose to about 15. These figures refer to the 
state of the wire immediately after the exposure ; the rate of decay 
is much more rapid for the radium than for the thorium emanation. 

23. The different elements — potential gradient, dissipation, 
ionization and radioactivity — ■ are clearly not independent of one 
another. The loss of a charge is naturally largely dependent on the 
richness of the surrounding air in ions. This is clearly shown by the 
following results obtained by Simpson (10) at Karasjok for the mean 
values of 0+ corresponding to certain groups of values of I ± . To 
eliminate the disturbing influence of wind, different wind strengths 
are treated separately. 

Table VIII. — Mean Values of a ± . 



Wind 
Strength. 


ItO to o-i. 


O-I tO 0-2. 


0-2 to 0-3 


0-3 to 0-4. 


0-4 to 0-5. 


to 1 

1 „ 2 

1 2 „ 3 


o-45 
0-65 


o-6o 
1-08 


1-26 

1-85 
2-70 


2-04 
2-92 

3-88 


3-°3 
3-83 
5-33 



Simspon concluded that for a given wind velocity dissipation is 
practically a linear function of ionization. 

24. Table IX. will give a general idea of the relations of potential 
gradient to dissipation and ionization. 

Table IX. — Potential, Dissipation, Ionization, 



Potential 

gradients. 

volts per 

metre. 


2 


Karasjok (Simpson (10)). 


Kremsmunster(41). 


Freiburg (43). 


Rothhorn (43). 


0+ 


o_ 


I + 


I_ 


Q 


to 50 




I-I2 














50 „ 100 


1-14 


I-3I 




4-29 


4-67 


0-43 


o-39 


i-n 


100 ,, 150 


1-24 


1 69 




3-38 


3-93 


o-37 


0-32 


i-i5 


150 „ 200 


1-48 


1-84 




i-«5 


2-58 


0-36 


0-28 


1-28 


200 ,, 300 






3-21 


1-37 


1-58 


0-26 


0-19 


1-42 


300 „ 400 






4-33 


060 


0-85 








400 „ 500 






5-46 












500 „ 700 




8-75 













If we regard the potential gradient near the ground as represent- 
ing a negative charge on the earth, then if the source of supply of 
that charge is unaffected the gradient will rise and become high when 
the queries by which discharge is promoted slacken their activity.
A diminution in the number of positive ions would thus naturally 
be accompanied by a rise in potential gradient. Table IX. associates 
with rise in potential gradient a reduced number of both positive 
and negative ions and a diminished rate of dissipation whether of 
a negative or a positive charge. The rise in q and Q indicates that 
the diminished rate of dissipation is most marked for positive charges, 
and that negative ions are even more reduced then positive. 

At KremsmiinsterZolss (41) finds a considerable similarity between 
the diurnal variations in q and in the potential gradient, the hours of 
the forenoon and afternoon maxima being nearly the same in the 
two cases. 

No distinct relationship has yet been established between potential 
gradient and radioactivity. At Karasjok Simpson (10) found fairly 
similar mean values of A for two groups of observations, one confined 
to cases when the potential gradient exceeded +400 volts, the other 
confined to cases of negative gradient. 

At Freiburg Gockel (55, 57) found that when observations were 
grouped according to the value of A there appeared a distinct rise 
in both a_ and I + with increasing A. For instance, when A lay 
between 100 and 150 the mean value of a_ was 1-27 times greater 
than when A lay between o and 50 ; while when A lay between 120 
and 150 the mean value of I + was 1-53 times larger than when A 
lay between o and 30. These apparent relationships refer to mean 
values. In individual cases widely different values of a_ or I + are 
associated with the same value of A. 

25. If V be the potential, p the density of free electricity at a point 
in the atmosphere, at a distance r from the earth's centre, then 
assuming statical conditions and neglecting variation ol V in horizon- 
tal directions, we have 

r^{dldr) (r*dV/dr) +4xp = o. 

For practical purposes we may treat r 2 as constant, and replace 
d/dr by d/dh, where h is height in centimetres above the ground. 

We thus find p = - (i/^dW/dh*. 

If we take a tube of force 1 sq. cm. in section, and suppose it cut 
by equipotential surfaces at heights hi and h 2 above the ground, we 
have for the total charge M included in the specified portion of the 
tube 

4irM = (dV!dh)h-(dVjdh)ih. 

Taking Linke's (28) figures as given in § 10, and supposing 
h\=o, A2 = i5Xio 4 , we find for the charge in the unit tube between 
the ground and 1500 metres level, remembering that the centimetre 
is now the unit of length, M = (1/471-) (i25-2s)/ioo. Taking 1 volt 
equal 1/300 of an electrostatic unit, we find M =0-000265. Between 
1 500 and 4000 metres the charge inside the unit tube is much less, 
only 0-000040. The charge on the earth itself has its surface density 
given by <t= — (1/4^X125 volts per metre, =0-000331 in electro- 
static units. Thus, on the view now generally current, in the circum- 
stances answering to Linke's experiemnts we have on the ground a 
charge of — 33lXio- 5 C.G.S. units per sq. cm. Of the corresponding 
positive charge, 265X10- 6 lies below the 1500 metres level, 40X10--' 
between this and the 4000 metres level, and only 26X10- 6 above 
4000 metres. 

There is a difficulty in reconciling observed values of the ionization 
with the results obtained from balloon ascents as to the variation of 
the potential with altitude. According to H. Gerdien (61), near the 
ground a mean value for d?V/dh? is — (1/10) volt/ (metre) 2 . From 
this we deduce for the charge p per cubic centimetre (i/4?r) X io -6 
(volt/cm 2 ), or2-7Xio- 9 electrostatic units. But taking, for example, 
Simpson's mean values at Karasjok, we have observed 
p== I+- Ii = 0-05 X (cm./metre) 3 = 5 X I0"«, 
and thus (calculated p)/(observed p) =0-05 approximately. Gerdien 
himself makes I+ — I- considerably larger than Simpson, and con- 
cludes that the observed value of p is from 30 to 50 times that cal- 
culated. The presumption is either that d'v/dh 2 near the ground is 
much larger numerically than Gerdien supposes, or else that the 
ordinary instruments for measuring ionization fail to catch some 
species of ion whose charge is preponderatingly negative. 

26. Gerdien (61) has made some calculations as to the probable 

average value of the vertical elec- 
tric current in the atmosphere in 
fine weather. This will be com- 
posed of a conduction and a con- 
vection current, the latter due to 
rising or falling air currents carry- 
ing ions. He supposes the field 
near the earth to be 100 volts per 
metre, or 1/300 electrostatic units. 
For simplicity, he assumes I + and 
I_ each equal 0-25 Xio- 6 electro- 
static units. The specific velocities 
of the ions — i.e. the velocities in 
unit field — he takes to be 1-3X300 
for the positive, and 1-6X300 for 
the negative. The positive and 



868 



ATMOSPHERIC ELECTRICITY 



negative ions travel in opposite directions, so the total current is 
(1/300X0-25 Xio -6 ) (1-3X300 + 1 -6X300), or 73 Xio~* in electrostatic 
measure, otherwise 2-4XIO -16 amperes per sq. cm. As to the con- 
vection current, Gerdien supposes — as in § 25 — p = 2-7Xlo -9 electro- 
static units, and on fine days puts the average velocity of rising 
air currents at 10 cm. per second. This gives a convection current 
of 2-7 Xio -8 electrostatic units, or about 1/27 of the conduction 
current. For the total current we have approximately 2-5 X io -16 
amperes per sq. cm. This is insignificant compared to the size of 
the currents which several authorities have calculated from con- 
siderations as to terrestrial magnetism (q.v.). Gerdien's estimate 
of the convection current is for fine weather conditions. During 
rainfall, or near clouds or dust layers, the magnitude of this current 
might well be enormously increased ; its direction would naturally 
vary with climatic conditions. 

27. H. Mache (62) thinks that the ionization observed in the atmo- 
sphere may be wholly accounted for by the radioactive emanation. 
If this is true we should have g = a» 2 , where q is the number of ions 
of one sign made in I cc. of air per second by the emanation, a the 
constant of recombination, and n the number of ions found simul- 
taneously by, say, Ebert's apparatus. Mache and R. Holfmann, 
from observations on the amplitude of saturation currents, deduce 
9 = 4 as a mean value. Taking for o Townsend's value i-2 + lo -6 , 
Mache finds n = 1800. The charge on an ion being 3-4 Xio -10 Mache 
deduces for the ionic charge, I + or I_, per cubic metre 1800X3-4 
Xio -10 Xio 6 , or o-6. This is at least of the order observed, which 
is all that can be expected from a calculation which assumes I + and 
1_ equal. If, however, Mache's views were correct, we should expect 
a much closer connexion between I and A than has actually been 
observed. 

28. C. T. R. Wilson (63) seems disposed to regard the action of 
rainfall as the most probable source of the negative charge on the 
earth's surface. That great separation of positive and negative 
electricity sometimes takes place during rainfall is undoubted, and 
the charge brought to the ground seems preponderatingly negative. 
The difficulty is in accounting for the continuance in extensive fine 
weather districts of large positive charges in the atmosphere in face 
of the processes of recombination always in progress. Wilson 
considers that convection currents in the upper atmosphere would 
be quite inadequate, but conduction may, he thinks, be sufficient 
alone. At barometric pressures such as exist between 18 and 
36 kilometres above the ground the mobility of the ions varies in- 
versely as the pressure, whilst the coefficient of recombination o 
varies approximately as the pressure. If the atmosphere at different 
heights is exposed to ionizing radiation of uniform intensity the rate 
of production of ions per cc, g, will vary as the pressure. In the 
steady state the number, n, of ''ons of either sign per cc. is given by 
n = yjqja, and so is independent of the pressure or the height. The 
conductivity, which varies as the product of n into the mobility, 
will thus vary inversely as the pressure, and so at 36 kilometres will be 
one hundred times as large as close to the ground. Dust particles 
interfere with conduction near the ground, so the relative conduc- 
tivity in the upper layers may be much greater than that calculated. 
Wilson supposes that by the fall to the ground of a preponderance of 
negatively charged rain the air above the shower has a higher positive 
potential than elsewhere at the same level, thus leading to large 
conduction currents laterally in the highly conducting upper layers. 

29. Thunder. — Trustworthy frequency statistics for an individual 
station are obtainable only from a long series of observations, while 
if means are taken from a large area places may be included which 
differ largely amongst themselves. There is the further complication 
that in some countries thunder seems to be on the increase. In 
temperate latitudes, speaking generally, the higher the latitude the 
fewer the thunderstorms. For instance, for Edinburgh (64) (1771 to 
1900) and London (65) (1763 to 1896) R. C. Mossman found the 



appears fairly uniform, we may take Hungary (67). According to 
the statistics for 1903, based on several hundred stations, the average 
number of days of thunder throughout six subdivisions of the 
country, some wholly plain, others mainly mountainous, varied 
only from 2I-I to 26-5, the mean for the whole of Hungary being 
23-5. The antithesis of this exists in the United States of America. 
According to A, J. Henry (68) there are three regions of maximum 
frequency: one in the south-east, with its centre in Florida, has an 
average of 45 days of thunder in the year; a second including the 
middle Mississippi valley has an average of 35 days; and a third 
in the middle Missouri valley has 30. With the exception of a narrow 
strip along the Canadian frontier, thunderstorm frequency is fairly 
high over the whole of the United States to the east of the 100th 
meridian. But to the west of this, except in the Rocky Mountain 
region where storms are numerous, the frequency steadily diminishes, 
and along the Pacific coast there are large areas where thunder occurs 
only once or twice a year. 

30. The number of thunderstorm days is probably a less exact 
measure of the relative intensity of thunderstorms than statistics 
as to the number of persons killed annually by lightning per million 
of the population. Table X. gives a number of statistics of this kind. 
The letter M stands for " Midland." 

Table X. — Deaths by Lightning, per annum, per million 
Inhabitants. 
Hungary 7-7 



2-8 

i-8 
1-3 



Netherlands 

England, N.M. . . . 

E. . . . . 
„ S.M 

York and W.M. 

N 

Wales 0-9 

England, S.E. .... o-8 
„ N.W. . . . 07 

S.W. .... o-6 
London o-i 



1-2 

i-i 



i-o 



15 

10 

8 

7 
7 

' 7 
6 

■'■' ' 5 

20 
b 



Upper Missouri and Plains . 

Rocky Mountains and Plateau 

South Atlantic .... 

Central Mississippi 

Upper ,, ... 

Ohio Valley 

Middle Atlantic . . . . 

Gulf States 

New England ... 

Pacific Coast . 

North and South Dakota 

California . 

The figure for Hungary is based on the seven years 1897-1903; 
that for the Netherlands, from data by A. J. Monne (69) on the nine 
years 1882-1890. The English data, due to R. Lawson (70), arefrom 
twenty-four years, 1857-1880; those for the United States, due to 
Henry (68), are for five years, 1896-1900. In comparing these data 
allowance must be made for the fact that danger from lightning is 
much greater out of doors than in. Thus in Hungary, in 1902 and 
1903, out of 229 persons killed, at least 171 were killed out of doors. 
Of the 229 only 67 were women, the only assignable explanation 
being their rarer employment in the fields. Thus, ceteris paribus, 
deaths from lightning are much more numerous in a country than 
in an industrial population. This is well brought out by the low 
figure for London. It is also shown conspicuously in figures given 
by Henry. In New York State, where the population is largely 
industrial, the annual deaths per million are only three, but of the 
agricultural population eleven. In states such as Wyoming and 
the Dakotas the population is largely rural, and the deaths by light- 
ning rise in consequence. The frequency and intensity of thunder- 
storms are unquestionably greater in the Rocky Mountain than in 
the New England states, but the difference is not so great as the 
statistics at first sight suggest. 

3 1 . Even at the same place thunderstorms vary greatly in intensity 
and duration. Also the times of beginning and ending are difficult 
to define exactly, so that several elements of uncertainty exist in 
data as to the seasonal or diurnal variation. The monthly data in 
Table XL are percentages of the total for the year. In most cases 
the figures are based on the number of days of thunder at a particular 
station, or at the average station of a country; but the second set 



Table XI. — Annual Variation of Thunderstorms. 



Jan. 



Feb. March. April. May. June 



July. Aug. Sept. Oct. 



Nov. 



Dec. 



Edinburgh 
London 
Paris 

Netherlands 
France 
Switzerland 
Hungary (a) 
(b) 
United States 
Hong-Kong 
Trevandrum 
Batavia 



1-8 
o-6 

0-2 
2-2 
2-2 
0-2 
0-0 
00 
O-I 
O-O 

3-2 

IO-4 



1-4 

o-5 
0-4 
i-8 

2-8 

o-3 
o-i 

0-0 
O-I 
2-1 

3-8 
9-2 



1-4 
i-6 
2-3 
3-7 
4-1 

o-5 
1-6 
i-o 

1-2 

4-3 
I3-I 
ii-i 



3-8 
6-6 

7-5 
6-5 
8-4 
4.9 

57 
3'2 
4-0 

8-5 
20-9 
10-5 



12-3 
12-7 

14-9 

14-0 
13-8 
n-9 
20-9 
n-8 
H-3 

12-8 

18-6 
7-9 



20-8 
18-3 

21-6 

14-7 
18-7 
22-9 
25-0 

20-6 

25-0 

23-4 
5-5 



28-2 
25-5 

22-0 

15-6 
14-6 
29-9 
23-2 
30-7 
27-2 
14-9 

1-2 

4-3 



19 
19 

17 
14 
13 
18 

15 
25 
20 
21 
3 
3 



7-0 

9-3 
9.9 

10-3 
io-o 

9-8 
5-7 
6-9 
5-8 
106 
2-5 
5-4 



2-3 

3-1 

3-5 

io- 1 

6-3 
i-i 

1-3 
o-5 
1-4 

2-1 

12-9 



I-I 

i-7 
0-4 

3-8 
3-1 
o-3 
0-4 

0-0 

o-3 

0-0 
12-0 
12-2 



0-8 

0-9 
0-4 

2-5 
2-4 

0-2 
0-2 
O-O 
O-I 
O-O 

33 
10-9 



storm days to be respectively 
893) E. Renou (66) found 27-3 



average annual number of'thundei 

6-4 and 10-7; while at Paris (1873-] 

such days. In some tropical stations, at certain seasons of the year, 

thunder is almost a daily occurrence. At Batavia (18) during the 

epoch 1867-1895, there were on the average 120 days of thunder in 

the year. 

As an example of a large area throughout which thunder frequency 



for Hungary relates to the number of lightning strokes causing fire,; 
and the figures for the United States relate to deaths by lightning. 
Thedata for Edinburgh, due to R. C. Mossman (64), refer to 130 years, 
1771 to 1900. The data for London (1763-1896) are also due to 



1 Note in case of Pacific Coast, Table X., 
than 1." 



<i 



1 less 



ATMOSPHERIC ELECTRICITY 



869 



Mossman (65) ; for Paris (1 873-1 893) to Renou (66) ; for the Nether- 
lands (1882-1900) to A. J. Monne (69) ; for France(71) (1886-1899) 
to Frou and Hann ; for Switzerland to K. Hess (72) ; for Hungary (67) 
(1896-1903) to L. von Szalay and others; for the United States 
(1890-1900) to A. J. Henry (68); for Hong-Kong (73H1894-1903) 
to VV. Doberck. The Trevandrum (74) data (1 853-1 864) were due 
originally to A. Broun; the Batavia data (1867-1895) are from the 
Batavia Observations, vol. xviii. 

Most stations in the northern hemisphere have a conspicuous 
maximum at midsummer with little thunder in winter. Trevan- 
drum (8° 31' N.) and Batavia (6° 11' S.), especially the former, show 
a double maximum and minimum. 

32. Daily Variation. — The figures in Table XII. are again per- 



for Germany, due to O. Steffens (80), represent the average number 
of houses struck by lightning in a year per million houses; in 
the first decade only seven years (1854-1860) are really included. 
Mossman thinks that the apparent increase at Edinburgh and 
London in the later decades is to some extent at least real. The 
two sets of figures show some corroborative features, notably the 
low frequency from i860 to 1870. The figures for Germany — repre- 
senting four out of six divisions of that country — are remarkable. 
In Germany as a whole, out of a million houses themumber struck 
per annum was three and a half times as great in the decade 1890 
to 1900 as between 1854 and i860. Von Bezold (81) in an earlier 
memoir presented data analogous to Steffens', seemingly accepting 
them as representing a true increase in thunderstorm destructiveness. 



Table XII. — Diurnal Variation of Thunderstorms. 



Hour. 



0-2. 



2-4. 



4-6. 



6-8. 



-10. 10-12. 0-2' 2-4'. 4'-6'. 6'-8'. 8'-io'. 10-12' 



Finland (76) 

Edinburgh (64) . 

Belgium (77) . 

Brocken (78) . 

Switzerland (72) 

Italy (77) . . 

Hungary (i.) (67) 
(ii.) (67) 
(iii.) (75) 
(iv.) (75) 

Trevandrum (74) 

Agustia (74) 



2-3 
i-7 
3-0 
1-6 
3-i 
.1-3 
21 
6-9 
"2-3 

2-6 

5-6 
2-9 



2-0 
2-0 

2-9 
2-5 

2-3 

16 
19 

4-2 

1-9 

2-2 

4-9 
2-9 



2-2 
1-4 

1-7 
i-3 

2-1 

1-4 
19 
2-3 

2-0 

19 

4-3 
o-3 



3-o 
1-7 
1-8 

1-3 
1-6 
2-0 

2-1 
2-0 

2-4 
1-9 
1-3 

0-0 



4-6 

47 

2-0 

4-2 

2-0 

3-o 
2-9 

2-0 

i-7 
3-6 
1-4 

1-7 



I2-I 

14-2 
6-4 
3-1 
7-3 
8-5 

n-5 
5-o 
7-9 

13-3 

2-0 

2-9 



18-9 
22-4 
12-9 

I2-I 

13-8 
19-5 
18-1 
9.9 
16-1 
199 
13-3 
I5-I 



19-2 
237 

21-6 

28-6 
20-9 
26-5 

22-0 
l6-9 
22-1 

20-7 
24-5 
36-1 



I6-I 
n-9 
19-4 

22-4 
20-8 

16-6 
17-9 
18-2 
19- 1 
15-2 
15-9 

22-2 



10-1 
9-2 

15-8 

10- 1 

146 

9-8 

10-7 

10-7 

12-7 

9-2 

13-3 

9-3 



61 
51 

8-4 
7-2 
8-o 

8-3 
6-2 
n-7 
7-6 
62 
7-6 
4-6 



3-4 

2-0 

4-1 
5-6 
3-5 
1-5 

2-8 
IO-O 

3-2 
3-3 
5-9 

2-0 



centages. They are mostly based on data as to the hour of com- 
mencement of thunderstorms. Data as to the hour when storms are 
most severe would throw the maximum later in the day. This is 
illustrated by the first two sets of figures for Hungary (67). The first 
set relate as usual to the hour of commencement, the second to the 
hours of occurrence of lightning causing fires. Of the two other sets 
of figures for Hungary (75;, (iii.) relates to the central plain, (iv.) to 
the mountainous regions to north and south of this. The hour of 
maximum is earlier for the mountains, thunder being more frequent 
there than in the plains between 8 a.m. and 4 p.m., but less frequent 
between 2 and 10 p.m. Trevandrum (8° 31' N., 76 59' E., 195 ft. 

Table XIII. 



Year. 


Nether- 
lands. 


France. 


Hungary. 


U.S.A. 


Year. 


Nether- 
lands. 


France. 


Hungary. 


U.S.A. 


1882 


98 




141 




1893 


102 


288 


233 


209 


1883 


117 




195 




1894 


III 


300 


333 


336 


1884 


95 




229 




1895 


119 


309 


280 


426 


1885 


93 




192 




1896 


109 


266 


299 


34i 


1886 


102 


251 


3*9 




1897 


119 


297 


350 


362 


1887 


78 


292 


236 




1898 


95 


299 


386 


367 


1888 


94 


286 


232 




1899 


112 


299 


368 


563 


1889 


126 


294 • 


258 




1900 


108 




401 


713 


1890 


93 


299 


265 




1901 






502 




1891 


98 


317 


302 


204 


1902 






322 




1892 


86 


324 


350 


251 


1903 






256 





above sea-level) and Agustia (8° 37' N., 77 20' E., 6200 ft. above 
sea-level) afford a contrast between low ground and high ground in 
India. In this instance there seems little difference in the hour of 
maximum, the distinguishing feature being the great concentration 
of thunderstorm occurrence at Agustia between noon and 6 p.m. 

33. Table XIII. gives some data as to the variability of thunder 
from year to year. The figures for the Netherlands (69) and France (71) 
are the number of days when thunder occurred somewhere 
in the country. Its larger area and more varied climate give a 
much larger number of days of thunder to France. Notwith- 
standing the proximity of the two countries, there is not much 
parallelism between the data. The figures 

for Hungary (67) give the number of light- 
ning strokes causing fire; those for the 
United States (68) give the number of per- 
sons killed by lightning. The conspicuous 
maximum in 1901 and great drop in 1902 
in Hungary are also shown by the statistics 
as to the number of days of thunder. 
This number at the average station of the 
country fell from 38-4 in 1901 to 23-1 in 
1902. On the whole, however, the 
number of destructive lightning strokes 
and of days of thunder do not show a 
close parallelism. 

34. Table XIV. deals with the variation of thunder over longer 
periods. The data for Edinburgh (64) and London (65) due to 
Mossman, and those for Tilsit, due to C. Kassner (79), represent 
the average number of days of thunder per annum. The data 



Doubts have, however, been expressed by others — e.g. A. Gockel, 
Das Gewitter, p. 106 — as to the real significance of the figures. 
Changes in the height or construction of buildings, and a greater 
readiness to make claims on insurance offices, may be contributory 
causes. 

35. The fact that a considerable number of people sheltering 
under trees are killed by lightning is generally accepted as a con- 
vincing proof of the unwisdom of the proceeding. When there is 
an option between a tree and an adjacent house, the latter is doubt- 
less the safer choice. But when the option is between sheltering 
under a tree and remaining in the open it is not so clear. In 

Hungary (67), during 
the three years 1901 
to 1903, 15% of the 
total deaths by light- 
ning occurred under 
trees, as against 57 % 
wholly in the open. 
In the United States 
(68) in 1900, only 10 % 
of the deaths where the 
precise conditions were 
ascertained occurred 
under trees, as against 
52 % in the open. If 
then the risk under 
trees exceeds that in 
the open in Hungary 
and the United States, 
at least five or six times as many people must remain in the open as seek 
shelter under trees. An isolated tree occupying an exposed position 
is, it should be remembered, much more likely to be struck than the 
average tree in the midst of a wood. A good deal also depends on 
the species of tree. A good many years' data for Lippe (82) in Ger- 
many make the liability to lightning stroke as follows — the number 
of each species being supposed the same: — Oak 57, Fir 39, Pine 5, 
Beech I. In Styria, according to K. Prohaska (83), the species most 
liable to be struck are oaks, poplars and pear trees; beech trees 
again are exceptionally safe. It should, however, be borne in mind 
that the apparent differences between different species may be partly 

Table XIV. 



Decade ending 


1810. 


1820. 


1830. 


184O. 


I85O. 


i860. 


1870. 


1880. 


1890. 


1900. 


Edinburgh 


4.9 


57 


7-7 


67 


5-7 


6-5 


5-4 


jo-6 


9-4 


9-2 


London 


9-5 


8-3 


"•5 


n-8 


10-5 


n-9 


9-6 


15-7 


13-0 




Tilsit .... 






I2-I 


I2-I 


i6-i 


15-3 


n-9 


17-6 


21-8 




Germany, South . 












49 


66 


91 


143 


175 


,, West . 












92 


106 


187 


244 


331 


North 












124 


135 


245 


288 


352 


,, East . 












102 


143 


186 


210 


273 


Whole 












90 


116 


189 


254 


318 



a question of height, exposure or proximity to water. A good deal 
may also depend on the soil. According to Hellmann, as quoted by 
Henry (82), the liability to lightning stroke in Germany may be put 
at chalk 1, clay 7, sand 9, loam 22. 



870 



ATMOSPHERIC RAILWAY— ATOM 



36. Numerous attempts have been made to find periodic varia- 
tions in thunderstorm frequency. Among the periods suggested are 
the I i-year sunspot period, or half this (cf. v. Szalay (67)). Ekholm 
and Arrhenius (84) claim to have established the existence of a 
tropical lunar period, and a 25929-day period; while P. Polis (85) 
considers a synodic lunar period probable. A. B. MacDowall (86) 
and others have advanced evidence in favour of the view that 
thunderstorms are most frequent near new moon and fewest near 
full moon. Much more evidence would be required to produce a 
general acceptance of any of the above periods. 

37. St Elmo's Fire. — Luminous discharges from masts, lightning 
conductors, and other pointed objects are not very infrequent, 
especially during thunderstorms. On the Sonnblick, where the 
phenomenon is common, Elster and Geitel (87) have found St Elmo's 
fire to answer to a discharge sometimes of positive sometimes of 
negative electricity. The colour and appearance differ in the two 
cases, red predominating in a positive, blue in a. negative discharge. 
The differences characteristic of the two forms of discharge are de- 
scribed and illustrated in Gockel's Das Gewitter. Gockel states 
{I.e. p. 74) that during snowfall the sign is positive or negative accord- 
ing as the flakes are large or an small and powdery. The discharge 
is not infrequently accompanied by a sizzling sound. 

38. Of late years many experiments have been made on the 
influence of electric fields or currents on plant growth. S. Lem- 
strom (88), who was a pioneer in this department, found an electric 
field highly beneficial in some but not in all cases. Attempts have 
been made to apply electricity to agriculture on a commercial scale, 
but the exact measure of success attained remains somewhat doubt- 
ful. Lemstrom believed atmospheric electricity, to play an im- 
portant part in the natural growth of vegetation, and he assigned 
a special role to the needles of fir and pine trees. 

Bibliography. — The following abbreviations are here used: — • 
M.Z., Meteorologische Zeitschrift ; P.Z., Physikalische Zeitschrift ; 
S., Sitzungsberichte k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, Math. Naturw. Klasse, 
Theil ii. 2; P.T., "Philosophical Transactions Royal Society 
of London"; T.M., Terrestrial Magnetism, edited by Dr L. A. 
Bauer. 

Text-books: — (1) G. le Cadet, Etude du champ electrique del' at- 
mosphere (Paris, 1898); (2) Svante A. Arrhenius, Lehrbuch der 
kosmischen Physik (Leipzig, 1903) ; (3) A. Gockel, Das Gewitter 
(Cologne, 1905). 

Lists of original authorities: — (4) F. Exner, M.Z., vol. 17, 1900, 
p. 529 (especially pp. 542-3); (5) G. C. Simpson, Q.J.R. Met. Soc, 
vol.31, 1905, p. 295 (especially pp. 305-6). References in the text : — 
(6) M.Z., vol. 4, 1887, p. 352; (7) T.M., vol. 4, 1899, p. 213; (8) P.Z., 
vol. 4, p. 661 ; (9) M.Z., vol. 23, 1906, p. 114; (10) P.T., vol. 205 A, 
1906, p. 61 ; (11) P.Z., vol. 5, p. 260; (12) C. Chree, P.T., vol. 206 A, 
p. 299; (13) Annual volumes, Greenwich Magnetical and Meteoro- 
logical Observations; (14) M.Z., vol. 8, 1891, p. 357; (15) M.Z., 
vol. 7, 1890, p. 319 and vol. 8, 1891, p. 113; (16) Annual volumes, 
Annaes do Obs. do Infante D. Luiz; (17) Annual Reports, Central 
Meteorological Observatory of Japan; (18) Observations made at 
the Mag. and Met. Obs. at Batavia, vol. 18, 1895; (19) J. D. Everett, 
P.T., vol. 158, 1868, p. 347; (20) M.Z., vol. 6, 1889, p. 95; (21) 
A. B. Chauveau, Ann. bureau central meteorologique, Paris, annee 
1900, " Memoires," p. Ci; (22) V. Conrad, S., 113, p. 1143; (23) 
P. B. Zolss, P.Z., vol. 5, p. 260; (24) T.M., vol. 7, 1902, p. 89; 
(25) Revue generate des sciences, 1906, p. 442 ; (26) T.M., vol. 8, 1903, 
p. 86, and vol. 9, 1904, p. 147 ; (27) S., 93, p. 222 ; (28) M.Z., vol. 22, 
1905, p. 237; (29) P.Z., vol. 4, p. 632; (30) Phil. Mag., vol. 20, 
1885, p. 456; (31) Expedition polaire finlandaise, vol. 3 (Helsingfors, 
1898); (32) A. Paulsen, Bull, de I' Acad. . . . de Danemarke, 1894, 
p. 148; (33) Wied. Ann., vol. 46, 1892, p. 584; (34) P.T., vol. 191 A, 
p. 187; (35) M.Z., vol. 5, 1888, p. 95; S., 99, p. 421; T.M., vol. 4, 
1899, p. 15; (36) Camb. Phil. Soc. Proc, vol. II, p. 428, and vol. 12, 
pp. 17 and 85; (37) P.Z., vol. 4, pp. 267 and 873; (38) E. R. v. 
Schweidler, 5., 113, p. 1433; (39) S., ill, July 1902; (40) Verbffentl. 
des Kg. Preuss. Met. Inst., 1904; (41) P.Z., vol. 5, p. 106; (42) 5., 114, 
p. 198; (43) P.Z., vol. 4, p. 871 ; (44) P.Z., vol. 4, p. 93; (45) M.Z., 
vol. 23, 1906, p. 229; (46) S., 114, p. 1705; (47) S., 114, p. 399; (48) 
P.Z., vol. 4, p. 522; (49) S., 113, p. 1455; (50) P.Z., vol. 4, p. 627; 
(51) P.Z., vol. 4, p. 90; (52) S., 114, p. 151 ; (53) M.Z., vol. 23, 1906, 
p. 253; (54) P.Z., vol. 5, p. 749; (55) M.Z., vol. 23, 1906, pp. 53 
and 339; (56) P.Z., vol. 5, p. 11; (57) P.Z., vol. 5, p. 591; (58) 
T.M., vol. 9, 1904, p. 49; (59) P.Z., vol. 4, p. 295; (60) P.Z., vol. 5, 
p. 504; (61) T.M., vol. 10, 1905, p. 65; (62) S., 114, p. 1377; (63) 
Camb. Phil. Soc. Proc, vol. 13, p. 363; (64) Trans. R.S. Edin., vol. 39, 
p. 63, and vol. 40, p. 484; (65) Q.J.R. Met. Soc, vol. 24, 1898, p. 31 ; 
(66) M.Z., vol. 11, 1894, P- 2 77; (67) Jahrbucher der Konigl. Ung. 
Reichsanstalt fur Met. und Erdmag., vol. 33, 1903, III. Theil with 
appendix by L. von Szalay; (68) U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Weather 
Bureau Bulletin, No. 30, 1901; (69) M.Z., vol. 19, 1902, p. 297; 
(70) Q.J.R. Met. Soc, vol. 15, 1889, p. 140; (71) M.Z., vol. 20, 1903, 
p. 227; (72) M.Z., vol. 20, 1903, p. 522; (73) M.Z., vol. 23, 1906, 
p. 367; (74) M.Z., vol. 22, 1905, p. 175; (75) J. Hegyfoky, M.Z., 
vol. 20, 1903, p. 218; (76) M.Z., vol. 22, 1905, p. 575; (77) S. 
Arrhenius, M.Z., vol. 5, 1888, p. 348; (78) G, Hellmann, M.Z., 
vol. 22, 1905, p. 223; (79) M.Z., vol. 11, 1894, p. 239; (80) M.Z., 
vol. 23, 1906, p. 468; (81) Berlin Sitz., 1889, No. 16; (82) A. J. 
Henry, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture Bull., No. 26, 1899; (83) M.Z., 



vol. 16, 1899, p. 128; (84) K. Sven. Vet. Akad. Hand., Bd. 19, No. 8, 
Bd. 20, No. 6, Bd. 31, Nos. 2 and 3; (85) M.Z., vol. 1.1/1894, P- 2 3°; 
(86) Nature, vol. 65, 1902, p. 367; (87) M.Z., vol. 8, 1891, p. 321; 
(88) Brit. Assoc. Report for 1898, p. 808, also Electricity in Agri- 
culture and Horticulture (London, 1904). (C. Ch.) 

ATMOSPHERIC RAILWAY. About 1840-1845 great interest 
was excited by a method of propelling railway trains through 
the agency of atmospheric pressure. Various inventors worked 
at the realization of this idea. On the system worked out in 
England by Jacob Samuda and S. Clegg, a continuous pipe or 
main was laid between the rails, and in it a partial vacuum was 
maintained by means of air pumps. A piston fitting closely in 
it was connected to the leading vehicle of the train by an iron 
plate which passed through a longitudinal groove or aperture 
running the whole length of the pipe. This aperture was covered 
by a valve consisting of a continuous strip of leather, strengthened 
on each side with iron plates; one edge was fastened, while the 
other was free to rise, and was closed against a composition of 
beeswax and tallow placed in the groove, the surface of which 
was slightly melted by a heater, carried on each train, in order 
to secure an air-tight joint. Connected behind the piston was 
a frame carrying four wheels which lifted and sustained the 
continuous valve for a distance of about 15 ft. Thus the piston 
having atmospheric pressure on one side of it and a vacuum equal 
to 15 or 16 in. of mercury on the other, was forced along the tube, 
taking the train with it. Various advantages were claimed by 
the advocates of the system, including cheapness of operation 
as compared with steam locomotives, and safety from collision, 
because the main was divided into sections by separating valves 
and only one train could be in each section at a given time. It 
was installed on about 2 m. of line between Kingstown and 
Dalkey (Ireland) in 1843 and worked till 1855; it was also tried 
on the London and Croydon and on the South Devon lines, but 
was soon abandoned. The same principle is applied in the 
system of pneumatic despatch (q.v.) to the transmission of small 
parcels in connexion with postal and telegraph work. 

For further particulars see three papers by J. Samuda, P. W. 
Barlow and G. Berkeley, with reports of the discussions upon them, 
in Proc. Inst. C.E., 1844 and 1845. 

ATOLL (native name atollon in the Maldive Islands) ; a horse- 
shoe or ring shaped coral reef enclosing a lagoon. The usual 
shape is that of a partly submerged dish with a broken edge, 
forming the ring of islands, standing upon a conical pedestal. 
The dish is formed of coral rock and the shells of various reef- 
dwelling mollusca, covered, especially at the seaward edges, with 
a film of living coral polyps that continually extend the fringe, 
and enlarge the diameter of the atoll. The lagoon tends to deepen 
when the land is stationary by the death of the coral animals in 
the still water, and the patchy disintegration of the " hard " 
coral, while waves and storms tear off blocks of rock and pile 
them up at the margin, increasing the height of the islands, 
which become covered by vegetation. The lagoon entrance in 
the open part of the horse-shoe is always to leeward of prevailing 
winds, since the coral growth is there slower than where the waves 
constantly renew the polyps' food supply. The conical pedestal 
rising from the depths is frequently a submarine volcanic cone 
or island, though any submerged peak may be crowned by an 
atoll. For the theory of atoll formation see Coral-reees, 

ATOM (Gr. aro/xos, indivisible, from d- privative, and Tifivtw, 
to cut) , the term given in physical science to the ultimate 
indivisible particle of matter, and so by analogy to something 
minutely small in size. If we examine such a substance as sugar 
we find that it can be broken up into fine grains, and these again 
into finer, the finest particles still appearing to be of the same 
nature as sugar. The same is true in the case of a liquid such as 
water; it can be divided into drops and these again into smaller 
drops, or into the finest spray the particles of which are too small 
to be detected by our unaided vision. In fact, so far as the direct 
evidence of our senses tells us, matter appears to be indefinitely 
divisible. Moreover, small particles do not seem to exist in the 
water until it is broken up; so far as we can see, the material 
of the water is continuous not granular. This conception of 
matter, as infinitely divisible and continuous, Was taught by 



ATOM 



871 



Anaxagoras more than four centuries before the Christian era, 
and in the philosophy of Aristotle the same ideas are found. 
But some phenomena are difficult to reconcile with 
of matter ^^ v ' ew > f° r example, a cubic foot of air can be com- 
pressed into less than one five-hundredth of a cubic 
foot, or, if allowed to expand, the air originally occupying 
the cubic foot can be made to fill, apparently uniformly, a space 
of a million cubic feet or more. This enormous capacity for 
expansion and contraction is astonishing if we believe matter 
to be continuous, but if we imagine air to be made up of little 
particles separated by relatively large empty spaces the changes 
in volume are more easily conceivable. Moreover, if we attribute 
such a structure to gases, we are led to attribute it to liquids 
and to solids also, since gases can be liquefied without any abrupt 
change, and many substances usually solid can be converted 
into gases by heating them. This conception of the grained 
structure of matter is very ancient; traces of it are to be found 
in Indian philosophy, perhaps twelve centuries before the 
Christian era, and the Greek philosophers Democritus and 
Epicurus, in the 3rd and 4th centuries B.C., taught it very 
definitely. Their view was that " matter is not indefinitely 
divisible, but that all substances are formed of indivisible particles 
or atoms which are eternal and unchangeable, that the atoms 
are separated from one another by void, and that these atoms, 
by their combinations, form the matter we are conscious of." 
The Roman poet Lucretius (De Rerum Natura) was an eloquent 
exponent of this theory, but throughout the middle ages, indeed 
until the 17th century, it was eclipsed by the prestige of Aristotle. 
In the time, however, of Boyle ' and Newton, we again find an 
atomic theory of matter; Newton 2 regarded a gas as consisting 
of small separate particles which repelled one another, the 
tendency of a gas to expand being attributed to the supposed 
repulsion between the particles. 

Let us consider some common phenomena in the light of these 
rival theories as to the nature of matter. When a few lumps of 
sugar are added to a glass of water and stirred, the sugar soon 
disappears and we are left with a uniform liquid resembling 
water, except that it is sweet. What has become of the sugar? 
Does it still exist ? The atomist would say, " Yes, it is broken 
up into its atoms, and these are distributed throughout the spaces 
between the particles of water." The rival philosopher, who 
believes water to be continuous and without spaces between its 
particles, has a greater difficulty in accounting for the dis- 
appearance of the sugar; he would probably say that the sugar, 
and the water also, had ceased to exist, and that a new con- 
tinuous substance had been formed from them, but he could 
offer no picture of how this change had taken place. Or consider 
a well-marked case of what we are in the habit of calling chemical 
combination. If 127 parts of iodine, which is an almost black 
solid, and 100 parts of mercury, which is a white liquid metal, 
be intimately mixed by rubbing them together in a mortar, the 
two substances wholly disappear, and we obtain instead a 
brilliant red powder quite unlike the iodine or the mercury; 
almost the only property that is unchanged is the weight. The 
question again arises, what has become of the original sub- 
stances? The atomist has an easy answer; he says that the 
new body is made up by the juxtaposition of the atoms of 
iodine and mercury, which still exist in the red powder. His 
opponent would be disposed to say that the iodine and the 
mercury ceased to exist when the red powder was formed, that 
they were components but not constituents of it. The fact that 
the two components can be recovered from the compound by 
destroying it does not decide the question. It is remarkable 
that pure chemistry, even to-day, has no very conclusive 
arguments for the settlement of this controversy; but the sister 
science of physics is steadily accumulating evidence in favour of 
the atomic conception. 

Until the time of John Dalton, the atomic conception remained 
purely qualitative, and until then it does not appear to have 

•Robert Boyle, The Sceptical Chymist (1661); The Usefulness of 
Natural Philosophy (1663). 
* Sir Isaac Newton. Principia, bk. ii. prop. 23. 



advanced chemistry or to have found further confirmation in 
the facts of chemistry. Dalton (1803) gave the atomic theory a 
quantitative form, and showed that, by means of it, DaUon 
a vast number of the facts of chemistry could be 
predicted or explained. In fact, he did so much to make the 
atomic theory of matter probable that he is popularly regarded 
as its originator. Dalton lived in a period marked by great ad- 
vances in experimental chemistry. Rather before the commence- 
ment of the 10th century the work of Lavoisier had rendered 
it very probable that chemical changes are not accompanied 
by any change in weight, and this principle of the conservation of 
matter was becoming universally accepted; chemists were also 
acquiring considerable skill in chemical analysis, that is, in the 
determination of the nature and relative amounts of the elements 
contained in compounds. But Sir H. E. Roscoe and A. Harden, 
New View of the Atomic Theory (1896), have shown, from a study 
of Dalton's manuscript notes, that we do not owe his atomic 
theory to such experiments. If their view is correct, the theory 
appears to be a remarkable example of deductive reasoning. 
Dalton, who was a mathematical physicist even more than a 
chemist, had given much thought to the study of gases. Follow- 
ing Newton, he believed a gas to be made up of particles or atoms, 




From Dalton's New System o] Chemical Philosophy . 
Hydrogen Gas. Nitrous Gas. 



Carbonic Acid Gas. 



separated from one another by considerable spaces. Certain 
difficulties that he met with in his speculations led him to the 
conclusion that the particles of any one kind of gas, though all 
of them alike, must differ from those of another gas both in size 
and weight. He thus arrived at the conception oi a definite 
atomic weight peculiar to the particles of each gas, and he 
thought that he could determine these atomic weights, in terms 
of one of them, by means of the quantitative analysis of com- 
pounds. The conclusion that each element had a definite atomic 
weight, peculiar to it, was the new idea that made his specula- 
tions fruitful, because it allowed of quantitative deduction and 
verification. He drew simple diagrams, three of which, taken 
from Dalton's New System of Chemical Philosophy, part ii. 
(1810), are reproduced here, in which gases are represented as 
composed of atoms. Knowing that the gas which he called 
" nitrous gas " was composed of oxygen and nitrogen, and believ- 
ing it to be the simplest compound of these two elements, he 
naturally represented its atom as formed of an atom of oxygen 
and an atom of nitrogen in juxtaposition. When two elements 
form more than one compound, as is the case with oxygen and 
carbon, he assigned to the compound which he thought the more 
complex an atom made up of two atoms of the one element and 
one atom of the other; the diagram , , 

for carbonic acid illustrates this, and X oxygen? 11 ' 
an extension of the same plan enabled nitrogen, 
him to represent any compound, how- • carbon, 

ever complex its structure. The table ©$ water. _ 
. • , • c t\ 1. > ©CD ammonia, 

here given contains some of Dalton s q,* ethvlene 

diagrams of atoms. They are not all #0 carbon monoxide, 
considered to be correct at the present 0*0 carbon dioxide, 
time; for example, we now think that ®Q nitric oxide 
the ultimate particle of water is made qqcd nitrousoxfde 
up of two atoms of hydrogen and one CKDO nitrogen peroxide, 
of oxygen, and that that of ammonia 

contains three atoms of hydrogen to one of nitrogen. But 
these differences between Dalton's views and our present ones 
do not impair the accuracy of the arguments which follow. 



$72 



ATOM 



The diagrams show that Dal ton formed a very definite conception 
of the nature of chemical combination; it was the union of a 
small number of atoms of one kind with a small number of 
another kind to form a compound atom, or as we now say a 
" molecule," this identical process being repeated millions of 
times to form a perceptible amount of a compound. The con- 
ceptions of " element," " compound " and " mixture " became 
more precise than they had been hitherto; in an element all the 
atoms are alike, in a compound all the molecules are alike, in a 
mixture there are different kinds of molecules. If we accept the 
hypothesis that each kind of atom has a specific and invariable 
weight, we can, with the aid of the above theery, make most 
important inferences concerning the proportions by weight in 
which substances combine to form compounds. These inferences 
are often summarized as the laws of constant, multiple and 
Xeciprocal proportions. 

The law of constant proportions asserts that when two elements 
unite to form a compound the weights that combine are in an 
Law of invariable ratio, a ratio that is characteristic of that 
constant compound. Thus if Dalton's diagram for the molecule, 
propor- or compound atom, of water be correct, it follows that 
in all samples of water the total number of the hydrogen 
atoms is equal to that of the oxygen atoms; consequently, the 
ratio of the weight of oxygen to that of hydrogen in water is the 
same as the ratio of the weights of an oxygen and a hydrogen 
atom, and this is invariable. Different samples of water cannot 
therefore differ ever so little in percentage composition, and the 
same must be true for every compound as distinguished from a 
mixture. Apart from the atomic theory there is no obvious 
reason why this should be so. We give the name bread to a 
substance containing variable proportions of flour and water. 
Similarly the substance we call wine is undeniably variable in 
composition. Why should not the substance we call water also 
vary more or less? The Aristotelian would find no difficulty 
in such a variability; it is only the disciple of Dalton to whom 
it seems impossible. It is evident that we have in this law a 
definite prediction that can be tested by experiment. 

The law of multiple proportions asserts that if two elements 
form more than one compound, then the weights of the one element 
Lav of which are found combined with unit weight of the other 
multiple in the different compounds, must be in the ratio of two 
propor- or more w hole numbers. If we compare Dalton's 
diagrams of the two oxides of carbon or of the three 
oxides of nitrogen that are given in the preceding table, we at 
once see the necessity of this law; for the more complex molecule 
has to be formed from the simpler one by the addition of one or 
more whole atoms. In the oxides of carbon the same weight 
of carbon must be combined with weights of oxygen that are as 
i : 2, and in the oxides of nitrogen a fixed weight of nitrogen 
must be in union with weights of oxygen that are as i : 2 : \, 
which are the same ratios as 2 : 4 : 1. This law has been abun- 
dantly verified by experiment; for example, five oxides of 
nitrogen are known, and independent analyses show that, if we 
consider the same weight of nitrogen in every case, the weights 
of oxygen combined with it are to one another asi :2 : 3 : 4 : 5. 
The discovery of this law is due to Dalton; it is a direct deduction 
from his atomic theory. Here again, apart from this theory, 
there is no obvious reason why the composition of different 
substances should be related in so simple a way. As Dalton 
said, " The doctrine of definite proportions appears mysterious 
unless we adopt the atomic hypothesis." " It appears like the 
mystical ratios of Kepler which Newton so happily elucidated." 
The chemists of Dalton's time were not unanimous in accepting 
these laws; indeed C. L. Berthollet (Essai de statique chimique, 
1803) expressly controverted them. He maintained that, 
under varying conditions, two substances could combine in an 
indefinitely large number of different ratios, that there could in 
fact be a continuous variation in the combining ratio. This 
view is clearly inconsistent with the atomic theory, which requires 
that when the combining ratio of two substances changes it 
should do so, per saltum, to quite another value. 

The law of reciprocal proportions, or, as it might well be named, 



the law of equivalence, cannot be adequately enunciated in a few 
words. The following gives a partial statement of it. Law of 
If we know the weights a and b of two elements that are reciprocal 
found in union with unit weight of a third element, then P r °P» r ' 
we can predict the composition of the compounds which 
the first two elements can form with each other; either the weights 
a and b will combine exactly, or if not, these weights must be multi- 
plied by integers to obtain the composition of a compound. To see 
how this law follows from Dalton's theory let us consider his 
diagrams for the molecules of water, ethylene and the oxides of 
carbon. In water and in ethylene experiment shows that 8 
parts by weight of oxygen and 6 parts of carbon, respectively, 
are in union with one part of hydrogen; also, if the diagrams 
are correct, these numbers must be in the ratio of the atomic 
weights of oxygen and carbon. We can therefore predict that 
all oxides of carbon will have compositions represented by the 
ratio of 8m parts of oxygen to 6« parts of carbon, where m and n 
are whole numbers. This prediction is verified by the result of 
analysis. Similarly, if we know by experiment the composition 
of water and of ammonia, we can predict the probable composi- 
tion of the oxides of nitrogen. Experiment shows that, in water 
and ammonia, we have, respectively, 8 parts of oxygen and 4-67 
parts of nitrogen in union with one part of hydrogen; we can 
therefore infer that the oxides of nitrogen will all have the 
composition of &m parts of oxygen to 4-6yn parts of nitrogen. 
Experiment alone can tell us the values of m and n; all that 
the theory tells us is that they are whole numbers. In this 
particular case, n turns out to be 3, and m has in succession the 
values 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 

It is evident that these laws all follow from the idea that a 
compound molecule can only alter through the a'ddition or 
subtraction of one or more complete atoms, together with the 
idea that all the molecules in a pure substance are alike. For- 
tunately, the compounds at first examined by the chemists 
engaged in verifying these laws were comparatively simple, so 
that the whole numbers referred to above were small. The 
astonishing variety of ratios in which carbon and hydrogen 
combine was not at first realized. Otherwise Berthollet's 
position would have been a much stronger one, and the atomic 
theory might have had to wait a long while for acceptance. 
Even at the present time, it would be too much to say that all 
the complex organic substances have been proved by analysis 
to obey these laws; all we can assert is that their composition 
and properties can be satisfactorily explained on the assumption 
that they do so. 

The above statement does not by any means exhaust the 
possible predictions that can be made from the atomic theory, 
but it shows how to test the theory. If chemical compounds 
can be proved by experiment to obey these laws, then the 
atomic theory acquires a high degree of probability; if they are 
contradicted by experiment then the atomic theory must be 
abandoned, or very much modified. Dalton himself made many 
analyses with the purpose of establishing his views, but his 
skill as an analyst was not very great. It is in the work of the 
great Swedish chemist J. J. Berzelius, and somewhat later, in 
the experiments of the Belgian chemist J. S. Stas, that we find 
the most brilliant and vigorous verification of these laws, and 
therefore of the atomic theory. 

We shall now give an outline of the experimental evidence for 
the truth of these laws. 

The law of the conservation of matter, ah important element 
in the atomic theory, has been roughly verified by innumerable 
analyses, in which, a given weight of a substance 
having been taken, each ingredient in it is isolated Experi- 
and its weight separately determined; the total weight evidence. 
of the ingredients is always found to be very nearly 
equal to the weight of the original substance. But on account 
of experimental errors in weighing and measuring, and through 
loss of material in the transfer of substances from one vessel to 
another, such analyses are rarely trustworthy to more than one 
part in about 500; so that small changes in weight consequent 
on the chemical change could not with certainty be proved or 



ATOM 



873 



disproved. A few experimenters have carried the verification 
much further. Stas, in his syntheses of silver iodide, weighed 
the silver and the iodine separately, and after converting them 
into the compound he weighed this also. In each of a number 
of experiments he found that the weight of the silver iodide 
did not differ by one twenty-thousandth of the whole from the 
sum of the weights of the silver and the iodine used. His analyses 
of another compound, silver iodate, confirm the law to one part 
in 78,000. In E. W. Morley's experiments on the synthesis of 
water the hydrogen, the oxygen and the water that had been 
formed were separately determined; taking the mean of his 
results, the sum of the weights of the ingredients is not found to 
differ from the weight of the product by one part in 10,000. It 
is evident that if our experiments are solely directed to the 
verification of this law, they should, if possible, be carried out 
in a hermetically closed vessel, the vessel and its contents being 
weighed before and after the chemical change. The extremely 
careful experiments of this kind, by H. Landolt and others, 
made it at first appear that the change in weight, if there is any, 
consequent on a chemical change can rarely exceed one-millionth 
of the weight of the reacting substances, and that it must often 
be much less. The small discrepancies found are so easily 
accounted for by attributing them to experimental errors that, 
until recently, every chemist would have regarded the law 
as sufficiently verified. Landolt's subsequent experiments 
showed, what was already noticed in the earlier ones, that these 
minute changes in weight are nearly always losses, the products 
weigh less than the components, while if they had been purely 
experimental errors, due to weighing, they might have been ex- 
pected to be as frequently gains as losses. Landolt was dis- 
posed to attribute these losses in weight to the containing 
vessel, which was of glass or quartz, not being absolutely im- 
pervious, but in 1908 he showed that, by making allowance for 
the moisture adsorbed on the vessel, the errors were both positive 
and negative, and were less than one in ten million. He concluded 
that no change of weight can be detected. Modern researches (see 
Radioactivity) on the complex nature of the atom have a 
little shaken the belief in the absolute permanence of matter. 
But it seems pretty clear that if there is any change in weight 
consequent on chemical change, it is too minute to be of im- 
portance to the chemist, though the methods of modern physics 
may settle the question. (See Element.) 

The law of constant proportions is easily verified to a moderate 
degree of accuracy by such experiments as the following. We 
can prepare, in the laboratory, a white powder that proves to be 
calcium carbonate, that is, it appears to be wholly composed of 
carbon dioxide and lime. We find in nature two other unlike 
substances, marble and Iceland spar, each of which is wholly 
composed of carbon dioxide and lime. Thus these three sub- 
stances, unlike in appearance and origin, are composed of the 
same ingredients: if small variations in the combining ratio of 
the components were possible, we might expect to find them 
in such a case as this. But analysis has failed to find such 
differences; the ratio of the weights of lime and carbon 
dioxide is found to be the same in all three substances. 
Such analyses, which do not always admit of great accuracy, 
have been confirmed by a few carefully planned experi- 
ments in which two components were brought together under 
very varied conditions, and the resulting compound analysed. 
Stas carried out such experiments on the composition of 
silver chloride and of ammonium chloride, but he never found a 
variation of one part in 10,000 in the composition of the 
substances. 

The two laws discussed above were more or less accepted before 
the promulgation of the atomic theory, but the law of multiple 
proportions is the legitimate offspring of this theory. Berzelius 
saw at once that it afforded an admirable test for the correctness 
of Dalton's views, and he made numerous experiments expressly 
designed to test the law. One of these experiments may be 
described. Two chlorides of copper are known, one a highly 
coloured substance, the other quite white. Berzelius took 8 
grams of copper, converted it into the coloured chloride, and 



sealed up the whole of this in solution, together with a weighed 
strip of copper. After some time the colour entirely dis- 
appeared; the strip of copper was then taken out and reweighed, 
and it was found to have lost 8-03 grams. Thus the chlorine, 
which in the coloured compound was in union with 8 grams of 
copper, appears, in the colourless chloride, to be combined with 
16-03 grams, or almost exactly double the amount. It is easy 
to verify this result. In a series of repetitions of the experiment, 
by different observers, the following numbers were obtained for 
the ratio of the copper in the two chlorides: 1-98, 1-97, 2-03, 
2-003, the mean value being 1-996. It will be noticed that the 
ratio found is sometimes above and sometimes below the number 
2, which is required by the atomic theory, and therefore the 
deviations may not unreasonably be attributed to experimental 
errors. Such experiments — and numerous ones of about this 
degree of accuracy have been made on a variety of substances 1 — ■ 
give a high degree of probability to the law, but leave it an open 
question whether it has the exactitude of the law of the conserva- 
tion of matter, or whether it is only approximately true. The 
question is, however, vital to the atomic theory. It is, therefore, 
worth while to quote a verification of great exactitude from the 
work of Stas and J. B. A. Dumas 1 on the composition of the 
two oxides of carbon. From their work it follows that the ratio 
of the weights of oxygen combined with unit weight of carbon 
in the two oxides is 1-99995, or with somewhat different data, 
1-9996. 

The law of reciprocal proportion, of which some examples have 
been already given, is part of a larger law of equivalence that 
underlies most of our chemical methods and calculations. One 
section of the law expresses the fact that the weights of two 
substances, not necessarily elements, that are equivalent in one 
reaction, are often found to be equivalent in a number of other 
reactions. The neutralization of acids by bases affords many 
illustrations, known even before the atomic theory, of the truth 
of the statement. It is universally found that the weights of two 
bases which neutralize the same weight of one acid are equivalent 
in their power of neutralizing other acids. Thus 5 parts by 
weight of soda, 7 of potash and 3-5 of quicklime will each 
neutralize 4-56 parts of hydrochloric acid or 7-875 of nitric or 
6-125 parts of sulphuric acid; these weights, in fact, are mutually 
equivalent to one another. The Daltonian would say that each 
of these weights represents a certain group of atoms, and that 
these groups can replace, or combine with, each other, to form 
new molecules. The change from a binary compound, that is, 
one containing two elements, to a ternary compound in which 
these two elements are associated with a third, sometimes affords 
a very good test for the theory. The atomic theory car picture 
the change from the binary to the ternary compound si aply as 
the addition of one or more atoms of the third elemen . to the 
previously existing molecule; in such a case the combining 
ratio of the first two elements should be absolutely the same in 
both compounds. Berzelius tested this prediction. He showed 
that lead sulphide, a black substance containing only lead and 
sulphur, could be converted by oxidation into lead sulphate, a 
white compound containing oxygen as well as lead and sulphur. 
The whole of the lead and sulphur of the sulphide was found to 
be present in the sulphate; in other words, the combining ratio 
of the lead and sulphur was not altered by the addition of the 
oxygen. This is found to be a general rule. It was verified very 
exactly by Stas's experiments, in which he removed the oxygen 
from the ternary compound silver iodate and found that the 
whole of the silver and the iodine remained in combination with 
each other as silver iodide; his results prove, to one part in ten 
millions, that the combining ratio of the silver and the iodine 
is unaltered by the removal of the oxygen. 

The above gives some idea of the evidence that has been 
accumulated in favour of the laws of chemical combination, laws 
which can be deduced from the atomic theory. Whenever any 
of these laws, or indeed any prediction from the theory, can be 
tested it has so far proved to be in harmony with experiment. 
The existence of the periodic law (see Element), and the 
1 Freund, The Study of Chemical Composition. 



8 74 



ATONEMENT 



Formulae. 



researches of physicists on the constitution of matter (q.v.), also 
furnish very strong support to the theory. 

Dalton was of the opinion that it was possible to determine 
the weights of the elementary atoms in terms of any one by the 
analysis of compounds. It is evident that this is 
weight practicable if the number and kind of atoms contained 
in the molecule of a compound can be determined. 
To take the simplest possible case, if Dalton had been correct 
in assuming that the molecule of water was made up of one atom 
of oxygen and one of hydrogen, then the experimental fact that 
water contains eight parts by weight of oxygen to one part of 
hydrogen, would at once show that the atom of oxygen is eight 
times as heavy as the atom of hydrogen, or that, taking the 
atomic weight of hydrogen as the unit, the atomic weight of 
oxygen is 8. Similarly, Dalton's diagram for ammonia, together 
with the fact that ammonia contains 4-67 parts of nitrogen to 
one of hydrogen, at once leads to the conclusion that the atomic 
weight of nitrogen is 4-67. But, unfortunately, the assumption 
as to the number of atoms in the molecules of these two com- 
pounds was an arbitrary one, based on no valid evidence. It is 
now agreed that the molecule of water contains two atoms of 
hydrogen and one of oxygen, so that the atomic weight of oxygen 
becomes 16, and similarly that the molecule of ammonia contains 
three atoms of hydrogen and one of nitrogen, and that conse- 
quently the atomic weight of nitrogen is 14. On account of 
this difficulty, the atomic weights published by Dalton, and the 
more accurate ones of Berzelius, were not always identical with 
the values now accepted, but were often simple multiples or 
submultiples of these. 

The " symbols " for the elements used by Dalton, apparently 
suggested by those of the alchemists^have been rejected in favour 
of those which were introduced by Berzelius. The 
latter employed the first letter, or the first two letters, 
of the name of an element as its symbol. The symbol, like that 
of Dalton, always stands for the atomic weight of the element, 
that is, while H stands for one part by weight of hydrogen, 
O stands for 16 parts of oxygen, and so on. The symbols 
of compounds become very concise, as the number of atoms 
of one kind in a molecule can be expressed by a sub-index. 
Thus the symbol or formula H 2 for water expresses the view 
that the molecule of water consists of one 'atom of oxygen 
and two of hydrogen; and if we know the atomic weights 
of oxygen and hydrogen, it also tells us the composition of 
water by weight. Similarly, the modern formula for ammonia 
is NH 3 . 

The .superiority of this notation over that of Dalton is not so 
obviov when we consider such simple cases as the above, but 
cherni s are now acquainted with very complex molecules 
contai ing numerous atoms; cane sugar, for example, has the 
formula CuHmOh. It would be a serious business to draw 
a Daltonian diagram for such a molecule. 

Dalton believed that the molecules of the elementary gases 
consisted each of one atom; his diagram for hydrogen gas makes 
the point clear. We now believe that the molecule of an element 
is frequently made up of two or more atoms; thus the formulae 
for the gases hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen are H 2 , 2 , N 2 , while 
gaseous phosphorus and sulphur are probably P4 and S 6 , and 
gaseous mercury is Hgi, — that is, the molecule of this element 
is monatomic. This view, as to the frequently complex nature 
of the elementary molecule, is logically and historically connected 
with the striking hypothesis of Amadeo Avogadro and A. M. 
Ampere. These natural philosophers suggested that equal 
volumes of all gaseous substances must contain, at the same 
temperature and pressure, the same number of molecules. Their 
hypothesis explains so many facts that it is now considered to be 
as well established as the parts of the theory due to Dalton. 1 
This principle at once enables the weights of molecules to be 
compared even when their composition is unknown; it is only 

1 It will be seen that in the three gas diagrams of Dalton that are 
reproduced above, equal numbers of molecules are contained in 
equal volumes, but if Dalton held this view at one time he certainly 
afterwards abandoned it. 



necessary to determine the specific gravities of the various gases 
referred to some one of them, say hydrogen; the numbers so 
obtained giving the weights of the molecules referred to that of 
the hydrogen molecule. 

The atomic theory has been of priceless value to chemists, but 
it has more than once happened in the history of science that a 
hypothesis, after having been useful in the discovery p*e„ a t 
and the co-ordination of knowledge, has been aban- position 
doned and replaced by one more in harmony with later of the 
discoveries. Some distinguished chemists have thought **<""*' 
that this fate may be awaiting the atomic theory, and 
that in future chemists may be able to obtain all the guidance 
they need from the science of the transformations of energy. 
But modern discoveries in radioactivity 2 are in favour of the 
existence of the atom, although they lead to the belief that the 
atom is not so eternal and unchangeable a thing as Dalton and 
his predecessors imagined, and in fact, that the atom itself may 
be subject to that eternal law of growth and decay of which 
Lucretius speaks. (F. H. Ne.) 

ATONEMENT and DAY OF ATONEMENT. "Atone" 
(originally — see below — " at one ") and " atonement " are 
terms ordinarily used as practically synonymous with 
satisfaction, reparation, compensation, with a view r *® 
to reconciliation. As the English technical terms ^J^ne. 
representing a theological doctrine which plays an 
important part not only in Christianity but in most religions, 
the underlying ideas require more detailed analysis. A doctrine 
of atonement makes the following presuppositions, (a) There 
is a natural relation between God and man in which God looks 
favourably upon man. (b) This relation has been disturbed so 
that God regards man's character and conduct with disapproval, 
and inflicts suffering upon him by way of punishment. In the 
higher religions the disturbance is due, as just implied, to 
unsatisfactory conduct on man's part, i.e. sin. (c) The normal 
relation may be restored, i.e. sin may be forgiven; and this 
restoration is the atonement. 

The problem of the atonement is the means or condition of 
the restoration of man to God's favour; this has been variously 
found (a) in the endurance of punishment; (6) in the payment 
of compensation for the wrong done, the compensation consist- 
ing of sacrifices and other offerings; (c) in the performance of 
magical or other ritual, the efficacy of the ritual consisting in its 
being pleasing to or appointed by God, or even in its having a 
coercive power over the deity; (d) in repentance and amendment 
of life. .Most theories of atonement would combine two or more 
of these, and would include repentance and amendment. Some 
or all of the conditions of atonement may be fulfilled, according 
to various views, either by the sinner or vicariously on his behalf 
by some kinsman; or by his family, clan or nation; or by 
some one else. 

In the Old Testament, " atonement," " make an atonement " 
represent the Hebrew kippur and its derivatives. It is doubtful 
whether this root meant originally to " cover " or 
" wipe out "; but probably it is used as a technical °' rf _ 
term without any consciousness of its etymology. meat. 
The Old Testament presents very varied teaching on 
this subject without attempting to co-ordinate its doctrines in 
a harmonious system. In some cases there is no suggestion of 
any forgiveness; sinners are " cut off " from the chosen people; 
individuals and nations perish in their iniquity. 3 Some passages 
refer exclusively to the endurance of punishment as a condition 
of pardon; 4 others to the penitence and amendment of the 
sinner. 5 In Ezekiel xxxvi. 25-31, repentance is called forth by 
the divine forgiveness. 

Sacrifice and other rites are also spoken of as conditions of the 
restoration of man to happy relations with God. The Priestly 
Code (Leviticus and allied passages) seems to confine the efficacy 

2 Rutherford, Radioactivity. 

3 Cf. Exodus xii. 15, &c. ; Josh. vii. 24 (Achan) ; Jer. li. 62 
(Babylon). 

4 2 Sam. xii. 13, 14 (David) ; Isaiah xl. 2 (Jerusalem) : in such 
cases, however, the context implies repentance. 

6 Ezek. xviii., Micah vi. 



ATONEMENT 



875 



atone- 
ment. 



of sacrifice to ritual, venial and involuntary sins, 1 and requires 
that the sacrifices should be offered at Jerusalem by the Aaronic 
priests; but these limitations did not belong to the older religion; 
and even in later times popular faith ascribed a larger efficacy to 
sacrifice. On the other hand, other passages protest against the 
ascription of great importance to sacrifice; or regard the rite 
as a consequence rather than a cause of forgiveness. 2 The Old 
Testament has no theory of sacrifice; in connexion with sin the 
sacrifice was popularly .regarded as payment of penalty or com- 
pensation. Lev. xvii. 1 1 suggests a mystic or symbolic explana- 
tion by its statement " the life of the flesh is in the blood; and 
I have given it to you upon the altar to make atonement for 
your lives: 3 for it is the blood that maketh atonement by reason 
of the life." The Old Testament nowhere explains why this 
importance is attached to the blood, but the passage is often held 
to mean that the life of the victim represented the forfeited life 
of the offerer. 

The atoning ritual reached its climax on the Day of Atpne- 
ment n-:9?n ti\\ 17/xepa e£iXcwjuoD, in the Mishna simply " the 
Jewish Day " Yomd), observed annually on the 10th day of 
day of the 7 th month (Tisri), in the autumn, about October, 
shortly before the Feast of Tabernacles or vintage 
festival. At one time the year began in Tisri. The 
laws of the Day of Atonement belong to the Priestly Code. 4 
There is no trace of this function before the exile; the earliest 
reference to any such special time of atonement being the 
proposal of Ezek. xlv. 18-20 to establish two days of atonement, 
in the first and seventh months. 5 No doubt, however, both the 
principles and ritual are partly derived from earlier times. The 
object of the observances was to cleanse the sanctuary, the 
priesthood and the people from all their sins, and to renew 
and maintain favourable relations between Yahweh and Israel. 
The ritual includes features found on other holy days, sacrifices, 
abstinence from work, &c. ; and also certain unique acts. The 
Day of Atonement is the only fast provided in the Law; it is 
only on this occasion that (a) the Jews are required to " afflict 
their souls," (b) the High Priest enters the Holy of Holies, (c) the 
High Priest offers incense before the mercy seat and sprinkles 
it with blood, and (d) the scapegoat or Azazel is sent away into 
the wilderness, bearing upon him all the iniquities of the people. 
In later Judaism, especially from about 100 B.C., great stress 
was laid on the Day of Atonement, and it is now the most 
important religious function of the Jews. On that day many 
attend the synagogues who are seldom or never seen in them 
at other times. 

The idea of vicarious atonement appears in the Old Testament 
in different forms. The nation suffers for the sin of the indivi- 
dual; 8 and the individual for the sin of his kinsfolk 7 or of 
the nation. 8 Above all the Servant of Yahweh 9 appears as 
atoning for sinners by his sufferings and death. Again, the 
Old Testament speaks of the restoration of heathen nations, 
and of the salvation of the heathen; 10 but does not formulate 
any theory of atonement in this connexion. The Old Testament, 
however, only prepares the way for the Christian doctrine of the 
atonement; this is clear, inasmuch as its teaching is largely 
concerned with the nation, and hardly touches on the future 
life. Moreover, it could not define the relation of Christ to the 
atonement. Later Judaism emphasized the idea of vicarious 
atonement for Israel through the sufferings of the righteous, 
especially the martyrs; but it is very doubtful whether the 
idea of the atonement through the death of the Messiah is a 
pre-Christian Jewish doctrine. 11 

In the New Testament, the English version uses " atonement " 

1 Lev. iv. 2, " sin unwittingly " bishegagd, c. 450 B.C., &c. 
* Psalm 1. 10, li. 16-19; Isaiah i. 11; Micah vi. 6-8. 

3 Heb. nephesh, also translated " soul." 

4 Lev. xvi., xxiii. 27-32; Numb. xxix. 7-1 1. 

5 So Davidson, &c. with LXX. The A.V. with Hebrew text has 
" seventh day of the month." 

■ ' e.g. Achan, Josh. vii. 10-15. 

7 2 Sam. xxi. 1-9; Deut. v. 9, 10. 

8 Ezek. xxi. 3, 4. 9 Isaiah liii. 
u Koberle, Siinde und Gnade, pp. 592 ff. 



Isaiah xix. 25 xlix. 6. 



once, Rom. v. 11, for KaraWaylj (R.V. here and elsewhere 
" reconciliation "). This Greek word corresponds to 
the idea suggested by the etymology of at-one-ment, rtsta- 
the re-uniting in amity of those at variance, a sense meat 
which the word had in the 17th century but has since 
lost. But the idea which is now usually expressed by " atone- 
ment " is rather represented in the New Testament by iXacr/ios 
and its cognates, e.g. 1 John ii. 2 R.V., " He (Jesus) is the 
propitiation (tXacr/uos) for our sins." But these words are rare, 
and we read more often of " salvation " (cruTiipLa) and " being 
save,d," which includes or involves that restoration to divine 
favour which is called atonement. The leading varieties of 
teaching, the Sayings of Jesus, Paul, the Johannine writings, 
the Epistle to the Hebrews, connect the atonement with Christ 
especially with His death, and associate it with faith in Him and 
with repentance and amendment of life. 12 

These ideas are also common to Christian teaching generally. 
The New Testament, however, does not indicate that its writers 
were agreed as to any formal dogma of the atonement, as regards 
the relation of the death of Christ to the sinner's restoration to 
God's favour; but various suggestions are made as to the 
solution of the problem. St Paul's teaching connects with the 
Jewish doctrine of vicarious suffering, represented in the Old 
Testament by Is. liii., and probably, though not expressly, with 
the ritual sacrifices. Christ suffering on behalf of sinners satisfies 
the divine righteousness, which was outraged by their sin. 13 
His work is an expression of God's love to man; 14 the redeeming 
power of Christ's death is also explained by his solidarity with 
humanity as the second Adam, 15 — the redeemed sinner has 
" died with Christ. " 16 Some atoning virtue seems also attributed 
to the Resurrection; 17 Christ's sayings connect admission to the 
kingdom of God with susceptibility to the influence of His 
personality, faith in Himself and His mission, and the loyalty 
that springs from faith. 18 In John, Christ is a " propitiation " 
(iXatryuos) provided by the love of God that man may be cleansed 
from sin; He is also their advocate (IIa.pa.KXijTOs) with God that 
they may be forgiven, for His name's sake. 19 Hebrews speaks of 
Christ as transcending the rites and officials of the law; He 
accomplishes the realities which they could only foreshadow; 
in relation to the perfect, heavenly sacrifice which atones for sin, 
He is both priest and victim. 20 

The subsequent development of the Christian doctrine has 
chiefly shaped itself according to the Pauline formula of vicarious 
atonement; the sufferings of Christ were accepted as a 
substitute for the punishment which men deserved, /JJ e ^C 
and so the divine righteousness was satisfied — a pretation. 
formula, however, which left much room for contro- 
versy. The creeds and confessions are usually vague. Thus the 
Apostles' Creed, " I believe in the forgiveness of sins "; the 
Nicene Creed, " I believe in one Lord Jesus Christ . . . who for 
us men and for our salvation came down from Leaven ... I 
acknowledge one baptism for the remission of sins"; the 
Athanasian Creed, " Who (Christ) suffered for our salvation." 
In the Thirty-nine Articles of the Church of England we have 
(ii.) " Christ suffered ... to reconcile his Father to us, and to 
be a sacrifice, not only for original guilt, but also for all actual 
sins of men " ; and (xxxi.) " The offering of Christ once made 
is that perfect redemption, propitiation, and satisfaction, for 
all the sins of the whole world." The council of Trent declared 
that " Christus . . . nobis sua sanctissima passione Ugno cruets 
justificationem meruit et pre nobis deo patri satisfecit," " Christ 
earned our justification by His most holy passion and satisfied 
God the Father for us." The Confession of Augsburg uses words 
equivalent to the Articles quoted above which were based upon 
it. The Westminster Confession declares: "The. Lord Jesus 
Christ, by His perfect obedience and sacrifice of Himself, which 
He through the Eternal Spirit once offered up to God, hath 

12 Mark x. 45 ; Matt. xxvi. 28 ; 1 Cor. xv. 3 ; John xi. 48-52 ; 
Heb. ii. 9. 

13 Rom. iii. 25. u Rom. v. 8. ls Rom. v. 15-19. 
16 Rom. vi. 8. « Rom. iv. 25. 

18 Matt. xxv. 34 f. ; Mark viii. 34 ff., ix. 36 f., x. 21. 

19 1 John ii. 1, 2, 12, iii. 5, 8, iv. 10. M Heb. ii. 17. ix.14. 



876 



ATRATO— ATREUS 



fully satisfied the justice of His Father, and purchased not only 
reconciliation, but an everlasting inheritance in the kingdom 
of heaven, for all those whom the Father hath given unto Him." 

Individual theologians have sought to define more exactly 
the points on which the standards are vague. For instance, 
how was, justice satisfied by Christ? The early Fathers, from 
Irenaeus (d. c. 200) to Anselm (d. noo), 1 held, inter alia, that 
Christ paid a ransom to Satan to induce him to release men from 
his power. Anselm and the scholastics regarded the atonement 
as an offering to God of such infinite value as to outweigh men's 
sins, a view sometimes styled the " Commerical Theory." 2 The 
leading reformers emphasized the idea that Christ bore the punish- 
ment of sin, sufferings equivalent to the punishments deserved 
by men, a view maintained later on by Jonathan Edwards 
junior. But the intellectual activity of the Reformation also 
developed other views; the Socinians, with their humanitarian 
theory of the Person of Christ, taught that He died only to 
assure men of God's forgiving love and to afford them an example 
of obedience — " Forgiveness is granted upon the ground of 
repentance and obedience." 3 Grotius put forward what has been 
called the Governmental Theory, viz. that the atonement took 
place not to satisfy the wrath of God, but in the practical 
interests of the divine government of the world, " The sufferings 
and death of the Son of God are an exemplary exhibition of 
God's hatred of moral evil, in connexion with which it is safe and 
prudent to remit that penalty, which so far as God and the divine 
attributes are concerned, might have been remitted without it." 4 

The formal legal view continued to be widely held, though 
it was modified in many ways by various theologians. For 
instance, it has been held that Christ atoned for man- 
views" kind not by enduring the penalty of sin, but by identify- 
ing Himself with the sinner in perfect sympathy, and 
feeling for him an " equivalent repentance " for his sin. Thus 
McLeod Campbell (q.v.) held that Christ atoned by offering up 
to God a perfect confession of the sins of mankind and an 
adequate repentance for them, with which divine justice is 
satisfied, and a full expiation is made for human guilt. A similar 
view was held by F. D. Maurice. 6 Others hold that the effect of 
the atoning death of Christ is not to propitiate God, but to 
reconcile man to God; it manifests righteousness, and thus 
reveals the heinousness of sin; it also reveals the love of God, 
and conveys the assurance of His willingness to forgive or receive 
the sinner; thus it moves men to repentance and faith, and 
effects their salvation; so substantially Ritschl. 6 In England 
much influence has been exerted by Dr R. W. Dale's Atonement 
(1875), the special point of which is that the death of Christ is 
not required by the personal demand of God to be propitiated, 
but by the necessity of honouring an ideal law of righteousness; 
thus, " the death of Christ is the objective ground on which the 
sins of men are remitted, because it was an act of submission to 
the righteous authority of the law by which the human race was 
condemned . . . and because in consequence of the relation 
between Him and us — His life being our own — His submission 
is the expression of ours, and carries ours with it . . . (and) 
because in His submission to the awful penalty of sin . . . there 
was a revelation of the righteousness of God, which must other- 
wise have been revealed in the infliction of the penalties of sin 
on the human race." 7 This view, however, leads to a dilemma; 
if the law of righteousness is simply an expression of the divine 
will, satisfaction to law is equivalent to propitiation offered to 
God; if the law has an independent position, the view is incon- 
sistent with pure monotheism. 

The present position may be illustrated from a work repre- 
senting the more liberal Anglican theology. Bishop Lyttelton 
in Lux Mundi* stated that the death of Christ is propitiatory 

1 Stevens, Christian Doctrine of Salvation, p. 138. 

2 Ibid. p. 151. 

3 Shedd, Hist, of Christ. Doctr. ii. 385 ff. ; cf. van Oosterzee, Christ. 
Dogmatics, 611. * Shedd ii. 358 f. 

' Crawford, Scripture Doctrine of the Atonement, pp. 327 ff. 

8 Orr, Ritschlian Theology, pp. 149 ff. 

7 Dale, Atonement, pp. 430 ff. 

' Pp. 209, 212, 214, 216, 219, 221, 225. 



towards God because it expressed His perfect obedience, it 
manifested God's righteous wrath against sin, and in virtue 
of Christ's human nature involved man's recognition of the 
righteousness of God's condemnation of sin; also because in 
some mysterious way death has a propitiatory value; and 
finally because Christ is the representative of the human race. 
Towards man, the death of Christ has atoning efficacy because 
it delivers from sin, bestows the divine gift of life and conveys 
the assurance of pardon. The benefits of the atonement are 
appropriated by " the acceptance of God's forgiveness in Christ, 
our self-identification with Christ's atoning attitude, and then 
working out, by the power of the life bestowed upon us, all the 
(moral and spiritual) consequence of forgiveness." 

At present the belief in an objective atonement is still widely 
held; whether in the form of penal theories — the old forensic 
view that the death of Christ atones by paying the penalty of 
man's sin — or in the form of governmental theories; that the 
Passion fulfilled a necessity of divine government by expressing 
and vindicating God's righteousness. But there is also a wide- 
spread inclination to minimize, ignore or deny the objective 
aspect of the atonement, the effect of the death of Christ on 
God's attitude towards men; and to follow the moral theories 
in emphasizing the subjective aspect of the atonement, the ' 
influence of the Passion on man. There is a tendency to eclectic 
views embracing the more attractive features of the various 
theories; and attempts are made to adapt, interpret and 
qualify the imagery and language of older formulae, in order 
so to speak, to issue them afresh in new editions, compatible 
with modern natural science, psychology and historical criticism. 
Such attempts are necessary in a time of transition, but they 
involve a measure of obscurity and ambiguity. 

Bibliography. — Atonement: H. Bushnell, Vicarious Sacrifice 
(1871); J. McLeod Campbell, Nature of the Atonement (1869); 
T. J. Crawford, Doctrine of the Holy Spirit respecting the Atonement 
(1871); R. W. Dale, Atonement (1875); J. Denney, Death of Christ, 
Atonement and the Modern Mind (1903) ; A. Lyttelton, Lux Mundi, 
pp. 201 ff. (Atonement), (1889); R. Moberly, Atonement and Per- 
sonality; A. Ritschl, Die christliche Lehre von der Rechtfertigung 
und Versohnung (1870-1874); G. B. Stevens, Christian Doctrine 
of Salvation (1905). 

Day of Atonement: articles in Hastings' Bible Dictionary, and 
in the Encyclopaedia Biblica. ' (W. H. Be.) 

ATRATO, a river of western Colombia, South America, rising 
on the slopes of the Western Cordilleras, in 5° 36' N. lat., and 
flowing almost due north to the Gulf of Uraba, or Darien, where 
it forms a large delta. Its length is about 400 m., but owing to 
the heavy rainfall of this region it discharges no less than 175,000 
cub. ft. of water per second, together with a very large quantity 
of sediment, which is rapidly filling the gulf. The river is navi- 
gable to Quibdo (250 m.), and for the greater part of its course 
for large vessels, but the bars at its mouth prevent the entrance 
of sea-going steamers. Flowing through the narrow valley 
between the Cordillera and coast range, it has only short tribu- 
taries, the principal ones being the Truando, Sucio and Murri. 
The gold and platinum mines of Choco were on some of its 
affluents, and the river sands are auriferous. The Atrato at one 
time attracted considerable attention as a feasible route for a 
trans-isthmian canal, which, it was estimated, could be excavated 
at a cost of £11,000,000. 

ATREK, a river which rises in 37° 10' N. lat. and 59° E., in the 
mountains of the north-east of the Persian province of Khorasan, 
and flows west along the borders of Persia and the Russian 
Transcaspian province, till it falls, after a course of 350 m., 
into the south-eastern corner of the Caspian, a short distance 
north-north-west of Astarabad. 

ATREUS, in Greek legend, son of Pelops and Hippodameia, 
and elder brother of Thyestes. Having murdered his step- 
brother Chrysippus, Atreus fled with Thyestes to Mycenae, 
where he succeeded Eurystheus in the sovereignty. His wife 
Aerope was seduced by Thyestes, who was driven from Mycenae. 
To avenge himself, Thyestes sent Pleisthenes (Atreus' son whom 
Thyestes had brought up as his own) to kill Atreus, but Plei- 
sthenes was himself slain by his own father. After this Atreus, 
apparently reconciled to his brother, recalled him to Mycenae 



ATRI— ATTA 



877 



and invited him to a banquet to eat of his son, whom Atreus had 
slain. Thyestes fled in horror. Subsequently Atreus married 
the daughter of Thyestes, Pelopia, who had by her own father 
a son, Aegisthus, who was adopted by Atreus. Thyestes was 
found by Agamemnon and Menelaus, the sons of Atreus, and 
imprisoned at Mycenae. Aegisthus being sent to murder 
Thyestes, mutual recognition took place, and Atreus was slain 
by the father and son, who seized the throne, and drove Aga- 
memnon and Menelaus out of the country (Thucydides i. 9; 
Hyginus, Fabulae; Apollodorus). Homer does not speak of the 
horrors of the story, which are first found in the tragedians; 
he merely states (Iliad, ii. 105) that Atreus at his death left the 
kingdom to Thyestes. 

See T. Voigt in Dissert, philol. Halenses. vi. (1886). 

ATRI, a town of the Abruzzi, Italy, in the province of Teramo, 
6 m. W. of the station of that name on the railway from Ancona 
to Foggia, and 18 m. due E.S.E. of Teramo, on the site of the 
ancient Hadria (q.v.). Pop. (1901) 13,448. Its Gothic cathedral 
(1 285-1305) is remarkably fine; and the interior, though spoilt 
by restoration in 1657, contains some important frescoes of the 
end of the 1 5th century by Andrea di Lecce and his pupils. The 
crypt was originally a cistern of the Roman period. The palace 
of the Acquaviva family, who were dukes of Atri from 1398 to 
1775, is a massive building situated in the principal square. 

ATRIUM (either from ater, black, referring to the blackening 
of the walls from the smoke of the hearth, or from the Greek 
dfflpwv, open to the sky, or from an Etruscan town, Atria, 
where the style of building is supposed to have originated), the 
principal entrance hall or court of a Roman dwelling, giving 
access and light to the rooms round it. The centre of the roof 
over the atrium was open to the sky and called the compluvium; 
the rain-water from the roof collected in the gutters was dis- 
charged into a marble tank underneath, which was known as 
the impluvium. In the early periods of Roman civilization the 
atrium was the common public apartment, and was used for 
the reception of visitors and clients, and for ordinary domestic 
purposes, as cooking and dining. In it were placed the ancestral 
pictures, the marriage-couch, the hearth and generally a small 
altar. At a somewhat later period, and among the wealthy, 
separate apartments were built for kitchens and dining-rooms, 
and the atrium was kept as a general reception-room for clients 
and visitors. There were many varieties of the atrium, depending 
on the way in which the roof was carried. These are described 
by Vitruvius under the title of canaedium. 

Other buildings, both consecrated and unconsecrated, were 
called by the term (corresponding to the English " hall "), such 
as the Atrium Vestae, where the vestal virgins lived, and the 
Atrium Libertatis, the residence of the censor, where Asinius 
Pollio established the first public library at Rome. 

The word atrium in Rome had a second signification, being 
given to an open court with porticos round, sometimes placed 
in front of a temple. A similar arrangement was adopted by 
the early Christians with relation to the Basilica, in front of 
which there was an open court surrounded by colonnades or 
arcades. The church of San Clemente at Rome, that of Sant' 
Ambrogio at Milan and the cathedral of Parenzo in Istria still 
retain their atria. 

ATROPHY (Gr. &.- priv., Tpcxfyfi, nourishment), a term in 
medicine used to describe a state of wasting due to some inter- 
ference with the function of healthy nutrition (see Pathology). 
In the living organism there are always at work changes involving 
the waste of its component tissues, which render necessary, in 
order to maintain and preserve life, the supply and proper assimi- 
lation of nutritive material. It is also essential for the mainten- 
ance of health that a due relation exist between these processes 
of waste and repair, so that the one may not be in excess of the 
other. When the appropriation of nutriment exceeds the waste, 
hypertrophy (q.v.) or increase in bulk of the tissues takes place. 
When, on the other hand, the supply of nutritive matter is 
suspended or diminished, or when the power of assimilation is 
impaired, atrophy or wasting is the result. Thus the whole 
body becomes atrophied in many diseases; and in old age every 



part of the frame, with the single exception of the heart, under- 
goes atrophic change. Atrophy may, however, affect single 
organs or parts of the body, irrespective of the general state of 
nutrition, and this may be brought about in a variety of ways. 
One of the most frequently observed of such instances is atrophy 
from disuse, or cessation of function. Thus, when a limb is 
deprived of the natural power of motion, either by paralysis 
or by painful joint disease, the condition of exercise essential 
to its nutrition being no longer fulfilled, atrophy of all its textures 
sooner or later takes place. The brain in imbeciles is frequently 
observed to be shrivelled, and in many cases of blindness there 
is atrophy of the optic nerve and optic tract. This form of 
atrophy is likewise well exemplified in the case of those organs 
and structures of the body which subserve important ends 
during foetal life, but which, ceasing to be necessary after birth, 
undergo a sort of natural atrophy, such as the thymus gland, 
and certain vessels specially concerned in the foetal circulation. 
The uterus after parturition undergoes a certain amount of 
atrophy, and the ovaries, after the child-bearing period, become 
shrunken. Atrophy of a part may also be caused by interrup- 
tion to its normal blood-supply, as in the case of the ligature 
or obstruction of an artery. Again, long-standing disease, by 
affecting the nutrition of an organ and by inducing the deposit 
of morbid products, may result in atrophy, as frequently happens 
in affections of the liver and kidneys. Parts that are subjected 
to continuous pressure are liable to become atrophied, as is 
sometimes seen in internal organs which have been pressed upon 
by tumours or other morbid growths, and is well illustrated in 
the Chinese practice of foot-binding. Atrophy may manifest 
itself simply by loss of substance; but, on the other hand, it is 
often found to co-exist with degenerative changes in the textures 
affected and the formation of adventitious growth, so that the 
part may not be reduced in bulk although atrophied as regards 
its proper structure. Thus, in the case of the heart, when 
affected with fatty degeneration, there is atrophy of the proper 
muscular texture, but as this is largely replaced by fatty matter, 
the organ may undergo no diminution in volume, but may, on 
the contrary, be increased in size. Atrophy is usually a gradual 
and slow process, but sometimes it proceeds rapidly. In the 
disease known by the name of acute yellow atrophy of the liver, 
that organ undergoes such rapidly destructive change as results 
in its shrinking to half, or one-third, of its normal size in the 
course of a few days. The term progressive muscular atrophy 
(synonyms, wasting or creeping palsy) is applied to an affection 
of the muscular system, which is characterized by the atrophy 
and subsequent paralysis of certain muscles, or groups of muscles, 
and is associated with morbid changes in the anterior roots of 
the nerves of the spinal cord. This disease begins insidiously, 
and is often first observed to affect the muscles of one hand, 
generally the right. The attention of the sufferer is first attracted 
by the power of the hand becoming weakened, and then there is 
found to be a wasting of certain of its muscles, particularly those 
of the ball of the thumb. Gradually other muscles in the arms 
and legs become affected in a similar manner, their atrophy 
being attended with a corresponding diminution in power. 
Although sometimes arrested, this disease tends to progress, 
until in course of time the greater part of the muscular system 
is implicated and a fatal result ensues. 

ATROPOS, in Greek mythology, the eldest of the three Fates 
(see Fate). Her name, the " Unalterable " (a- privative, and 
rpexeic, to turn), indicates her function, that of rendering the 
decisions of her sisters irreversible or immutable. Atropos is 
most frequently represented with scales, a sun-dial or a cutting 
instrument, the " abhorred shears," with which she slits the 
thin-spun thread of life that has been placed on the spindle by 
Clotho and drawn off by Lachesis. 

ATTA, TITUS QUINCTIUS, or Quintictus (d. 77 B.C.), Roman 
comedy writer, was, like Titinius and Afranius, distinguished 
as a writer of fabulae togatae, national comedies. He had the 
reputation of being a vivid delineator of character, especially 
female. He also seems to have published a collection of epigrams. 
The scanty fragments contain many archaisms, but are lively in 



878 



ATTACAPA— ATTAINDER 



style. According to Horace (Epistles, ii 1. 79) the plays of 
Atta were still put on the stage in his time. 

Aulus Gellius vii. 9; fragments in Neukirch, De fabula togaia 
Romanorum (1833) ; Ribbeck, Comicorum Latinorum reliquiae (1855). 

ATTACAPA (Choctaw for " cannibal "), a tribe of North- 
American Indians, whose home was in south-west Louisiana; 
they are now practically extinct. 

ATTACHMENT, 1 in law, a process from a court of record, 
awarded by the justices at their discretion, on a bare suggestion, 
or on their own knowledge, and properly grantable in cases of 
contempt. It differs from arrest {q.v.), in that he who arrests 
a man carries him to a person of higher power to be forthwith 
disposed of; but he that attaches keeps the party attached, 
and presents him in court at the day assigned, as appears by the 
words of the writ. Another difference is, that arrest is only upon 
the body of a man, whereas an attachment is often upon his 
goods. It is distinguished from distress in not extending to 
lands, as the latter does; nor does a distress touch the body, 
as an attachment does. Every court of record has power to fine 
and imprison for contempt of its authority. Attachment being 
merely a process to bring the defendant before the court, is not 
necessary in cases of contempt in the presence of the court itself. 
Attachment will be granted in England against peers and 
members of parliament only for such gross contempts as rescues, 
disobedience to the sovereign's writs and the like. Attachment 
will not he against a corporation. The county courts in this 
respect are regulated by acts of 1846 and 1849. They can only 
punish for contempts committed in presence of the court (see 
Contempt of Court). Attachments are granted on a rule in 
the first instance to show cause, which must be personally served 
before it can be made absolute, except for non-payment of costs 
on a master's allocatur, and against a sheriff for not obeying a 
rule to return a writ or to bring in the body. The offender is 
then arrested, and when committed will be compelled to answer 
interrogatories, exhibited against him by the party at whose 
instance the proceedings have been had; and the examination 
when taken is referred to the master, who reports thereon, and 
on the contempt being reported, the court gives judgment accord- 
ing to its discretion, in the same manner as upon a conviction 
for a misdemeanour at common law. Sir W. Blackstone observes 
that " this method of making the defendant answer upon oath 
to a criminal charge is not agreeable to the genius of the common 
law in any other instance "; and the elasticity of the legal defini- 
tions of contempt of court, especially with respect to comments 
on judicial proceedings, is the subject of much complaint. 

Attachment of Debts. — It was suggested by the common law 
commissioners in 1853 that a remedy analogous to that of 
Foreign Attachment (see below) might be made available to 
creditors, after judgment, against debts due to their debtors. 
Accordingly, the Common Law Procedure Act 1854 enacted 
that any creditor, having obtained judgment in the superior 
courts, should have an order that the judgment debtor might 
be examined as to any debts due and owing to him before a master 
of the court. The rules and regulations under the Judicature 
Act 1873 retained the process for attachment of debts as estab- 
lished by the Procedure Act of 1854. On affidavit that the judg- 
ment was still unsatisfied, and that any other person within the 
jurisdiction was indebted to the judgment debtor, the judge 
was empowered to attach all debts due from such third person 
(called the garnishee) to the judgment debtor, to answer the 
judgment debt. This order binds the debts in the hands of the 
garnishee, and if he does not dispute his liability execution 
issues against him at once. If he disputes his liability the ques- 
tion must be tried. Payment by the garnishee or execution 

1 " To attach " is first used in English in the legal sense of arrest 
or seizure, and the sense of " fasten to " is comparatively late. The 
Old French atachier, modern attacker, from which the English 
" attach " is derived, is from a word for a peg or nail, in English 
" tack," which is found in many forms in Scandinavian and Celtic 
languages, and is ultimately connected with the root seen in Latin 
tangere, to touch. The Italian attacare, especially in the phrase 
attacare battaelia, to join battle, gave the French attaquer, whence 
the English attack," which is therefore by origin a doublet of 
" attach." 



against him is a complete discharge as against the judgment 
debtor. These provisions were, by an order in council of the 
18th of November 1867, extended to the county courts. By 
the Wages Attachment Abolition Act 1870 it is enacted that 
no order for the attachment of the wages of any servant, labourer 
or workman shall be made by the judge of any court of record or 
inferior court, and by the Merchant Shipping Act 1894 it is 
enacted that the wages of a seaman or apprentice are not subject 
to attachment. 

In the United States attachment of debts is a statutory remedy 
accorded in most of the states in certain circumstances for the 
security of creditors, by the seizure by the sheriff of the debtor's 
goods or the imposition of a lien upon his land, before judgment, 
and sometimes at the very commencement of the action. In 
some states it is only allowed in special cases, as when the 
debtor has absconded, or is a non-resident or guilty of fraud; 
in a few it may be had, as of right, at the commencement of 
ordinary actions. The common-law courts of the United States 
(by act of Congress) follow the practice in this regard of the state 
in which they sit. Such attachments (on mesne process) can 
generally be dissolved by the substitution of a bond with surety. 
The body can also be attached in most states on civil actions 
of tort (for a wrongful or negligent act to the damage of another), 
but not in actions on contract. 

Foreign Attachment is an important custom prevailing in the 
city of London, whereby a creditor may attach money owing to 
his debtor, or property belonging to him in the possession of third 
parties. The person holding the property or owing the money 
must be within the city at the time of being served with the 
process, but all persons are entitled to the benefit of the custom. 
The plaintiff having commenced his action, and made a satis- 
factory affidavit of his debt, is entitled to issue attachment, 
which thereupon affects all the money or property of the de- 
fendant in the hands of the third party, the garnishee. The 
garnishee, of course, has as against the attachment all the 
defences which would be available to him against the defendant, 
his alleged creditor. The garnishee may plead payment under 
the attachment, if there has been no fraud or collusion, in bar 
to an action by the defendant for his debt or property. The 
court to which this process belongs is the mayor's court of 
London, the procedure in which is regulated by the Mayor's 
Court of London Procedure Act 1857. This custom, and all 
proceedings relating thereto, are expressly exempted from the 
operation of the Debtor's Act 1869. Similar customs exist in 
Bristol and a few other towns in England and also in Scotland. 

A Writ of Attachment enforces answers and obedience to decrees 
and orders of the High Court of Justice, and is made out without 
order upon an affidavit of the due service of the process, &c, 
with whose requirements compliance is sought. A corporation, 
however, is proceeded against by distringas and not by attach- 
ment. It was formerly competent to the plaintiff to compel 
the appearance of a defendant in chancery by attachment, but 
the usual course was to enter appearance for him in case of 
default. It is one of the modes of execution allowed for the 
recovery of property other than land or money. 

Attachment of the Forest was the proceeding in the courts of 
attachments, Woodmote, or Forty Days' courts. These courts 
have fallen into desuetude. They were held before the verderers 
of the royal forests in different parts of the kingdom once in 
every forty days, for the purpose of inquiring into all offences 
against " vert (greensward) and venison." The attachment was 
by the bodies of the offenders, if taken in the very act of killing 
venison, or stealing wood, or preparing so to do, or by fresh 
and immediate pursuit after the act was done; else they must 
be attached by their goods. These attachments were received 
by the verderers and enrolled, and certified under their seals to 
the Swainmote, or Court of Justice-seat, which was the superior 
of the forest courts. 

ATTAINDER (from the 0. Fr. ataindre, ateindre, to attain, 
i.e. to strike, accuse, condemn; Lat. attingere, tangere, to touch; 
the meaning has been greatly affected by the confusion with 
Fr. taindre, teindre, to taint, stain, Lat. tingere, to dye), in English 



ATTAINT— ATTEMPT 



8 79 



law, was the immediate and inseparable consequence from the 
common law upon the sentence of death. When it was clear 
beyond all dispute that the criminal was no longer fit to live 
he was called attaint, and could not, before the Evidence Act 
1843, be a witness in any court. This attainder took place after 
judgment of death, or upon such circumstances as were equivalent 
to judgment of death, such as judgment of outlawry on a capital 
crime, pronounced for absconding from justice. Conviction 
without judgment was not followed by attainder. The con- 
sequences of attainder were (1) forfeiture, (2) corruption of blood. 
On attainder for treason, the criminal forfeited to the crown 
his lands, rights of entry on lands, and any interest he might 
have in lands for his own life or a term of years. For murder, 
the offender forfeited to the crown the profit of his freeholds 
during life, and in the case of lands held in fee-simple, the lands 
themselves for a year and a day; subject to this, the lands 
escheated to the lord of the fee. These forfeitures related back 
to the time of the offence committed. Forfeitures of goods 
and chattels ensued not only on attainder, but on conviction 
for a felony of any kind, or on flight from justice, and had 
no relation backwards to the time of the offence committed. 
By corruption of blood, " both upwards and downwards," the 
attainted person could neither inherit nor transmit lands. The 
lands escheated to the lord of the fee, subject to the crown's 
right of forfeiture. The doctrine of attainder has, however, 
ceased to be of much importance. The Forfeiture Act 1870 
enacted that henceforth no confession, verdict, inquest, con- 
viction or judgment of or for any treason or felony, or felo de se, 
should cause any attainder or corruption of blood, or any 
forfeiture or escheat. Sentence of death, penal servitude or 
imprisonment with hard labour for more than twelve months, 
after conviction for treason or felony, disqualifies from holding 
or retaining a seat in parliament, public offices under the crown 
or otherwise, right to vote at elections, &c, and such disability 
is to remain until the punishment has been suffered or a pardon 
obtained. Provision was made for the due administration of 
convicts' estates, in the interests of themselves and their families. 
Forfeiture consequent on outlawry was exempted from the pro- 
visions of the act. The United States constitution (Art. III. 
s. 3) says: " The Congress shall have power to declare the 
punishment of treason, but no attainder of treason shall work 
corruption of blood, or forfeiture except during the life of the 
person attainted." 

Bills of Attainder, in English legal procedure, were formerly 
a parliamentary method of exercising judicial authority. They 
were ordinarily initiated in the House of Lords and the pro- 
ceedings were the same as on other bills, but the parties against 
whom they were brought might appear by counsel and produce 
witnesses in both Houses. In the case of an impeachment (q.v.), 
the House of Commons was prosecutor and the House of Lords 
judge; but such bills being legislative in form, the consent of 
crown, lords and commons was necessary to pass them. Bishops, 
who do not exercise but who claim the right to vote in cases of 
impeachment^.^.), have a right to vote upon bills of attainder, 
but their vote is not conclusive in passing judgment upon 
the accused. First passed in 1459, such bills were employed, 
more particularly during the reigns of the Tudor kings, as a 
species of extrajudicial procedure, for the direct punishment of 
political offences. Dispensing with the ordinary judicial forms 
and precedents, they took away from the accused whatever 
advantages he might have gained in the courts of law; such 
evidence only was admitted as might be necessary to secure 
conviction; indeed, in many cases bills of attainder were passed 
without any evidence being produced at all. In the reign of 
Henry VIII. they were much used, through a subservient 
parliament, to punish those who had incurred the king's dis- 
pleasure; many distinguished victims who could not have been 
charged with any offence under the existing laws being by this 
means disposed of. In the 17th century, during the disputes 
with Charles I., the Long Parliament made effective use of the 
same procedure, forcing the sovereign to give his consent. 
After the Restoration it became less frequent, though the Jacobite 



movement in Scotland produced several instances of attainder, 
without, however, the infliction of the extreme penalty of death. 
The last bill of attainder passed in England was in the case of 
Lord Edward Fitzgerald, one of the Irish rebel leaders of 1798. 

A bill for reversing attainder took a form contrary to the 
usual rule. It was first signed by the sovereign and presented 
by a peer to the House of Lords by command of the crown, then 
passed through the ordinary stages and on to the commons, to 
whom the sovereign's assent was communicated before the first 
reading was taken, otherwise the whole proceedings were null 
and void. 

A Bill of Pains and Penalties resembles a bill of attainder 
in object and procedure, but imposes a lesser punishment than 
death. The most notable instances of the passing of a bill of 
pains and penalties are those of Bishop Atterbury in 1722, and 
of Queen Caroline, wife of George IV., in 1820. 

The constitution of the United States declares that " no bill 
of attainder or ex post facto law shall be passed." 

ATTAINT, WRIT OF, an obsolete method of procedure in 
English law, for inquiring by a jury of twenty-four whether 
a false verdict had been given in a trial before an ordinary jury 
of twelve. If it were found that an erroneous judgment had been 
given, the wrong was redressed and the original jury incurred 
infamy, with imprisonment and forfeiture of their goods, 
which punishments were, however, commuted later for a 
pecuniary penalty. In criminal cases a writ of attaint was 
issued at suit of the king, and in civil cases at the suit of either 
party. In criminal cases it appears to have become obsolete 
by the end of the 15th century. Procedure by attaint in civil 
cases had also been gradually giving place to the practice of 
granting new trials, and after the decision in Bushell's case in 
1670 (see Jury) it became obsolete, and was finally abolished 
by the Juries Act 1825, except as regards jurors guilty of 
embracery (q.v.). 

ATTALIA, an ancient city of Pamphylia, which derived its 
name from Attalus II., king of Pergamum; the modern Adalia 
(q.v.). It was important as the nearest seaport to the rich 
districts of south-west Phrygia. A much-frequented " half- 
sea " route led through it to the Lycus and Maeander valleys, 
and so to Ephesus and Smyrna. This was the natural way 
from any part of central Asia Minor to Syria and Egypt, and 
accordingly we hear of Paul and Barnabas taking ship at Attalia 
for Antioch. Originally the port of Perga, Attalia eclipsed the 
old Pamphylian capital in early Christian times and became 
the metropolis. There are extensive remains of the ancient 
walls, including some portions which go back to the foundation 
of the Pergamenian city. The most conspicuous monument 
is the triple Gate of Hadrian, flanked by a tower built by the 
empress Julia. This lies about half-way round the enceinte 
and formerly admitted the road from Perga. 

ATTAR [or Otto] OF ROSES (Pers. 'afar, essence), a perfume 
consisting of essential oil of roses, prepared by distilling, or, 
in some districts, by macerating the flowers. The manufacture 
is chiefly carried out in India, Persia and the Balkans; the last 
named supplying the bulk of the European demand. It is used 
by perfumery manufacturers as an ingredient. The genuine 
attar of roses is costly and it is frequently adulterated. 

ATTEMPT (Lat. adtemptare, attentare, to try), in law, an act 
done with intent to commit a crime, and forming one of a series 
of acts which would constitute its actual commission if it were 
not interrupted. An attempt must proceed beyond mere pre- 
paration, but at the same time it must fall short of the ultimate 
purpose in any part of it. The actual point, however, at which 
an act ceases to be an attempt, and becomes criminal, depends 
upon the circumstances of each particular case. A person may 
be guilty of an attempt to commit a crime, even if its commis- 
sion in the manner proposed was impossible. Every attempt to 
commit a treason, felony or indictable misdemeanour is in itself 
an indictable misdemeanour, punishable by fine or imprisonment, 
unless the attempt to commit is specifically punishable by statute 
as a felony, or in a defined manner as a misdemeanour; and a 
person who has been indicted for a, felony or misdemeanour may, 



88o 



ATTENTION— ATTERBURY 



if the evidence so warrants, be found guilty only of the attempt, 
provided that it too is a misdemeanour. 

ATTENTION (from Lat. ad-tendo, await, expect; the condi- 
tion of being " stretched " or " tense "), in psychology, the con- 
centration of consciousness upon a definite object or objects. 
The result is brought about, not by effecting any change in the 
perceptions themselves, but simply by isolating them from other 
objects. Since all consciousness involves this isolation, attention 
may be denned generally as the necessary condition of conscious- 
ness. Such a definition, however, throws no light upon the nature 
of the psychological process, which is partly explained by the 
general law that the greater the number of objects on which 
attention is concentrated the less will each receive (" pluribus 
intentus, minor est ad singula sensus "), and conversely. There 
are also special circumstances which determine the amount of 
attention, e.g. influences not subject to the will, such as the 
vividness of the impression (e.g. in the case of a shock), strong 
change in pleasurable or painful sensations. Secondly, an exer- 
cise of volition is employed in fixing the mind upon a definite 
object. This is a purely voluntary act, which can be strengthened 
by habit and is variable in different individuals; to it the name 
"attention" is sometimes restricted. The distinction is ex- 
pressed by the words " reflex " or " passive," and " volitional " 
or " active." It is important to notice that in every case of 
attention to an object, there must be in consciousness an implicit 
apprehension of surrounding objects from which the particular 
object is isolated. These objects are known as the " psychic 
fringe," and are essential to the systematic unity of the attention- 
process. Attempts have been made to examine the attention- 
process from the physiological standpoint by investigating the 
muscular and neural changes which accompany it, and even to 
assign to it a specific local centre. It has, for example, been 
remarked that uniformity of environment, resulting in practi- 
cally automatic activity, produces mental equilibrium and the 
comparative disappearance of attention-processes; whereas the 
necessity of adapting activity to abnormal conditions produces 
a comparatively high degree of attention. In other words, 
attention is absent where there is uniformity of activity in 
accordance with uniform, or uniformly changing, environment. 
In spite of the progress made in this branch of study, it has to 
be remembered that all psycho-physical experiments are to some 
extent vitiated by the fact that the phenomena can scarcely 
remain normal under inspection. 

See G. F. Stout, Analytic Psychology (London, 1896), especially 
part ii. chap. 2 ; also Psychology, Brain, &c. 

ATTERBOM, PER DANIEL AMADEUS (1790-1855), Swedish 
poet, son of a country parson, was born in the province of 
Ostergotland on the 19th of January 1790. He studied in the 
university of Upsala from 1805 to 1815, and became professor 
of philosophy there in 1828. He was the first great poet of the 
romantic movement which, inaugurated by the critical work of 
Lorenzo Hammerskold, was to revolutionize Swedish literature. 
In 1807, when in his seventeenth year, he founded at Upsala 
an artistic society, called the Aurora League, the members of 
which included V. F. Palmblad, A. A. Grafstrom (d. 1870), Samuel 
Hedborn (d. 1849), and other youths whose names were destined 
to take a foremost rank in the literature of their generation. 
Their first newspaper, Poly/em, was a crude effort, soon aban- 
doned, but in 1810 there began to appear a journal, Fosforos, 
edited by Atterbom, which lasted for three years and finds a 
place in classic Swedish literature. It consisted entirely of 
poetry and aesthetico-polemical essays; it introduced the study 
of the newly arisen Romantic school of Germany, and formed 
a vehicle for the early works, not of Atterbom only, but of 
Hammerskold, Dahlgren, Palmblad and others. Later, the 
members of the Aurora League established the Poetisk Kalender 
(1812-1822), in which their poems appeared, and a new critical 
organ, Svensk Litter alurtidning (1813-1824). Among Atterbom's 
independent works the most celebrated is Lycksalighetens O 
{The Fortunate Island), a romantic drama of extraordinary 
beauty, published in 1823. Before this he had published a 
cycle of lyrics, Blommorna {The Flowers), of a mystical character, 



somewhat in the manner of Novalis. Of a dramatized fairy tale, 
Fagel bid (The Blue Bird), only a fragment, which is among the 
most exquisite of his writings, is preserved. As a purely lyrical 
poet he has not been excelled in Sweden, but his more ambitious 
works are injured by his weakness for allegory and symbolism, 
and his consistent adoption of the mannerisms of Tieck and 
Novalis. In his later years he became less violent in literary 
controversy. He became in 1835 professor of aesthetics and 
literature at Upsala, and four years later he was admitted to the 
Swedish Academy. He died on the 21st of July 1855. His 
Svenska Siare och Skalder (6 vols., 1841-1855) supplement, 
1864) consists of a series of biographies of Swedish poets and men 
of letters, which forms a valuable history of Swedish letters down 
to the end of the " classical " period. Atterbom's works were 
collected (13 vols., Orebro) in 1854-1870. 

ATTERBURY, FRANCIS (1662-1732), English man of letters, 
politician and bishop, was born in the year 1662, at Milton or 
Middleton Keynes in Buckinghamshire, a parish of which his 
father was rector. He was educated at Westminster school and 
at Christ Church, Oxford, where he became a tutor. In 1682 
he published a translation of Absalom and Ahithophel into Latin 
verse; but neither the style nor the versification was that of the 
Augustan age. In English composition he succeeded much' 
better. In 1687 he published An Answer to some Considerations,, 
on the Spirit of Martin Luther and the Original of the Reformation, 
a reply to Obadiah Walker, who, elected master of University 
College in 1676, had printed in a press set up by him there an 
attack on the Reformation, written by Abraham Woodhead. 
Atterbury's treatise, though highly praised by Bishop Burnet, 
is perhaps more distinguished for the vigour of his rhetoric than 
for the soundness of his arguments, and the Papists were so much 
galled by his sarcasms and invectives that they accused him of 
treason, and of having, by implication, called King James 
a Judas. 

After the Revolution, Atterbury, though bred in the doctrines 
of non-resistance and passive obedience, readily swore fealty 
to the new government. He had taken holy orders in 1687, 
preached occasionally in London with an eloquence which raised 
his reputation, and was soon appointed one of the royal chaplains. 
But he ordinarily resided at Oxford, where he was the chief 
adviser and assistant of Dean Aldrich, under whom Christ Church 
was a stronghold of Toryism. Thus he became the inspirer of 
his pupil, Charles Boyle, in the attack (1698) on the Whig scholar, 
Richard Bentley (q.v.), arising out of Bentley's impugnment 
of the genuineness of the Epistles of Phalaris. He was figured 
by Swift in the Battle of the Books as the Apollo who directed 
the fight, and was, no doubt, largely the author of Boyle's essay. 
Bentley spent two years in preparing his famous reply, which 
proved not only that the letters ascribed to Phalaris were 
spurious, but that all Atterbury's wit, eloquence and skill in 
controversial fence was only a cloak for an audacious pretence 
of scholarship. 

Atterbury was soon occupied, however, in a dispute about 
matters still more important and exciting. The rage of religious 
factions was extreme. High Church and Low Church divided 
the nation. The great majority of the clergy were on the High 
Church side; the majority of King William's bishops were 
inclined to latitudinarianism. In 1700 Convocation, of which 
the lower house was overwhelmingly Tory, had not been suffered 
to meet for ten years. This produced a lively controversy, into 
which Atterbury threw himself with characteristic energy, 
publishing a series of treatises written with much wit, audacity 
and acrimony. By the mass of the clergy he was regarded as 
the most intrepid champion that had ever defended their rights 
against the oligarchy of Erastian prelates. In 1701 he was 
rewarded with the archdeaconry of Totnes and a prebend in 
Exeter cathedral. The lower house of Convocation voted him 
thanks for his services; the university of Oxford created him a, 
doctor of divinity; and in 1704, soon after the accession of Anne,, 
while the Tories still had the chief weight in the government,, 
he was promoted to the deanery of Carlisle. 

Soon after he had obtained this preferment the Wtug party 



ATTERBURY 



881 



came into power. From that party he could expect no favour. 
Six years elapsed before a change of fortune took place. At 
length, in the year 1710, the prosecution of Sacheverell produced 
a formidable explosion of High Church fanaticism. At such a 
moment Atterbury could not fail to be conspicuous. His in- 
ordinate zeal for the body to which he belonged, his turbulent 
and aspiring temper, his rare talents for agitation and for con- 
troversy, were again signally displayed. He bore a chief part 
in framing that artful and eloquent speech which the accused 
divine pronounced at the bar of the Lords, and which presents 
a singular contrast to the absurd and scurrilous sermon which 
had very unwisely been honoured with impeachment. During 
the troubled and anxious months which followed the trial, 
Atterbury was among the most active of those pamphleteers 
who inflamed the nation against the Whig ministry and the Whig 
parliament. When the ministry had been changed and the 
parliament dissolved, rewards were showered upon him. The 
lower house of Convocation elected him prolocutor, in which 
capacity he drew up, in 1711, the often-cited Representation of 
the Slate of Religion; and, in August 1711, the queen, who had 
selected him as her chief adviser in ecclesiastical matters, 
appointed him dean of Christ Church on the death of his old 
friend and patron Aldrich. 

At Oxfcrd he was as conspicuous a failure as he had been at 
Carlisle, and it was said by his enemies that he was made a bishop 
because he was so bad a dean. Under his administration Christ 
Church was in confusion, scandalous altercations took place, 
and there was reason tc fear that the great Tory college would 
be ruined by the tyranny of the great Tory doctor. In 1713 he 
was removed to the bishopric of Rochester, which was then 
always united with the deanery of Westminster. Still higher 
dignities seemed to be before him. For, though there were many 
able men on the episcopal bench, there was none who equalled 
or approached him in parliamentary talents. Had his party 
continued in power it is not improbable that he would have been 
raised to the archbishopric of Canterbury. The more splendid 
his prospects the more reason he had to dread the accession 
of a family which was well known to be partial to the Whigs, 
and there is every reason to believe that he was one of those 
politicians who hoped that they might be able, during the life 
of Anne, to prepare matters in such a way that at her decease 
there might be little difficulty in setting aside the Act of Settle- 
ment and placing the Pretender on the throne. Her sudden 
death confounded the projects of these conspirators, and, what- 
ever Atterbury's previous views may have been, he acquiesced 
in what he could not prevent, took the oaths to the house of 
Hanover, and did his best to ingratiate himself with the royal 
family. But his servility was requited with cold contempt; 
and he became the most factious and pertinacious of all the 
opponents of the government. In the House of Lords his oratory, 
lucid, pointed, lively and set off with every grace of pronunciation 
and of gesture, extorted the attention and admiration even of 
a hostile majority. Some of the most remarkable protests which 
appear in the journals of the peers were drawn up by him; and, 
in some of the bitterest of those pamphlets which called on the 
English to stand up for their country against the aliens who had 
come from beyond the seas to oppress and plunder her, critics 
easily detected his style. When the rebellion of 1715 broke out, 
he refused to sign the paper in which the bishops of the province 
of Canterbury declared their attachment to the Protestant 
succession, and in 1717, after having been long in indirect 
communication with the exiled family, he began to correspond 
directly with the Pretender. 

In 1721, on the discovery of the plot for the capture of the 
royal family and the proclamation of King James, Atterbury 
was arrested with the other chief malcontents, and in 1722 
committed to the Tower, where he remained in close confinement 
during some months. He had carried on his correspondence 
with the exiled family so cautiously that the circumstantial 
proofs of his guilt, though sufficient to produce entire moral 
conviction, were not sufficient to justify legal conviction. He 
could be reached only by a bill of pains and penalties. Such a bill 



the Whig party, then decidedly predominant in both Houses, 
was quite prepared to support, and in due course a bill passed 
the Commons depriving him of his spiritual dignities, banishing 
him for life, and forbidding any British subject to hold inter- 
course with him except by the royal permission. In the Lords 
the contest was sharp, but the bill finally passed by eighty-three 
votes to forty-three. 

Atterbury took leave of those whom he loved with a dignity 
and tenderness worthy of a better man, to the last protesting 
his innocence with a singular disingenuousness. After a short 
stay at Brussels he went to Paris, and became the leading man 
among the Jacobite refugees there. He was invited to Rome 
by the Pretender, but Atterbury felt that a bishop of the Church 
of England would be out of place at the Vatican, and declined 
the invitation. During some months, however, he seemed to 
stand high in the good graces of James. The correspondence 
between the master and the servant was constant. Atterbury's 
merits were warmly acknowledged, his advice was respectfully 
received, and he was, as Bolingbroke had been before him, the 
prime minister of a king without a kingdom. He soon, however, 
perceived that his counsels were disregarded, if not distrusted. 
His proud spirit was deeply wounded. In 1728 he quitted Paris, 
fixed his residence at Montpelier, gave up politics, and devoted 
himself entirely to letters. In the sixth year of his exile he had 
so severe an illness that his daughter, Mrs Morice, herself very ill, 
determined to run all risks that she might see him once more. 
She met him at Toulouse, received the communion from his 
hand, and died that night. 

Atterbury survived the severe shock of his daughter's death 
two years. He even returned to Paris and to the service of the 
Pretender, who had found out that he had not acted wisely in 
parting with one who, though a heretic, was the most able man 
of the Jacobite party. In the ninth year of his banishment he 
published a luminous, temperate and dignified vindication of 
himself against John Oldmixon, who had accused him of having, 
in concert with other Christ Church men, garbled the new edition 
of Clarendon's History of the Rebellion. The charge, as respected 
Atterbury, had not the slightest foundation; for he was not one 
of the editors of the History, and never saw it till it was printed. 
A copy of this little work he sent to the Pretender, with a letter 
singularly eloquent and graceful. It was impossible, the old 
man said, that he should write anything on such a subject without 
being reminded of the resemblance between his own fate and 
that of Clarendon. They were the only two English subjects 
who had ever been banished from their country and debarred 
from all communication with their friends by act of parliament. 
But here the resemblance ended. One of the exiles had been so 
happy as to bear a chief part in the restoration of the royal house. 
All that the other could now do was to die asserting the rights 
of that house to the last. A few weeks after this letter was 
written Atterbury died, on the 2 2nd of February 1732. His body 
was brought to England, and laid, with great privacy, under the 
nave of Westminster Abbey. No inscription marks his grave. 

It is agreeable to turn from Atterbury's public to his private 
life. His turbulent spirit, wearied with faction and treason, now 
and then required repose, and found it in domestic endearments, 
and in the society of the most illustrious literary men of his 
time. Of his wife, Katherine Osborn, whom he married while at 
Oxford, little is known; but between him and his daughter 
there was an affection singularly close and tender. The gentle- 
ness of his manners when he was in the company of a few friends 
was such as seemed hardly credible to those who knew him only 
by his writings and speeches. Though Atterbury's classical 
attainments were not great, his taste in English literature was 
excellent; and his admiration of genius was so strong that it 
overpowered even his political and religious antipathies. His 
fondness for Milton, the mortal enemy of the Stuarts and of the 
Church, was such as to many Tories seemed a crime; and he 
was the close friend of Addison. His favourite companions, 
however, were, as might have been expected, men whose politics 
had at least a tinge of Toryism. He lived on friendly terms with 
Swift, Arbuthnot and Gay. With Prior he had a close intimacy, 



882 



ATTESTATION— ATTICA 



which some misunderstanding about public affairs at last dis- 
solved. Pope found in Atterbury not only a warm admirer, but 
a most faithful, fearless and judicious adviser. 

See F. Williams, Memoirs and Correspondence of Atterbury with 
Notes, &c. (1869); Stuart Papers, vol. i. : Letters of Atterbury to the 
Chevalier St George, &c. (1847); J. Nichols, Epistolary Correspond- 
ence, &c. (1783-1796) ;and H. C. Beeching, Francis Atterbury, (1909). 

ATTESTATION (Lat. adtestare, attestare, to bear witness, testis, 
a witness), the verification of a deed, will or other instrument 
by the signature to it of a witness or witnesses, who endorse or 
subscribe their names under a memorandum, to the effect that 
it was signed or executed in their presence. The essence of 
attestation is to show that at the execution of the document 
there was present some disinterested person capable of giving 
evidence as to what took place. The clause at the end of the 
instrument, immediately preceding the signatures of the wit- 
nesses to the execution, and stating that they have witnessed 
it, is known as the attestation clause. In Scots law, the corre- 
sponding clause is called the testing-clause (see Deed; Will 
or Testament; Witness). 

ATTHIS (an adjective meaning " Attic "), the name given to 
a monograph or special treatise on the religious and political 
history, antiquities and topography of Attica and Athens. 
During the 4th and 3rd centuries B.C., a class of writers arose, 
who, making these subjects their particular study, were called 
atthidographi, or compilers of atthides. The first of these 
was Clidemus or Clitodemus (about 378 B.C.); the last, Ister 
of Cyrene (died 212 B.C.); the most important was Philochorus 
(first half of the 3rd century B.C.), of whose work considerable 
fragments have been preserved. The names of the other atthido- 
graphi known to us are Phanodemus, Demon, Androtion, 
Andron, Melanthius. They laid no claim to literary skill; their 
style was monotonous and soon became wearisome. They were in 
fact chroniclers or annalists — not historians. Their only object 
was to set down, in plain and simple language, all that seemed 
worthy of note in reference to the legends, history, constitution, 
religion and civilization of Attica. They followed the order 
of the olympiads and archons, and their work was supported 
by the authority of original documents, monuments and in- 
scriptions. Their writings were much used by historians, as well 
as by the scholiasts and grammarians. 

Fragments in Miiller, Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum, i. 

ATTIC {i.e. "in the Attic style"), an architectural term given 
to the masonry rising above the main cornice of a building, 
the earliest example known being that of the monument of Thra- 
syllus at Athens. It was largely employed by the Romans, who 
in their arches of triumph utilized it for inscriptions or for bas- 
relief sculpture. It was used also to increase the height of 
enclosure walls such as those of the Forum of Nerva. By the 
Italian revivalists it was utilized as a complete storey, pierced 
with windows, as found in PaUadio's work at Vicenza and in 
Greenwich hospital. The largest attic in existence is that 
which surmounts the entablature of St Peter's at Rome, 
which measures 39 ft. in height. The term is also employed 
in modern terminology to designate an upper storey in a 
roof, and the feature is sometimes introduced to hide a roof 
behind. 

ATTICA, a district of ancient Greece, triangular in shape, 
projecting in a south-easterly direction into the Aegean Sea, 
the base line being formed by the continuous chain of Mounts 
Cithaeron and Parnes, the apex by the promontory of Sunium. 
It was washed on two sides by the sea, and the coast is broken 
up into numerous small bays and harbours, which, however, 
are with few exceptions exposed to the south wind. The surface 
of Attica, as of the rest of Greece, is very mountainous, and 
between the mountain chains lie several plains of no great size, 
open on one side to the sea. On the west its natural boundary 
is the Corinthian Gulf, so that it would include Megaris; indeed, 
before the Dorian invasion, which resulted in the foundation of 
Megara, the whole country was politically one, in the hands of 
the Ionian race. This is proved by the column which, as we 
learn from Strabo, once stood on the Isthmus of Corinth, bearing 



on one side in Greek the inscription, "This land is Peloponnesus, 
not Ionia," and on the other, "This land is not Peloponnesus, 
but Ionia." 

The position of Attica was one main cause of its historical 
importance. Hence in part arose the maritime character of 
its inhabitants; and when they had once taken to the sea, 
the string of neighbouring islands, Ceos, Cythnos and others, 
some of which lay within sight of their coasts, and from one to 
another of which it was possible to sail without losing sight of 
land, served to tempt them on to further enterprises. Similarly 
on land, the post it occupied between northern Greece and the 
Peloponnese materially influenced its relation to other states, 
both in respect of its alliances, such as that with Thessaly, towards 
which it was drawn by mutual hostility to Boeotia, which lay 
between them; and also in respect of offensive combinations 
of other powers, as that between Thebes and Sparta, which 
throughout an important part of Greek history were closely 
associated in their politics, through mutual dread of their 
powerful neighbour. 

The mountains of Attica, which form its most characteristic , 
feature, are a continuation of that chain which, starting from 
Tymphrestus at the southern extremity of Pindus, 
passes through Phocis and Boeotia under the names. tains. 
of Parnassus and Helicon; from this proceeds the range 
which, as Cithaeron in its western and Parnes in its eastern 
portion, separates Attica from Boeotia, throwing off spurs 
southward towards the Saronic Gulf in Aegaleos and Hymettus, 
which bound the plain of Athens. Again, the eastern extremity 
of Parnes is joined by another line of hills, which, separating 
from Mount Oeta, skirts the Euboic Gulf, and, after entering 
Attica, throws up the lofty pyramid of Pentelicus, overlooking 
the plain of Marathon, and then sinks towards the sea at Sunium 
to rise once more in the outlying islands. Finally, at the ex 7 
treme west of the whole district, Cithaeron is bent round at right 
angles in the direction of 'the isthmus, at the northern approach 
to which it abuts against the mighty mass of Mount Geraneia, 
which is interposed between the Corinthian and the Saronic 
Gulf. Both Cithaeron and Parnes are about 4600 ft. high, 
Pentelicus 3635, and Hymettus 3370, while Aegaleos does not 
rise higher than 1534 ft. At the present day they are extremely 
bare, and in this respect almost repellent; but the lack of colour 
is compensated by the delicacy of the outlines, the minute 
articulation of the minor ridges and valleys, and the symmetrical 
grouping of the several mountains. 

The soil is light and thin, and requires very careful agricul- 
ture not only on the rocky mountain sides but to some extent 
also in the maritime plains. This fact had consider- 
able influence on the inhabitants, both by enforcing 
industrious habits and by leading them at an early period to 
take, to the sea. Still, the level ground was sufficiently fertile to 
form a marked contrast to the rest of the district. . Thucydides 
attributes to the nature of the scil (i. 2 to \eirT6yt(i>v) , which 
presented no attraction to invaders, the permanence of the same 
inhabitants in the country, whence arose the claim to indigenous- 
ness on which the Athenians so greatly prided themselves; 
while at the same time the richer ground fostered that fondness 
for country life, which is proved by the enthusiastic terms in 
which it is always spoken of by Aristophanes. That we are not 
justified in judging of the ancient condition of the soil by, 
the aridity which prevails at the present day, is shown by 
the fact that out of the 182 demes (see Cleisthenes) into 
which Attica was divided, one- tenth were named from trees' or 
plants. 

The climate of Attica has always been celebrated. In ap- 
proaching Attica from Boeotia a change of temperature is felt 
as soon as a person descends from Cithaeron or Parnes, cumaie. 
and the sea breeze, which in modern times is called 
6 'e^hrrjs, or that which sets towards shore, moderates the 
heat in summer. The Attic comedians and Plato speak with 
enthusiasm of their native climate, and the fineness of the 
Athenian intellect was attributed to the clearness of the Attic 
atmosphere. It was in the neighbourhood of Athens itself that 



Soil. 



ATTICA 



88 3 



Vegeta- 
tion. 



the air was thought to be purest. So Euripides describes the 
inhabitants as " ever walking gracefully through the most 
luminous ether " {Med. 829); and Milton — 

',' Where, on the Aegean shore, a city stands, 

Built nobly, pure the air, and light the soil — 

Athens, the eye of Greece." 

Or again Xenophon says " one would not err in thinking that 
this city is placed near the centre of Greece — nay, of the civilized 
world — because, the farther removed persons are from it, the 
severer is the cold or heat they meet with" (Vectigol. 1. 6). 
The air is so clear that one can see from the Acropolis the lines 
of white marble that streak the sides of Pentelicus. The brilliant 
colouring which is so conspicuous in an Athenian sunset is 
due to the same cause. The epithet " violet-crowned," used 
of Athens by Pindar, is due. either to the blue haze on the 
surrounding hills, or to the use of violets (or irises) for festal 
wreaths. This otherwise perfect climate is slightly marred by 
the prevalence of the north wind. This is expressed on the 
Horologium of Andronicus Cyrrhestes, called the Temple or 
Tower of the Winds, at Athens, where Boreas is represented 
as a bearded man of stern aspect, thickly clad, and wearing 
strong buskins; he blows into a conch shell, which he holds 
in his hand as a sign of his tempestuous character. 

Of the flora of Attica, the olive is the most important. This 
tree, we learn from Herodotus (v. 82), was thought at one 
time to have been found in that country only; and 
the enthusiastic praises of Sophocles (Oed. Col. 700) 
teach us that it was the land in which it flourished 
best. So great was the esteem in which it was held, that in the 
early legend of the struggle between the gods of sea and land, 
Poseidon and Athena, for the patronage of the country, the 
sea-god is represented as having to retire vanquished before the 
giver of the olive; and at a later period_the evidences of this 
contention were found in an ancient olive tree in the Acropolis, 
together with three holes in the rock, said to have been made by 
the trident of Poseidon, and to be connected with a salt well 
hard by. The fig also found its favourite home in this country, 
for Demeter was said to have bestowed it as a gift on the Eleu- 
sinian Phytalus, i.e. " the gardener." Both Cithaeron and 
Parnes must have been wooded in former times; for on the 
former are laid the picturesque silvan scenes in the Bacchae of 
Euripides, and it was from the latter that the wood came which 
caused the neighbouring deme of Acharnae to be famous for 
its charcoal — the avOpanes Ilapj^crwi of the Aeharnians of 
Aristophanes (348). From the thymy slopes of Hymettus 
came the famous Hymettian honey. Among the 
other products we must notice the marble — both that 
of Pentelicus, which afforded a material of unrivalled purity and 
whiteness for building the Athenian temples, and the blue 
marble of Hymettus — the trabes Hymettiae of Horace — which 
used to be transported to Rome for the construction of palaces. 
But the richest of all the sources of wealth in Attica was the 
silver mines of Laurium, the yield of which was so considerable 
as to render silver the principal medium of exchange in Greece, 
so that " a silver piece " (apyvpiov) was the Greek equivalent 
term for money. Hence Aeschylus speaks of the Athenians as 
possessing a " fountain of silver " (Pers. 235), and Aristophanes 
makes his chorus of birds promise the audience that, if they 
show him favour, owls from Laurium (i.e. silver pieces with the 
emblem of Athens) shall never fail them (Birds, 1106). The 
reputation of these coins for purity of metal and accuracy of 
weight was so great that they had a very wide circulation, and 
in. consequence it was thought undesirable to make any alteration 
in the types lest their genuineness should be doubted. This 
accounts for the somewhat inartistic character which the 
Athenian coins maintained to the last (see further Numismatics : 
Greek, § Athens). In Strabo's time, though the mines had 
almost ceased to yield, silver was obtained in considerable 
quantities from the scoriae; and at the present day a large 
amount of lead is got in the same way, the work being chiefly 
carried on by two companies, one of which is French and the 
ether Greek. In the ancient workings, many of which are in the 



Minerals. 



same condition as they were left 1800 years ago, there are in all 
2000 shafts and galleries. 

It has been already mentioned that the base line of Attica 
is formed by the chain of Cithaeron and Parnes, running from 
west to east; and that from this transverse chains run 
southward, dividing Attica into a succession of plains. Megara. 
The westernmost of these, which is separated from the 
innermost bay of the Corinthian Gulf, called the Mare Alcyonium, 
by an offshoot of Cithaeron, and is bounded on the east by a 
ridge which ends towards the Saronic Gulf in a striking two- 
horned peak called Kerata, is the plain of Megara. It is only for 
geographical purposes that we include this district under Attica, 
for both the Dorian race of the inhabitants, and its dangerous 
proximity to Athens, caused it to be at perpetual feud with 
that city; but its position as an outpost for the Peloponnesians, 
together with the fact of its having once been Ionian soil, suffi- 
ciently explains the bitter hostility of the Athenians towards 
the Megarians. The great importance of Megara arose from its 
commanding all the passes into the Peloponnese. These were 
three in number: one along the shores of the Corinthian Gulf, 
which, owing to the nature of the ground, makes a long detour; 
the other two starting from Megara, and passing, the one by a 
lofty though gradual route over the ridge of Geraneia, the other 
along the Saronic Gulf, under the dangerous precipices of the 
Scironian rocks. 

To the east of the plain of Megara lies that of Eleusis, bounded 
on the one side by the chain of Kerata, and on the other by that 
of Aegaleos, through a depression in which was the 
line of the sacred way, where the torchlight processions Eleusis. 
from Athens used to descend to the coast, the " brightly 
gleaming shores " (Xa/rn-<x5es a/crai) of Sophocles (Oed. Col. 
1040). The deep bay which here runs into the land is bounded 
on its southern side by the rocky island of Salamis, which was at 
all times an important possession to the Athenians on account 
of its proximity to their city; and the winding channel which 
separates that island from the mainland in the direction of the 
Peiraeus was the scene of the battle of Salamis, while on the last 
declivities of Mt. Aegaleos, which here descends to the sea, was 
the spot where, as Byron wrote — 

" A king sate on the rocky brow 
Which looks o'er sea-born Salamis." 

The eastern portion of the plain of Eleusis was called the Thriasian 
plain, and the city itself was situated in the recesses of the bay 
just mentioned. 

Next in order to the plain of Eleusis came that of Athens, 
which is the most extensive of all, reaching from the foot of 
Parnes to the sea, and bounded on the west by 
Aegaleos, and on the east by Hymettus. Its most Atheas. 
conspicuous feature is the broad line of dark green 
along its western side, formed by the olive-groves of Colonus 
and the gardens of the Academy, which owe their fertility 
to the waters of the Cephisus. This river is fed by copious 
sources on the side of Mt. Parnes, and thus, unlike the 
other rivers of Attica, has a constant supply of water, 
which was diverted in classical times, as it still is, into the 
neighbouring plantations (cf. Sophocles, Oed. Col. 685). The 
position of Colonus itself is marked by two bare knolls of light- 
coloured earth, which caused the poet in the same chorus tc 
apply the epithet " white " (apyfJTa) to that place. On the 
opposite side of the plain runs the other river, the Ilissus, which 
rises from two sources on the side of Mt. Hymettus, and skirts 
the eastern extremity of the city of Athens; but this, notwith- 
standing its celebrity, is a mere brook, which stands in pools a 
great part of the year, and in summer is completely dry. The 
situation of Athens relatively to the surrounding objects is 
singularly harmonious; for, while it forms a central point, so 
as to be the eye of the plain, and while the altar-rock of the 
Acropolis and the hills by which it is surrounded are conspicuous 
from every point of view, there is no such exactness in its position 
as to give formality, since it is nearer to the sea than to Parnes, 
and nearer to Hymettus than to Aegaleos, The most striking 
summit in the neighbourhood of the city is that of Lycabettus, 



884 



ATTIC BASE— ATTICUS 



on the north-eastern side; and the variety is still further in- 
creased by the continuation of the ridge which it forms for some 
distance northwards through the plain. Three roads lead to 
Athens from the Boeotian frontier over the intervening mountain 
barrier — the easternmost over Parnes, from Delium and Oropus 
by Decelea, which was the usual route of the invading Lacedae- 
monians during the Peloponnesian War; the westernmost over 
Cithaeron, by the pass of Dryoscephalae, or the " Oakheads," 
leading from Thebes by Plataeajto Eleusis, and so to Athens, 
which we hear of in connexion with the battle of Plataea, and 
with the escape of the Plataeans at the time of the siege of that 
city in the Peloponnesian War; the third, midway between the 
two, by the pass of Phyle, near the summit of which, on a rugged 
height overlooking the Athenian plain, is the fort occupied by 
Thrasybulus in the days of the Thirty Tyrants. On the sea- 
coast to the south-west of Athens rises the hill of Munychia, a 
mass of rocky ground, forming the acropolis of the town of 
Peiraeus. It was probably at one time an island; this was 
Strabo's opinion, and at the present day the ground which joins 
it to the mainland is low and swampy, and seems to have been 
formed by alluvial soil brought down by the Cephisus. On one 
side of this, towards Hymettus, lay the open roadstead of 
Phalerum, on the other the harbour of Peiraeus, a completely 
land-locked inlet, safe, deep and spacious, the approach to which 
was still further narrowed by moles. The eastern side of the 
hill was further indented by two small but commodious havens, 
which were respectively called Zea and Munychia. 

The north-eastern boundary of the plain of Athens is formed 
by the graceful pyramid of Pentelicus, which received its name 
from the deme of Pentele at its foot, but was far more 
Attica." commonly known as Brilessus in ancient times. This 
mountain did not form a continous chain with Hy- 
mettus, for between them intervenes a level space of ground 
2 m. in width, which formed the entrance to the Mesogaea, an 
elevated undulating plain in the midst of the mountains, reaching 
nearly to Sunium. At the extremity of Hymettus, where it 
projects into the Saronic Gulf, was the promontory of Zoster 
(" the Girdle "), which was so called because it girdles and 
protects the neighbouring harbour; but in consequence of the 
name, a legend was attached to it, to the effect that Latona had 
loosed her girdle there. From this promontory to Sunium there 
runs a lower line of mountains, and between these and the sea 
a fertile strip of land intervenes, which was called the Paralia. 
Beyond Sunium, on the eastern coast, were two safe ports, 
that of Thoricus, which is defended by the island of Helene, 
forming a natural breakwater in front of it, and that of Prasiae, 
now called Porto Raphti (" the Tailor "), from a statue at the 
entrance to which the natives have given that name. In the 
north-east corner is the little plain of Marathon (q.v.), the scene 
of the battle against the Persians (490 B.C.). It lies between 
Parnes, Pentelicus and the sea. The bay in front is sheltered by 
Euboea, and on the north by a projecting tongue of land, called 
Cynosura. The mountains in the neighbourhood were the home 
of the Diacrii or Hyperacrii, who, being poor mountaineers, 
and having nothing to lose, were the principal advocates of 
political reform; while, on the other hand, the Pedieis, or in- 
habitants of the plains, being wealthy landholders, formed the 
strong conservative element, and the Parali, or occupants of the 
sea-coast, representing the mercantile interest, held an inter- 
mediate position between the two (see Cleisthenes). Finally, 
there was one district of Attica, the territory of Oropus, which 
properly belonged to Boeotia, as it was situated to the north of 
Parnes; but on this the Athenians always endeavoured to retain 
a firm hold, because it facilitated their communications with 
Euboea. The command of that island was of the utmost im- 
portance to them; for, if Aegina could rightly be called " the 
eyesore of the Peiraeus," Euboea was quite as truly a thorn 
in the side of Attica; for we learn from Demosthenes (De Cor. 
p. 307) that at one period the pirates that made it their 
headquarters so infested the neighbouring sea as to prevent all 
navigation. 

The place in Attica which has been the chief scene of excava- 



tions (independently of Athens and its vicinty) is Eleusis (q.v.), 
where the remains of the sanctuary of Demeter, the 

EXCttV& m 

home of the Eleusinian Mysteries, together with other tions. 
buildings in its neighbourhood, were cleared by the 
Greek Archaeological Society in 1882-1887 and 1895-1896. Of 
the other classical ruins in Attica the best-known is the temple 
of Athena at Sunium, which forms a conspicuous object on the 
headland, to which it gave the name of Cape Colonnae, still used 
by the peasants. It is in the Doric style, of white marble, and 
eleven columns of the peristyle and one of the pronaos are now 
standing. At Thoricus there is a theatre, which was cleared 
of earth by the archaeologists of the American School in 1886. 
In the neighbourhood of Rhamnus are the remains of two temples 
that stood side by side, the larger of which was dedicated to 
Nemesis, the smaller probably to Themis, of which goddess a fine 
statue was discovered in its ruins in the course of the excavations 
of the Greek Archaeological Society in 1890. The same Society, 
in 1884, 1886 and 1887, excavated the sanctuary of Amphiaraus, 
4 m. from Oropus; in ancient times this was the resort of 
numerous invalids, who came thither to consult the healing 
divinity. Within it were found a temple of Amphiaraus, a large 
altar, and a long colonnade, which may have been the dormitory 
where the patients slept in hope of obtaining counsel in dreams. 
There Were also baths and a small theatre, and numerous in- 
scriptions relating to the arrangement and observances Of the 
sanctuary and oracle. The walls and towers also of the city 
of Eleutherae and the fortress of Phyle are fine specimens of 
Hellenic fortifications. 

Of the condition of Attica in medieval and modern times 
little need be said, for it has followed for the most part the fortunes 
of Athens. The population, however, has undergone a great 
change, independently of the large admixture of Slavonic blood 
that has affected the Greeks of the mainland generally, by the 
immigration of Albanian colonists, who now occupy a great 
part of the country. The district formed part of the nome 
(administrative division) of Boeotia and Attica until 1899, 
when it became a separate nome. 

Bibliography.— J. G. Frazer, Pausanias's Description of Greece, 
vols. ii. and v. (London, 1898); W. M. Leake, The Demi of Attica 
(2nd ed., London, 1841); Chr. Wordsworth, Athens and Attica 
(4th ed., London, 1869); C. Bursian, Geographie von Griechenldnd, 
vol. i. (Leipzig, 1862) ; Baedeker's Greece (4th Eng. ed., Leipzig, 
1908); Karten von Attica, published by the German Archaeological 
Institute of Athens, with explanatory text, chiefly by Professor 
Milchhofer (1875-1903); see also Athens, Eleusis and Greece: 
Topography. (H. F. T.) 

ATTIC BASE, the term given in architecture to the base of 
the Roman Ionic order, consisting of an upper and lower torus, 
separated by a scotia (q.v.) and fillets. It was the favourite 
base of the Romans, and was employed by them for columns 
of the Corinthian and Composite orders, and in Byzantine and 
Romanesque work would seem to have been generally adopted 
as a model. 

ATTICUS, TITUS POMPONIUS (109-32 B.C.), Roman patron 
of letters, was born at Rome three years before Cicero, with 
whom he and the younger Marius were educated. His name was 
Titus Pomponius, that of Atticus, by which he is known, being 
given him afterwards from his long residence in Athens (86-65) 
and his intimate acquaintance with the Greek literature and 
language. His family is said to have been of noble and ancient 
descent; his father belonged to the equestrian order, and was 
very wealthy. When Pomponius was still a young man his 
father died, and he at once took the prudent resolution of 
transferring himself and his fortune to Athens, in order to 
escape the dangers of the civil war, in which he might have been 
involved through his connexion with the murdered tribune, 
Sulpicius Rufus. Here he lived in retirement, devoting himself 
entirely to study. On his return to Rome, he took possession 
of an inheritance left him by his uncle and assumed the name 
of Quintus Caecilius Pomponianus. From this time he kept aloof 
from political strife, attaching himself to no particular party, 
and continuing on intimate terms with men so opposed as Caesar 
I and Pompey, Antony and Octavian. His most intimate friend, 



ATTICUS HERODES— ATTILA 



885 



however, was Cicero, whose correspondence with him extended 
over many years, and who seems to have found his prudent 
counsel and sympathy a remedy for all his many troubles. 
His private life was tranquil and happy. He did not marry 
till he was fifty-three years of age, and his only child became 
the wife of Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa, the distinguished minister 
of Augustus. In 32, being seized with an illness believed to be 
incurable, he starved himself to death. Of his writings none 
is extant, but mention is made of two: a Greek history of 
Cicero's consulship, and some annals, in Latin, an epitome of 
the events of Roman history down to the year 54. His most 
important work was his edition of the letters addressed to him 
by Cicero. He also formed a large library at Athens, and 
engaged a staff of slaves to make copies of valuable works. 

See Life by Cornelius Nepos ; Berwick, Lives of Messalla Corvinus 
and T.P.A. (1813); Fialon, Thesis in T.P.A. (1861); Boissier, 
Ciceron et ses amis (1888: Eng. trans. A. D. Jones, 1897); Peter, 
Historicorum Romanorum Fragmenta. 

ATTICUS HERODES, TIBERIUS CLAUDIUS (c. a.d. 101-177), 
Greek rhetorician, was born at Marathon in Attica. He belonged 
to a wealthy and distinguished family, and received a careful 
education under the most distinguished masters of the time, 
especially in rhetoric and philosophy. His talents gained him 
the favourable notice of Hadrian, who appointed him praefect 
of the free towns in the province of Asia (125). On his return 
to Athens, he attained great celebrity as an orator and teacher 
of rhetoric, and was elected to the office of archon. In 140 he 
was summoned by Antoninus Pius to undertake the education 
of Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Verus, and received many marks 
of favour, amongst them the consulship (143). He is principally 
celebrated, however, for the vast sums he expended on public 
purposes. He built at Athens a great race-course of Pentelic 
marble, and a splendid musical theatre, called the Odeum in 
memory of his wife Regilla, which still exists. At Corinth he 
built a theatre, at Delphi a stadium, at Thermopylae hot baths, 
at Canusium in Italy an aqueduct. He even contemplated 
cutting a canal through the Isthmus of Corinth, but was afraid 
to carry out his plan because the same thing had been unsuccess- 
fully attempted before by the emperor Nero. Many of the 
partially ruined cities oi Greece were restored by Atticus, and 
numerous inscriptions testify their gratitude to their benefactor. 
His latter years were embittered by family misfortune, and 
having incurred the enmity of the Athenians, he withdrew from 
Athens to his villa near Marathon, where he died. He enjoyed 
a very high reputation amongst his contemporaries, and wrote 
numerous works, of which the only one to come down to us is 
a rhetorical exercise On the Constitution (ed. Hass, 1880), advo- 
cating an alliance of the Thebans and Peloponnesians against 
Archelaus, king of Macedonia. The genuineness of this speech, 
which is of little merit, has been disputed. 

Philostratus, Vit. Soph. ii. I ; Fiorillo, Herodis Attici quae super- 
sunt (1801) ; A Biographical Notice of A.H. (London, 1832), privately 
printed; Fuelles, De Herodis Attici Vita (1864); Vidal-Lablache, 
Herode Atticus (1871). 

ATTILA (d. 453), king of the Huns, became king in 433, along 
with his brother Bleda, on the death of his uncle Roua. We hear 
but little as to Bleda, who died about 445, possibly slain by his 
brother's orders. In the first eight years of his reign Attila was 
chiefly occupied in the wars with other barbarian tribes, by which 
he made himself virtually supreme in central Europe. His own 
special kingdom comprised the countries which are now called 
Hungary and Transylvania, his capital being possibly not far from 
the modern city of Buda-Pest; but having made the Ostro- 
goths, the Gepidae and many other Teutonic tribes his subject- 
allies, and having also sent his invading armies into Media, he 
seems for nearly twenty years to have ruled practically without 
a rival from the Caspian to the Rhine. Very early in his reign, 
Honoria, grand-daughter of the emperor Theodosius II., being 
subjected to severe restraint on account of an amorous intrigue 
with one of the chamberlains of the palace, sent her ring to the 
king of the Huns and called on him to be her husband and her 
deliverer. Nothing came of the proposed engagement, but the 
wrongs of Honoria, his affianced wife, served as a convenient 



pretext for some of the constantly recurring embassies with which 
Attila, fond of trampling on the fallen majesty of Rome, worried 
and bullied the two courts of Constantinople and Ravenna. 
Another frequent subject of complaint was found in certain 
sacred . vessels which the bishop of Sirmium had sent as a bribe 
to the secretary of Attila, and which had been by him, fraudu- 
lently, as his master contended, pawned to a silversmith at Rome. 
There were also frequent and imperious demands for the surrender 
of fugitives who had sought shelter from the wrath of Attila 
within the limits of the empire. One of the return embassies 
from Constantinople, that sent in 448, had the great advantage 
of being accompanied by a rhetorician named Priscus, whose 
minute journalistic account of the negotiations, including as it 
does a vivid picture of the great Hun in his banquet-hall, is by 
far the most valuable source of information as to the court and 
camp of Attila. What lends additional interest to the story, is 
the fact that in the ambassador's suite there was an interpreter 
named Vigilas, who for fifty pounds of gold had promised to 
assassinate Attila. This base design was discovered by the 
Hunnish king, but had never been revealed to the head of the 
embassy or to his secretary. The situations created by this 
strange combination of honest diplomacy and secret villainy are 
described by Priscus with real dramatic power. 

In 450 Theodosius II., the incapable emperor of the East, 
died, and his throne was occupied by a veteran soldier named 
Marcian, who answered the insulting message of Attila in a 
manlier tone than his predecessor. Accordingly the Hun, who 
had something of the bully in his nature, now turned upon 
Valentinian III., the trembling emperor of the West, and 
demanded redress for the wrongs of Honoria, and one-half of 
Valentinian's dominions as her dowry. Allying himself with 
the Franks and Vandals, he led his vast many-nationed army 
to the Rhine in the spring of 451, crossed that river, and sacked, 
apparently, most of the cities in Belgic Gaul. Most fortunately 
for Europe, the Teutonic races already settled in Gaul rallied 
to the defence of the empire against invaders infinitely more 
barbarous than themselves. Prominent in this new coalition 
was Theodoric, king of the Visigoths, whose capital city was 
Toulouse. His firm fighting alliance with the. Roman general 
Aetius, with whom he had had many a conflict in previous years, 
was one of the best auguries for the new Europe that was to 
arise out of the ruins of the Roman empire. Meanwhile Attila 
had reached the Loire and was besieging the strong city of 
Orleans. The citizens, under the leadership of their bishop 
Anianus, made a heroic defence, but the place was on the point 
of being taken when, on the 24th of June, the allied Romano- 
Gothic army was seen on the horizon. Attila, who knew the 
difficulty that he should have in feeding his immense army if 
his march was further delayed, turned again to the north-east, 
was persuaded by the venerable bishop Lupus to spare the city 
of Troyes, but halted near that place in the Catalaunian plains 
and offered battle to his pursuers Aetius and Theodoric. The 
battle which followed — certainly one of the decisive battles of 
the world — has been well described by the Gothic historian 
Jordanes as " ruthless, manifold, immense, obstinate." It 
lasted for the whole day, and the number of the slain is variously 
stated at 175,000 and 300,000. All such estimates are, of course, 
untrustworthy, but there is no doubt that the carnage was 
terrible. The Visigothic king was slain, but the victory, though 
hardly earned, remained with his people and his allies. Attila 
did not venture to renew the engagement on the morrow, but 
retreated, apparently in good order, on the Rhine, recrossed 
that river and returned to his Pannonian home. From thence 
in the spring of 452 he again set forth to ravage or to conquer. 
Italy. Her great champion Aetius showed less energy in her 
cause than he had shown in his defence of Gaul. After a 
stubborn contest, Attila took and utterly destroyed Aquileia, 
the chief city bf Venetia, and then proceeded on his destructive 
course, capturing and burning the cities at the head of the 
Adriatic, Concordia, Altinum and Patavium (Padua). The 
fugitives from these cities, but especially from the last, seeking 
shelter in the lagoons of the Adriatic, laid the foundations of 



886 



ATTIS— ATTORNEY 



that which was one day to become the glorious city of Venice. 
Upon Milan and the cities of western Lombardy the hand of 
Attila seems to have weighed more lightly, plundering rather 
than utterly destroying; and at last when Pope Leo I., at the 
head of a deputation of Roman senators, appeared in his camp 
on the banks of the Mincio, entreating him not to pursue his 
Victorious career to the gates of Rome, he yielded to their 
entreaties and consented to cross the Alps, with a menace, 
however, of future return, should the wrongs of Honoria remain 
unredressed. As he himself jokingly said: he knew how to 
conquer men, but the Lion and the Wolf (Leo and Lupus) were 
too strong for him. No further expeditions to Italy were 
undertaken by Attila, who died suddenly in 453, in the night 
following a great banquet which celebrated his marriage with 
a damsel named Ildico. Notwithstanding some rumours of 
violence it is probable that his death was natural and due to 
his own intemperate habits. 

Under his name of Etzel, Attila plays a great part in Teu- 
tonic legend (see Nibelungenlied) and under that of Atli in 
Scandinavian Saga, but his historic lineaments are greatly 
obscured in both. He was short of stature, swarthy and broad- 
chested, with a large head which early turned grey, snub nose 
and deep-set eyes. He walked with proud step, darting a 
haughty glance this way and that as if he felt himself lord 
of all. 

The chief authorities for the life of Attila are Priscus, Jor- 
danes, the Historia Miscella, Apollonius Sidonius and Gregory of 
Tours. (T. H.) 

ATTIS, or Atys, a deity worshipped in Phrygia, and later 
throughout the Roman empire, in conjunction with the Great 
Mother of the Gods. Like Aphrodite and Adonis in Syria, 
Baal and Astarte at Sidon, and Isis and Osiris in Egypt, the 
Great Mother and Attis formed a duality which symbolized the 
relations between Mother Earth and her fruitage. Their worship 
included the celebration of mysteries annually on the return of 
the spring season. Attis was also known as Papas, and the 
Bithynians and Phrygians, according to evidence of the time 
of the late Empire, called him Zeus. He was never worshipped 
independently, however, though the worship of the Great 
Mother was not always accompanied by his. He was confused 
with Pan, Sabazios, Men and Adonis, and there were resem- 
blances between the orgiastic features of his worship and that 
of Dionysus. His resemblance to Adonis has led to the theory 
that the names of the two are identical, and that Attis is only 
the Semitic companion of Syrian Aphrodite grafted on to the 
Phrygian Great Mother worship (Haakh, Stuttgarter-Philolog.- 
Vers., 1857, 176 ff.). It is likely, however, that Attis, like the 
Great Mother, was indigenous to Asia Minor, adopted by the 
invading Phrygians, and blended by them with a deity of their 
own. 

Legends. — According to Pausanias (vii. 17), Attis was a 
beautiful youth born of the daughter of the river Sangarius, 
who was descended from the hermaphroditic Agdistis, a monster 
sprung from the earth by the seed of Zeus. Having become 
enamoured of Attis, Agdistis struck him with frenzy as he was 
about to wed the king's daughter, with the result that he deprived 
himself of manhood and died. Agdistis in repentance prevailed 
upon Zeus to grant that the body of the youth should never 
decay or waste. In Arnobius (v. 5-8) Attis emasculates himself 
under a pine tree, which the Great Mother bears into her cave 
as she and Agdistis together wildly lament the death of the youth. 
Zeus grants the petition as in the version of Pausanias, but 
permits the hair of Attis to grow, and his little finger to move. 
The little finger, digitus, Sd/cruXos, is interpreted as the phallus 
by Georg Kaibel (Gottinger Nachrichten, iqoi, p. 513). In 
Diodorus (iii. 58, 50) the Mother is the carnal lover of Attis, 
and, when her father the king discovers her fault and kills her 
lover, roams the earth in wild grief. In Ovicf {Fasti, iv. 223 ff.) 
she is inspired with chaste love for him, which he pledges himself 
to reciprocate. On his proving unfaithful, the Great Mother 
slays the nymph with whom he has sinned, whereupon in madness 
he mutilates himself as a penalty. Another form of the legend 



(Paus. vii. 17), showing the influence of the Aphrodite-Adonis 
myth, relates that Attis, the impotent son of the Phrygian 
Calaus, went into Lydia to institute the- worship of the Great 
Mother, and was there slain by a boar sent by Zeus. 

See Great Mother of the Gods; J. G. Frazer, Adonis, Attis, 
Osiris (1906). (G. Sn.) 

ATTLEBOROUGH, a township of Bristol county, in south-east 
Massachusetts, U.S.A. Pop. (1800) 7577; (1900) 11,335, of 
whom 3237 were foreign-born; (1910 census) 16,215 It is 
traversed by the New York, New Haven & Hartford railway, and 
by inter-urban electric lines. It has an area of 28 sq. m. The 
population is largely concentrated in and about the village 
which bears the name of the township. In Attleborough are 
the Attleborough Home Sanitarium, and a public library (1885). 
The principal manufactures of the township are jewelry, silver- 
ware, cotton goods, cotton machinery, coffin trimmings, and 
leather. In 1005 the total value of the township's factory 
products was $10,050,384, of which $5,544,285 was the value of 
jewelry, Attleborough ranking fourth among the cities of the 
country in this industry, and producing 10-4% of the total 
jewelry product of the United States. Attleborough was in- 
corporated in 1694, though settled soon after 1661 (records since 
1672) as part of Rehoboth. In 1887 the township was divided in 
population, wealth and area by the creation of the township 
of North Attleborough — pop. (1890) 6727; (1900) 7253, of 
whom 1786 were foreign-born; (1905, state census) 7878. This 
township produced manufactured goods in 1900 to the value 
of $3,990,731, jewelry valued at $2,785,567; it maintains the 
Richards memorial library. 

See J. Daggett, A Sketch of the History of Attleborough to 1887 
(Boston, 1894). 

ATTOCK, a town and fort of British India, in the Rawalpindi 
district of the Punjab, 47 m. by rail from Peshawar, and situated 
on the eastern bank of the Indus. Pop. (1901) 2822. The place 
is of both political and commercial importance, as the Indus is 
here crossed by the military and trade route through the Khyber 
Pass into Afghanistan. Alexander the Great, Tamerlane and 
Nadir Shah are believed to have successively crossed the Indus 
at or about this spot in their respective invasions of India. The 
river runs past Attock in a deep rapid channel about 200. yds. 
broad, but is easily crossed in boats or on inflated skins of oxen. 
The rocky gorges through which it flows, with a distant view of 
the Hindu Kush, form some of the finest scenery in the world. 
In 1883 an iron girder bridge of five spans was opened, which 
carries the North-Western railway to Peshawar, and has also a 
subway for wheeled traffic and foot passengers. The fort of 
Attock was built by the emperor Akbar in 1581, on a low hillock 
beside the river. The walls are of polished stone, and the whole 
structure is handsome; but from a military point of view it is of 
little importance, being commanded by a hill, from which it is 
divided only by a ravine. On the opposite side of the river is 
the village of Khairabad, with a fort, also erected by Akbar 
according to some, or by Nadir Shah according to others. The 
military importance of Attock has diminished, but it still has a 
small detachment of British troops. 

ATTORNEY (from O. Fr. atorne, a person appointed to act 
for another, from atourner, legal Lat. attornare, attorn, literally 
to turn over to another or commit business to another), in English 
law, in its widest sense, any substitute or agent appointed to 
act in " the turn, stead or place of another." Attorneys are of 
two kinds, attorneys-in-fact and attorneys-at-law. An attorney- 
in-fact is simply an agent, the extent of whose capacity to act 
is bounded only by the powers embodied in his authority, his 
power of attorney. An attorney-at-law was a public officer, 
conducting legal proceedings on behalf of others, known as his 
clients, and attached to the supreme courts of common law at 
Westminster. Attorneys-at-law corresponded to . the Solicitors 
of the courts of chancery and the proctors of the admiralty, 
ecclesiastical, probate and divorce courts. Since the passing of 
the Judicature Act of 1873, however, the designation " attorney" 
has become obsolete in England, all persons admitted as solicitors, 



ATTORNEY-GENERAL— ATTWOOD 



887 



attorneys or proctors of an English court being henceforth called 
" solicitors of the supreme court " (see Solicitor). 

In the United States an attorney-at-law exercises all the 
functions distributed in England between barristers, attorneys 
and solicitors, and his full title is " attorney and counsellor-at- 
law." When acting in a court of admiralty he is styled "proctor" 
or "advocate." Formerly, in some states, there existed a 
grade among lawyers of attorneys-at-law, which was inferior 
to that of counsellors-at-law, and in colonial times New Jersey 
established a higher rank still — that of serjeant-at-law. Now 
the term attorney-at-law is precisely equivalent to that of lawyer. 
Attorneys are admitted by some court to which the legislature 
confides the power, and on examination prescribed by the court, 
or by a board of state examiners, as the case may be. The term 
of study required is generally two or three years, but in some 
states less. In one no examination is required. College graduates 
are often admitted to examination after a shorter term of study 
than that required from those not so educated. In the courts 
of the United States, admission is regulated by rules of court 
and based upon a previous admission to the state bar. In 
almost all states aliens are not admitted as attorneys, and in 
many states women are ineligible, but during recent years several 
states have passed statutes permitting them to practise. Since 
1879 women have been eligible to practise before the U. S. 
Supreme Court, if already admitted to practise in some state 
court, under the same conditions as men. A state attorney or 
district attorney is the local public prosecutor. He is either 
elected by popular vote at the state elections for the district in 
which he resides and goes out of office with the political party 
for which he was elected, or he is appointed by the governor of 
the state for that district and for the same term. He represents 
the state in criminal prosecutions and also in civil actions within 
his district. There is a United States district attorney in each 
federal district, similarly representing the federal government 
before the courts. 

An attorney is an officer of the court which admits him to 
practise, and he is subject to its discipline. He is liable tc his 
client in damages for failure to exercise ordinary care and skill, 
and he can bring action for the value of his services. He has a 
lien on his client's papers, and usually on any judgment in favour 
of his client to secure the payment of his fees. (See also under 
Bar, The.) 

ATTORNEY-GENERAL, in England, the chief law officer 
appointed to manage all the legal affairs and suits in which the 
crown is interested. He is appointed by letters-patent authoriz- 
ing him to hold office during the sovereign's pleasure. He is 
ex officio the leader of the bar, and only counsel of the highest 
eminence are appointed to the office. The origin of the office 
is uncertain, but as far back as 1277 we find an attornatus regis 
appointed to look after the interests of the crown, in proceedings 
affecting rt before the courts. He has precedence in all the 
courts, and in the House of Lords he has precedence of the lord 
advocate, even in Scottish appeals, but unlike the lord advocate 
and the Irish attorney-general he is not necessarily made a privy 
councillor. He is a necessary party to all proceedings affecting 
the crown, and has extensive powers of control in matters relating 
to charities, lunatics' estates, criminal prosecutions, &c. The 
attorney-general and the solicitor-general are always members 
of the House of Commons (except for temporary difficulties in 
obtaining a seat) and of the ministry, being selected from the 
party in power, and their advice is at the disposal of the govern- 
ment and of each department of the government, while in the 
House of Commons they defend the legality of ministerial action 
if called in question. Previously to 1895 there was no restric- 
tion placed on the law officers as to their acceptance of private 
practice, but since that date this privilege has been withdrawn, 
and the salary of the attorney-general is fixed at £7000 a year and 
in addition such fees according to the ordinary professional 
scales as he may receive for any litigious business he may conduct 
on behalf of the crown. The crown has also as a legal adviser 
an attorney-general in Ireland. In Scotland he is called lord 
advocate (q.v.). There is also an attorney-general in almost all 



the British colonies, and his duties are very similar to those of 
the same officer in England. In the self-governing colonies he 
is appointed by the administration of the colony, and in the 
crown colonies by royal warrant under the signet and sign- 
manual. There is an attorney-general for the duchy of Cornwall 
and also one for the duchy of Lancaster, each of whom sues in 
matters relating to that duchy. 

The United States has an officer of this name, who has a seat 
in the cabinet. His duties are in general to represent the federal 
government before the United States Supreme Court, to advise 
the president on questions of law, and to advise similarly the 
heads of the state departments with reference to matters affecting 
their department. His opinions are published by the government 
periodically for the use of its officials and they are frequently 
cited by the courts. Every state but one or two has a similar 
officer. He represents the state in important legal matters, and 
is often required to assist the local prosecutor in trials for capital 
offences. He appears for the public interest in suits affecting 
public charities. He is generally elected by the people for the 
same term as the governor and on the same ticket. 

ATTORNMENT (from Fr. tourner, to turn), in English real 
property law, the acknowledgment of a new lord by the tenant 
on the alienation of land. Under the feudal system, the relations 
of landlord and tenant were to a certain extent reciprocal. 
So it was' considered unreasonable to the tenant to subject him 
to a new lord without his own approval, and it thus came about 
that alienation could not take place without the consent of the 
tenant. Attornment was also extended to all cases of lessees 
for life or for years. The necessity for attornment was abolished 
by an act of 1705. The term is now used to indicate an ac- 
knowledgment of the existence of the relationship of landlord 
and tenant. An attornment-clause, in mortgages, is a clause 
whereby the mortgagor attorns tenant to the mortgagee, thus 
giving the mortgagee the right to distrain, as an additional 
security. 

ATTRITION (Lat. attritio, formed from atlerere, to rub away), 
a rubbing away; a term used in pathology and geology. Theo- 
logians have also distinguished " attrition " from " contrition " 
in the matter of sin, as an imperfect stage in the process of re- 
pentance; attrition being due to servile fear of the consequences 
of sin, contrition to filial fear of God and hatred of sin for His 
sake. It has been held among the Roman Catholics that in the 
sacrament of penance attrition becomes contrition. 

ATTWOOD, THOMAS (1765-1838), English composer, the 
son of a coal merchant who had musical tastes, was born in 
London on the 23rd of November 1765. At the age of nine he 
became a chorister in the Chapel Royal, where he remained for 
five years. In 1783 he was sent to study abroad at the expense 
of the prince of Wales (afterwards George IV.), who had been 
favourably impressed by his skill at the harpsichord. After 
spending two years at Naples, Attwood proceeded to Vienna, 
where he became a favourite pupil of Mozart. On his return 
to London in 1787 he held for a short time an appointment 
as one of the chamber musicians to the prince of Wales. In 1796 
he was chosen organist of St Paul's, and in the same year he Was 
made composer to the Chapel Royal. His court connexion 
was further confirmed by his appointment as musical instructor 
to the duchess of York, and afterwards to the princess of Wales. 
For the coronation of George IV. he composed the anthem, 
" The King shall rejoice," a work of high merit. The king, 
who had neglected him for some years on account of his con- 
nexion with the princess of Wales, now restored him to favour, 
and in 182 1 appointed him organist to his private chapel at 
Brighton. Soon after the institution of the Royal Academy 
of Music in 1823, Attwood was chosen one of the professors. 
He was also one of the original members of the Philharmonic 
Society, founded in 1813. He wrote the anthem, " O Lord, 
grant the King a Long Life," which was performed at the corona- 
tion of William IV., and he was composing a similar work for 
the coronation of Queen Victoria when he died at his house in 
Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, on the 24th of March 1838. He was buried 
under the organ in St Paul's cathedral. His services and anthems 



888 



ATTWOOD— AUBE 



were published in a collected form after his death by his pupil 
Walmisley. Of his secular compositions several songs and glees 
are well known and popular. The numerous operas which he 
composed in early life- are now practically forgotten. Of his 
songs the most popular was " The Soldier's Dream," and the best 
of his glees were " In peace Love tunes the shepherd's reed," 
and " To all that breathe the air of Heaven." Attwood was a 
friend of Mendelssohn, for whom he professed an admiration 
at a time when the young German's talent was little appreciated 
by the majority of English musicians. 

ATTWOOD, THOMAS (1783-1856), English political re- 
former, was born at Halesowen, Worcestershire, on the 6th of 
October 1783. In 1800 he entered his father's banking business 
in Birmingham, where he was elected high bailiff in 181 1. He 
took a leading part in the public life of the city, and became very 
popular with the artisan class. He is now remembered for his 
share in the movement which led to the carrying of the Reform 
Act of 1832. He was one of the founders, in January 1830, of 
the Political Union, branches of which were soon formed through- 
out England. Under his leadership vast crowds of working- 
men met periodically in the neighbourhood of Birmingham to 
demonstrate in favour of reform of the franchise, and Attwood 
used his power over the multitude to repress any action on their 
part which might savour of illegality. His successful exertions 
in favour of reform made him a popular hero all over the country, 
and he was presented with the freedom of the city of London. 
After the passing of the Reform Act in 1832 he was elected one 
of the members for the new borough of Birmingham, for which 
he sat till 1839. He failed in the House of Commons to maintain 
the reputation which he had made outside it, for in addition 
to an eager partisanship in favour of every ultra-democratic 
movement, he was wearisomely persistent in advocating his 
peculiar monetary theory. This theory, which became with 
him a monomania, was that the existing currency should be 
rectified in favour of state-regulated and inconvertible paper- 
money, and the adoption of a system for altering the standard 
of value as prices fluctuated. His waning influence with his 
constituents led him to retire from parliament in 1837, and, 
though invited to re-enter political life in 1843, he had by that 
time become a thoroughly spent force. He died at Great Malvern 
on the 6th of March 1856. 

His grandson, C. M. Wakefield, wrote his life " for private cir- 
culation " (there is a copy in the British Museum), and his economic 
theories are set forth in a little book, Gemini, by T. B. Wright and 
J. Harlow, published in 1844. 

ATWOOD, GEORGE (1746-1807), English mathematician, 
was born in the early part of the year 1746. He entered West- 
minster school, and in 1759 was elected to a scholarship at 
Trinity College, Cambridge. He graduated in 1769, with the 
rank of third wrangler and first Smith's prizeman. Subsequently 
he became a fellow and a tutor of the college, and in 1776 was 
elected a fellow of the Royal Society of London. In the year 
1784 he left Cambridge, and soon afterwards received from 
William Pitt the office of a patent searcher of the customs, 
which required but little attendance, and enabled him to de- 
vote, a considerable portion of his time to his special studies. 
He died in July 1807. Atwood's published works, exclusive of 
papers contributed to the Philosophical Transactions, for one of 
which he obtained the Copley medal, are as follows: — Analysis 
of a Course of Lectures on the Principles of Natural Philosophy 
(Cambridge, 1784); Treatise on the Rectilinear Motion and 
Rotation of Bodies (Cambridge, 1784), which gives some interest- 
ing experiments, by means of which mechanical truths can be 
ocularly exhibited and demonstrated, and describes the machine, 
since called by Atwood's name, for verifying experimentally the 
laws of simple acceleration of motion; Review of the Statutes and 
Ordinances of Assize which have been established in England from 
the 4th year of King John, 1202, to the 37th of his present Majesty 
(London, 1801), a work of some historical research; Dissertation 
on the Construction and Properties of Arches (London, 1801), 
■with supplement, pt. i., 1801, pt. ii., 1804, an elaborate work, 
npw completely superseded. 



AUBADE (a French word from aube, the dawn), the dawn-song 
of the troubadours of Provence, developed by the Minnesingers 
(q.v.) of Germany into the Tagelied, the song of the parting at 
dawn of lovers at the warning of the watchman. In France in 
modern times the term is applied to the performance of a military 
band in the early morning in honour of some distinguished 
person. 

AUBAGNE, a town of south-eastern France, in the department 
of Bouches-du-Rhone on the Huveaune, n m. E. of Marseilles 
by rail. Pop. (1906) 6039. The town carries on the manufacture 
of earthenware and pottery, leather, &c. and the cultivation of 
fruit and wine. There is a fountain to the memory of the 
statesman, F. Barthelemy (d. 1830), born at Aubagne. 

AUBE, a department of north-eastern France, bounded N. by 
the department of Marne, N.W. by Seine-et-Marne, W. by 
Yonne, S. by Yonne and Cote-d'Or, and E. by Haute-Marne; 
it was formed in 1790 from Basse-Champagne, and a small 
portion of Burgundy. Area, 2326 sq. m. Pop. (1906) 243,670. 
The department belongs to the Seine basin, and is watered 
chiefly by the Seine and the Aube. These rivers follow the 
general slope of the department, which is from south-east, 
where the Bois du Mont (1200 ft.), the highest point, is situated, 
to north-west. The southern and eastern districts are fertile 
and well wooded. The remainder of the department, with the 
exception of a more broken and picturesque district in the 
extreme north-west, forms part of the sterile and monotonous 
plain known as Champagne Pouilleuse. The climate is mild 
but damp. The annual rainfall over the greater part varies 
from 24 to 28 in.; but in the extreme south-east it at times 
reaches a height of 36 in. Aube is an agricultural department; 
more than one- third of its surface consists of arable land of which 
the chief products are wheat and oats, and next to them rye, 
barley and potatoes; vegetables are extensively cultivated in 
the valleys of the Seine and the Aube. The vine flourishes 
chiefly on the hills of the south-east; the wines of Les Riceys, 
Bar-sur-Aube, Bouilly and Laines-aux-Bois are most esteemed. 
The river valleys abound in natural pasture, and sainfoin, 
lucerne and other forage crops are largely grown; cattle-raising 
is an important source of wealth, and the cheeses of Troyes are 
well known. There are excellent nurseries and orchards in the 
neighbourhood of Troyes, Bar-sur-Seine, Mery-sur-Seine arid 
Brienne. Chalk, from which blanc de Troyes is manufactured, 
and clay are abundant; and there are peat workings and 
quarries of building-stone and limestone. The spinning and 
weaving of cotton and the manufacture of hosiery, of both of 
which Troyes is the centre, are the main industries of the depart- 
ment; there are also a large number of distilleries, tanneries, 
oil works, tile and brick works, flour-mills, saw-mills and dye- 
works. The Eastern railway has works at Romilly, and there 
are iron works at Clairvaux and wire-drawing works at Plaines; 
but owing to the absence of coal and iron mines, metal working 
is of small importance. The exports of Aube consist of timber, 
cereals, agricultural products, hosiery, wine, dressed pork, &c; 
its imports include wool and raw cotton, coal and machinery, 
especially looms. The department is served by the Eastern 
railway, of which the main line to Belfort crosses it. The river 
Aube is navigable for 28 m. (from Arcis-sur-Aube to its confluence 
with the Seine) ; the Canal de la Haute-Seine extends beside the 
Seine from Bar-sur-Seine to Marcilly (just outside the depart- 
ment) a distance of 46 m. ; below Marcilly the Seine is canalized. 
Aube is divided into 5 arrondissements with 26 cantons and 
446 communes. It falls within the educational circumscription 
(acadimie) of Dijon and the military circumscription of the XX. 
army corps; its court of appeal is in Paris. It constitutes the 
diocese of Troyes and part of the archiepiscopal province of Sens. 
The capital of the department is Troyes; of the arrondissements 
the capitals are Troyes, Bar-sur-Aube, Arcis-sur-Aube, Bar-sur- 
Seine and Nogent-sur-Seine. The architecture of the department 
is chiefly displayed in its churches, many of which possess stained 
glass of the 16th century. Besides the cathedral and other 
churches of Troyes, those of Mussy-sur-Seine (13th century), 
Chaource (16th century) and Nogent-sur-Seine (15th and 16th 



AUBENAS— AUBIGNAC 



889 



centuries), are of note. The/ abbey buildings of Clairvaux are 
the type of the Cistercian abbey. 

AUBENAS, a town of south-eastern France, in the department 
of Ardeche, 19 m. S.W. of Privas by road. Pop. (1906) 3976 
(town) , 7064 (commune) . Aubenas is beautifully situated on the 
slope of a hill, on the right bank of the Ardeche, but its streets 
generally are crooked and narrow. It has a castle of the 13th 
and 1 6th centuries, now occupied by several of the public institu- 
tions of the town. These include a tribunal and chamber of 
commerce, and a conditioning-house for silk. Iron and coal 
mines are worked in the vicinity. As the centre of the silk trade 
of southern France Aubenas is a place of considerable traffic. 
It has also a large silk spinning and weaving industry, and 
carries on tanning and various minor industries together with 
trade in silk. The district is rich in plantations of mulberries 
and olives. 

AUBER, DANIEL FRANCOIS ESPRIT (1782-1871), French 
musical composer, the son of a Paris printseller, was born at 
Caen in Normandy on the 29th of January 1782. Destined by 
his father to the pursuits of trade, he was allowed, nevertheless, 
to indulge his fondness for music, and learnt to play at an early 
age on several instruments, his first teacher being the Tirolean 
composer, I. A. Ladurner. Sent at the age of twenty to London 
to complete his business training, he was obliged to leave England 
in consequence of the breach of the treaty of Amiens (1804). 
He had already attempted musical composition, and at this 
period produced several concertos pour basse, in the manner of 
the violoncellist, Lamarre, in whose name they were published. 
The praise given to his concerto for the violin, which was played 
at the Conservatoire by Mazas, encouraged him to undertake 
the resetting of the old comic opera, Julie (18 n). Conscious by 
this time of the need of regular study of his chosen art, he placed 
himself under the severe training of Cherubini, by which the 
special qualities of the young composer were admirably developed. 
In 1813 he made his debut in an opera in one act, the Sejour 
militaire, the unfavourable reception of which put an end for 
some years to his attempts as composer. But the failure in 
business and death of his father, in 1819, compelled him once 
more to turn to music, and to make that which had been his 
pastime the serious employment of his life. He produced another 
opera, the Testament et les billets-doux (1819), which was no 
better received than the former. But he persevered, and the 
next year was rewarded by the complete success of his Bergere 
chdlelaine, an opera in three acts. This was the first in a long 
series of brilliant successes: In 1822 began his long association 
with A. E. Scribe, who shared with him, as librettist, the success 
and growing popularity of his compositions. The opera of 
Leicester, in which they first worked together (1823), is remark- 
able also as showing evidences of the influence of Rossini. But 
his own style was an individual one, marked by lightness and 
facility, sparkling vivacity, grace and elegance, clear and piquant 
melody — characteristically French. In La Muette de Portici, 
familiarly known as Masaniello, Auber achieved his greatest 
musical triumph. Produced at Paris in 1828, it rapidly became a 
European favourite, and its overture, songs and choruses were 
everywhere heard. The duet, " Amour sacre de la patrie," was 
welcomed like a new Marseillaise; sung by Nourrit at Brussels 
in 1830, it became the signal for the revolution which broke 
out there. Of Auber's remaining operas (about 50 in all) the 
more important are: Le Macon (1825), La Fiancee (1829), Fra 
Diavolo (1830), Lestocq (1834), Le Cheval de bronze (1835), 
L'Ambassadrice (1836), Le Domino noir (1837), Le Lac des fees 
(1839), Les Diamants de la couronne (1841), Haydte (1847), 
Marco Spada (1853), Manon Lescaut (1856), and La Fiancee du 
roi des Garbes (1864). Official and other dignities testified the 
public appreciation of Auber's works. In 1829 he was elected 
member of the Institute, in 1830 he was named director of the 
court concerts, and in 1842, at the wish of Louis Philippe, he 
succeeded Cherubini as director of the Conservatoire. He was 
also a member of the Legion of Honour from 1825, and attained 
the rank of commander in 1847. Napoleon III', made Auber his 
Imperial Maitre de Chapelle in 1857. 



One of Auber's latest compositions was a march, written for 
the opening of the International Exhibition in London in 1862. 
His fascinating manners, his witty sayings, and his ever-ready 
kindness and beneficence won for him a secure place in the respect 
and love of his fellow-citizens. He remained in his old home 
during the German siege of Paris, 1870-71, but the miseries 
of the Communist war which followed sickened his heart, and 
he died in Paris on the 13th of May 1871. 

See Adolph Kohut, " Auber," vol. xvii. of Musiker Biographien 
(Leipzig, 1895). 

AUBERGINE (diminutive of Fr. auberge, a variant of alberge, 
a kind of peach), or Egg Plant (Solatium melongena, var. 
ovigerum) , a tender annual widely cultivated in the warmer parts 
of the earth, and in France and Italy, for the sake of its fruits, 
which are eaten as a vegetable. The seed should be sown early 
in February in a warm pit, where the plants are grown till shifted 
into 8-in. or 10-in. pots, in well-manured soil. Liquid manure 
should be given occasionally while the fruit is swelling; about 
four fruits are sufficient for one plant. The French growers 
sow them in a brisk heat in December, or early in January, 
and in March plant them out four or eight in a hot-bed with a 
bottom heat of from 60° to 68°, the sashes being gradually more 
widely opened as the season advances, until at about the end of 
May they may be taken off. The two main branches which are 
allowed are pinched to induce laterals, but when the fruits are 
set all young shoots are taken off in order to increase their size. 
The best variety is the large purple, which produces oblong 
fruit, sometimes reaching 6 or 7 in. in length and 10 or 12 in. in 
circumference. The fruit of the ordinary form almost exactly 
resembles the egg of the domestic fowl. It is also grown as 
an ornamental plant, for covering walls or trellises; especially 
the black-fruited kind. 

AUBERVILLIERS, or Aubervilliers-les-Vertus, a town 
of northern France, in the department of Seine, on the canal 
St Denis, 2 m. from the right bank of the Seine and 1 m. N. of 
the fortifications of Paris. Pop. (1906) 33,358. Its manufac- 
tures include cardboard, glue, oils, colours, fertilizers, chemical 
products, perfumery, &c. During the middle ages and till 
modern times Aubervilliers was the resort of numerous pilgrims, 
who came to pay honour to Notre Dame des Vertus. In 1814 
the locality was the scene of a stubborn combat between the 
French and the Allies. 

AUBIGNAC, FRANCOIS HEDELIN, Abbe d' (1604-1676), 
French author, was born at Paris on the 4th of August 1604. 
His father practised at the Paris bar, and his mother was a 
daughter of the great surgeon Ambroise Pare. Francois Hedelin 
was educated for his father's profession, but, after practising 
for some time at Nemours he abandoned law, took holy orders, 
and was appointed tutor to one of Richelieu's nephews, the 
due de Fronsac. This patronage secured for him the abbey 
of Aubignac and of Mainac. The death of the due de Fonsac 
in 1646 put an end to hopes of further preferment, and the 
Abb6 d' Aubignac retired to Nemours, occupying himself with 
literature till his death on the 25th of July 1676. He took an 
energetic share in the literary controversies of his time. Against 
Gilles Menage he wrote a Terence juslifie (1656); he laid claim 
to having originated the idea of the " Carte de tendre " of Mile de 
Scudery's Clelie; and after being a professed admirer of Corneille 
he turned against him because he had neglected to mention the 
abbe in his Discours sur le poeme dramalique. He was the author 
of four tragedies: La Cyminde (1642), La Pucelle d'Orleans (1642), 
ZSnobie (1647) and Le Martyrede Sainte Catherine (1650). Zenobie 
was written with the intention of affording a model in which 
the strict rules of the drama, as understood by the theorists, were 
observed. In the choice of subjects for his plays, he seems to 
have been guided by a desire to illustrate the various kinds of 
tragedy — patriotic, antique and religious. The dramatic authors 
whom he was in the habit of criticizing were not slow to take 
advantage of the opportunity for retaliation offered by the 
production of these mediocre plays. It is as a theorist that 
D'Aubignac still arrests attention. It has been proved that to 
Jean Chapelain belongs the credit of having been the first to 



890 



AUBIGNE 



establish as a practical law the convention of the unities that 
plays so large a part in the history of the French stage; but 
the laws of dramatic method and construction generally were 
codified by d'Aubignac in his Pratique du thedtre. The book 
was only published in 1657, but had been begun at the desire 
of Richelieu as early as 1640. His Conjectures academiques sur 
I'lliade d'Homere, which was not published until nearly forty 
years after his death, threw doubts on the existence of Homer, 
and anticipated in some sense the conclusions of Friedrich August 
Wolf in his Prolegomena ad Homerum (1795). 

The contents of the Pratique du theatre are summarized by F. 
Brunetiere in his notice of Aubignac in the Grande Encyclopedic. 
See also G. Saintsbury, Hist, of Criticism, bk. v., and H. Rigault, 
Hist, de la querelle des anciens et modernes. (1859). 

AUBIGNfi, CONSTANT D' [Baron de Surineau] (c. 1584- 
1647), French adventurer, was the son of Theodore Agrippa 
d'Aubigne, and the father of Madame de Maintenon. Born 
a Protestant, he became by turns Catholic or Protestant as it 
suited his interests. He betrayed the Protestants in 1626, 
revealing to the court, after a voyage to England, the projects 
of the English upon La Rochelle. He was renounced by his 
father; then imprisoned by Richelieu's orders at Niort, where 
he was detained ten years. After having tried his fortunes in 
the Antilles, he died in Provence, leaving in destitution his wife, 
Jeanne de Cardillac, whom he had married in 1627. He had two 
children, Charles, father of the duchess of Noailles, and Francoise, 
known in history as Madame de Maintenon. 

See T. Lavallee, LaFamille d'Aubigne et I'enfance de Madame de 
Maintenon (Paris, 1863). 

AUBIGN& JEAN HENRI MERLE D' (1794-1872), Swiss 
Protestant divine and historian, was born on the 16th of August 
1794, at Eaux Vives, near Geneva. The ancestors of his father, 
Aime Robert Merle d'Aubigne (1755—1799), were French Pro- 
testant refugees. Jean Henri was destined by his parents to a 
commercial life; but at college he decided to be ordained. He 
was profoundly influenced by Robert Haldane, the Scottish 
missionary and preacher who visited Geneva. When in 181 7 he 
went abroad to further his education, Germany was about to 
celebrate the tercentenary of the Reformation; and thus early 
he conceived the ambition to write the history of that great 
epoch. At Berlin he received stimulus from teachers so unlike 
as J. A. W. Neander and W. M. L. de Wette. After presiding for 
five years over the French Protestant church at Hamburg, he 
was, in 1823, called to become pastor of a congregation in 
Brussels and preacher to the court. He became also president of 
the consistory of the French and German Protestant churches. 
At the Belgian revolution of 1830 he thought it advisable to 
undertake pastoral work at home rather than to accept an 
educational post in the family of the Dutch king. The Evan- 
gelical Society had been founded with the idea of promoting 
evangelical Christianity in Geneva and elsewhere, but it was found 
that there was also needed a theological school for the training 
of pastors. On his return to Switzerland, d'Aubigne was invited 
to become professor of church history in an institution of the 
kind, and continued to labour in the cause of evangelical Pro- 
testantism. In him the Evangelical Alliance found a hearty 
promoter. He frequently visited England, was made a D.C.L. 
by Oxford University, and received civic honours from the city 
of Edinburgh. He died suddenly in 1872. 

His principal works are — Discours sur I'elude de I'histoire de 
Chrislianisme (Geneva, 1832); Le Luther anisme et la Riforme 
(Paris, 1844); Germany, England and Scotland, or Recollections 
of a Swiss Pastor (London, 1848); Trois siecles de lutte en Ecosse, 
ou deux rois et deux royaumes; Le Protecteur ou la ripublique 
d'Angleterre aux jours de Cromwell (Paris, 1848); Le Concile et 
V inf dillibilite (1870) ; Histoire de la Reformation au XV I iinu siecle 
(Paris, 1835-1853; new ed:, 1 861-1862, in 5 vols.); and Histoire de 
la Reformation en Europe au temps de Calvin (8 vols., 1862-1877). 

The first portion of his Histoire de la Reformation, which was 
devoted to the earlier period of the movement in Germany, gave 
him at once a foremost place amongst modern French ecclesi- 
astical historians, and was translated into most European 
tongues. The second portion, dealing with reform in the time 



of Calvin, was not less thorough, and had a subject hitherto less 
exhaustively treated, but it did not meet with the same success. 
This part of the subject, with which he was most competent to 
deal, was all but completed at the time of his death. Among 
his minor treatises, the most important are the vindication of 
the character and aims of Oliver Cromwell, and the sketch of the 
contendings of the Church of Scotland. 

Indefatigable in sifting original documents, Aubigne had 
amassed a wealth of authentic information; but his desire to 
give in all cases a full and graphic picture, assisted by a vivid 
imagination, betrayed him into excess of detail concerning minor 
events, and in a few cases into filling up a narrative by inference 
from later conditions. Moreover, in his profound sympathy . 
with the Reformers, he too frequently becomes their apologist. 
But his work is a monument of painstaking sincerity, and brings 
us into direct contact with the spirit of the period. 

AUBIGNfi, THEODORE AGRIPPA D' (1552-1630), French 
poet and historian, was born at St Maury, near Pons, in Saintonge, 
on the 8th of February 1552. His name Agrippa (aegre partus) 
was given him through his mother dying in childbirth. In his 
childhood he showed a great aptitude for languages; according 
to his own account he knew Latin, Greek and Hebrew at six years 
of age; and he had translated the Crito of Plato before he was 
eleven. His father, a Huguenot who had been one of the con- 
spirators of Amboise, strengthened his Protestant sympathies 
by showing him, while they were passing through that town on 
their way to Paris, the heads of the conspirators exposed upon 
the scaffold, and adjuring him not to spare his own head in order 
to avenge their death. After a brief residence he was obliged 
to flee from Paris to avoid persecution, but was captured and 
threatened with death. Escaping through the intervention of 
a friend, he went to Montargis. In his fourteenth year he was 
present at the siege of Orleans, at whicn his father was killed. 
His guardian sent him to Geneva, where he studied for a con- 
siderable time under the direction of Beza. In 1567 he made 
his escape from tutelage, and attached himself to the Huguenot 
army under the prince of Conde. Subsequently he joined Henry 
of Navarre, whom he succeeded in withdrawing from the corrupt- 
ing influence of the house of Valois (1576), and to whom he 
rendered valuable service, both as a soldier and as a counsellor, 
in the wars that issued in his elevation to the throne as Henry IV. 
After a furious battle at Casteljaloux, and suffering from fever 
from his wounds, he wrote his Tragiques (1571). He was in the 
battle of Coutras (1587), and at the siege of Paris (1590). His 
career at camp and court, however, was a somewhat chequered 
one, owing to the roughness of his manner and the keenness of 
his criticisms, which made him many enemies and severely tried 
the king's patience. In his tragedie-ballet Circe (1576) he did not 
hesitate to indulge in the most outspoken sarcasm against the 
king and other members of the royal family. Though he more 
than once found it expedient to retire into private life he never 
entirely lost the favour of Henry, who made him governor of 
Maillezais. After the conversion of the king to Roman Catho- 
licism, d'Aubigne remained true to the Huguenot cause, and 
a fearless advocate of the Huguenot interests. The first two 
volumes of the work by which he is best known, his Histoire 
universelle depuis 1550 jusqu'a Van 1601, appeared in 1616 and 
1618 respectively. The third volume was published in 1619, but, 
being still more free and personal in its satire than those which 
had preceded it, it was immediately ordered to be burned by the 
common hangman. The work is a lively chronicle of the incidents 
of camp and court life, and forms a very valuable source for the 
history of France during the period it embraces. In September 
1620 its author was compelled to take refuge in Geneva, where 
he found a secure retreat for the last ten years of his life, though 
the hatred of the French court showed itself in procuring a 
sentence of death to be recorded against him more than once. 
He devoted the period of his exile to study, and the superintend- 
ence of works for the fortifications of Bern and Basel which were 
designed as a material defence of the cause of Protestantism. 
He died at Geneva on the 29th of April 1630. 

A complete edition of his works according to the original MSS. 



AUBIN— AUBURN 



89! 



was begun by E. Reaume and F. de Caussade (1879). It contains 
all the literary works, the Avenlures du baron de Faeneste (1617), 
and the Memoires (6 vols., 1873-1892). The best edition of the 
Histoire universelle is by A. de Ruble. The Memoires were edited 
by L. Lalanne (1854). 

AUBIN, a town of southern France, in the department of 
Aveyron on the Enne, 30 m. N.W. of Rodez. In 1906 the urban 
population was 2229, the communal population 9986. Aubin is 
the centre of important coal-mines worked in the middle ages, 
and also has iron-mines, the product of which supplies iron works 
close to the town. Sheep-breeding is important in the vicinity. 
The church dates from the 12th century. 

AUBREY, JOHN (1626-1697), English antiquary, was born at 
Easton Pierse or Percy, near Malmesbury, Wiltshire, on the 12th 
of March 1626, his father being a country gentleman of consider- 
able fortune. He was educated at the Malmesbury grammar 
school under Robert Latimer, who had numbered Thomas 
Hobbes among his earlier pupils, and at his schoolmaster's house 
Aubrey first met the philosopher about whom he was to leave 
so many curious and interesting details. He entered Trinity 
College, Oxford, in 1642, but his studies were interrupted by the 
Civil War. In 1646 he became a student of the Middle Temple, 
but was never called to the bar. He spent much of his time in 
the country, and in 1649 he brought into notice the megalithic 
remains at Avebury. His father died in 1652, leaving to Aubrey 
large estates, and with them, unfortunately, complicated law- 
suits. Aubrey, however, lived gaily, and used his means to 
gratify his passion for the company of celebrities and for every 
sort of knowledge to be gleaned about them. Anthony a Wood 
prophesied that he would one day break his neck while running 
downstairs after a retreating guest, in the hope of extracting a 
story from him. He took no active share in the political troubles 
of the time, but from his description of a meeting of the Rota 
Club, founded by James Harrington, the author of Oceana, he 
appears to have been a theorizing republican. His reminiscences 
on this subject date from the Restoration, and are probably 
softened by considerations of expediency. In 1663 he became 
a member of the Royal Society, and in the next year he met 
Joan Somner, " in an ill hour," he tells us. This connexion did 
not end in marriage, and a lawsuit with the lady complicated 
his already embarrassed affairs. He lost estate after estate, 
until in 1670 he parted with his last piece of property, Easton 
Pierse. From this time he was dependent on the hospitality of 
his numerous friends. In 1667 he had made the acquaintance of 
Anthony a Wood at Oxford, and when Wood began to gather 
materials for his invaluable Athenae Oxonienses, Aubrey offered 
to collect information for him. From time to time he forwarded 
memoranda to him, and in 1680 he began to promise the 
" Minutes for Lives," which Wood was to use at his discretion. 
He left the task of verification largely to Wood. As a hanger-on 
in great houses he had little time for systematic work, and he 
wrote the " Lives " in the early morning while his hosts were 
sleeping off the effects of the dissipation of the night before. 
He constantly leaves blanks for dates and facts, and many 
queries. He made no attempt at a fair copy, and, when fresh in- 
formation occurred to him, inserted it at random. He made some 
distinction between hearsay and authentic information, but had 
no pretence to accuracy, his retentive memory being the chief 
authority. The principal charm of his " Minutes " lies in the 
amusing details he has to recount about his personages, and in 
the plainness and truthfulness that he permits himself in face of 
established reputations. In 1592 he complained bitterly that 
Wood had destroyed forty pages of his MS., probably because of 
the dangerous freedom of Aubrey's pen. Wood Was prosecuted 
eventually for insinuations against the judicial integrity of the 
earl of Clarendon. One of the two statements called in question 
was certainly founded on information provided by Aubrey. 
This perhaps explains the estrangement between the two anti- 
quaries and the ungrateful account that Wood gives of the elder 
man's character. " He was a shiftless person, roving and 
magotie-headed, and sometimes little better than erased. And 
being exceedingly credulous, would stuff his many letters sent 
to A. W. with follies and misinformations, which sometimes 



would guide him into the paths of errour." 1 In 1673 Aubrey 
began his " Perambulation " or " Survey " of the county of 
Surrey, which was the result of many years' labour in collecting 
inscriptions and traditions in the country. He began a " History 
of his Native District of Northern Wiltshire," but, feeling that 
he was too old to finish it as he would wish, he made over his 
material, about 1695, to Thomas Tanner, afterwards bishop of 
St Asaph. In the next year he published his only completed, 
though certainly not his most valuable work, the Miscellanies, a 
collection of stories on ghosts and dreams. He died at Oxford 
in June 1697, and was buried in the church of St Mary 
Magdalene. 

Beside the works already mentioned, his papers included: 
" Architectonica Sacra," notes on ecclesiastical antiquities; and 
" Life of Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury," which served as the basis 
of Dr Blackburn's Latin life, and also of Wood's account. His 
survey of Surrey was incorporated in R. Rawlinson's Natural 
History and Antiquities of Surrey (1719); his antiquarian notes on 
Wiltshire were printed in Wiltshire; the Topographical Collections 
of John Aubrey, corrected and enlarged by J. E. Jackson (Devizes, 
1862) ; part of another MS. on " The Natural History of Wiltshire " 
was printed by John Britton in 1847 for the Wiltshire Topographical 
Society; the Miscellanies were edited in 1890 for the Library of Old 
Authors; the " Minutes for Lives " were partially edited in 1813. 
A complete transcript, Brief Lives chiefly of Contemporaries set down 
by John Aubrey between the Years 1669 and 1696, was edited for the 
Clarendon Press in 1898 by the Rev. Andrew Clark from the MSS. 
in the Bodleian, Oxford. 

See also John Britton, Memoir of John Aubrey (1845); David 
Masson, in the British Quarterly Review, July 1856; Emile Montegut, 
Heures de lecture d'un critique (1891); and a catalogue of Aubrey's 
collections in The Life and Times of Anthony Wood . . ., by Andrew 
Clark (Oxford, 1891-1900, vol. iv. pp. 191-193), which contains 
many other references to Aubrey. 

AUBURN, a city and the county-seat of Androscoggin county, 
Maine, U.S.A., on the Androscoggin river, opposite Lewiston 
(with which it practically forms an industrial unit), in the S.W. 
part of the state. Pop. (1890) 11,250; (1900) 12,951, of whom 
2076 were foreign-born; (1910, census) 15,064. It is served 
by the Grand Trunk and the Maine Central railways. The river 
furnishes abundant water-power, and the city ranked fourth in 
the state as a manufacturing centre in 1905. Boots and shoes 
are the principal products; in 1905 seven-tenths of the city's 
wage-earners were engaged in their manufacture, and Auburn's 
output ($4,263,162 = 66-5% of the total factory product of the 
city) was one-third of that of the whole state. Other manu- 
factures are butter, bread and other bakery products, cotton 
goods, furniture and leather. The municipality owns and 
operates its waterworks. Auburn was first settled in 1786, 
and was incorporated in 1842, but the present charter dates 
only from 1869. 

AUBURN, a city and the county-seat of Cayuga county, 
New York, U.S.A., 25 m. S.W. of Syracuse, on an outlet of 
Owasco Lake. Pop. (1890) 25,858; (1900) 30,345, of whom 
5436 were foreign-born, 2084 being from Ireland and 1023 from 
England; (1910) 34,668. It is served by the Lehigh Valley 
and the New York Central & Hudson River railways, and by 
inter-urban electric lines. The city is attractively situated 
amidst a group of low hills in the heart of the lake country of 
western New York; the streets are wide, with a profusion of 
shade trees. Auburn has a city hall, the large Burtis Audi- 
torium, the Auburn hospital, two orphan asylums, and the 
Seymour library in the Case Memorial building. There is a 
fine bronze statue of William H. Seward, who made his home 
here after 1823, and was buried in Fort Hill Cemetery. In 
Auburn are the Auburn (State) prison (1816), in connexion 
with which there is a women's prison; the Auburn Theological 
Seminary (Presbyterian), founded in 1819, chartered in 1820, 
and opened for students in 1821; the Robinson school for girls; 
and the Women's Educational and Industrial Union, for the 
education of working girls, with a building erected in 1907. 
The city owns its water-supply system, the water being pumped 
from Owasco Lake, about 2 -J m. S.S.E. of the city. There is a 
good water-power, and the city has important manufacturing 

1 "Life of Anthony a Wood written by Himself" (Athen. Oxon., 
ed. Bliss). 



892 



AUBURN— AUCH 



interests. The principal manufactures are cordage and twine, 
agricultural implements, engines, pianos, boots and shoes, 
cotton and woollen goods, carpets and rugs, rubber goods, 
flour and machinery. The total factory product in 1905 was 
valued at $13,420,863; of this $2,890,301 was the value of 
agricultural implements, in the manufacture of which Auburn 
ranked fifth among the cities of the United States. There are 
a number of grey and blue limestone quarries, one of which is 
owned and operated by the municipality. 

Settled soon after the close of the War of Independence, 
Auburn was laid out in 1793 by Captain John L. Hardenburgh, 
a veteran of the war, and for some years was known as Harden- 
burgh's Corners. In 1805, when it was made, the county-seat, 
it was renamed Auburn. It was incorporated in 1814, and was 
chartered as a city in 1848. 

See C. Hawley, Early Chapters of Cayuga History (Auburn, 1879). 

AUBURN (from the Low Lat. alburnus, whitish, light-coloured) , 
ruddy-brown; the meaning has changed from the original one 
of brownish-white or light yellow (cilrinus, in Promptorium 
Parvulorum) , probably through the intensification of the idea 
of brown caused by the early spelling " abron " or " abrown." 

AUBUSSON, PIERRE D' (1423-1503), grand-master of the 
order of St John of Jerusalem, and a zealous opponent of the 
Turks, was born in 1423. He belonged to a noble French family, 
and early devoted himself to the career of a soldier in the service 
of the emperor Sigismund. Under the archduke Albert of 
Austria he took part in a campaign against the Turks, and on his 
return to France sided with the Armagnacs against the Swiss, 
greatly distinguishing himself at the battle of St Jacob in 1444. 
He then joined the order of the knights of Rhodes, and success- 
fully conducted an expedition against the pirates of the Levant 
and an embassy to Charles VII. He soon rose to the most 
important offices in the order, and in 1476 was elected grand- 
master. It was the period of the conquests of Mahommed II., 
who, supreme in the East, now began to threaten Europe. In 
December 1479 a large Turkish fleet appeared in sight of Rhodes; 
a landing was effected, and a vigorous attack made upon the city. 
But in July of the next year, being reinforced from Spain, the 
knights forced the Mussulmans to retire, leaving behind them 
9000 dead. The siege, in which d'Aubusson was seriously 
wounded, enhanced his renown throughout Europe. Mahommed 
was furious, and would have attacked the island again but for 
his death in 148 1. His succession was disputed between his 
sons Bayezid and Jem. The latter, after his defeat by Bayezid, 
sought refuge at Rhodes under a safe-conduct from the grand- 
master and the council of the knights. What followed remains 
a stain on dAubusson's memory. Rhodes not being considered 
secure, Jem with his own consent was sent to France. Mean- 
while, in spite of the safe-conduct, d'Aubusson accepted an 
annuity of 45,000 ducats from the sultan; in return for which he 
undertook to guard Jem in such a way as to prevent his design 
of appealing to the Christian powers to aid him against his 
brother. For six years Jem, in spite of frequent efforts to 
escape, was kept a close prisoner in various castles of the Rhodian 
order in France, until in 1489 he was handed over to Pope 
Innocent VIII. , who had been vying with the kings of Hungary 
and Naples for the possession of so valuable a political weapon. 
D'Aubusson's reward was a cardinal's hat (1489), and the 
power to confer all benefices connected with the order without 
the sanction of the papacy; the order of St John received the 
wealth of the suppressed orders of the Holy Sepulchre and St 
Lazarus. The remaining years of his life d'Aubusson spent in 
the attempt to restore discipline and zeal in his order, and to 
organize a grand international crusade against the Turks. The 
age of the Renaissance, with Alexander Borgia on the throne of 
St Peter, was, however, not favourable to such an enterprise; 
the death of Jem in 1495 had removed the most formidable 
weapon available against the sultan; and when in 1501 d'Aubus- 
son led an expedition against Mytilene, dissensions among his 
motley host rendered it wholly abortive. The old man's last 
years were embittered by chagrin at his failure, which was 
hardly compensated by his success in extirpating Judaism in 



Rhodes, by expelling all adult Jews and forcibly baptizing their 
children. In the summer of 1503 he died. 

See P. Bouhours, Hist, de Pierre d'Aubusson (Paris, 1676; Hague, 
1793; abridged ed. Bruges, 1887); G. E. Streck, Pierre d'Aubusson, 
Grossmeister, &c. (Chemnitz, 1873); J. B. Bury in Cambridge Mod. 
Hist. vol. i. p. 85, &c. (for relations with Jem). 

AUBUSSON, a town of France, capital of an arrondissement 
in the department of Creuse, picturesquely situated on the river 
Creuse 24 m. S.E. of Gueret by rail. Pop. (1906) 6475. It has 
celebrated manufactories of carpets, &c, employing about 2000 
workmen, the artistic standard of which is maintained by a 
national school of decorative arts, founded in 1869. Nothing 
certain is known as to the foundation of this industry, but it 
was in full activity at least as far back as 1531. From the 10th 
to the 13th century Aubusson was the centre of a viscounty, 
and the viscountess Marguerite, wife of Rainaud VI., was sung 
by many a troubadour. After the death of the viscount Guy II. 
(a little later than 1262) Aubusson was incorporated in the 
countship of La Marche by Hugh XII. of Lusignan, and shared 
in its fortunes. Louis XIV. revived the title of viscount of 
Aubusson in favour of Franfois, first marshall de la Feuillade 
(1686). From the family of the old viscounts was descended 
Pierre d'Aubusson (q.v.). Admiral Sallandrouze de Lamornaix 
(1840-1902) belonged to a family of tapestry manufacturers 
established at Aubusson since the beginning of the 19th century. 
Aubusson was also the native place of the novelists Leonard 
Sylvain, Julien Sandeau and Alfred Assollant (1827-1886). 

See Le Pere Anselme, Hist, genealogique de la maison de 
France, vol. v. pp. 318 et seq.; P. Mignaton, Hist, de la maison 
d' Aubusson (Paris, 1886); Cyprien Perathon, Hist. d'Aubusson 
(Limoges, 1886). (A. T.) 

AUCH, a city of south-western France, capital of the depart- 
ment of Gers, 55 m. W. of Toulouse on the Southern railway. 
Pop. (1906) 9294. Auch is built on the summit and sides of 
a hill at the foot of which flow the yellow waters of the Gers. 
It consists of a lower and upper quarter united in several places 
by flights of steps. The streets are in general steep and narrow, 
but there is a handsome promenade in the upper town, laid out 
in the 18th century by the intendant Antoine Megret d'Etigny. 
Three bridges lead from the left to the right bank of the Gers, 
on which the suburb of Patte d'Oie is situated. The most in- 
teresting part of the town lies in the old quarter around the 
Place Salinis, a spacious terrace which commands an extensive 
view over the surrounding country. On its eastern side it 
communicates with the left bank of the river by a handsome 
series of steps; on its north side rises the cathedral of Sainte- 
Marie. This church, built from 1489 to 1662, belongs chiefly to 
the Gothic style, of which it is one of the finest examples in 
southern France. The facade, however, with its two square and 
somewhat heavy flanking towers dates from the 17th century, 
and is Greco-Roman in architecture. Sainte-Marie contains 
many artistic treasures, the chief of which are the magnificent 
stained-glass windows of the Renaissance which b'ght the apsidal 
chapels, and the 113 choir-stalls of carved oak, also of Renaissance 
workmanship. The archbishop's palace adjoins the cathedral; 
it is a building of the 18th century with a Romanesque hall and 
a tower of the 14th century. Opposite the south side of the 
cathedral stands the lycee on the site of a former Jesuit college. 
Only scanty remains are left of the once celebrated abbey of 
St Orens. The ecclesiastical seminary contains an important 
library with a collection of manuscripts, and there is a public 
library in the Carmelite chapel, a building of the 17 th century. 
The former palace of the intendants of Gascony is now used as 
the prefecture. Auch is the seat of an archbishopric, a prefect 
and a court of assizes, and has tribunals of first instance and 
of commerce, a chamber of commerce, a lycee, training-colleges, 
a school of design, a branch of the Bank of France and an im- 
portant lunatic asylum. The manufactures include agricultural 
implements, leather, vinegar and plaited sandals, and there is 
a trade in brandy, wine, cattle, poultry and wool; there are 
quarries of building-stone in the neighbourhood. 

Auch (Elimberris) was the capital of a Celtiberian tribe, the 
Ausci, and under the Roman domination was one of the most 



AUCHMUTY— AUCKLAND 



893 



important cities in Gaul. In the 4th century this importance 
was increased by the foundation of its bishopric, and after the 
destruction of Eauze in the 9th century it became the metropolis 
of Novempopulana. Till 73 2, Auch stood on the right bank of the 
Gers, but in that year the ravages of the Saracens drove the 
inhabitants to take refuge on the left bank of the river, where 
a new city was formed. In the 10th century Count Bernard of 
Armagnac founded the Benedictine abbey of St Orens, the monks 
of which, till 1308, shared the jurisdiction over Auch with the 
archbishops — an arrangement which gave rise to constant strife. 
The counts of Armagnac possessed a castle in the city, which was 
the capital of Armagnac in the middle ages. During the Religious 
Wars of the 16th century Auch remained Catholic, except for a 
short occupation in 1569 by the Huguenots under Gabriel, count 
of Montgomery. In the 18th century it was capital of Gascony, 
and seat of a generality. Antoine Megret d'Etigny, intendant 
from 1751 to 1767, did much to improve the city and its 
commerce. 

AUCHMUTY, SIR SAMUEL (1756-1822), British general, 
was born at New York in 1756, and served as a loyalist in the 
American War of Independence, being given an ensigncy in the 
royal army in 1777, and in 1778 a lieutenancy in the 45th Foot, 
without purchase. When his regiment returned to England 
after the war, having neither private means nor influence, he 
exchanged into the 5 2n d, in order to proceed to India. He took 
part in the last war against Hyder Ali ; he was given a staff 
appointment by Lord Cornwallis in 1790, served in the queries
against Tippoo Sahib,and continued in various staff appointments 
up to 1797, when he returned to England a brevet lieut- 
coloncl. In- 1800 he was made lieut. -colonel and brevet colonel; 
and in the following year, as adjutant-general to Sir David 
Baird in Egypt, took a distinguished share in the march across 
the desert and the capture of Alexandria. On his return to 
England in 1803 he was knighted, and three years later he went 
out to the River Plate as a brigadier-general. Auchmuty was 
one of the few officers who came out of the disastrous Buenos 
Aires expedition of 1806-7 with enhanced reputation. While 
General Whitelocke, the commander, was cashiered, Auchmuty 
was at once re-employed and promoted major-general, and was 
sent out in 1810 to command at Madras. In the following year 
he commanded the expedition organized for the conquest of 
Java, which the governor-general, Lord Minto, himself accom- 
panied. The storming of the strongly fortified position of 
Meester Cornells (28th August 1811), stubbornly defended by 
the Dutch garrison under General Janssens, practically achieved 
the conquest of the island, and after the action of Samarang 
(September 8th) Janssens surrendered. Auchmuty received the 
thanks of parliament and the order of K.C.B. (G.C.B. in 1815), 
and in 1813, on his return home, was promoted to the rank of 
lieut. -general. In 1821 he became commander-in-chief in Ireland , 
and a member of the Irish privy council. He died suddenly on 
the nth of August 1822. 

AUCHTERARDER (Gaelic, " upper high land "), a police 
burgh of Perthshire, Scotland, 13! m. S.W. of Perth by the 
Caledonian railway. Pop. (1901) 2276. It is situated on 
Ruthven Water, a right-hand tributary of the Earn. The chief 
manufactures are those of tartans and other woollens, and of 
agricultural implements. At the beginning of the 13th century 
it obtained a charter from the earl of Strathearn, afterwards 
became a royal burgh for a period, and was represented in the 
Scottish parliament. Its castle, now ruinous, was built as a 
hunting-lodge for Malcolm Canmore, but of the abbey which it 
possessed as early as the reign of Alexander II. (1198-1249) no 
remains exist. The ancient church of St Mungo, now in ruins, 
was a building in the Norman or Early Pointed style. The town 
was almost entirely burned down by the earl of Mar in 17 16 
during the abortive Jacobite rising. It was in connexion with 
this parish that the ecclesiastical dispute arose which led to the 
disruption in the Church of Scotland in 1843. The estate of 
Kincardine, 1 m. south, gives the title of earl of Kincardine to the 
duke of Montrose. The old castle, now in ruins, was dismantled 
in 1645 by the marquis of Argyll in retaliation for the destruction 



of Castle Campbell in Dollar Glen on the south side of the Ochils. 
The old ruined castle of Tullibardine, 2 m. west of the burgh, once 
belonged to the Murrays of Tullibardine, ancestors of the duke 
of Atholl, who derives the title of marquis of Tullibardine from 
the estate. The ancient chapel adjoining, also ruinous, was a 
burial-place of the Murrays. 

AUCHTERMUCHTY (Gaelic, " the high ground of the wild 
sow"), a royal and police burgh of Fifeshire, Scotland, built 
on an elevation about 9 m. W. by S. of Cupar, with a station on a 
branch of the North British railway from Ladybank to Mawcarse 
Junction. Pop. 1387. The rapid Loverspool Burn divides 
the town. The principal industries include the weaving of 
linen and damasks, bleaching, distilling and malting. John 
Glas, founder of the sect known as Glassites or Sandemanians, 
was a native of the town. A mile and a half to the south-west 
is the village of Strathmiglo (pop. 966), on the river Eden, with 
a linen factory and bleaching works. 

AUCKLAND, GEORGE EDEN, Earl of (1784-1849), English 
statesman, was the second son of the 1st Baron Auckland. He 
completed his education at Oxford, and was admitted to the bar 
in 1809. His elder brother was drowned in the Thames in the 
following year ; and in 1814, on the death of his father, he took 
his seat in the House of Lords as Baron Auckland. He supported 
the Reform party steadily by his vote, and in 1830 was made 
president of the Board of Trade and master of the Mint. In 
1834 he held office for a few months as first lord of the admiralty, 
and in 1835 he was appointed governor-general of India. He 
proved himself to be a painstaking and laborious legislator, and 
devoted himself specially to the improvement of native schools, 
and the expansion of the commercial industry of the nation 
committed to his care. These useful labours were interrupted 
in 1838 by complications in Afghanistan, which excited the fears 
not only of the Anglo-Indian government but of the home 
authorities. Lord Auckland resolved to enter upon a war, and 
on the 1st of October 1838 published at Simla his famous 
manifesto dethroning Dost Mahommed. The early queries
were crowned with success, and the governor-general received 
the title of earl of Auckland. But reverses followed quickly, 
and in the ensuing campaigns the British troops suffered the 
most severe disasters. Lord Auckland had the double mortifica- 
tion of seeing his policy a complete failure and of being super- 
seded before his errors could be rectified. In the autumn of 
1 84 1 he was succeeded in office by Lord Ellenborough, and 
returned to England in the following year. In 1846 he was made 
first lord of the admiralty, which office he held until his death, 
on the 1st of January 1849. He died unmarried, and the earldom 
became extinct, the barony (see below) passing to his brother 
Robert. 

See S. J. Trotter, The Earl of Auckland (" Rulers of India " series), 
1893. 

AUCKLAND, WILLIAM EDEN, ist Baron (1745-1814), 
English statesman, son of Sir Robert Eden, 3rd Bart., of Windle- 
stone Hall, Durham, and of Mary, daughter of William Davison, 
was born in 1 745, educated at Eton and Christ Church, Oxford, 
and called to the bar at the Middle Temple in 1768. In 1771 
he published Principles of Penal Law, and was early recognized 
as an authority on commercial and economic questions, and ' 
in 1772 he was appointed an under secretary of state. He repre- 
sented New Woodstock in the parliaments of 1774 and 1780, 
and Heytesbury in those of 1784 and 1790. In 1776 he was 
appointed a commissioner on the board of trade and plantations. 
In 1778 he carried an act for the improvement of the treatment 
of prisoners, and accompanied the earl of Carlisle as a com- 
missioner to North America on an unsuccessful mission to settle 
the disputes with the colonists. On his return in 1779 he 
published his widely read Four Letters to the Earl of Carlisle, 
and in 1780 became chief secretary for Ireland. He was elected 
to the Irish House of Commons as member for Dungannon in 
1781 and sworn of the Irish privy council, and while in Ireland 
established the National Bank. He advised the increase of the 
secret service fund, and was reputed, according to Lord Charle- 
mont (a political opponent), as especially skilful in the arts of 



«94 



AUCKLAND— AUCTION PITCH 



corruption and in overcoming political prejudices. He resigned 
in 1782, but in the following year he took office again as vice- 
treasurer of Ireland under the coalition ministry, which he had 
been instrumental in arranging, and was included in the privy 
council, resigning with the government in December. He 
opposed strongly Pitt's propositions for free trade between Eng- 
land and Ireland in 1785, but took office with Pitt as a member 
of the committee on trade and plantations, and negotiated in 
1786 and 1787 Pitt's important commercial treaty with France, 
and agreements concerning the East India Companies and 
Holland. In 1787 he published his History of New Holland. 
Next year he was sent as ambassador to Spain, and after his 
return was created (September 1789) Baron Auckland in the 
Irish peerage. The same year he was sent on a mission to 
Holland, and represented English interests there with great 
zeal and prudence during the critical years of 1790 to 1793, 
obtaining the assistance of the Dutch fleet in 1790 on the menace 
of a war with Spain, signing the convention relating to the 
Netherlands the same year, and in 1793 attending the congress 
at Antwerp. He retired from the public service in the latter 
year, received a pension of £2300, and was created Baron Auck- 
land of West Auckland, Durham, in the English peerage. During 
his retirement in the country at Beckenham, he continued his 
intimacy with Pitt, his nearest neighbour at Holwood, who at 
one time had thoughts of marrying his daughter; and with Pitt's 
sanction he published his Remarks on the Apparent Cicumstances 
of the War in 1 795, to prepare public opinion for a peace. In 1 798 
he was included in Pitt's government as joint postmaster-general, 
and supported strongly the income tax and the Irish Union, 
assisting in drawing up the act embodying the latter. In 1 799 he 
brought in a bill to check adultery by preventing the marriage 
of the guilty parties, and the same year took a mischievous 
part in the cabal against Sir Ralph Abercromby. He severely 
criticized Pitt's resignation in 1801, from which he had en- 
deavoured to dissuade him, and retained office under Addington. 
This terminated his friendship with Pitt, who excluded him 
from his administration in 1804 though he increased his pension. 
Auckland was included in Granville's ministry of " All the 
Talents " as president of the board of trade in 1806. He held 
the appointments of auditor and director of Greenwich hospital, 
recorder of Grantham, and chancellor of the Marischal College 
in Aberdeen. He died on the 28th of May 18 14. 

He had married in 1776 Eleanor, sister of the first Lord Minto, 
and had a large family. Emily Eden (1797-1869), the novelist, 
was one of his daughters. On the death of his son George, 
2nd baron and earl of Auckland (q.v.), the barony passed to the 
1st baron's younger son Robert John (1790-1870), bishop of 
Bath and Wells, from whom the later barons were descended, 
and who was also the father of Sir Ashley Eden (1831-1887), 
lieutenant-governor of Bengal. The 1st baron had two dis- 
tinguished brothers — Morton Eden (1752-1830), a diplomatist, 
who married Lady Elizabeth Henley, and in 1799 was created 
1st Baron Henley (his family, from 1831, taking the name of 
Henley instead of Eden); and Sir Robert Eden, governor of 
Maryland, whose son, Sir Frederic Morton Eden (1766-1809), 
was a well-known economist. 

Lord Auckland's Journal and Correspondence, published in 1861- 
1862, throws much light on the political history of the time. 

AUCKLAND, a city and seaport on the east coast of North 
Island, New Zealand, in Eden county; capital of the province 
of its name, and the seat of a bishop. Pop. (1906) 37,736; 
including suburbs, 82,101. It is situated at the mouth of an arm 
of Hauraki Gulf, and is only 6 m. distant from the head of 
Manukau harbour on the western coast. The situation is ex- 
tremely beautiful. The Hauraki Gulf, a great square inlet 
opening northward, is studded with islands of considerable 
elevation; Rangitoto, which protects the harbour, is a volcanic 
cone reaching nearly 1000 ft. The isthmus on which the town 
stands (which position has caused it to be likened to Corinth) 
can be crossed without surmounting any great elevation, and 
offers a feasible canal route. A number of small extinct volcanoes, 
however, appear in all directions. To the west the Titirangi hills 



exceed 1400 ft. Some of the volcanic soil is barren, but much 
of the district is clothed in luxuriant vegetation. 

Auckland harbour, one of the best in New Zealand, is approach- 
able by the largest vessels at the lowest tide. There are two 
graving docks. Queen Street, the principal thoroughfare, 
leads inland from the main dock, and contains the majority 
of the public buildings. There is a small government house, 
standing in beautiful grounds, adjoining Albert Park, with plan- 
tations of oaks and pines. The government offices, art gallery 
and exchange, with St Mary's cathedral (Anglican), a building 
in a combination of native timbers, St Paul's and St Patrick's 
cathedral (Roman Catholic), are noteworthy buildings. The 
art gallery and free library contain excellent pictures, and 
valuable books and MSS. presented by Sir G. Grey. The museum 
contains one of the best existing collections of Maori art. There 
are an opera-house and an academy of music. The Auckland 
University College and the grammar school are the principal 
educational establishments. The parks are the Domain, with 
a botanical garden, the Albert Park near the harbour, with a 
bronze statue of Queen Victoria, the extensive grounds at One 
Tree Hill on the outskirts, and Victoria Park on Freeman's 
Bay. The principal thoroughfares are served by electric tramway. 
Of the suburbs, Newton, Parnell and Newmarket are in reality 
outlying parts of the town itself. Devonport, Birkenhead and 
Northcote are beautifully situated on the north shore of the 
inlet, and are served by steam-ferries. Several other residential 
suburbs lie among the hills on the mainland, such as Mount 
Albert, Mount Eden and Epsom. Onehunga is a small port on 
Manukau harbour, served by rail. In Parnell is the former 
residence of Bishop Selwyn, who, arriving in the colony in 1842, 
assisted to draw up the constitution of the Anglican church. 
There are many associations with his name in the neighbour- 
hood. The prospect over the town and its environs from 
Mount Eden is justly famous. The hill is terraced with former 
native fortifications. 

Auckland has industries of sugar-refining, ship-building and 
paper-, rope- and brick-making, and timber is worked. The 
town was founded as capital of the colony in 1840 by Governor 
Hobson. There is communication both south and north by 
rail, and regular steamers serve the ports of the colony, the 
principal Pacific Islands, Australia, &c. From 1853 to 1876 
Auckland was the seat of the provincial government, and until 
1865 that of the central government, which was then transferred 
to Wellington. The first session of the general assembly took 
place here in 1854. Auckland is under municipal government. 

AUCKLAND ISLANDS, a group in the Pacific Ocean, dis- 
covered in 1806 by Captain Briscoe, of the English whaler 
" Ocean," in 50° 24' S., 166 7' E. The islands, of volcanic origin, 
are very fertile, and are covered with forest. They were granted 
to the Messrs Enderby by the British government as a whaling 
station, but the establishment was abandoned in 1852. The 
islands belong politically to New Zealand. 

AUCTION PITCH, a card game which is a popular variation 
of All Fours (q.v.). The name is derived from the rule that 
the first card played, or pitched, is the trump suit, and that the 
eldest hand has the privilege of pitching it or of selling out 
to the highest bidder. A full pack is used, and the cards rank 
as in All Fours, namely from ace down to 2, ace being highest 
in cutting also. From four to seven may play, each player being 
provided with seven white counters, and also with red counters 
in case stakes are played for. Each player receives six cards 
in every deal, three at a time, no trump being turned. The object 
is to get rid of the white counters, one of which may be put into 
the pool either (1) for holding the highest trump played; (2) 
for having the lowest trump dealt to one; (3) for taking the 
Jack (knave) of trumps; or (4) for winning the game, namely 
the greatest number of pips that count. In case of a tie of pips 
no game is scored. If the eldest hand decides to pitch and not to 
sell out, he may do so, but is obliged to make four points or be 
set back that number. If he decides to sell, he says " I pass," 
and the player at his left bids for the privilege of pitching the 
trump or passes, &c. When a bid has been made the rest must 



AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS— AUCUBA 



895 



pass or bid higher, and the eldest hand must either accept a bid 
or undertake to make as many points as the bidder. If no bid 
is made he pitches the trump himself, without the obligation 
of making anything. The first card played is the trump suit, 
the winner of the trick leading again. In trumps a player must 
follow suit if he can, and the same rule applies in plain suits, 
excepting that a trump may be played at any time (" follow 
suit or trump "). In play the highest card wins the trick unless 
trumped. When the hand is played out each player puts a white 
counter into the pool for every point won, and the first player 
to get rid of all his seven white counters wins the pool and takes 
from it all the red counters, which represent cash. This ends the 
game. In case two players count out during the same deal, the 
bidder has the first right to the pool, the rule being " bidder 
counts out first." If the two players who count out are neither 
of them bidder, then they go out in regular order, i.e. high first, 
then low, Jack and game. If a bidder fails to make his points 
he is set back that number. A revoke is punished by the offender 
being set back the number of points bid and forfeiting a red 
counter to the pool. 

AUCTIONS and AUCTIONEERS. An auction (Lat. audio, 
increase) is a proceeding at which people are invited to compete 
for the purchase of property by successive offers of advancing 
sums. The advantages of conducting a sale in this way are ob- 
vious, and we naturally find that auctions are of great antiquity. 
Herodotus describes a custom which prevailed in Babylonian 
villages of disposing of the maidens in marriage by delivering 
them to the highest bidders in an assembly annually held for 
the purpose (Book i. 196). So also among the Romans the 
quaestor sold military booty and captives in war by auction — • 
sub hasta — the spear being the symbol of quiritarian ownership. 
The familiarity of such proceedings is forcibly suggested by the 
conduct of the Praetorian Guard when Sulpicianus was treating 
for the imperial dignity after the murder of Pertinax. Appre- 
hending that they would not obtain a sufficient price by private 
contract, the Praetorians proclaimed from their ramparts that 
the Roman world was to be disposed of by public auction to the 
best bidder. Thereupon Julian proceeded to the foot of the 
ramparts and outbid his competitor (Gibbon, vol. i. ch. v.). 
Though, however, auctions were undoubtedly common among 
the Romans both in public and private transactions, the rules 
whereby they were governed are by no means clearly enunciated 
in the Corpus Juris Civilis. 

In England the method of conducting auctions has varied. 
In some places it has been usual to set up an inch of lighted 
candle, the person making the last bid before the fall of the wick 
becoming the purchaser. By an act of William III. (1698), 
this method of sale was prescribed for goods and merchandise 
imported from the East Indies. Lord Eldon speaks of " candle- 
stick biddings," where the several bidders did not know what 
the others had offered. A " dumb bidding " was the name 
given to a proceeding at which a price was put by the owner 
under a candlestick with a stipulation that no bidding should 
avail if not equal to it. In a " Dutch auction " property is 
offered at a certain price and then successively at lower prices 
until one is accepted. 

According to the practice now usual in England, a proposed 
auction is duly advertised, and a printed catalogue in the case 
of chattels, or particulars of sale in the case of land, together 
with conditions of sale, are circulated. Sometimes, in sales of 
goods, the conditions are merely suspended in the auction room. 
At the appointed time and place, the auctioneer, standing in a 
desk or rostrum, " puts up " the several lots in turn by inviting 
biddings from the company present. He announces the accept- 
ance of the last bid by a tap with his hammer and so "knocks 
down " the lot to the person who has made it. Sometimes 
property is offered on lease to the highest bidder. " Roup " is 
the Scottish term for an auction. A bid in itself is only an 
offer, and may accordingly be retracted at any time before its 
acceptance by the fall of the hammer or otherwise. Puffing is 
unlawful. Unless a right to bid is expressly reserved on behalf 
of the vendor, he must neither bid himself nor employ any one i 



else to bid. When a right to bid has been expressly reserved, 
the seller or any one person (but no more) on his behalf may bid 
at the auction. If it is simply announced that the sale is to be 
subject to a reserved or upset price, no bidding by or on behalf 
of the seller is permissible: it is only lawful to declare by some 
appropriate terms that the property is withdrawn. Where a 
sale is expressed to be without reserve, or where an upset price 
has been reached, the auctioneer must, after the lapse of a 
reasonable interval, accept the bid of the highest bona fide 
bidder. By not doing so he would render the vendor liable in 
damages. The auctioneer must not make a pretence of receiving 
bids which are not in fact made, as it would be fraudulent to 
run up the price by such an artifice. A " knock-out " is a 
combination of persons to prevent competition between them- 
selves at an auction by an arrangement that only one of their 
number shall bid, and that anything obtained by him shall be 
afterwards disposed of privately among themselves. Such a 
combination is not illegal. A " mock auction " is a proceeding 
at which persons conspire by artifice to make it appear, contrary 
to the fact, that a bona fide sale is being conducted, and so 
attempt to induce the public to purchase articles at prices far 
above their value. Those who invite the public to enter the 
room where the supposed auction is proceeding, or otherwise 
endeavour to attract bidders, are called " barkers." A conspiracy 
to defraud in this way is an indictable offence. 

American law is in general the same as the English law with 
regard to auctions. As to bidding by the vendor, however, 
it is less stringent. For, though puffing or by-bidding, as it is 
often called, will, under both systems alike, render an auction 
sale voidable at the option of a purchaser when it amounts to 
fraud, the weight of authority in the United States is in favour 
of the view that an owner may, without notice, employ a person 
to bid for him, if he does so with no other purpose than to 
prevent a sacrifice of the property under a given price. 

By a charter of Henry VII., confirmed by Charles I., the 
business of selling by auction was confined to an officer called 
an outroper, and all other persons were prohibited from selling 
goods or merchandise by public claim or outcry (see Henry 
Blackstone's Reports, vol. ii. p. 557). The only qualification 
now required by an auctioneer is a licence on which a duty of 
£10 has to be paid, and which must be renewed before the 5th 
of July in each year. A liability to a penalty of £100 is incurred 
by acting as an auctioneer without being duly licensed. The 
duty formerly imposed upon the purchase-money payable by 
virtue of a sale at auction was abolished by an act of 1845. 
An auctioneer is bound under a penalty of £20 to see that his 
full name and address are displayed before the commencement 
of an auction and during its continuance in the place where he 
conducts it. He is the agent of the vendor only, except in so 
far that, after he has knocked down a lot to the highest bidder, 
he has authority to affix the name of the latter to a memorandum 
of the transaction, so as to render the contract of sale enforceable 
where written evidence is necessary. An auctioneer does not, 
by merely announcing that a sale of certain articles will take 
place, render himself liable to those who, in consequence, attend 
at the time and place advertised, if the sale is not in fact pro- 
ceeded with, provided he acts in good faith. One of the chief 
risks run by an auctioneer is that of being held liable for the 
conversion of goods which he has sold upon the instructions of a 
person whom he believed to be the owner, but who in fact had 
no right to dispose of them. 

The number of auctioneers' licences issued during the year 
ended the 31st of March 1908 was in England 6639, in Scotland 
760, and in Ireland 839. A central organization having its 
headquarters in London, the Auctioneers' Institute of the 
United Kingdom, was founded in 1886, in order to elevate the 
status and further the interests of auctioneers, estate agents 
and valuers. It has nearly 2000 members. (H. Ha.) 

AUCUBA, the Japanese name for a small genus of the Dogwood 
order (Cornaceae). The familiar Japanese laurel of gardens and 
shrubberies is Aucuba japonica. It bears male and female 
flowers on distinct plants; the red berries often last till the 



8 9 6 



AUDAEUS— AUDIENCE 



next season's flowers appear. There are numerous varieties 
in cultivation , differing in the variegation of their leaves. 

AUDAEUS, or Audius, a church reformer of the 4th century, 
by birth a Mesopotamian. He suffered much persecution from 
the Syrian clergy for his fearless censure of their irregular lives, 
and was expelled from the church, thereupon establishing an 
episcopal monastic community. He was afterwards banished 
into Scythia, where he worked successfully among the Goths, 
not living to see the destruction of his labours by Athanaric. 
The Audaeans celebrated the feast of Easter on the same day as 
the Jewish Passover, and they were also charged with attributing 
to the Deity a human shape, an opinion which they appear to 
have founded on Genesis i. 26. Theodoret groundlessly accuses 
them of Manichean tendencies. 

The main source of information is Epiphanius {Haer. 70) . 

AUDE, a river of south-western France, rising in the eastern 
Pyrenees and flowing into the Golfe du Lion. Rising in a small 
lake a short distance east of the Puy de Carlitte, it soon takes 
a northerly direction and flows for many miles through deep 
gorges of great beauty as far as the plain of Axat. Beyond Axat 
its course again lies through defiles which become less profound 
as the river nears Carcassonne. Below that town it receives the 
waters of the Fresquel and turns abruptly east. From this 
point to its junction with the Cesse its course is parallel with 
that of the Canal du Midi. The river skirts the northern spurs 
of the Corbieres, some distance below which it is joined by the 
Orbieu and the Cesse. It then divides into two branches, the 
northernmost of which, the Aude proper, runs east and empties 
into the Mediterranean some 12 m. east-north-east of Narbonne, 
while the other branch, the Canal de la Robine, turning south, 
traverses that town, below which its course to the sea lies between 
two extensive lagoons, the Etang de Bages et de Sigean and the 
Etang de Gruissan. The Aude has a length of 140 m. and a 
basin 2061 sq. m. in extent. There is practically no traffic 
upon it. 

AUDE, a maritime department of southern France, formed 
in 1790 from part of the old province of Languedoc. Area, 
2448 sq. m. Pop. (1906) 308,327. It is bounded E. by the 
Mediterranean, N. by the departments of Herault and Tarn, 
N.W. by Haute-Garonne, W. by Ariege, and S. by Pyrenees- 
Orientales. The department is traversed on its western boundary 
from S. to N. by a mountain range of medium height, which 
unites the Pyrenees with the southern Cevennes; and its 
northern frontier is occupied by the Montagne Noire, the most 
westerly portion of the Cevennes. The Corbieres, a branch 
of the Pyrenees, run in a south-west and north-east direction 
along the southern district. The Aude (q.v.), its principal river, 
has almost its entire length in the department, and its lower 
course, together with its tributary the Fresquel, forms the 
dividing line between the Montagne Noire and the Pyrenean 
system. 

The lowness of the coast causes a, series of large lagoons, the 
chief of which are those of Bages et Sigean, Gruissan, Lapalme 
and Leucate. The climate is warm and dry, but often sudden 
in its alterations. The wind from the north-west, known as the 
cers, blows with great violence, and the sea-breeze is often laden 
with pestilential effluvia from the lagoons. The agriculture of 
the department is in a flourishing condition. The meadows are 
extensive and well watered, and are pastured by numerous 
flocks and herds. The grain produce, consisting mainly of wheat, 
oats, rye and Indian corn, exceeds the consumption, and the 
vineyards yield an abundant supply of both white and red wines, 
those of Limoux and the Narbonnais being most highly esteemed. 
Truffles are abundant. The olive and chestnut are the chief 
fruits. Mines of iron, manganese, and especially of mispickel, 
are worked, and there are stone-quarries and productive salt- 
marshes. Brewing, distilling, cooperage, iron-founding, hat- 
making and machine construction are carried on, and there 
are flour-mills, brick-works, saw-mills, sulphur refineries and 
leather and paper works. The formerly flourishing textile 
industries are now of small importance. The department 
imports coal, lime, stone, salt, raw sulphur, skins and timber 



and exports agricultural and mineral products, bricks and tiles, 
and other manufactured goods. It is served by the Southern 
railway. The Canal du Midi, following the courses of the 
Fresquel and the Aude, traverses it for 76 m.; and a branch, 
the Canal de la Robine, which passes through Narbonne to the 
sea, has a length of 24 m. The capital is Carcassonne, and the 
department is divided into the four arrondissements of Carcas- 
sonne, Limoux, Narbonne and Castelnaudary, with 31 cantons 
and 439 communes. It belongs to the 16th military region, 
and to the academie (educational division) of Montpellier, 
where also is its court of appeal. It forms the diocese of Carcas- 
sonne, and part of the province of the archbishop of Toulouse. 
Carcassonne, Narbonne and Castelnaudary are the principal 
towns. At Alet, which has hot springs of some note, there 
are ruins of a fine Romanesque cathedral destroyed in the 
religious wars of the 16th century. The extensive buildings 
of the Cistercian abbey of Fontfroide, near Bizanet, include a 
Romanesque church, a cloister, dormitories and a refectory 
of the 12th century. A curious polygonal church of the nth 
century at Rieux-Minervois, the abbey-church at St Papoul, 
with its graceful cloister' of the 14th century, and the remains 
of the important abbey of St Hilaire, founded in the 6th 
century and rebuilt from the 12th to the 15th century, are also 
of antiquarian interest. Rennes-les-Bains has mineral springs 
of repute. 

AUDEBERT, JEAN BAPTISTE (1759-1800), French artist 
and naturalist, was born at Rochefort in 1759. He studied 
painting and drawing at Paris, and gained considerable reputa- 
tion as a miniature-painter. Employed in preparing plates for the 
Histoire des coleopteres of G. A. Olivier (1756-1814), he acquired 
a taste for natural history. In 1800 appeared his first original 
work,!,' 'Histoire naturelle des singes, des makis et des gaUopitheques, 
illustrated by sixty-two folio plates, drawn and engraved by 
himself. The colouring in these plates was unusually beautiful, 
and was applied by a method devised by himself. Audebert 
died in Paris in 1800, leaving complete materials for another 
great work, Histoire des colibris, des oiseaux-mouches , desjacamars 
etdes promirops, which was published in 1802. Two hundred 
copies were printed in folio, one hundred in large quarto, and 
fifteen were printed with the whole text in letters of gold. 
Another work, left unfinished, was also published after the 
author's death, L'Histoire des grimpereaux et des oiseaux de 
paradis. The last two works also appeared together in two 
volumes, Oiseaux doris ou a reflets metalliques (1802). 

AUDEFROI LE BATARD, French Irouvere, flourished at the 
end of the 1 2 th century and was born at Arras. Of his life nothing 
is known. The seigneur de Nesles, to whom some of his songs 
are addressed, is probably the chatelain of Bruges who joined 
the crusade of 1200. Audefroi was the author of at least five 
lyric romances: Argentine, Belle Idoine, Belle Isabeau, Belle 
Emmelos and Beatrix. These romances follow older chansons 
in subject, but the smoothness of the verse and beauty of detail 
hardly compensate for the spontaneity of the shorter form. 

See A. Jeanroy, Les Origines de la poesie lyrique en France ail moyen 
Age (Paris, 1889). 

AUDIENCE (from Lat. audire, to hear), the act or state of 
hearing, the term being therefore transferred to those who hear 
or listen, as in a theatre, at a concert or meeting. In a more 
technical sense, the term is applied to the right of access to the 
sovereign enjoyed by the peers of the realm individually and by 
the House of Commons collectively. More particularly it means 
the ceremony of the admission of ambassadors, envoys or others 
to an interview with a sovereign or an important official for the 
purpose of presenting their credentials. In France, audience 
is the term applied to the sitting of a law court for hearing 
actions. In Spain, audiencia is the name given to certain 
tribunals which try appeals from minor courts. The Spanish 
judges were originally known as oidores, hearers, from the 
Spanish oir, to hear; but they are now called ministros, or magis- 
trados togados, robed judges, as the gown of the Spanish judge 
is called a toga. The audiencia pretorial, i. e. of the praetor, 
was a court in Spanish America from which there was no appeal 



AUDIFFRET-PASQUIER— AUDIT 



897 



to the viceroy, but only to the council of the Indies in Spain. 
It is not the custom in Spain to speak of audiencias reales, royal 
courts, but of the audiencias del Reino, courts of the kingdom. 

In England the Audience-court was an ecclesiastical court, 
held by the archbishops of Canterbury and York, in which they 
once exercised a considerable part of their jurisdiction, dealing 
with such matters as they thought fit to reserve for their own 
hearing. It has been long disused and is now merged in the 
court of arches. 

AUDIFFRET-PASQUIER, EDME ARMAND GASTON, Due d' 
(1823-1905), French statesman, was the grand-nephew and 
adopted son of Baron Etienne Denis Pasquier. He was created 
duke in 1844, and became auditor at the council of state in 1846. 
After the revolution of 1848 he retired to private life. Under the 
empire he was twice an unsuccessful candidate for the legislature, 
but was elected in February 187 1 to the National Assembly, 
and became president of the right centre in 1873. After the 
fall of Thiers, he directed the negotiations between the different 
royalist parties to establish a king in France, but as he refused 
to give up the tricolour for the flag of the old rSgime, the project 
failed. Yet he retained the confidence of the chamber, and was 
its president in 1875 when the constitutional laws were being 
drawn up. Nominated senator under the new constitution, he 
likewise was president of the senate from March 1876 to 1879 
when his party lost the majority. Henceforth he was less 
prominent in politics. He was distinguished by his moderation 
and uprightness; and he did his best to dissuade MacMahon 
from taking violent advisers. In 1878 he was elected to the 
French Academy, but never published anything. 

AUDIT and AUDITOR. An audit is the examination of the 
accounts kept by the financial officers of a state, public corpora- 
tions and bodies, or private persons, and the certifying of their 
accuracy. In the United Kingdom the public accounts were 
audited from very early times, though, until the reign of Queen 
Elizabeth, in no very systematic way. Prior to 1559 this duty 
was carried out, sometimes by auditors specially appointed, 
at other times by the auditors of the land revenue, or by the 
auditor of the exchequer, an office established as early as 13 14. 
But in 15 59 an endeavour was made to systematize the auditing 
of the public accounts, by the appointment of two auditors of the 
imprests. These officers were paid by fee and did their work 
by deputy, but as the results were thoroughly unsatisfactory 
the offices were abolished in 1785. An audit board, consisting 
of five commissioners, was appointed in their place, but in order 
to concentrate under one authority the auditing of the accounts 
of the various departments, some of which had been audited 
separately, as the naval accounts, the Exchequer and Audit 
Act of 1866 was passed. This statute, which sets forth at length 
the duties of the audit office, empowered the sovereign to appoint 
a "comptroller and auditor-general," with the requisite staff to 
examine and verify the accounts prepared by the different 
departments of the public service. In examining accounts of 
the appropriation of the several supply grants, the comptroller 
and auditor-general " ascertains first whether the payments 
which the account department has charged to the grant are 
supported by vouchers or proofs of payments; and second, 
whether the money expended has been applied to the purpose 
or purposes for which such grant was intended to provide." 
The treasury may also submit certain other accounts to the 
audit of the comptroller-general. All public moneys payable 
to the exchequer (q.v.) are paid to the "account of His Majesty's 
exchequer " at the Bank of England, and daily returns of such 
payments are forwarded to the comptroller. Quarterly accounts 
of the income and charge of the consolidated fund are prepared 
and transmitted to him, and in case of any deficiency in the 
consolidated fund, he may certify to the bank to make advances. 

In the United States the auditing of the Federal accounts is 
in the charge of the treasury department, under the supervision 
of the comptroller of the treasury, under whom are six auditors, 
(1) for the treasury department, (2) for the war, (3) for the 
interior, (4) for the navy, (5) for the state, &c, (6) for the post 
office, as well as a register and assistant register, who keep all 

11. 29 



general receipt and expenditure ledgers; there are official auditors 
in most of the states and in many cities. In practically all 
European countries there is a department of the administration, 
charged with the auditing of the public accounts, as the cour 
des comptes in France, the Rechnungshof des deutschen Reiches 
in Germany, &c. All local boards, large cities, corporations, 
and other bodies have official auditors for the purpose of examin- 
ing and checking their accounts and looking after their expendi- 
ture. So far as regards the work which auditors discharge in 
connexion with the accounts of joint-stock companies, building 
societies, friendly societies, industrial and provident societies, 
savings banks, &c, the word auditor is now almost synonymous 
with " skilled accountant," and his duties are discussed in the 
article Accountants. 

In Scotland there is an " auditor " who is an official of the 
court of session, appointed to tax costs in litigation, and who 
corresponds to the English taxing-master. In France there 
are legal officers, called auditors, attached to the Conseil d'Etat, 
whose duties consist in drawing up briefs and preparing docu- 
ments. On the continent of Europe, lawyers skilled in military 
law are called " auditors " (see Military Law). 

Auditor is also the designation of certain officials of the Roman 
curia. The auditores Rotae are the judges of the court of the 
Rota (so called, according to Hinschius, probably from the form 
of the panelling in the room where they originally met) . These 
were originally ecclesiastics appointed to hear particular questions 
in dispute and report to the pope, who retained the decision 
in his own hands. In the Speculum juris of Durandus (published 
in 1272 and re-edited in 1287 and 1291) the auditores palatii 
domini papae are cited as permanent officials appointed to 
instruct the pope on questions as they arose. The court of the 
Rota appears for the first time under this name in. the bull 
Romani Pontificis of Martin V. in 1422, and the auditores by 
this time had developed into a permanent 'tribunal to which 
the definitive decision of certain disputes, hitherto relegated 
to a commission of cardinals or to the pope himself, was assigned. 
From this time the powers of the auditores increased until the 
reform of the curia by Sixtus V., when the creation of the 
congregations of cardinals for specific purposes tended gradually 
to withdraw from the Rota its most important functions. It 
still, however, ranks as the supreme court of justice in the papal 
curia, and, as members of it, the auditores enjoy special privileges. 
They are prelates, and, besides the rights enjoyed by these, have 
others conceded by successive popes, e.g. that of holding benefices 
in plurality, of non-residence, &c. When the pope says mass 
pontifically the subdeacon is always an auditor. The auditores 
must be in priest's or deacon's orders, and have always been 
selected — nominally at least — after severe tests as to their moral 
and intellectual qualifications. They are twelve in number, and, 
by the constitution of Pius IV., four of them were to be foreigners; 
one French, one Spanish, one German and one Venetian; while 
the nomination of others was the privilege of certain, cities. 
No bishop, unless in partibus (see Bishop), may be an auditor-. 
On the other hand, from the auditores, as the intellectual elite 
of the curia, the episcopate, the nunciature and the cardinalate 
are largely recruited. The auditor camerae (uditore Sfffiftt}// 
umd ffflei'enda camera apostolica) is an official formerly charged 
with important executive functions. In 1485, by a bull of 
Innocent VIII., he was given extensive jurisdiction over all 
civil and criminal causes arising in the curia, or appealed to it 
from the papal territories. In addition he received the function 
of watching over the execution of all sentences passed by the 
curia. This was extended later, by Pius IV., to a similar execu- 
tive function in respect of all papal bulls and briefs, wherever 
no special executor was named This right was confirmed by 
Gregory XVI. in 1834, and the auditor may still in principle 
issue letters monitory. In practice, however, this function was 
at all times but rarely exercised, and, since 1847, has fallen to 
a prelate locum tenens, who also took over the auditor's jurisdiction 
in the papal states (Hinschius, Kathol. Kirchenrecht,\. 409, &c). 

Auditores (listeners), in the early Church, was another name . 
for catechumens (q.v.). 

11 



8 9 8 



AUDLEY— AUDRAN 



AUDLEY, or Audeley, SIR JAMES (c. 1316-1386), one of the 
original knights, or founders, of the order of the Garter, was the 
eldest son of Sir James Audley of Stratton Audley in Oxford- 
shire. When the order of the Garter was founded, he was 
instituted as one of the first founders, and his stall in St George's 
chapel, Windsor, was the eleventh on the side of Edward, the 
Black Prince. He appears to have served in France in 1346, 
and in August 1350 took part in the naval fight off Sluys. When 
hostilities were renewed between England and France in 1354 
Sir James was in constant attendance upon the Black Prince, 
and earned a great reputation for valour. At the battle of 
Poitiers on the 19th of September 1356 he took his stand in 
front of the English army, and after fighting for a long time was 
severely wounded and carried from the fight. After the victory, 
the prince inquired for Sir James, who was brought to the royal 
tent, where Edward told him he had been the bravest knight 
on his side, and granted him an annuity of five hundred marks. 
Sir James made over this gift to the four esquires who had 
attended him during the battle, and received from the prince 
a further pension of six hundred marks. In 1359 he was one of 
the leaders of an expedition into France, in 1360 he took the 
fortress of Chaven in Brittany, and was present at Calais when 
peace was made between England and France in October 1360. 
He was afterwards governor of Aquitaine and great seneschal 
of Poitou, and took part in the capture of the town of La Roche- 
sur-Yon by Edmund, earl of Cambridge. He died in 1386 at 
Fontenay-le-Comte, where he had gone to reside, and was buried 
at Poitiers. 

See Jean Froissart, Chroniques, translated by T. Johnes (Hafod, 
1810) ; G. F. Beltz, Memorials of the Most Noble Order of the Garter 
(London, 1841). 

AUDLEY, THOMAS AUDLEY, Baron (c. 1488-1544), lord 
chancellor of England, whose parentage is unknown, is believed 
to have studied at Buckingham College, Cambridge. He was 
educated for the law, entered the Middle Temple (becoming 
autumn reader in 1526), was town clerk of Colchester, and was 
on the commission of the peace for Essex in 152 1. In 1523 he 
was returned to parliament for Essex, and represented this con- 
stituency in subsequent parliaments. In 1527 he was groom 
of the chamber, and became a member of Wolsey's household. 
On the fall of the latter in 1529, he was made chancellor of the 
duchy of Lancaster, and the same year speaker of the House of 
Commons, presiding over the famous assembly styled the Black 
or Long Parliament of the Reformation, which abolished the 
papal jurisdiction. The same year he headed a deputation of 
the Commons to the king to complain of Bishop Fisher's speech 
against their proceedings. He interpreted the king's " moral " 
scruples to parliament concerning his marriage with Catherine, 

f and made himself the instrument of the king in the attack upon 
the clergy and the preparation of the act of supremacy. In 
1 53 1 he had been made a serjeant-at-law and king's Serjeant; 
and on the 20th of May 1532 he was knighted, and succeeded 
Sir Thomas More as lord keeper of the great seal, being appointed 
lord chancellor on the 26th of January 1533. He supported the 
king's divorce from Catherine and the marriage with Anne 
Boleyn; and presided at the trial of Fisher and More in 1535, 
at which his conduct and evident intention to secure a conviction 
has been generally censured. Next year he tried Anne Boleyn 
and her lovers, was present on the scaffold at the unfortunate 
queen's execution, and recommended to parliament the new act 
of succession. In 1537 he condemned to death as traitors the 
Lincolnshire and the Yorkshire rebels. On the 29th of November 
1538 he was created Baron Audley of Walden; and soon after- 
wards presided as lord steward at the trials of Henry Pole, 
Lord Montacute, and of the unfortunate marquess of Exeter. 
In 1539, though inclining himself to the Reformation, he made 
himself the king's instrument in enforcing religious conformity, 
and in the passing of the Six Articles Act. On the 24th of 
April 1 540 he was made a knight of the Garter, and subsequently 
managed the attainder of Thomas Cromwell, earl of Essex, and 

• the dissolution of Henry's marriage with Anne of Cleves. In 
1542 he warmly supported the privileges of the Commons in the 



case of George Ferrers, member for Plymouth, arrested and 
imprisoned in London, but his conduct was inspired as usual 
by subservience to the court, which desired to secure a subsidy, 
and his opinion that the arrest was a flagrant contempt has been 
questioned by good authority. He resigned the great seal on 
the 21st of April 1544, and died on the 30th, being buried at 
Saffron Walden, where he had prepared for himself a splendid 
tomb. He received several grants of monastic estates, including 
the priory of Christ Church in London and the abbey of Walden 
in Essex, where his grandson, Thomas Howard, earl of Suffolk, 
built Audley End, doubtless named after him. In 1542 he 
re-endowed and re-established Buckingham College, Cambridge, 
under the new name of St Mary Magdalene, and ordained in the 
statutes that his heirs, " the possessors of the late monastery of 
Walden," should be visitors of the college in perpetuum. A Book 
of Orders for the Warre both by Sea and Land (Harleian MS. 297, 
f. 144) is attributed to his authorship. He married (1) Christina, 
daughter of Sir Thomas Barnardiston, and (2) Elizabeth, 
daughter of Thomas Grey, marquess of Dorset, by whom he 
had two daughters. His barony became extinct at his death. 

AUDOUIN, JEAN VICTOR (1797-1841), French naturalist, 
was born at Paris on the 27th of April 1797. He began the study 
of law, but was diverted from it by his strong predilection for 
natural history, and entered the medical profession. In 1824 
he was appointed assistant to P. A. Latreille (1762-1833) in 
the entomological chair at the Paris museum of natural history, 
and succeeded him in 1833. In 1838 he became a member of the 
Academy of Sciences. He died in Paris on the 9th of November 
1 84 1. His principal work, Histoire des insectes nuisibles & la 
■eigne (1842), was completed after his death by Henry Milne- 
Edwards and Emile Blanchard. His papers mostly appeared in 
the Annates des sciences naturelles, which, with A. T. Brongniart 
and J. B. A. Dumas, he founded in 1824, and in the proceedings 
of the Societe Entomologique de France, of which he was one of 
the founders in 1832. 

AUDRAN, the name of a family of French artists and en- 
gravers. The first who devoted himself to the art of engraving 
was Claude Audran, born 1597, and the last was Benoit, Claude's 
great-grandson, who died in 1772. The two most distinguished 
members of the family are Gerard and Jean. 

Gerard, or Girard, Audran, the most celebrated French 
engraver, was the third son of Claude Audran, and was born at 
Lyons in 1640. He was taught the first principles of design 
and engraving by his father; and, following the example of his 
brother, went to Paris to perfect himself in his art. He there, 
in 1666, engraved for Le Brun " Constantine's Battle with 
Maxentius," his " Triumph," and the " Stoning of Stephen," 
which gave great satisfaction to the painter, and placed Audran 
in the very first rank of engravers at Paris. Next year he set 
out for Rome, where he resided three years, and engraved 
several fine plates. That great patron of the arts, J. B. Colbert, 
was so struck with the beauty of Audran's works, that he per- 
suaded Louis XIV. to recall him to Paris. On his return he 
applied himself assiduously to engraving, and was appointed 
engraver to the king, from whom he received great encourage- 
ment. In the year 1681 he was admitted to the council of this 
Royal Academy. He died at Paris in 1703. His engravings 
of Le Brun's " Battles of Alexander " are regarded as the best 
of his numerous works. " He was," says the Abbe Fontenay, 
" the most celebrated engraver that ever existed in the historical 
line. We have several subjects, which he engraved from his 
own designs, that manifested as much taste as character and 
facility. But in the ' Battles of Alexander ' he surpassed even 
the expectations of Le Brun himself." Gerard published in 
1683 a work entitled Les Proportions du corps humain mesuries 
sur les plus belles figures de I'antiquite. 

Jean Audran, nephew of Gerard, was born at Lyons in 1667. 
After having received instructions from his father, he went to 
Paris to perfect himself in the art of engraving under his uncle, 
next to whom he was the most distinguished member of his family. 
At the age of twenty his genius began to display itself in a 
surprising manner; and his subsequent success was such, that 



AUDRAN— AUERBACH 



899 



in 1707 he obtained the title of engraver to the king, Louis XIV., 
who allowed him a pension, with apartments in the Gobelins; 
and the following year he was made a member of the Royal 
Academy. He was eighty years of age before he quitted the 
graver, and nearly ninety when he died. The best prints of 
this artist are those which appear not so pleasing to the eye at 
first sight. In these the etching constitutes a great part; and 
he has finished them in a bold, rough style. The " Rape of the 
Sabines," after Poussin, is considered his masterpiece. 

AUDRAN, EDMOND (1842-1901), French musical composer, 
was born at Lyons on the 1 ith of April 1842. He studied music 
at the Ecole Niedermeyer, where he won the prize for composition 
in 1859. Two years later he accepted the post of organist of 
the church of St Joseph at Marseilles. He made his first appear- 
ance as a dramatic composer at Marseilles with L'Ours et le Pacha 
(1862), a musical version of one of Scribe's vaudevilles. This 
was followed by La Chercheuse d'Esprit (1864), a comic opera, 
also produced at Marseilles. Audran wrote a funeral march 
on the death of Meyerbeer, which was performed with some 
success, and made various attempts to win fame as a writer of 
sacred music. He produced a mass (Marseilles, 1873), an 
oratorio, La Sulamite (Marseilles, 1876), and numerous minor 
works, but he is known almost entirely as a composer of the 
lighter forms of opera. His first Parisian success was made 
with Les Noces d'Olivette (1879), a work which speedily found 
its way to London and (as Olivette) ran for more than a year at 
the Strand theatre (1880-1881). Audran's music has, in fact, 
met with as much favour in England as in France, and all save 
a few of his works have been given in a more or less adapted 
form in London theatres. Besides those already mentioned, 
the following have been the most undeniably successful of 
Audran's many comic operas: Le Grand Mogol (Marseilles, 
1876; Paris, 1884; London, as The Grand Mogul, 1884), La 
Mascotte (Paris, 1880; London, as The Mascotte, 1881), Gillette 
de Narbonne (Paris, 1882; London, as Gillette, 1883), La Cigale 
et la Fourmi (Paris, 1886; London, as La Cigale, 1890), Miss 
Hilyett (Paris, 1890; London, as Miss Decima i89i),La Poupte 
(Paris, 1896; London, 1897). Audran was one of the best 
of the successors of Offenbach. He had little of Offenbach's 
humour, but his music is distinguished by an elegance and a 
refinement of manner which lift it above the level of opera bouffe 
to the confines of genuine op6ra comique. He was a fertile if not 
a very original melodist, and his orchestration is full of variety, 
without being obtrusive or vulgar. Many of his operas, La 
Mascotte in particular, reveal a degree of musicianship which 
is rarely associated with the ephemeral productions of the lighter 
stage. He died in Paris on the 16th of August 1901. 

AUDREHEM, ARNOUL D* (c. 1305-1370), French soldier, was 
born at Audrehem, in the present department of Pas de Calais, 
near St Omer. Nothing is known of his career before 1332, when 
he is heard of at the court of the king of France. Between 
1335 and 1342 he went three times to Scotland to aid King 
David Bruce in his wars. In 1342 he became captain for the 
king of France in Brittany; then he seems to have served in the 
household of the duke of Normandy, and in 1346, as one of the 
main defenders of Calais, was taken as a prisoner to England 
by Edward III. From 1349 he holds an important place in the 
military history of France, first as captain in Angouleme, and 
from June 1351, in succession to the lord of Beaujeu, as marshal 
of France. In March 1352 he was appointed lieutenant for the 
king in the territory between the Loire and the Dordogne, in 
June 1353 in Normandy, and in 1355 in Artois, Picardy and the 
Boulonnais. It was Audrehem who arrested Charles the Bad, 
king of Navarre, and his partisans, at the banquet given by the 
dauphin at Rouen in 1356. At Poitiers he was one of those who 
advised King John to attack the English, and, charging in the 
front line of the French army, was slightly wounded and taken 
prisoner. From England he was several times given safe-conducts 
to France, and he took an active part in the negotiations for 
the treaty of Bretigny, recovering his liberty the same time as 
King John. In 1361, as the king's lieutenant in Languedoc, he 
prevented the free companies from seizing the castles, and 



negotiated the treaty with their chiefs under which they followed 
Henry, count of Trastamara (later Henry II. of Castile), into 
Spain. In 1365 he himself joined du Guesclin in the expedition 
to Spain, was taken prisoner with him by the Black Prince at 
the battle of Najera (1367), and was unable to pay his ransom 
until 1369. In 1368, on account of his age, he was relieved of 
the office of marshal, being appointed bearer of the oriflamme, 
with a pension of 2000 livres. He was sent to Spain in 1370 by 
Charles V., to urge his friend du Guesclin to return to France, 
and in spite of his age he took part in the battle of Pontvallain 
(December 1370), but fell ill and died, probably at Saumur, 
in the latter part of December 1370. 

See £mile Molinier, " Etude sur la vie d'Arnoul d'Audrehem, 
marechal de France," in Menioires presentes par divers savants d, 
Vacademie des inscriptions et belles-lettres, 2 serie, iv. (1883). 

AUDUBON, JOHN JAMES (1780-1851), American naturalist, 
is said to have been born on the 5th of May 1780 in Louisiana, 
his father being a French naval officer and his mother a Spanish 
Creole. He was educated in Paris, where he had lessons from 
the painter, J. L. David. Returning to America in 1798 he 
settled on a farm near Philadelphia, and gave himself up to the, 
study of natural history, and especially to drawing birds. In 
1826 he went to England in the hope of getting his drawings 
published, and by the following year he had obtained sufficient 
subscribers to enable him to begin the publication of his Birds 
of America, which on its completion in 1838 consisted of 435 
coloured plates, containing 1055 figures of birds the size of life. 
Cuvier called it " le plus magnifique monument que l'art ait encore 
elev6 a. la nature." The descriptive matter to accompany the 
plates appeared at Edinburgh in 5 vols, from 1831 to 1839 under 
the title of American Ornithological Biography. During the 
publication of these works Audubon divided his time between 
Great Britain and America, devoting his leisure to expeditions 
to various parts of the United States and Canada for the purpose 
of collecting new material. In 1842 he bought an estate on the 
Hudson, now Audubon Park in New York City. In 1844 he pub- 
lished in America a popular octavo edition of his Birds of A merica. 
He also took up the preparation of a new work, The Quadrupeds 
of America, with the collaboration of John Bachman, the publica- 
tion of which was begun in New York in 1846 and finished in 
1853-1854. He died at New York on the 27th of January 1851. 

See Ornithology; also Audubon and his Journals (1897), by his 
grand-daughter Maria R. Audubon, with notes by Elliot Coues. 

AUE, a town of Germany, in the kingdom of Saxony, at the 
confluence of the Mulde and Schwarzwasser, 21 m. S.W. from 
Chemnitz on the railway to Adorf. It has a school of lace- 
making, foundries, and manufactures of machinery, tin-plate 
and cotton goods. Pop. (1905) 17,102. 

AUERBACH, BERTHOLD (181 2-1882), German novelist, was 
born on the 28th of February 1812 at Nordstetten in the 
Wiirttemberg Black Forest. His parents were Jews, and he 
was intended for the ministry; but after studying philosophy 
at Tubingen, Munich and Heidelberg, and becoming estranged 
from Jewish orthodoxy by the study of Spinoza, he devoted 
himself to literature. He made a fortunate beginning in a 
romance on the life of Spinoza (1837), so interesting in itself, 
and so close in its adherence to fact, that it may be read with 
equal advantage as a novel or as a biography. Dichter und 
Kaufmann followed in 1839, and a translation of Spinoza's 
works in 1841, when Auerbach turned to the class of fiction 
which has made him famous, the Schwarzwalder Dorfgeschichten 
(1843), stories of peasant life in the Black Forest. In these, 
as well as in Barfilssele (1856), Edelweiss (1861), and other 
novels of greater compass, he depicts the life of the south German 
peasant as " Jeremias Gotthelf " (Albrecht Bitzius) had painted 
the peasantry of Switzerland, but in a less realistic spirit. When 
this vein was exhausted Auerbach returned to his first phase 
as a philosophical novelist, producing Auf der Hohe (1865), 
Das Landhaus am Rhein (1869), and other romances of profound 
speculative tendencies, turning on plots invented by himself. 
With the exception of Auf der Hohe, these works did not enjoy 
much popularity, and suffer from lack of form and concentration. 



goo 



AUERSPERG— AUGEREAU 



Auerbach's fame continues to rest upon his Dorfgeschichten, 
although the celebrity of even these has been impaired by the 
growing demand for a more uncompromising realism. Auerbach 
died at Cannes on the 8th of February 1882. 

The first collected edition of Auerbach's Schriften appeared in 
22 vols, in 1863-1864; the best edition is in 18 vols. (1892-1895). 
Auerbach's Briefe an seinen Freund J. Auerbach (with a preface by 
F. Spielhagen) were published in 2 vols. (1884). See E. Zabel, 
B. Auerbach (1882); and E. Lasker, B. Auerbach, ein Gedenkblatt 
(1882). 

AUERSPERG, ANTON ALEXANDER, Graf von (1806-1876), 
Austrian poet, who wrote under the pseudonym of Anastasitjs 
Grun, was born on the 1 ith of April 1806, at Laibach, the capital 
of the Austrian duchy of Carniola, and was head of the Thurn-am- 
Hart branch of the Carniolan cadet line of the house of Auersperg. 
He received his university education first at Graz and then at 
Vienna, where he studied jurisprudence. In 1830 he succeeded 
to his ancestral property, and in 1832 appeared as a member 
of the estates of Carniola on the Herrenbank of the diet at 
Laibach. Here he distinguished himself by his outspoken 
criticism of the Austrian government, leading the opposition 
of the duchy to the exactions of the central power. In 1832 
the title of " imperial chamberlain " was conferred upon him s 
and in 1839 he married Maria, daughter of Count Attems. After 
the revolution of 1848 at Vienna he represented the district of 
Laibach at the German national assembly at Frankfort-on-the- 
Main, to which he tried in vain to persuade his Slovene com- 
patriots to send representatives. After a few months, however, 
disgusted with the violent development of the revolution, he 
resigned his seat, and again retired into private life. In i860 
he was summoned to the remodelled Reichsrat by the emperor, 
who next year nominated him a life member of the Austrian 
upper house (Herrenhaus), where, while remaining a keen up- 
holder of the German centralized empire, as against the federalism 
of Slavs and Magyars, he greatly distinguished himself as one 
of the most intrepid and influential supporters of the cause of 
liberalism, in both political and religious matters, until his death 
at Graz on the 12th of September 1876. 

Count Auersperg's first publication, a collection of lyrics, 
Blatter der Liebe (1830), showed little originality; but his second 
production, Der letzte Ritter (1830), brought his genius to light. 
It celebrates the deeds and adventures of the emperor Maxi- 
milian I. (1493-1519) in a cycle of poems written in the strophic 
form of the Nibelungenlied. But Auersperg's fame rests almost 
exclusively on his political poetry; two collections entitled 
Spaziergdnge eines Wiener Poeten (1831) and' Schutt (1835) 
created a sensation in Germany by their originality and bold 
liberalism. These two books, which are remarkable not merely 
for their outspoken opinions, but also for their easy versification 
and powerful imagery, were the forerunners of the German 
political poetry of 1840-1848. His Gedichte (1837), if anything, 
increased his reputation; his epics, Die Nibelungen im Frack 
(1843) and Der Pfaff vom Kohlenberg (1850), are characterized 
by a fine ironic humour. He also produced masterly translations 
of the popular Slovenic songs current in Carniola (Volkslieder 
aus Krain, 1850), and of the English poems relating to " Robin 
Hood " (1864). 

Anastasius Griin's Gesammelte Werke were published by L. A. 
Frankl in 5 vols. (Berlin, 1877); his Briefwechsel mit L. A. Frankl 
(Berlin, 1897). A selection of his Politische Reden und Schriften 
has been published by S. Hock (Vienna, 1906). See P. von Radics, 
Anastasius Griin (2nd ed., Leipzig, 1879). 

AUFIDENA, an ancient city of the Samnites Caraceni, the site 
of which is just north of the modern Alfedena, 1 Italy, a station 
on the railway between Sulmona and Isernia, 37 m. from the 
latter. Its remains are fully and accurately described by 
L. Mariani in Monumenti dei Lincei (1901), 225 seq. : cf. Notizie 
degli scam, 1901, 442 seq.; 1902, 516 seq. The ancient city 
occupied two hills, both over 3800 ft. above sea-level (in the valley 
between were found the supposed remains of the later forum), 
and the walls, of rough Cyclopean work, were over a mile in 

1 Two churches here contain paintings of interest in the history of 
Abruzzese art, and one of them, the Madonna del Campo, contained 
fragments of a temple of considerable size. 



length. A fortified outpost lay on a still higher hill to the north. 
Not very much is as yet known of the city itself (though one 
public building of the 5th century B.C. was excavated in: 1901, 
and a small sanctuary in 1902), attention having been chiefly 
devoted to the necropolis which lay below it; 1400 tombs had 
already been examined in 1908, though this number is con- 
jectured to be only a sixteenth of the whole. They are all 
inhumation burials, of the advanced iron age, and date from the 
7th to the 4th century B.C., falling into three classes — those 
without coffin, those with a coffin formed of stone slabs, and 
those with a coffin formed of tiles. The objects discovered are 
preserved in a museum on the spot. In the Roman period we 
find Aufidena figuring as a post station on the road between 
Sulmo and Aesernia, which, however, runs past Castel di Sangro, 
crossing the river by an ancient bridge some 5 m. to the north- 
east. Castel di Sangro has remains of ancient walls, but these 
are attributed to a road by Mariani, and in any case the fortified 
area there was quite small, only one-sixteenth the size of Aufidena. 
The attempted identification of Castel di Sangro with Aufidena 
must therefore be 'rejected, though we must allow that it was 
probably the Roman post station; the ancient city, since its 
capture by the Romans in the 3rd century B.C., having lost 
something of its importance. (T. As.) 

AUGEAS, or Augeias, in Greek legend, a son of Helios, the 
sun-god, and king of the Epeians in Elis. He possessed an im- 
mense wealth of herds, including twelve bulls sacred to Helios, 
and white as swans. Eurystheus imposed upon Heracles the 
task of clearing out all his stalls unaided in one day. This he 
did by turning the rivers Alpheus and Peneus through them. 
Augeas had promised him a tenth of the herd, but refused this, 
alleging that Heracles had acted only in the service of Eurys- 
theus. Heracles thereupon sent an army against him, and, 
though at first defeated, finally slew Augeas and his sons. 

Apollodorus ii. 5, 7; Pindar, Olympia, xi, 24; Diodorus iv. 13; 
Theocritus, Idyll 25. 

AUGER (from the O. Eng. nafu-gdr, nave-borer; the original 
initial n having been lost, as in " adder," through a confusion 
in the case of a preceding indefinite article), a tool for boring 
(q.v.) or drilling. 

AUGEREAU, PIERRE FRANCOIS CHARLES, duke of 
Castiglione (1757-1816), marshal of France, was born in Paris 
in a humble station of life. At the age of seventeen he enlisted in 
the carabineers and thereafter came into note as a duellist. 
Having drawn his sword upon an officer who insulted him, he fled 
from France and roamed about in the Levant. He served in the 
Russian army against the Turks; but afterwards escaped into 
Prussia and enlisted in the guards. Tiring of this, he deserted 
with several others and reached the Saxon frontier. Service in 
the Neapolitan army and a sojourn in Portugal filled up the years 
1788-1791; but the events of the French Revolution brought 
him back to his native land. He served with credit against the 
.Vendeans and then joined the troops opposing the Spaniards in 
the south. There he rose rapidly, becoming general of division 
on the 23rd of December 1793. His division distinguished itself 
even more when transferred to the army of Italy; and under 
Bonaparte he was largely instrumental in gaining the battle of 
Millesimo and in taking the castle of Cosseria and the camp of 
Ceva. At the battle of Lodi (May 10, 1796), the turning move- 
ment of Augereau and his division helped to decide the day. 
But it was at Castiglione that he rendered the most signal 
services. Marbot describes him as encouraging even Bonaparte 
himself in the confused situation that prevailed before that battle, 
and, though this is exaggerated, there is no doubt that Augereau 
largely decided the fortunes of those critical days. Bonaparte 
thus summed up his military qualities: " Has plenty of char- 
acter, courage, firmness, activity; is inured to war; is well liked 
hy the soldiery; is fortunate in his queries." In 1797 Bona-
parte sent him to Paris to encourage the Jacobinical Directors, 
and it was Augereau and the troops led by him that coerced 
the " moderates " in the councils and carried through the coup 
d'etat of 18 Fructidor (4th of September) 1797. He was then 
sent to lead the united French forces in Germany; but peace 



AUGHRIM— AUGITE 



901 



speedily ensued; and he bore a grudge against the Directors and 
Bonaparte for their treatment of him at that time. He took 
no part in the coup d'etat of Brumaire 1799, and did not dis- 
tinguish himself in the Rhenish campaign which ensued. Never- 
theless, owing to his final adhesion to Bonaparte's fortunes, he 
received a marshal's baton at the beginning of the Empire 
(May 19, 1804). In the campaign of 1805 he did good service 
around Constance and Bregenz, and at Jena (October 14, 1806) 
his corps distinguished itself. Early in 1807 he fell ill of a fever, 
and at the battle of Eylau he had to be supported on his horse, 
but directed the movements of his corps with his wonted bravery. 
His corps was almost annihilated and the marshal himself 
received a wound from which he never quite recovered. When 
transferred to Catalonia, he gained some successes but tarnished 
his name by cruelty. In the campaign of 181 2 in Russia and in 
the Saxon campaign of 1813 his conduct was little more than 
mediocre. Before the battle of Leipzig (October 16, 18, 19, 1813), 
Napoleon reproached him with not being the Augereau of 
Castiglione; to which he replied, " Give me back the old soldiers 
of Italy, and I will show you that I am." In 1814 he had com- 
mand of the army of Lyons, and his slackness exposed him to 
the charge of having come to an understanding with the Austrian 
invaders. Thereafter he served Louis XVIII. , but, after reviling 
Napoleon, went over to him during the Hundred Days. The 
emperor repulsed him and charged him with being a traitor to 
France in 1814. Louis XVIII. , when restored to the throne, 
deprived him of his military title and pension. He died at his 
estate of La Houssaye on the 12th of June 1816. In person he 
was tall and commanding, but his loud and vulgar behaviour 
frequently betrayed the soldier of fortune. 

As authorities consult: Kock's Memoires de Massena; Bouvier, 
Bonaparte en Italie; Count A. F. Andreossi, La Campagne sur le 
Mein, 1800-1801 ; Baron A. Ducasse, Precis de la campagne de 
Varmee de Lyon en 1814; and the Memoirs of Marbot. (J. Hl. R.) 

AUGHRIM, or Aghrim, a small village in Co. Galway, 
Ireland, 4 m. W. by S. of Ballinasloe. It is rendered memorable 
by the decisive victory gained here on the 12th of July 1691 by 
the forces of William III. under General Ginkel, over those of 
James II. under the French general St Ruth, who fell in the fight. 
The Irish numbering 25,000, and strongly posted behind marshy 
ground, at first maintained a vigorous resistance; but Ginkel 
having penetrated their line of defence, and their general being 
struck down by a cannon ball at this critical moment, they were at 
length overcome and routed with terrible slaughter. The loss of 
the English did not exceed 700 killed and 1000 wounded; while 
the Irish, in their disastrous flight, lost about 7000 men, besides 
the whole material of the army. This defeat rendered the ad- 
herents of James in Ireland incapable of further efforts, and was 
speedily followed by the complete submission of the country. 

AUGIER, GUILLAUME VICTOR EMILE (1820-1889), French 
dramatist, was born at Valence, Dr6me, on the 17th of September 
1820. He was the grandson of Pigault Lebrun, and belonged 
to the well-to-do bourgeoisie in principles and in thought as well 
as by actual birth. He received a good education and studied 
for the bar. In 1844 he wrote a play in two acts and in verse, 
La Cigue, refused at the Theatre Francais, but produced with 
considerable success at the Odeon. This settled his career. 
Thenceforward, at fairly regular intervals, either alone or in 
collaboration with other writers — Jules Sandeau, Eugene- 
Marie Labiche, fid. Foussier — he produced plays which were 
in their way eventful. Le Fils de Giboyer (1862) — which was 
regarded as an attack on the clerical party in France, and was 
only brought out by the direct intervention of the emperor — 
caused some political excitement. His last comedy, Les Four- 
chambault, belongs to the year 1879. After that date he wrote 
no more, restrained by an honourable fear of producing inferior 
work. The Academy had long before, on the 31st of March 
1857, elected him to be one of its members. He died in his 
house at Croissy on the 25th of October 1889. Such, in briefest 
outline, is the story of a life which Augier himself describes as 
" without incident " — a life in all senses honourable. Augier, 
with Dumas fils and Sardou, may be said to have held the 



French stage during the Second Empire. The man respected 
himself and his art, and his art on its ethical side — for he did not 
disdain to be a teacher — has high qualities of rectitude and self- 
restraint. Uprightness of mind and of heart, generous honesty, 
as Jules Lemaitre well said, constituted the very soul of all 
his dramatic work. L' Aventuriere (1848), the first of Augier's 
important works, already shows a deviation from romantic 
models; and in the Mariage d'Olympe (1855) the courtesan is 
shown as she is, not glorified as in Dumas's Dame aux Camillas. 
In Gabrielle (1849) the husband, not the lover, is the sympathetic, 
poetic character. In the Lionnes pauvres (1858) the wife who 
sells her favours comes under the lash. Greed of gold, social 
demoralization, ultramontanism, lust of power, these are satirized 
in Les Ejjrontes (1861), Le Fils de Giboyer (1862), Contagion, 
first announced under the title of Le Baron d'Estrigaud (1866), 
Lions et renards (1869) — which, with Le Gendre de M. Poirier 
(1854), written in collaboration with Jules Sandeau, reach the 
high-water mark of Augier's art; in Philiberte (1853) he pro- 
duced a graceful and delicate drawing-room comedy; and in 
Jean de Thommeray, acted in 1873 after the great reverses of 
1870, the regenerating note of patriotism rings high and clear. 
His last two dramas, Madame Caverlet (1876) and Les Fourcham- 
bault (1879), are problem plays. But it would be unfair to 
suggest that Emile Augier was a preacher only. He was a 
moralist in the great sense, the sense in which the term can be 
applied to Moliere and the great dramatists — a moralist because 
of his large and sane outlook on life. Nor does the interest of 
his dramas depend on elaborate plot. It springs from character 
and its evolution. His men and women move as personality, 
that mysterious factor, dictates. They are real, several of them 
typical. Augier's first drama, La Cigue, belongs to a time (1844) 
when the romantic drama was on the wane; and his almost 
exclusively domestic range of subject scarcely lends itself to lyric 
outbursts of pure poetry. But his verse, if not that of a great 
poet, has excellent dramatic qualities, while the prose of his prose 
dramas is admirable for directness, alertness, sinew and a large 
and effective wit. Perhaps it wanted these qualities to enlist 
laughter on his side in such a war as he waged against false 
passion and false sentiment. (F. T. M.) 

AUGITE, an important member of the pyroxene (q.v.) group 
of rock-forming minerals. The name (from avyfj, lustre) has 
at various times been used in different senses; it is now applied 
to aluminous pyroxenes of the monoclinic series which are dark- 
greenish, brownish or black in colour. Like the other pyroxenes 
it is characterized crystallographically by its distinct cleavages 
parallel to the prism-faces (M), the angle between which is 87 . 
A typical crystal is represented in fig. 1, whilst fig. 2 shows a 
crystal twinned on 
the orthopinacoid (/). 
Such crystals, of short 
prismatic habit and 
black in colour, are 
common as pheno- 
crysts in many basalts, 
and are hence known 
as " basaltic augite ": 
when the containing 
rock weathers to a 
clayey material the 
augite is left as black 
isolated crystals, and 
such specimens, usually from Bohemia, are represented in all 
mineral collections. Though typical of basaltic rocks, augite is also 
an important constituent of many other kinds of igneous rocks, and 
a rock composed almost wholly of augite is known as augitite. 
It also occurs in metamorphic rocks; for example, in the 
crystalline limestones of the Fassathal in Tirol, where the 
variety known as fassaite is found as pistachio-green crystals 
resembling epidote in appearance. 

Chemically, augite resembles diopside in consisting mainly 
of CaMgSi 2 6 , but it contains in addition alumina and ferric 
iron as (Mg, Fe") (Al, Fe"")s Si0 6 ; the acmite (NaFe"'Si 8 0«) 




Fig. 1. 



Fig. 2. 



go2 



AUGMENT— AUGSBURG 



and jadeite (NaAlSi 2 0e) molecules are also sometimes present. 
Variations in the amount of iron in mixtures of these isomorphous 
molecules are accompanied by variations in the optical characters 
of the augite. (L. J. S.) 

AUGMENT (Lat. augere, to increase), in Sanskrit and Greek 
grammar the vowel prefixed to indicate the past tenses of a verb ; 
in Greek grammar it is called syllabic, when only the e is pre- 
fixed; temporal, when it causes an initial vowel in the verb to 
become a diphthong or long vowel. 

AUGMENTATION, or enlargement, a term in heraldry for 
an addition to a coat of arms; in music, for the imitation in 
longer notes of an original theme; in biology, an addition to the 
normal number of parts; in Scots law, an increase of a minister's 
stipend by an action called " Process of Augmentation." The 
" Court of Augmentation " in Henry VIII. 's time was established 
to try cases affecting the suppression of monasteries, and was 
dissolved in Mary's reign. 

AUGSBURG, a city and episcopal see of Germany, in the 
kingdom of Bavaria, chief town of the district of Swabia. Pop. 
(1885) 65,905; (1000) 89,109; (1905) 93,882. It lies on a high 
plateau, 1500 ft. above the sea, between the rivers Wertach and 
Lech, which unite below the city, 39 m. W.N.W. from Munich, 
with which, as with Regensburg, Ingolstadt and Ulm, it is 
connected by main lines of railway. It consists of an upper and a 
lower town, the old Jakob suburb and various modern suburbs. 
Its fortifications were dismantled in 1703 and have since been 
converted into public promenades. Maximilian Street is re- 
markable for its breadth and architectural beauty. One of its 
most interesting edifices is the Fugger Haus, of which the entire 
front is painted in fresco. Among the public buildings of Augs- 
burg most worthy of notice is the town-hall in Renaissance style, 
one of the finest in Germany, built by Elias Holl in 1616-1620. 
One of its rooms, called the " Golden Hall," from the profusion 
of its gilding, is 113 ft. long, 59 broad and 53 high. The palace 
of the bishops, where the memorable Confession of Faith was 
presented to Charles V., is now used for government offices. 
Among the seventeen Reman Catholic churches and chapels, the 
cathedra], a basilica with two Romanesque towers, dates in its 
oldest portions from the 10th century. The church of St Ulrich 
and St Afra, built 1474-1500, is a Late Gothic edifice, with a 
nave of magnificent proportions and a tower 300 ft. high. The 
church stands on the spot where the first Christians of the district 
suffered martyrdom, and where a chapel was erected in the 6th 
century over the grave of St Afra. There are also a Protestant 
church, St Anne's, a school of arts, a polytechnic institution, a 
picture gallery in the former monastery of St Catherine, a museum, 
observatory, botanical gardens, an exchange, gymnasium, deaf- 
mute institution, orphan asylum, several remarkable fountains 
dating from the 16th century, &c. Augsburg is particularly well 
provided with special and technical schools. The newer buildings, 
all in the modern west quarter of the city, include law courts, a 
theatre, and a municipal library with .200,000 volumes. The 
" Fuggerei," built in 1519 by the brothers Fugger, is a miniature 
town, with six streets or alleys, three gates and a, church, and 
consists of a hundred and six small houses let to indigent Roman 
Catholic citizens at a nominal rent. The manufactures of Augs- 
burg are of great importance. It is the chief seat of the textile 
industry in south Germany, and its cloth, cotton goods and linen 
manufactories employ about 10,000 hands. It is also noted for 
its bleach and dye works, its engine works, foundries, paper 
factories, and production of silk goods, watches, jewelry, mathe- 
matical instruments, leather, chemicals, &c. Augsburg is also 
the centre of the acetylene gas industry of Germany. Copper- 
engraving, for which it was formerly noted, is no longer carried 
on; but printing, lithography and publishing have acquired a 
considerable development, one of the best-known Continental 
newspapers being the Allgemeine Zeitung or Augsburg Gazette. 
On the opposite side of the river, which is here crossed by a 
bridge, lies the township of Lechhausen. 

Augsburg (the Augusta Vindelicorum of the Romans) derives 
its name from the Roman emperor Augustus, who, on the 
conquest of Rhaetia by Drusus, established here a Roman colony 



about 14 B.C. In the 5th century it was sacked by the Huns, and 
afterwards came under the power of the Frankish kings. It was 
almost entirely destroyed in the war of Charlemagne against 
Tassilo III., duke of Bavaria; and after the dissolution and 
division of that empire, it fell into the hands of the dukes of 
Swabia. After this it rose rapidly into importance as a manu- 
facturing and commercial town, becoming, after Nuremberg, 
the centre of the trade between Italy and the north of Europe; 
its merchant princes, the Fuggers and Welsers, rivalled the 
Medici of Florence; but the alterations produced in the currents 
of trade by the discoveries of the 15th and 16th centuries occa- 
sioned a great decline. In 1 276 it was raised to the rank of a free 
imperial city, which it retained, with many changes in its internal 
constitution, till 1806, when it was annexed to the kingdom of 
Bavaria. Meanwhile, it was the scene of numerous events of 
historical importance. It was besieged and taken by Gustavus 
Adolphus in 1632, and in 1635 it surrendered to the imperial 
forces; in 1703 it was bombarded by the electoral prince of 
Bavaria, and forced to pay a contribution of 400,000 dollars; 
and in the war of 1803 it suffered severely. Of its conventions 
the most memorable are those which gave birth to the Augsburg 
confession (1530) and to the Augsburg alliance (1686). 

See Wagenseil, Geschichte der Stadt Augsburg (Augs., 1820-1822); 
Werner, Geschichte der Stadt Augsburg (1899); Roth, Augsburg'i 
Reformationsgeschichte (1902). 

AUGSBURG, CONFESSION OF, the most important Protestant 
statement of belief drawn up at the Reformation. In summoning 
a diet for April 1530, Charles V. offered a fair hearing to all 
religious parties in the Empire. Luther, Justus Jonas, Melanch- 
thon and Johann Bugenhagen were appointed to draw up a 
statement of the Saxon position. These " Torgau Articles " 
(March 1530) tell merely why Saxony had abolished certain 
ecclesiastical abuses. Melanchthon, however, soon found. that, 
owing to attacks by Johann Eck of Ingolstadt (" 404 Articles "), 
Saxony must state its position in doctrinal matters as well. 
Taking the Articles of Marburg (see Marburg, Colloquy o?) 
and of Schwabach as the point of departure, he repudiated all 
connexion with heretics condemned by the ancient church. 
On the nth of May he sent the draft to Luther, who approved it, 
adding that he himself " could not tread so softly and gently." 
On the 23rd of June the Confession, originally intended as the 
statement of Electoral Saxony alone, was discussed and signed 
by a number of other Protestant princes and cities, and read 
before the diet on the 25th of June. Articles 1-21 attempt 
to show that the Evangelicals had deviated from current doctrine 
only in order to restore the pure and original teaching of the 
church. In spite of significant omissions (the sole authority 
of scripture; rejection of transubstantiation), the Confession 
contains nothing contradictory to Luther's position, and in its 
emphasis on justification by faith alone enunciates a cardinal 
concept of the Evangelical churches. Articles 22-28 describe 
and defend the reformation of various " abuses." On the 3rd 
of August, shorn of much of its original bitterness, the so-called 
Confutatio pontificia was read; it well expresses the views 
approved in substance by the emperor and all the Catholic 
party. In answer, Melanchthon was ordered to prepare an 
Apology of the Confession, which the emperor refused to receive; 
so Melanchthon enlarged it and published the editio princeps 
of both Confession and Apology in 153 1. 

As he felt free to make slight changes, the first edition does not 
represent the exact text of 1530; the edition of 1533 was further 
improved, while that of 1540, rearranged and in part rewritten, is 
known as the Variata. Dogmatic changes in this seem to have drawn 
forth no protest from Luther or Brenz, so Melanchthon made fresh 
alterations in 1542. Later, the Variata of 1540 became the creed 
of the Melanchthonians and even of the Crypto-calvimsts ; so the 
framers of the Formula of Concord, promulgated in 1580, returned 
to the text handed in at the Diet. By mistake they printed from a 
poor copy and not from the original, from which their German text 
varies at over 450 places. Their Latin text, that of Melanchthon s 
editio princeps, is more nearly accurate. The textus receptus is that 
of the Formula of Concord, the divergent Latin and German forms 
being equally binding. 

Acceptance of the Confession and Apology was made a 
condition of membership in the Schmalkalden League. The 



AUGSBURG— AUGURS 



9°3 



Wittenberg Concord (1536) and the Articles of Schmalkalden 
(1537) reaffirmed them. The Confession was the ultimate 
source of much of the Thirty-nine Articles. The Religious 
Peace of Augsburg (1555) recognized no Protestants save ad- 
herents of the Confession; this was modified in 1648. To-day 
the Invariata is of symbolical authority among Lutherans 
generally, while the Variata is accepted by the Reformed 
churches of certain parts of Germany (see Lober, pp. 79-83.) 

Editions of the received text: J. T. Muller, Die symbolischen 
Bucher der evangelisch-lutherischen Kirche (10th ed., Giitersloh, 
1907), with a valuable historical introduction by Th. Kolde; 
Theodor Kolde, Die Augsburgische Konfession (Gotha, 1896), (con- 
tains also the Marburg, Schwabach and Torgau Articles, the Confu- 
tatio and the Variata of 1540). For translations of these, as well as 
of Zwingli's Reckoning of his Faith, and of the Tetrapolitan 
Confession, see H. E. Jacobs, The Book of Concord (Philadelphia, 
1882-83). The texts submitted to the emperor, lost before 1570, 
are reconstructed and compared with the textus receptus by P. 
Tschackert, Die unveranderte Augsburgische Konfession (Leipzig, 
1901). For the genesis of the Confession, see Th. Kolde, Die alteste 
Redaktion der Augsburger Konfession (Giitersloh, 1906), also Kolde's 
article, " Augsburger Bekenntnis," in Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklo- 
pddie (3rd ed., vol. ii., Leipzig, 1897). The standard commentary is 
still G. L. Plitt, Einleitung in die Augustana (Erlangen, 1867 ff.) ; 
compare also J. Ficker, Die Konfuiation des Augsburgischen Bekennt- 
nisses in ihrer ersten Gestalt (Leipzig, 1891); also A. Petzold, 
Die Konfuiation des Vierstddtebekenntnisses (Leipzig, 1900). On 
its present use see G. Leber, Die im evangelischen Deutschland 
geltenden Ordinationsverpflichtungen geschichtlich geordnet (Leipzig, 
1905), 79 ff. (W. W. R.*) 

AUGSBURG, WAR OF THE LEAGUE OF, the name applied 
to the European war of 1688-1697. The league of Augsburg 
was concluded on the 9th of July 1686 by the emperor, the 
elector of Brandenburg and other princes, against the French. 
Spain, Sweden, England and other non-German states joined 
the league, and formed the Grand Alliance by the treaty of 
Vienna (July 12, 1689). (See Grand Alliance, War of the.) 

AUGURS, in ancient Rome, members of a religious college 
whose duty it was to observe and interpret the signs (auspices) 
of approval or disapproval sent by the gods in reference to 
any proposed undertaking. The augures were originally called 
auspices, but, while auspex l fell into disuse and was replaced 
by augur, auspicium was retained as the scientific term for the 
observation of signs. 

The early history of the college is obscure. Its institution 
has been attributed to Romulus or Numa. It probably consisted 
originally of three members, of whom the king himself was one. 
This number was doubled by Tarquinius Priscus, but in 300 B.C. 
it was only four, two places, according to Livy (x. 6), being 
vacant. The Ogulnian law in the same year increased the 
number to nine, five plebeian being added to the four patrician 
members. In the time of Sulla the number was fifteen, which 
was increased to sixteen by Julius Caesar. This number con- 
tinued in imperial times; the college itself was certainly in 
existence as late as the 4th century. The office of augur, which 
was bestowed only upon persons of distinguished merit and was 
much sought after by reason of its political importance, was 
held for life. Vacancies were originally filled by co-optation, 
but by the Domitian law (104) the selection was made, by 
seventeen out of the thirty-five tribes chosen by lot, from 
candidates previously nominated by the college. The insignia 
of office were the lituus, a staff free from knots and bent at the 
top, and the trabea, a kind of toga with bright scarlet stripes 
and a purple border. The science of augury was contained in 
various written works, which were consulted as occasion arose: 
such were the libri augurum, a manual of augural ritual, and 
the commentarii augurum, a collection of decrees or answers 
given by the college to the senate in certain definite cases. 

1 There is no doubt that auspex = avi-spex (" observer of birds "), 
but the derivation of augur is still unsettled. The following have 
been suggested: (1) augur (or augus) is a substantive originally 
meaning " increase " (related to augustus as robur to robustus), 
then transferred to the priest as the giver of increase or blessing; 
(2) =avi-gur, the second part of the word pointing to (a) garrire, 
" chatter," or (b) gerere, the augur being conceived as " carrying " 
or guiding the flight of the birds; (3) from a lost verb augo — ' tell," 
" declare." It is now generally agreed that the science of augury is 
of Italian, not Etruscan, origin. 



The natural region to look to for signs of the will of Jupiter was 
the sky, where lightning and the flight of birds seemed directed 
by him as counsel to men. The latter, however, was the more 
difficult of interpretation, and upon it, therefore, mainly hinged 
the system of divination with which the augurs were occupied. 
It was the duty of the augur, before the auspices properly so 
called (those from the sky and from birds) were taken, to mark 
out with his staff the templum or consecrated space within 
which his observations were intended to be made. The method 
of procedure was as follows. At midnight, when the sky was 
clear and there was an absence of wind, the augur, in the presence 
of a magistrate, took up his position on a hill which afforded 
a wide view. After prayer and sacrifice, he marked out the 
templum both in the sky and on the ground and dedicated it. 
Within its limits he then pitched a tent, in which he sat down 
with covered head, asked the gods for a sign, and waited for an 
answer. As the augur looked south he had the east, the lucky 
quarter, on his left, and therefore signs on the left side were 
considered favourable, those on the right unfavourable. The 
practice was the reverse in Greece ; the observers of signs looked 
towards the north, so that signs on the right were regarded as 
the favourable ones, and this is frequently adopted in the Roman 
poets. The augur afterwards announced the result of his observa- 
tions in a set form of words, by which the magistrate was bound. 
Signs of the will of the gods were of two kinds, either in answer to 
a request (auspicia impetrativa) , or incidental (auspicia oblativa). 
Of such signs there were five classes: (1) Signs in the sky 
(caelestia auspicia), consisting chiefly of thunder and lightning, 
but not excluding falling stars and other phenomena. Lightning 
from left to right was favourable, from right to left unfavourable; 
but on its mere appearance, in either direction, all business in the 
public assemblies was suspended for the day. Since the person 
charged to take the auspices for a certain day was constitutionally 
subject to no other authority who could test the truth or false- 
hood of his statement that he had observed lightning, this became 
a favourite device for putting off meetings of the public assembly. 
Restrictions were, however, imposed in later republican times. 
When a new consul, praetor or quaestor entered on his first day of 
office and prayed the gods for good omens, it was a matter of 
custom to report to him that lightning from the left had been 
seen. (2) Signs from birds (signa ex avibus), with reference to the 
direction of their flight, and also to their singing, or uttering other 
sounds. To the first class, called alites, belonged the eagle and 
the vulture; to the second, called oscines, the owl, the crow and 
the raven. The mere appearance of certain birds indicated good 
or ill luck, while others had a reference only to definite persons or 
events. In matters of ordinary life on which divine counsel was 
prayed for, it was usual to have recourse to this form of divination. 
For public affairs it was, by the time of Cicero, superseded by the 
fictitious observation of lightning. (3) Feeding of birds {aus- 
picia ex tripudiis) , which consisted in observing whether a bird— 
usually a fowl — on grain being thrown before it, let fall a particle 
from its mouth (tripudium sollistimum) . If it did so, the will of 
the gods was in favour of the enterprise in question. The 
simplicity of this ceremony recommended k for very general use, 
particularly in the army when on service. The fowls were kept in 
cages by a servant, styled pullarius. In imperial times decuriales 
pullarii are mentioned. (4) Signs from animals (pedestria 
auspicia, or ex quadrupedibus) , i.e. observation of the course of, 
or sounds uttered by, quadrupeds and reptiles within a fixed 
space, corresponding to the observations of the flight of birds, 
but much less frequently employed. It had gone out of use by 
the time of Cicero. (5) Warnings (signa ex diris), consisting of 
all unusual phenomena, but chiefly such as boded ill. Being 
accidental in their occurrence, they belonged to the auguria 
oblativa, and their interpretation was not a matter for the augurs, 
unless occurring in the course of some public transaction, in 
which case they formed a divine veto against it. Otherwise, 
reference was made for an interpretation to the pontifices in olden 
times,af terwards frequently to the Sibylline books,or the Etruscan 
haruspices, when the incident was not already provided for by a 
rule, as, for example, that it was unlucky for a person leaving his 



9°4 



AUGUST— AUGUSTA 



house to meet a raven, that the sudden death of a person from 
epilepsy at a public meeting was a sign to break up the assembly. 

Among the other means of discovering the will of the gods were 
the casting of lots, oracles of Apollo (in the hands of the college 
sacris faciundis), but chiefly the examination of the entrails of 
animals slain for sacrifice (see Omen). Anything abnormal 
found there was brought under the notice of the augurs, but 
usually the Etruscan haruspices were employed for this. The 
persons entitled to ask for an expression of the divine will on 
a public affair were the magistrates. To the highest offices, 
including all persons of consular and praetorian rank, belonged 
the right of taking auspicia maxima; to the inferior offices of 
aedile and quaestor, the auspicia minora; the differences between 
these, however, must have been small. The subjects for which 
auspicia publica were always taken were the election of magis- 
trates, their entering on office, the holding of a public assembly 
to pass decrees, the setting out of an army for war. They could 
only be taken in Rome itself; and in case of a commander 
having to renew his auspicia, he must either return to Rome or 
select a spot in the foreign country to represent the hearth of that 
city. The time for observing auspices was, as a rule, between 
midnight and dawn of the day fixed for any proposed undertaking. 
In military affairs this course was not always possible, as in the 
case of taking auspices before crossing a river. The founding of 
colonies, the beginning of a battle, the calling together an army, 
the sittings of the senate, decisions of peace or war, were occasions, 
not always but frequently, for taking auspices. The place where 
the ceremony was performed was not fixed, but selected with a 
view to the matter in hand. A spot being selected, the official 
charged to make the observation pitched his tent there some 
days before. A matter postponed through adverse signs from 
the gods could on the following or some future day be again 
brought forward for the auspices. If an error (vitium) occurred 
in the auspices, the augurs could, of their own accord or at the 
request of the senate, inform themselves of the circumstances, 
and decree upon it. A consul could refuse to accept their decree 
while he remained in office, but on retiring he could be prosecuted. 
Auspicia oblaliva referred mostly to the comitia. A magistrate 
was not bound to take notice of signs reported merely by a 
private person, but he could not overlook such a report from a 
brother magistrate. For example, if a quaestor on his entry to 
office observed lightning and announced it to the consul, the 
latter must delay the public assembly for the day. 

On the subject generally, see A. Bouche-Leclercq, Histoire de la 
divination dans Vantiquite (1879), and his articles, with bibliography, 
in Daremberg and Saglio's Dictionnaire des antiquites; also articles 
" Augures," "Auspicium," by Wissowa in Pauly's Realencyclopadie 
(II. pt. ii., 1896), and by L. C. Purser (and others) in Smith's Diction- 
ary of Greek and Roman Antiquities (3rd ed., 1890). (See also 
Divination, Omen, Astrology, &c.) 

AUGUST (originally Sextilis), the sixth month in the pre- 
Julian Roman year, which received its present name from the 
emperor Augustus. The preceding month, Quintilis, had been 
called " July " after Julius Caesar, and the emperor chose August 
to be rechristened in his own honour because his greatest good 
fortune had then happened. In that month he had been admitted 
to the consulate, had thrice celebrated a triumph, had received the 
allegiance of the soldiers stationed on the Janiculum, had con- 
cluded the civil wars, and had subdued Egypt. As July contained 
thirty-one days, and August only thirty , it was thought necessary to 
add another day to the latter month, in order that the month of 
Augustus might not be in any respect inferior to that of Julius. 

AUGUSTA, a city and the county-seat of Richmond county, 
Georgia, U.S.A., at the head of steamboat navigation on the 
Savannah river, 132 m. N.W. of Savannah by rail and 240 m. 
by river course. Pop. (1890) 33,300; (1900) 39,441, of whom 
18,487 were negroes and only 995 were foreign-born; (1910 
census) 41,040. Augusta is served by the Southern, the 
Augusta Southern (controlled by the Southern), the Atlantic 
Coast Line, the Charleston & Western Carolina (controlled by 
the Atlantic Coast Line), the Georgia and the Central of Georgia 
railways, by an electric line to Aiken, South Carolina, and by a 
line of steamers to Savannah. The city extends along the river 



bank for a distance of more than 3 m., and is connected by a bridge 
with Hamburg, and with North Augusta, South Carolina, two 
residential suburbs. Augusta is well known as a winter resort 
(mean winter temperature, 47 F.), and there are many fine winter 
homes here of wealthy Northerners. There are good roads, 
stretching from Augusta for miles in almost every direction. 
In North Augusta there is a large hotel, and there is another 
in Summerville (pop. in 1910, 4361), 2\ m. N.W., an attractive 
residential suburb and winter resort, in which there are a country 
club and a large United States arsenal, established in 1831. 
Broad Street is the principal thoroughfare of Augusta, and Greene 
Street, with a park in the centre and flanking rows of oaks and 
elms, is the finest residential street. Of historical interest is 
St Paul's church (Protestant Episcopal); the present building 
was erected in 18 19 and is the third St Paul's church on the 
same site. The first church was " built by the gentlemen of 
Augusta " in 1750. In the crypt of the church General Leonidas 
Polk is buried; and in the churchyard are the graves of George 
Step toe Washington, a nephew of George Washington, and of 
William Longstreet, the inventor. Among the city's principal 
buildings are the Federal building, the Richmond county court 
house, the Augusta orphan asylum, the city hospital, the 
Lamar hospital for negroes, and the buildings of Richmond 
Academy (incorporated in 1783), of the Academy of the Sacred 
Heart (for girls), of Paine's Institute (for negroes), of Houghton 
Institute, endowed in 1852 to be " free to all the children of 
Augusta," and of the medical school of the university of Georgia, 
founded in 1829, and a part of the university since 1873. A 
granite obelisk 50 ft. high was erected in 1861 as a memorial 
to the signers for Georgia of the Declaration of Independence; 
beneath it are buried Lyman Hall (1 726-1 790) and George Walton 
( 1 740-1 804) . There are two Italian marble monuments in honour 
of Confederate soldiers, and monuments to the Southern poets, 
Paul Hamilton Hayne and Richard Henry Wilde (1789-1847). 

In commerce and manufacturing, Augusta ranks second 
among the cities of Georgia. As a centre of trade for the " Cotton 
Belt," it has a large wholesale and retail business; and it is an 
important cotton market. The principal manufacture is cotton 
goods; among the other products are lumber, flour, cotton 
waste, cotton-seed oil and cake, ice, silk, boilers and engines, 
and general merchandise staples. Water-power for factories is 
secured by a system of " water-power canals " from a large dam 
across the Savannah, built in 1847 and enlarged in 1871; the 
principal canal, owned by the city, is so valuable as nearly to 
pay the interest on the municipal debt. In 1905 the value 
of the city's total factory product was $8,829,305, of which 
$3,832,009, or 43-4 %, was the value of the cotton goods. The 
principal newspaper is the Augusta Chronicle, founded in 1785. 

Augusta was established in 1735-1736 by James Edward 
Oglethorpe, the founder of Georgia, and was named in honour 
of the princess of Wales. The Carolina colonists had a trading 
post in its vicinity before the settlement by Oglethorpe. The 
fort, built in 1736, was first named Fort Augusta, and in 1780, 
at the time of the British occupation, was enlarged and renamed 
Fort Cornwallis; its site is now marked by a Memorial Cross, 
erected by the Colonial Dames of Georgia in the churchyard 
of St Paul's. Tobacco was the principal agricultural product 
during the 18th century, and for its culture negro slaves were 
introduced from Carolina, before the restrictions of the Georgia 
Trustees on slavery were removed. During the colonial period 
several treaties with Indians were made at Augusta; by the most 
important, that of 1763, the Choctaws, Creeks, Chickasaws, 
Cherokees and Catawbas agreed (in a meeting with the governors 
of North and South Carolina, Virginia and Georgia) to the terms 
of the treaty of Paris. At the opening of the American War of. 
Independence, the majority of the people of Augusta were 
Loyalists. The town was taken by the British under Lieut.-Col. 
Archibald Campbell (1 739-1 791) in January 1779, but was evacu- 
ated a month later; it was the seat of government of Georgia 
for almost the entire period from the capture of Savannah in 
December 1778 until May 1780, and was then abandoned by the 
Patriots and was occupied chiefly by Loyalists under Lieut.-Col. 



AUGUSTA— AUGUSTAN HISTORY 



905 



Thomas Brown. In September 1780 a force of less than 500 
patriots under Col. Elijah Clarke marched against the town 
in three divisions, and while one division, attacking a neigh- 
bouring Indian camp, drew off most of the garrison, the other two 
divisions entered the town; but British reinforcements arrived 
before Brown could be dislodged from a building in which he had 
taken refuge, and Clarke was forced to withdraw. A stronger 
American force, under Lieut. -Col. Henry Lee, renewed the siege 
in May 1781 and gained possession on the 5th of June. From 
1783 until 1795 Augusta was again the seat of the state govern- 
ment. It was the meeting-place of the Land Court which con- 
fiscated the property of the Loyalists of Georgia, and of the 
convention which ratified for Georgia the Constitution of the 
United States. In 1798 it was incorporated as a town, and in 
181 7 it was chartered as a city. Augusta was the home of the 
inventor, William Longstreet (1759-1814), who as early as 1788 
received a patent from the state of Georgia for a steamboat, 
but met with no practical success until 1808; as early as 1801 
he had made experiments in the application of steam to cotton 
gins and saw-mills at Augusta. Near Augusta, on the site now 
occupied by the Eli Whitney Country Club, Eli Whitney is said 
to have first set up and operated bis cotton gin; he is com- 
memorated by a mural tablet in the court house. The establish- 
ment of a steamboat line to Savannah in 181 7 aided Augusta's 
rapid commercial development. There was a disastrous fire 
in 1829, an epidemic of yellow fever in 1839, and a flood in 1840, 
but the growth of the city was not seriously checked ; the 
cotton receipts of 1846 were 212,019 bales, and in 1847 a cotton 
factory was built. During the Civil War Augusta was the seat 
of extensive military factories, the tall chimney of the Confederate 
powder mills still standing as a memorial. The economic develop- 
ment has, since the Civil War, been steady and continuous. An 
exposition was held in Augusta in 1888, and another in 1893. 

AUGUSTA, the capital of Maine, U.S.A., and the county-seat 
of Kennebec county, on the Kennebec river ' (at the head of navi- 
gation), 44 m. from its mouth, 62 m. by rail N.E. of Portland, 
and 74 m. S.W. of Bangor. Pop. (1890) 10,527; (1900) 
11,683, of whom 2131 were foreign-born; (1910, census) 
13,211. It is served by the Maine Central railway, by several 
electric lines, and by steamboat lines to Portland, Boston and 
several other ports. It is built on a series of terraces, mostly on 
the west bank of the river, which is spanned here by a bridge 
1 100 ft. long. The state house, built of granite quarried in the 
vicinity, occupies a commanding site along the south border of 
the city, and in it is the state library. The Lithgow library 
is a city public library. Near the state house is the former 
residence of James G. Blaine. On the other side of the river, 
nearly opposite, is the Maine insane hospital. Among other 
prominent buildings are the court house, the post office and 
the city hall. In one of the parks is a soldiers' and sailors' 
monument. By means of a dam across the river, 17 ft. high 
and nearly 600 ft. long, good water-power is provided, and the 
city manufactures cotton goods, boots and shoes, paper, pulp 
and lumber. A leading industry is the printing and publishing 
of newspapers and periodicals, several of the periodicals published 
here having an enormous circulation. The total value of the 
factory products in 1905 was $3,886,833. Augusta occupies 
the site of the Indian village, Koussinoc, at which the Plymouth 
Colony established a trading post about 1628. In 1661 Plymouth 
sold its interests, and soon afterward the four purchasers aban- 
doned the post. In 1754, however, their heirs brought about 
the erection here of Fort Western, the main building of which 
is still standing at the east end of the bridge, opposite the city 
hall. Augusta was originally a part of the township of Hallowell 
(incorporated in 1771); in 1797 the north part of Hallowell was 
incorporated as a separate town and named Harrington ; and 
later in the same year the name was changed to Augusta. It 
became the county-seat in 1799 ; was chosen by the Maine 
legislature as the capital of the state in 1827, but was not occupied 
as such until the completion of the state house in 1831 ; and 
was chartered as a city in 1849. 

1 The Kennebec was first explored to this point in 1607. 



AUGUSTA, a seaport of the province of Syracuse, Sicily, 
19 m. N. of it by rail. Pop. (1901) 16,402. It occupies a part 
of the former peninsula of Xiphonia, now a small island, connected 
with the mainland by a bridge. It was founded by the emperor 
Frederick II. in 1232, and almost entirely destroyed by an 
earthquake in 1693, after which it was rebuilt. The castle is 
now a large prison. The fortified port, though unfrequented 
except as a naval harbour of refuge, is a very fine one. There 
are considerable saltworks at Augusta. To the south, on the 
left bank of the Molinello. i|m. from its mouth, Sicel tombs 
and Christian catacombs, and farther up the river a cave village 
of the early middle ages, have been explored {Notizie degli Scavi, 
1902, 411, 631 ; Romische Quartalschrift, 1902, 205). Whether 
there was ever a town bearing the name Xiphonia is doubted 
by E. A. Freeman {Hist, of Sic. i. 583); cf., however, E. Pais, 
Atakta (Pisa, 1891), 55, who attributes its foundation, under the 
name of Tauromenion (which it soon lost), to the Zancleans 
of Hybla (afterwards Megara Hyblaea). (T. As.) 

AUGUSTA BAGIENNORUM, the chief town of the Ligurian 
tribe of the Bagienni, probably identical with the modern Bene 
Vagienna, on the upper course of the Tanaro, about 35 m. due 
south of Turin. The town retained its position as a tribal centre 
in the reorganization of Augustus, whose name it bears, and was 
erected on a systematic plan. Considerable remains of public 
buildings, constructed in concrete faced with small stones with 
bands of brick at intervals, an amphitheatre with a major axis 
of 390 ft. and a minor axis of 305 ft., a theatre with a stage 
1 3 3 ft. in length, and near it the foundations of what was probably 
a basilica, an open space (no doubt the forum), an aqueduct, 
baths, &c, have been discovered by recent excavations, and 
also one of the city gates, flanked by two towers 22 ft. sq. 

See G. Assandria and G. Vacchetta in Notizie degli Scavi ( 1 894) , 155; 
(1896), 215 ; (1897), 441 ; (1898), 299 ; (1900), 389 ; (1901), 413. (T. As.) 

AUGUSTAN HISTORY, the name given to a collection of the 
biographies of the Roman emperors from Hadrian to Carinus 
(a.d. 117-284). The work professes to have been written during 
the reigns of Diocletian and Constantine, and is to be regarded 
as the composition of six authors, — Aelius Spartianus, Julius 
Capitolinus, Aelius Lampridius, Vulcacius Gallicanus, Trebellius 
Pollio and Flavius Vopiscus — known as Scriptores Historiae 
Augustae, writers of Augustan history. It is generally agreed, 
however, that there is a large number of interpolations in the work, 
which are referred to the reign of Theodosius ; and that the 
documents inserted in the lives are almost all forgeries. The more 
advanced school of critics holds that the names of the supposed 
authors are purely fictitious, as those of some of the authorities 
which they profess to quote certainly are. The lives, which 
(with few exceptions) are arranged in chronological order, are 
distributed as follows : — To Spartianus : the biographies of 
Hadrian, Aelius Verus, Didius Julianus, Septimius Severus, 
Pescennius Niger, Caracallus, Geta (?) ; to Vulcacius Gallicanus : 
Avidius Cassius ; to Capitolinus : Antoninus Pius, Marcus 
Aurelius Antoninus, Verus, Pertinax, Clodius Albinus, the two 
Maximins, the three Gordians, Maximus and Balbinus, Opilius 
Macrinus (?) ; to Lampridius : Commodus, Diadumenus, Elaga- 
balus, Alexander Severus; to Pollio: the two Valerians, the 
Gallieni, the so-called Thirty Tyrants or Usurpers, Claudius (his 
lives of Philip, Decius, and Gallus being lost); to Vopiscus: 
Aurelian, Tacitus, Florian, Probus, the four tyrants (Firmus, 
Saturninus, Proculus, Bonosus), Carus, Numerian, Carinus. 

The importance of the Augustan history as a repertory of 
information is very considerable, but its literary pretensions 
are of the humblest order. The writers' standard was con- 
fessedly low. " My purpose," says Vopiscus, " has been to 
provide materials for persons more eloquent than I." Copsider- 
ing the perverted taste of the age, it is perhaps fortunate that the 
task fell into the hands of no showy declaimer who measured 
his success by his skill in making surface do duty for substance, 
but of homely, matter-of-fact scribes, whose sole concern was to 
record what they knew. Their narrative is unmethodical and 
inartificial ; their style is tame and plebeian ; their conception 
of biography is that of a collection of anecdotes ; they have 



906 



AUGUSTA PRAETORIA— AUGUSTI 



no notion of arrangement, no measure of proportion, and no 
criterion of discrimination between the important and the trivial; 
they are equally destitute of critical and of historical insight, 
unable to sift the authorities on which they rely, and unsuspicious 
of the stupendous social revolution comprised within the period 
which they undertake to describe. Their value, consequently, 
depends very much on that of the sources to which they happen to 
have recourse for any given period of history, and on the fidelity 
of their adherence to these when valuable. Marius Maximus and 
Aelius Junius Cordus, to whose qualifications they themselves 
bear no favourable testimony, were their chief authorities for 
the earlier lives of the series. Marius Maximus, who lived about 
165-230, wrote biographies of the emperors, in continuation of 
those of Suetonius, from Nerva to Elagabalus; Junius Cordus 
dealt with the less-known emperors, perhaps down to Maximus 
and Balbinus. The earlier lives, however, contain a substratum 
of authentic historical fact, which recent critics have supposed to 
be derived from a lost work by a contemporary writer, described 
by one of these scholars as " the last great Roman historian." 
For the later lives the Scriptores were obliged to resort more 
largely to public records, and thus preserved matter of the highest 
importance, rescuing from oblivion many imperial rescripts and 
senatorial decrees, reports of official proceedings and speeches 
on public occasions, and a number of interesting and character- 
istic letters from various emperors. Their incidental allusions 
sometimes cast vivid though undesigned light on the circum- 
stances of the age, and they have made large contributions to our 
knowledge of imperial jurisprudence in particular. Even their 
trivialities have their use; their endless anecdotes respecting the 
personal habits of the subjects of their biographies, if valueless to 
the historian, are most acceptable to the archaeologist, and not 
unimportant to the economist and moralist. Their errors and 
deficiencies may in part be ascribed to the contemporary neglect 
of history as a branch of instruction. Education was in the hands 
of rhetoricians and grammarians; historians were read for their 
style, not for their matter, and since the days of Tacitus, none had 
arisen worth a schoolmaster's notice. We thus find Vopiscus 
acknowledging that when he began to write the life of Aurelian, 
he was entirely misinformed respecting the latter's competitor 
Firmus, and implying that he would not have ventured on 
Aurelian himself if he had not had access to the MS. of the 
emperor's own diary in the Ulpian library. The writers' historical 
estimates are superficial and conventional, but report the verdict 
of public opinion with substantial accuracy. The only imputation 
on the integrity of any of them lies against Trebellius Pollio, who, 
addressing his work to a descendant of Claudius, the successor 
and probably the assassin of Gallienus, has dwelt upon the latter 
versatile sovereign's carelessness and extravagance without ac- 
knowledgment of the elastic though fitful energy he so frequently 
displayed in defence of the empire. The caution of Vopiscus's 
references to Diocletian cannot be made a reproach to him. 

No biographical particulars are recorded respecting any of 
these writers. From their acquaintance with Latin and Greek 
literature they must have been men of letters by profession, and 
very probably secretaries or librarians to persons of distinction. 
There seems no reason to accept Gibbon's contemptuous estimate 
of their social position. They appear particularly versed in law. 
Spartianus's reference to himself as " Diocletian's own " seems to 
indicate that he was a domestic in the imperial household. They 
address their patrons with deference, acknowledging their own 
deficiencies, and seem painfully conscious of the profession of 
literature having fallen upon evil days. 

Editio princeps (Milan, 1475) ; Casaubon (1603) showed great 
critical ability in his notes, but for want of a good MS. left the restora- 
tion of the text to Salmasius (1620), whose notes are a most remark- 
able monument of erudition, combined with acuteness in verbal 
criticism and general vigour of intellect. Of recent years considerable 
attention has been devoted by German scholars to the History, 
especially by Peter, whose edition of the text in the Teubner series 
(2nd ed., 1884) contains (praef. xxxv.-xxxvii.) a bibliography of 
works on the subject preceding the publication of his own special 
treatise. The edition by Jordan-F.yssenhardt (1863) should also be 
mentioned. Amongst the most recent treatises on the subject are: 
A. Gemoll, Die Scriptores Historiae Augustae (1886); H. Peter, Die 



Scriptores Historiae Augustae (1892); G. Tropea, Sludi sugli Scrip- 
tores Historiae Augustae (1 899-1 903) ; J. M. Heer, Der historische 
Wert der Vita Commodi in der Sammlung der Scriptores Historiae 
Augustae (1901); C. Lecrivain, &udes sur I'histoire Auguste (1904); 
E. Kornemann, Kaiser Hadrian und der letzte grosse Historiker von 
Rom (1905), according to whom " the last great historian of Rome " 
is Lollius tJrbicus; O. Schulz, Das Kaiserhaus der Antonine und der 
letzte Historiker Roms (1907). On their style, see C. Paucker, De 
Latinitate Scriptorum Historiae Augustae (1870) ; special lexicon by 
C. Lessing (1901-1906). An English translation is included in The 
Lives of the Roman Emperors, by John Bernard (1698). See further 
Rome: History (anc. ad fin.), section " Authorities "; M. Schanz, 
Geschichte der romischen Litteratur, iii. p. 69 (for Marius Maximus 
and Junius Cordus), iv. p. 47; Teuffel-Schwabe, Hist, of Roman 
Literature (Eng. tr.), § 392; H. Peter, bibliography from 1893 to 
1905 in Bursian's Jahresbericht, cxxix. (1907). 

AUGUSTA PRAETORIA SALASSORUM (mod. Aosta, q.v.), 
an ancient town of Italy in the district of the Salassi, founded 
by Augustus about 24 B.C. on the site of the camp of Varro 
Murena, who subdued this tribe in 25 B.C., and settled with 
3000 praetorians. Pliny calls it the last town of Italy on the 
north-west, and its position at the confluence of two rivers, at 
the end of the Great and Little St Bernard, gave it considerable 
military importance, which is vouched for by considerable 
remains of Roman buildings. The ancient town walls, enclosing 
a rectangle 793 by 624 yds., are still preserved almost in their 
entire extent. The walls are 21 ft. high. They are built of 
concrete faced with small blocks of stone, and at the bottom 
are nearly 9 ft. thick, and at the top 6 ft. There are towers at 
the angles of the enceinte, and others at intervals, and two at 
each of the four gates, making a total of twenty towers altogether. 
They are roughly 32 ft. square, and project 14 ft. from the wall. 
The Torre del Pailleron on the south and the Torre del Leproso 
in the west are especially well preserved. The east and south 
gates exist (the latter, a double gate with three arches flanked 
by two towers, is the Porta Praetoria, and is especially fine), 
while the rectangular arrangement of the streets perpetuates 
the Roman plan, dividing the town into 16 blocks (insulae). 
The main road, 32 ft. wide, divides the city into two equal 
halves, running from east to west, an arrangement which makes 
it clear that the guarding of the road was the main raison d'Ure 
of the city. Some arcades of the amphitheatre (the diameters 
of which are 282 ft. and 239 ft.), and the south wall of the 
theatre are also preserved, the latter to a height of over 70 ft., 
and a market-place some 300 ft. square, surrounded by store- 
houses on three sides with a temple in the centre, and two on 
the open (south) side, and the thermae, have been discovered. 
Outside the town is a handsome triumphal arch in honour of 
Augustus. About 5 m. to the west is a single-arched Roman 
bridge, the Pondel, which has a closed passage lighted by windows 
for foot passengers in winter, and above it an open footpath, 
both being about 35 ft. in width. There are considerable 
remains of the ancient road from Eporedia (mod. Ivrea) to 
Augusta Praetoria, up the Valle d' Aosta, which the modern 
railway follows, notably the Pont St Martin, with a single arch 
with a span of 116 ft. and a roadway 15 ft. wide, the cutting of 
Donnaz, and the Roman bridges of Chatillon (Pont St Vincent) 
and Aosta (Pont de Pierre), &c. 

See C. Promis, Le antichila di Aosta (Turin, 1862); E. Berard in 
Atti delta Societa di Archeologia di Torino, iii. 119 seq. ; Notizie 
degli Scavi, passim ; A. d'Andrade, Relazione dell' Ufficio Regionale 
per la conservazione dei Monumenti del Piemonte e delta Liguria (Turin, 
1899), 46 seq. (T. As.) 

AUGUSTI, JOHANN CHRISTIAN WILHELM (1772-1841), 
German theologian, born at Eschenberga, near Gotha, was of 
Jewish descent, his grandfather having been a converted rabbi. 
He was educated at the gymnasium at Gotha and the university 
of Jena. At Jena he studied oriental languages, of which he 
became professor there in 1803. Subsequently he became 
ordinary professor of theology (1812), and for a time rector, at 
Breslau. In 1819 he was transferred to the university of Bonn, 
where he was made professor primarius. In 1828 he was ap- 
pointed chief member of the consistorial council at Coblenz. 
Here he was afterwards made director of the consistory. He 
died at Coblenz in 1841. Augusti had little sympathy with the 
modern philosophical interpretations of dogma, and although 



AUGUSTINE 



907 



he took up a position of free criticism with regard to the Biblical 
narratives, he held fast to the traditional faith. His works on 
theology (Dogmengeschichte, 1805; 4th ed., 1835) are simple 
statements of fact; they do not attempt a speculative treatment 
of their subjects. In 1809 he published in conjunction with 
W. M. L. de Wette a new translation of the Old Testament. 
Mention should also be made of his Grundriss einer historisch- 
krilischen Einleitung ins Alte Testament (1806), his Exegetisches 
Handbuch des Alten Testaments (1797-1800), and his edition of 
Die Apokryphen des A. T. (1804). In addition to these, his 
most important writings are the Denkwiirdigkeiten aus der 
Christlichcn Archaologie, 12 vols. (181 7-183 1), a partially digested 
mass of materials, and the Handbuch der Christ. Archaologie, 
3 vols. (1836-1837), which gives the substance of the larger 
work in a more compact and systematic form. 

AUGUSTINE, SAINT (354-430), one of the four great fathers 
of the Latin Church. Augustinus — the praenomen Aurelius is 
used indeed by his disciples Orosius and Prosper, and is found 
in the oldest Augustine MSS., but is not used by himself, nor in 
the letters addressed to him — was born at Tagaste, a town of 
Numidia, now Suk Ahras in Constantine, on the 13th of November 
354. His father, Patricius, was a burgess of Tagaste and still a 
pagan at the time of his son's birth. His mother, Monica, was 
not only a Christian, but a woman of the most tender and devoted 
piety, whose beautiful faith and enthusiasm and patient prayer for 
both her husband and son (at length crowned with success in both 
cases) have made her a type of womanly saintliness for all ages. 
She early instructed her son in the faith and love of Jesus Christ, 
and for a time he seems to have been impressed by her teaching. 
Falling ill, he wished to be baptized; but when the danger was 
past, the rite was deferred and, in spite of his mother's ad- 
monitions and prayers, Augustine grew up without any profession 
of Christian piety or any devotion to Christian principles. 

Inheriting from his father a passionate nature, he formed 
while still a mere youth an irregular union with a girl, by whom 
he became the father of a son, whom in a fit of pious emotion he 
named Adeodatus (" by God given "), and to whom he was 
passionately attached. In his Confessions he afterwards de- 
scribed this period of his life in the blackest colours; for in the 
light of his conversion he saw behind him only shadows. Yet, 
whatever his youthful aberrations, Augustine was from the first 
an earnest student. His father, noticing his early promise, 
destined him for the brilliant and lucrative career of a rhetorician, 
for which he spared no expense in training him. Augustine 
studied at his native town and afterwards at Madaura and 
Carthage, especially devoting himself to the works of the Latin 
poets, many traces of his love for which are to be found in his 
writings. His acquaintance with Greek literature was much 
more limited, and, indeed, it has been doubted, though without 
sufficient reason, whether he could use the Greek scriptures in 
the original. Cicero's Hortensius, which he read in his nineteenth 
year, first awakened in his mind the spirit of speculation and the 
impulse towards the knowledge of the truth. But he passed 
from one phase of thought to another, unable to find satisfaction 
in any. Manichaeism, that mixed product of Zoroastrian and 
Christian-gnostic elements, first, enthralled him. He became 
a fervent member of the sect, and was admitted into the class of 
auditors or " hearers." Manichaeism seemed to him to solve 
the mysteries of the world, and of his own experiences by which 
he was perplexed. His insatiable imagination drew congenial 
food from the fanciful religious world of the Manichaeans, 
decked out as this was with the luxuriant wealth of Oriental 
myth. His strongly developed sense of a need of salvation 
sought satisfaction in the contest of the two principles of Good 
and Evil, and found peace, at least for the moment, in the 
conviction that the portions of light present in him would be 
freed from the darkness in which they were immersed. The 
ideal of chastity and self-restraint, which promised a foretaste 
of union with God, amazed him, bound as he was in the fetters 
of sensuality and for ever shaking at these fetters. But while 
his moral force was not sufficient for the attainment of this 
ideal, gradually everything else which Manichaeism seemed to 



offer him dissolved before his criticism. Increasingly occupied 
with the exact sciences, he learnt the incompatibility of the 
Manichaean astrology with the facts. More and more absorbed 
in the problems of psychology, he realized the insufficiency of 
dualism, which did not solve the ultimate questions but merely 
set them back. The Manichaean propaganda seemed to him 
invertebrate and lacking in force, and a discussion which he had 
with Faustus, a distinguished Manichaean bishop and contro- 
versialist, left him greatly disappointed. 

Meanwhile nine years had passed. Augustine, after finishing 
his studies, had returned to Tagaste, where he became a teacher 
of grammar. He must have been an excellent master, who 
knew how to influence the whole personality of his pupils. It 
was then that Alypius, who in the later stages of Augustine's life 
proved a true friend and companion, attached himself to him. 
He remained in his native town little more than a year, during 
which time he lived with his mother, who was comforted by the 
bishop for the estrangement of her son from the Catholic faith 
("a son of so many tears cannot be lost": Confess. III. xii.§ 21), 
comforted also, and above all, by the famous vision, which 
Augustine thus describes: " She saw herself standing on a 
certain wooden rule, and a shining youth coming towards her, 
cheerful and smiling upon her the while she grieved, and was 
consumed with grief: and when he had inquired of her the 
causes of her grief and daily tears (for the sake, as is their wont, 
of teaching, not of learning) and she had made answer that she 
was bewailing my perdition, he bade her be at ease, and advised 
her to look and observe, ' That where she was, there was I also.' 
And when she looked there, she saw me standing by her on the 
same rule " (Confess. III. xi.). Augustine now returned for a 
second time to Carthage, where he devoted himself zealously 
to work. Thence, probably in the spring of 383, he migrated 
to Rome. His Manichaean friends urged him to take this 
step, which was rendered easier by the licentious lives of the 
students at Carthage. His stay at Rome may have lasted about 
a year, no agreeable time for Augustine, since his patrons and 
friends belonged to just those Manichaean circles with which 
he had in the meantime entirely lost all intellectual touch. He, 
therefore, accepted an invitation from Milan, where the people 
were in search of a teacher of rhetoric. 

At Milan the conflict within his mind in search of truth still 
continued. It was now that he separated himself openly from 
the Manichaean sect. As a thinker he came entirely under the 
influence of the New Academy; he professed the Sceptic philo- 
sophy, without being able to find in it the final conclusion 
of wisdom. He was, however, not far from the decision. Two 
things determined his further development. He became ac- 
quainted with the Neo-Platonic philosophy; its monism replaced 
the dualism, its intellectualized world of ideas the materialism 
of Manichaeism. Here he found the admonition to seek for 
truth outside the material world, and from created things he 
learnt to recognize the invisible God; he attained the certainty 
that this God is, and is eternal, always the same, subject to 
change neither in his parts nor in his motions. And while 
thus Augustine's metaphysical convictions were being slowly re- 
modelled, he met, in Ambrose, bishop of Milan, a man in whom 
complete worldly culture and the nobility of a ripe Christian 
personality were wonderfully united. He heard him preach; 
but at first it was the orator and not the contents of the sermons 
that enchained him. He sought an opportunity of conversation 
with him, but this was not easily found. Ambrose had no leisure 
for philosophic discussion. He was accessible to all who sought 
him, but never for a moment free from study or the cares of 
duty. Augustine, as he himself tells us, used to enter without 
being announced, as all persons might; but after staying for 
a while, afraid of interrupting him, he would depart again. 
He continued, however, to hear Ambrose preach, and gradually 
the gospel of divine truth and grace was received into his heart. 
He was busy with his friend Alypius in studying the Pauline 
epistles; certain words were driven home with irresistible force 
to his conscience. His struggle of mind became more and more 
intolerable, the thought of divine purity fighting in his heart 



908 



AUGUSTINE 



with the love of the world and the flesh. That sensuality was 
his worst enemy he had long known. The mother of his child 
had accompanied him to Milan. When he became betrothed 
he dismissed her; but neither the pain of this parting nor 
consideration for his not yet marriageable bride prevented him 
from forming a fresh connexion of the same kind. Meanwhile, 
the determination to renounce the old life with its pleasures 
of sense, was ever being forced upon him with more and more 
distinctness. He then received a visit from a Christian com- 
patriot named Pontitian, who told him about St Anthony and 
the monachism in Egypt, and also of a monastery near Milan. 
He was shaken to the depths when he learnt from Pontitian 
that two young officials, like himself betrothed, had suddenly 
formed a determination to turn their backs upon the life of the 
world. He could no longer bear to be inside the house; in 
terrible excitement he rushed into the garden; and now followed 
that scene which he himself in the Confessions has described 
to us with such graphic realism. He flung himself under a fig 
tree, burst into a passion of weeping, and poured out his heart 
to God. Suddenly he seemed to hear a voice bidding him consult 
the divine oracle: " Take up and read, take up and read." 
He left off weeping, rose up, sought the volume where Alypius 
was sitting, and opening it read in silence the following passage 
from the Epistle to the Romans (xiii. 13, 14): " Not in rioting 
and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife 
and envying. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not 
provision for the flesh to fulfil the lusts thereof." He adds: " I 
had neither desire nor need to read further. As I finished the 
sentence, as though the light of peace had been poured into the 
heart, all the shadows of doubt dispersed. Thus hast Thou con- 
verted me to Thee, so as no longer to seek either for wife or other 
hope of the world, standing fast in that rule of faith in which 
Thou so many years before hadst revealed me to my mother " 
(in qua me ante lot annos ei revelaveras: Confess. VIII. xii. § 30). 1 

The conversion of Augustine, as we have been accustomed 
to call this event, took place in the late summer of 386, a few 
weeks before the beginning of the vacation. The determination 
to give up his post was rendered easier by a chest-trouble which 
was not without danger, and which for months made him in- 
capable of work. He withdrew with several companions to 
the country estate of Cassisiacum near Milan, which had been 
lent him by a friend, and announced himself to the bishop as 
a candidate for baptism. His religious opinions were still to 
some extent unformed, and even his habits by no means altogether 
such as his great change demanded. He mentions, for example, 
that during this time he broke himself of a habit of profane 
swearing, and in other ways sought to discipline his character 
and conduct for the reception of the sacred rite. He received 
baptism the Easter following, in his thirty-third year, and along 
with him his son Adeodatus and his friend Alypius were admitted 
to the Church. Monica, his mother, had rejoined him, and at 
length rejoiced in the fulfilment of her prayers. She died at Ostia, 
just as they were about to embark for Africa, her last hours being 
gladdened by his Christian sympathy. In the account of the con- 
versation which he had with his mother before her end, in the 
narrative of her death and burial (Confess. IX. x.-xi., §§ 23-28), 
Augustine's literary power is displayed at its highest. 

The plan of returning home, remained for the present un- 
accomplished. Augustine stayed for a year in Rome, occupied 
in literary work, particularly in controversy with Manichaeism. 
It was not until the autumn of 388 that he returned to Tagaste, 
probably still accompanied by his son, who, however, must have 
died shortly afterwards. With some friends, who joined him in 
devotion, he formed a small religious community, which looked 
to him as its head. Their mode of life was not formally monastic 
according to any special rule, but the experience of this time of 
seclusion was, no doubt, the basis of that monastic system which 
Augustine afterwards sketched and which derived its name from 
him (see Augustinians). As may be imagined, the fame of such 
a convert in such a position soon spread, and invitations to a more 
active ecclesiastical life came to him from many quarters. He 
1 The reference is to the vision described above. 



shrank from the responsibility, but his destiny was not to be 
avoided. After two and a half years spent in retirement he went 
to Hippo, to see a Christian friend, who desired to converse with 
him as to his design of quitting the world and devoting himself 
to a religious life. The Christian community there being in want 
of a presbyter and Augustine being present at the meeting, the 
people unanimously chose him and he was ordained to the 
presbyterate. A few years afterwards, 395 or 396, he was made 
coadjutor to the bishop, and finally became bishop of the see. 

Henceforth Augustine's life is filled up with his ecclesiastical 
labours, and is more marked by the series of his numerous 
writings and the great controversies in which they engaged him 
than by anything else. His life was spent in a perpetual strife. 
During the first half this had been against himself; but even 
when others stepped into his place, it always seems as though a 
part of Augustine himself were incarnate in them. Augustine had 
early distinguished himself as an author. He had written several 
philosophical treatises, and, as teacher of rhetoric at Carthage, he 
had composed a work De pulchro et apto, which is no longer extant. 
Whenat Cassisiacum he had combated the scepticism of the New 
Academy (Contra Academicos) , had treated of the " blessed life " 
(De Vita beata), of the significance of evil in the order of the world 
(Deordine), of the means for the elucidation of spiritual truths 
(Soliloquia) . Shortly before the time of his baptism, he was occu- 
pied with the question of the immortality of the soul (De immor- 
talitate animae) , and in Rome and at Tagaste he was still engaged 
with philosophical problems, as is evidenced by the writings De 
quantitate animae and De magistro. In all these treatises is 
apparent the influence of the Neo-Platonic method of thought, 
which for him, as for so many others, had become the bridge to the 
Christian. While still in Rome, he began to come to a reckoning 
with the Manichaeans, and wrote two books on the morals of the 
Catholic Church and of the Manichaeans (De moribus ecclesiae 
Catholicae et de moribus Manichaeorum libri duo) . For many years 
he pursued this controversy in a long series of writings, of which 
the most conspicuous is the elaborate reply to his old associate 
and disputant, Faustus of Mileve (Contra Faustum Manichaeum, 
a.d. 400). It was natural that the Manichaean heresy, which had 
so long enslaved his own mind, should have first exercised 
Augustine's great powers as a theological thinker and contro- 
versialist. He was able from his own experience to give force to his 
arguments for the unity of creation and of the spiritual life, and 
to strengthen the mind of the Christian Church in its last struggle 
with that dualistic spirit which had animated and moulded in 
succession so many formsof thought at variance with Christianity. 

But the time was one of almost universal ecclesiastical and 
intellectual excitement; and so powerful a mental activity as 
his was naturally drawn forth in all directions. Following his 
writings against the Manichaeans came those against the Dona- 
tists. The controversy was one which strongly interested him, 
involving as it did the whole question of the constitution of the 
Church and the idea of catholic order, to which the circumstances 
of the age gave special prominence. The Donatist controversy 
sprang out of the Diocletian persecution in the beginning of the 
century. A party in the Church of Carthage, fired with fanatic 
zeal on behalf of those who had courted martyrdom by resistance 
to the imperial mandates, resented deeply the appointment of 
a bishop of moderate opinions, whose consecration had been 
performed, they alleged, by a traditor, viz. a bishop who had 
" delivered " the holy scriptures to the magistrates. They set up, 
in consequence, a bishop of their own, of the name of Majorinus, 
succeeded in 3 1 5 by Donatus. The party made great pretensions 
to purity of discipline, and rapidly rose in popular favour, not- 
withstanding a decision given against them both by the bishop 
of Rome and by the emperor Cons tan tine. Augustine was 
strongly moved by the lawlessness of the party and launched 
forth a series of writings against them, the most important of 
which survive. Amongst these are " Seven Books on Baptism " 
(De baptismo contra Donatistas, c. a.d. 400) and a lengthy 
answer, in three books, to Petilian, bishop of Cirta, who was the 
most eminent theologian amongst the Donatist divines. At a 
later period, about 417, Augustine wrote a treatise concerning 



AUGUSTINE 



909 



the correction of the • Donatists (De correctione Donatistarum) 
" for the sake of those," he says in his Retractations," who were not 
willing that the Donatists should be subjected to the correction 
of the imperial laws." In these writings, while vigorously 
maintaining the validity of the Church as it then stood in the 
Roman world, and the necessity for moderation in the exercise 
of church discipline, Augustine yet gave currency, in his zeal 
against the Donatists, to certain maxims as to the duty of 
the civil power to control schism, which were of evil omen, 
and have been productive of much disaster in the history of 
Christianity. 

The third controversy in which Augustine engaged was the 
most important, and the most intimately associated with his 
distinctive greatness as a theologian. As may be supposed, 
owing to the conflicts through which he had passed, the bishop 
of Hippo was intensely interested in what may be called the 
anthropological aspect of the great Christian idea of redemption. 
He had himself been brought out of darkness into " marvellous 
light," only by entering into the depths of his own soul, and 
finding, after many struggles, that there was no power but divine 
grace, as revealed in the life and death of the Son of God, which 
could bring rest to human weariness, or pardon and peace for 
human guilt. He had found human nature in his own case too 
weak and sinful to find any good for itself. In God alone he 
had found good. • This deep sense of human sinfulness coloured 
all his theology, and gave to it at once its depth — its profound 
and sympathetic adaptation to all who feel the reality of sin — 
and that tinge of darkness and exaggeration which has as surely 
repelled others. When the expression " Augustinism " is used, 
it points especially to those opinions of the great teacher which 
were evoked in the Pelagian controversy, to which he devoted 
the most mature and powerful period of his life. His opponents 
in this controversy were Pelagius, from whom it derives its name, 
and CoeJestius and JuJianus, pupils of the former. Nothing is 
certainly known as to the home of Pelagius. Augustine calls 
him Brito, and so do Marius Mercator and Orosius. Jerome 
points to his Scottish descent, in such terms, however, as to 
leave it uncertain whether he was a native of Scotland or of 
Ireland. He was a man of blameless character, devoted to the 
reformation of society, full of that confidence in the natural 
impulses of humanity which often accompanies philanthropic 
enthusiasm. About the year 400 he came, no longer a young 
man, to Rome, where he lived for more than a decade, and soon 
made himself conspicuous by his activity and by his opinions. 
His pupil Coeiestius, a lawyer of unknown origin, developed 
the views of his master with a more outspoken logic, and, while 
travelling with Pelagius in Africa, in the year 411, was at length 
arraigned before the bishop of Carthage for the following, amongst 
other heretical opinions:— (1) that Adam's sin was- purely 
personal, and affected none but himself; (2) that each man, 
consequently, is born with powers as incorrupt as those of Adam, 
and only falls into sin under the force of temptation and evil 
example; (3) that children who die in infancy, being untainted 
by sin, are saved without baptism. Views such as these were 
obviously in conflict with the whole course of Augustine's 
experience, as well as with his interpretation of the catholic 
doctrine of the Church. And when his attention was drawn 
to them by the trial and excommunication of Coeiestius, he 
undertook their refutation, first of all in three books on the 
punishment and forgiveness of sins and the baptism of infants 
(De peccatorum meritis et remissione et de baptismo parmlorum) , 
addressed to his friend Marcellinus, in which he vindicated the 
necessity of baptism of infants because of original sin and the 
grace of God by which we are justified {Retract, ii. 23). This 
was in 412. In the same year he addressed a further treatise 
to the same Marcellinus on The Spirit and the Letter (De spiritu 
et litter a). Three years later he composed the treatises on Nature 
and Grace (De natura et gratia) and the relation of the human 
to the divine righteousness (De perfectione iuslitiae hominis). 
The controversy was continued during many years in no fewer 
than fifteen treatises. Upon no subject did Augustine bestow 
more of his intellectual strength, and in relation to no other have 



his views so deeply and permanently affected the course of 
Christian thought. Even those who most usually agree with 
his theological standpoint will hardly deny that, while he did 
much in these writings to vindicate divine truth and to expound 
the true relations of the divine and human, he also, here as else- 
where, was hurried into extreme expressions as to the absolute- 
ness of divine grace and the extent of human corruption. Like 
his great disciple in a later age — Luther — Augustine was prone 
to emphasize the side of truth which he had most realized 
in his own experience, and, in contradistinction to the Pelagian 
exaltation of human nature, to depreciate its capabilities beyond 
measure. 

In addition to these controversial writings, which mark the 
great epochs of Augustine's life and ecclesiastical activity after 
his settlement as a bishop at Hippo, he was the author of other 
works, some of them better known and even more important. 
His great work, the most elaborate, and in some respects the 
most significant, that came from his pen, is The City of God 
(De civitate Dei). It is designed as a great apologetic treatise 
in vindication of Christianity and the Christian Church, — the 
latter conceived as rising in the form of a new civic order on 
the crumbling ruins of the Roman empire, — but it is also, 
perhaps, the earliest contribution to the philosophy of history, 
as it is a repertory throughout of his cherished theological 
opinions. This work and his Confessions are, probably, those 
by which he is best known, the one as the highest expression of 
his thought, and the other as the best monument of his living 
piety and Christian experience. The City of God was begun in 
413, and continued to be issued in its several portions for a 
period of thirteen years, or till 426. The Confessions were 
written shortly after he became a bishop, about 397, and give 
a vivid sketch of his early career. To the devout utterances 
and aspirations of a great soul they add the charm of personal 
disclosure, and have never ceased to excite admiration in all 
spirits of kindred piety. Something of this charm also belongs 
to the Retractations, that remarkable work in which Augustine, 
in 427, towards the end of his life, held as it were a review of his 
literary activity, in order to improve what was erroneous and 
to make clear what was doubtful in it. His systematic treatise 
on The Trinity (De Trinitate) which extends to fifteen books 
and occupied him for nearly thirty years, must not be passed 
over. This important work, unlike most of his dogmatic writings, 
was not provoked by any special controversial emergency, but 
grew up silently during this long period in the author's mind. 
This has given it something more of completeness and organic 
arrangement than is usual with Augustine, if it has also led him 
into the prolonged discussion of various analogies, more curious 
than apt in their bearing on the doctrine which he expounds. 
Brief and concise is the presentation of the Catholic doctrine 
in the compendium, which, about 421, he wrote at the request 
of a Roman layman named Laurentius (Encheiridion, sive defide 
spe et caritate). In spite of its title, the compendious work on 
Christian doctrine (De doctrina Christiana), begun as early as 
393, but only finished in 426, does not belong t6 the dogmatic 
writings. It is a sort of Biblical hermeneutic, in which homiletic 
questions are also dealt with. His catechetical principles Augus- 
tine developed in the charming writing De catechizandis rudibus 
(c 400). A large number of tractates are devoted to moral 
and theological problems (Contra mendaciunt, c 420; De bono 
conjugali, 401, &c). A widespread influence was exercised 
by the treatise De opere monachorum (c.400), in which, on the 
ground of Holy Scripture, manual work was demanded of monks. 
Of less importance than the remaining works are the numerous 
exegetical writings, among which the commentary on the Gospel 
of St John deserves a special mention. These have a value 
owing to Augustine's appreciation of the deeper spiritual mean- 
ing of scripture, but hardly for their exegetical qualities. His 
Letters are full of interest owing to the light they throw on many 
questions in the ecclesiastical history of the time, and owing to 
his relations with such contemporary theologians as Jerome. 
They have, however, neither the liveliness Hor the varied interest 
of the letters of Jerome himself. As a preacher Augustine was 



gio 



AUGUSTINE— AUGUSTINIAN CANONS 



of great importance. We still possess almost four hundred 
sermons which may be ascribed to him with certainty. Many 
others only pass under his celebrated name. 

The closing years of the great bishop were full of sorrow. The 
Vandals, who had been gradually enclosing the Roman empire, 
appeared before the gates of Hippo, and laid siege to it. Augus- 
tine was ill with his last illness, and could only pray for his 
fellow-citizens. He passed away during the siege, on the 28th 
of August 430, at the age of seventy-five, and thus was spared 
the indignity of seeing the city in the hands of the enemy. 

The character of Augustine, both as a man and as a theologian, 
has been briefly indicated in the course of our sketch. None can 
deny the greatness of Augustine's soul — his enthusiasm, his 
unceasing search after truth, his affectionate disposition, his 
ardour, his self-devotion. And even those who may doubt the 
soundness of his dogmatic conclusions, cannot but acknowledge 
the depth of his spiritual convictions, and the logical force and 
penetration with which he handled the most difficult questions, 
thus weaving all the elements of his experience and of his profound 
scriptural knowledge into a great system of Christian thought. 
Of the four great Fathers of the Church he was admittedly the 
greatest — more profound than Ambrose, his spiritual father, more 
original and systematic than Jerome, his correspondent, and 
intellectually far more distinguished than Gregory the Great, 
his pupil on the papal throne. The theological position and 
influence of Augustine may be said to be unrivalled. No single 
name has ever exercised such power over the Christian Church, 
and no one mind ever made so deep an impression upon Christian 
thought. In him scholastics and mystics, popes and the 
opponents of the papal supremacy, have seen their champion. 
He was the fulcrum on which Luther rested the thoughts by 
which he sought to lift the past of the Church out of the 
rut; yet the judgment of Catholics still proclaims the ideas of 
Augustine as the only sound basis of philosophy. 

The best complete edition of Augustine's works is that of the 
Maurines, in II vols. fol. published at Paris, 1679-1700, and re- 
printed in Migne's Patrologie (Paris, 1841-1842). Of the new critical 
edition in the Corpus Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Latinorum, issued 
by the Vienna Academy, thirteen volumes had been published in 
1908, including the Confessions, the Retractations, De civitate Dei, 
and a number of exegetical and of dogmatic polemical works, 
together with a portion of the Letters. An English translation of 
nearly the whole of Augustine's writings will be found in the Select 
Library of the Nicene and post-Nicene Fathers of the Christian Church 
(series I, Buffalo, 1886, &c). Tillemont, in his Memoires pour servir 
d I'histoire ecclesiastique des VI premiers siecles, has devoted a quarto 
volume (vol. xiii.) to Augustine's life and writings. The most com- 
plete monographs are those on the Catholic side by Kloth (Aix-la- 
Chapelle, 1839-1840, 3 vols.) and J. J. F. Poujoulat (7th ed., Paris, 
1886, 2 vols.), and on the Protestant side by Bindemann (Berlin, 
Leipzig, Greifswald, 1844-1869, 3 vols,). There are interesting 
sketches, from quite different points of view, by von Hertling, 
Augustinus (2nded., Mainz, 1904), and Joseph McCabe, St Augustine 
and His Age (London, 1902). See also Nourrisson, La Philosophic 
de St Augustin (2nd ed., Paris, 1866, 2 vols.); H. A. Naville, St 
Augustin, etude sur la developpement de sa pensee jusqu'a Vepoque 
de son ordination (Geneva, 1872) ; Dorner, Augustinus (Berlin, 1873) ; 
Reuter, Augustinisclie Studien (Gotha, 1886); F. Scheel, Die 
Anschauung Augustins iiber Christi Person und Werk (Tubingen, 
1901); A. Hatzfeld, Saint Augustin (6th ed., Paris, 1902); G. von 
Hertling, Augustin (Mainz, 1902); A. Egger, Der heilige Augustinus 
(Kempten, 1904) ; J. N. Espenberger, Die Elemente der Erbsunde 
nach Augustin und der Fruhscholastik (Mainz, 1905); S. Angus, 
The Sources of the First Ten Books of Augustine's De Civitate Dei 
(Princeton, 1906) ; and the more modern text-books of the history 
of dogma, especially Harnack. (G. K.) 

AUGUSTINE, SAINT (d. c.613), first archbishop of Canterbury, 
occupied a position of authority in the monastery of St Andrew 
at Rome, when Gregory I. summoned him to lead a mission to 
England in a.d. 596. The apprehensions of Augustine's followers 
caused him to return to Rome, but the pope furnished him with 
letters of commendation and encouraged him to proceed. He 
landed in Thanet in a.d. 597, and was favourably received by 
^Ethelberht, king of Kent, who granted a dwelling-place for 
the monks in Canterbury, and allowed them liberty to preach. 
Augustine first made use of the ancient church of St Martin at 
Canterbury, which before his arrival had been the oratory of the 
Queen Berhta and her confessor Liudhard. ^Ethelberht upon 



his conversion employed all his influence in support of the 
mission. In 601 Augustine received the pallium from Gregory 
and was given authority over the Celtic churches in Britain, as 
well as all future bishops consecrated in English territory, 
including York. Authority over the see of York was not, 
however, to descend to Augustine's successors. In 603 he 
consecrated Christ Church, Canterbury, and built the monastery 
of SS. Peter and Paul, afterwards known as St Augustine's. 
At the conference of Augustine's Oak he endeavoured in 
vain to bring over the Celtic church to the observance of the 
Roman Easter. He afterwards consecrated Mellitus and Justus 
to the sees of London and Rochester respectively. The 
date of his death is not recorded by Bede, but MS. F of the 
Saxon Chronicle puts it in 614, and the Annales Monaslerienses 
in 612. 

See Bede, Eccl. Hist. (ed. by Plummer), i. 23-ii. 3. 

AUGUSTINIAN CANONS, a religious order in the Roman 
Catholic Church, called also Austin Canons, Canons Regular, 
and in England Black Canons, because their cassock and mantle 
were black, though they wore a white surplice : elsewhere the 
colour of the habit varied considerably. 

The canons regular (see Canon) grew out of the earlier institute 
of canonical life, in consequence of the urgent exhortations of 
the Lateran Synod of 1059. The clergy of some cathedrals 
(in England, Carlisle), and of a great number of collegiate 
churches all over western Europe, responded to the appeal ; and 
the need of a rule of life suited to the new regime produced, 
towards the endx>f the nth century, the so-called Rule of St 
Augustine (see Axtgtjstinians). This Rule was widely adopted 
by the canons regular, who also began to bind themselves by 
the vows of poverty, obedience and chastity. In the 12 th 
century this discipline became universal among them; and so 
arose the order of Augustinian canons as a religious, order in the 
strict sense of the word. They resembled the monks in so far 
as they lived in community and took religious vows; but their 
state of life remained essentially clerical, and as clerics their 
duty was to undertake the pastoral care and serve the parish 
churches in their patronage. They were bound to the choral 
celebration of the divine office, and in its general tenor their 
manner of life differed little from that of monks. 

Their houses, at first without bonds between them, soon 
tended to draw together and coalesce into congregations with cor- 
porate organization and codes of constitutions supplementary to 
the Rule. The popes encouraged these centralizing tendencies; 
and in 1339 Benedict XII. organized the Augustinian canons on 
the same general lines as those laid down for the Benedictines, 
by a system of provincial chapters and visitations. 

Some thirty congregations of canons regular of St Augustine 
are numbered. The most important were: (1) the Lateran 
canons, formed soon after the synod of 1059, by the clergy of 
the Lateran Basilica; (2) Congregation of St Victor in Paris, 
c. 1 1 00, remarkable for the theological and mystical school Of 
Hugh, Richard and Adam of St Victor; (3) Gilbertines (see 
Gilbert of Sempringham, St) ; (4) Windesheim Congregation, 
c. 1400, in the Netherlands and over north and central Germany 
(see Groot, Gerhard), to which belonged Thomas a. Kempis; 
(5) Congregation of Ste Genevieve in Paris, a reform c. 1630. 
During the later middle ages the houses of these various con^ 
gregations of canons regular spread all over Europe and became 
extraordinarily numerous. They underwent the natural and 
inevitable vicissitudes of all orders, having their periods of 
depression and degeneracy, and again of revival and reform. 
The book of Johann Busch, himself a canon of Windesheim, De 
Reformatione monasteriorum, shows that in the 15 th century 
grave relaxation had crept into many monasteries of Augustinian 
canons in north Germany, and the efforts at reform were only 
partialiy successful. The Reformation, the religious wars and 
the Revolution have swept away nearly all the canons regular, 
but some of their houses in Austria still exist in their medieval 
splendour. In England there were as many as 200 houses of 
Augustinian canons, and 60 of them were among the " greater 
monasteries" suppressed in 1538-1540 (for list see Tables in 



AUGUSTINIAN HERMITS— AUGUSTUS 



911 



F. A. Gasquet's English Monastic Life). The first foundation 
was Holy Trinity, Aldgate, by Queen Maud, in 1108; Carlisle 
was an English cathedral of Augustinian canons. In Ireland 
the order was even more numerous, Christ Church, Dublin, 
being one of their houses. Three houses of the Lateran canons 
were established in England towards the close of the 19th 
century. Most of the congregations of Augustinian canons had 
convents of nuns, called canonesses; many such exist to this day. 
See the works of Amort and Du Molinet, mentioned under Canon. 
Vol. ii. of Helyot's Hist, des ordres religieux (1792) is devoted to 
canons regular of all kinds. The information is epitomized by 
Max Heimbucher, Orden und Kongregationen, i. (1896), §§ 54-60, 
where copious references to the literature of the subject are sup- 
plied. See also Otto Zockler, A skese und Monchtum, ii. (1897), p. 422 ; 
and Wetzer und Welte, Kirchenlexicon (2nd ed.), art. " Canonici 
Regulares " and " Canonissae." For England see J. W. Clark, 
Observances in use at the Augustinian Priory at Barnwell (1897); 
and an article in Journal of Theological Studies (v.) by Scott 
Holmes. (E. C. B.) 

AUGUSTINIAN HERMITS, or Friars, a religious order in 
the Roman Catholic Church, sometimes called (but improperly) 
Black Friars (see Friars). In the first half of the 13th century 
there were in central Italy various small congregations of hermits 
living according to different rules. The need of co-ordinating 
and organizing these hermits induced the popes towards 1250 
to unite into one body a number of these congregations, so as to 
form a single religious order, living according to the Rule of St 
Augustine, and called the Order of Augustinian Hermits, or 
simply the Augustinian Order. Special constitutions were drawn 
up for its government, on the same lines as the Dominicans and 
other mendicants — a general elected by chapter, provincials to 
rule in the different countries, with assistants, definitors and 
visitors. For this reason, and because almost from the beginning 
the term " hermits " Became a misnomer (for they abandoned 
the deserts and lived conventually in towns), they ranked 
among the friars, and became the fourth of the mendicant orders. 
The observance and manner of life was, relatively to those times, 
mild, meat being allowed four days in the week. The habit is 
black. The institute spread rapidly all over western Europe, 
so that it eventually came to have forty provinces and 2000 
friaries with some 30,000 members. In England there were 
not more than about 30 houses (see Tables in F. A. Gasquet's 
English Monastic Life). The reaction against the inevitable 
tendencies towards mitigation and relaxation led to a number 
of reforms that produced upwards of twenty different congrega- 
tions within the order, each governed by a vicar^general, who was 
subject to the general of the order. Some of these congregations 
went in the matter of austerity beyond the original idea of the 
institute; and so in the 16th century there arose in Spain, 
Italy and France, Discalced or Barefooted Hermits of St Augus- 
tine, who provided in each province one house wherein a strictly 
eremitical life might be led by such as desired it. 

About 1500 a great attempt at a reform of this kind was set 
on foot among the Augustinian Hermits of northern Germany, 
and they were formed into a separate congregation independent 
of the general. It was from this congregation that Luther went 
forth, and great numbers of the German Augustinian Hermits, 
among them Wenceslaus Link the provincial, followed him 
and embraced the Reformation, so that the congregation was 
dissolved in 1526. 

The Reformation and later revolutions have destroyed most 
of the houses of Augustinian Hermits, so that now only about a 
hundred exist in various parts of Europe and America; in Ireland 
they are relatively numerous, having survived the penal times. 
The Augustinian school of theology (Noris, Berti) was formed 
among the Hermits. There have been many convents of Augus- 
tinian Hermitesses, chiefly in the Barefooted congregations; 
such convents exist still in Europe and North America, devoted 
to education and hospital work. There have also been nurnerous 
congregations of Augustinian Tertiaries, both men and women, 
connected with the order and engaged on charitable works of 
every kind (see Tertiaries). 

See Helyot, Hist, des ordres religieux (1792), iii. ; Max Heimbucher, 
Orden und Kongregationen, i. (1896), § 61-65; Wetzer und Welte, 



Kirchenlexicon (2nd ed.), art " Augustiner " ; Herzog, Realency- 
klopddie (3rd ed.), art. " Augustiner." The chief book on the 
subject is Th. Kolde, Die deutschen Augustiner - Kongregationen 
(1879). (E. C. B.) 

AUGUSTINIANS, in the Roman Catholic Church, a generic 
name for religious orders that follow the so-called " Rule of 
St Augustine." The chief of these orders are: — Augustinian 
Canons (q.v.), Augustinian Hermits (q.v.) or Friars, Premon- 
stratensians (q.v.), Trinitarians (q.v.), Gilbertines (see Gilbert 
of Sempringham, St) . The following orders, though not called 
Augustinians, also have St Augustine's Rule as the basis of their 
life : Dominicans, Servites, Our Lady of Ransom, Hieronymites, 
Assumptionists and many others; also orders of women: 
Brigittines, Ursulines, Visitation nuns and a vast number of 
congregations of women, spread over the Old and New Worlds, 
devoted to education and charitable works of all kinds. 

See Helyot, Ordres religieux (1792), vols, ii., iii., iv. ; Max Heim- 
bucher, Orden und Kongregationen, i. (1896), § 66-85; Wetzer und 
Welte, Kirchenlexicon, i., 1665-1667. 

St Augustine never wrote a Rule, properly so called; but 
Ep. 211 (al. 109) is a long letter of practical advice to a com- 
munity of nuns, on their daily life; and Sertn. 355, 356 describe 
the common life he led along with his clerics in Hippo. When in 
the second half of the nth century the clergy of a great number 
of collegiate churches were undertaking to live a substantially 
monastic form of life (see Canon), it was natural that they 
should look back to this classical model for clerics living in 
community. And so attention was directed to St Augustine's 
writings on community life; and out of them, and spurious 
writings attributed to him, were compiled towards the close of 
the nth century three Rules, the "First" and "Second" 
being mere fragments, but the " Third " a substantive rule of 
life in 45 sections, often grouped in twelve chapters. This Third 
Rule is the one known as " the Rule of St Augustine." Being 
confined to fundamental principles without entering into details, 
it has proved itself admirably suited to form the foundation of 
the religious life of the most varied orders and congregations, 
and since the 12 th century it has proved more prolific than the 
Benedictine Rule. In an uncritical age it was attributed to St 
Augustine himself, and Augustinians, especially the canons, put 
forward fantastic claims to antiquity, asserting unbroken con- 
tinuity, not merely from St Augustine, but from Christ and the 
Apostles. 

The three Rules are printed in Dugdale, Monasticon (ed. 1846), vi. 
42; and in Holsten-Brockie, Codex Regularum, ii. 121. For the 
literature see Otto Zockler, Askese und Monchtum (1897), pp. 347, 
354- (E. C. B.) 

AUGUSTOWO, a city of Russian Poland, in the government 
of Suwalki, 20 m. S. of the town of that name, on a canal 
(65 m.) connecting the Vistula with the Niemen. It was founded 
in 1557 by Sigismund II. (Augustus), and is laid out in a very 
regular manner, with a spacious market-place. It carries on a 
large trade in cattle and horses, and manufactures linen and 
huckaback. Pop. (1897) 12,746. 

AUGUSTUS (a name 1 derived from Lat. augeo, increase, 
i.e. venerable, majestic, Gr. 2e/3aoT6s), the title given by the 
Roman senate, on the 17th of January 27 B.C., to Gaius Julius 
Caesar Octavianus (63 b.C.-a.d. 14), or as he was originally 
designated, Gaius Octavius, in recognition of his eminent services 
to the state (Mon. Anc. 34), and borne by him as the first of the 
Roman emperors. The title was adopted by all the succeeding 
Caesars or emperors of Rome long after they had ceased to be 
connected by blood with the first Augustus. 

Gaius Octavius was born in Rome on the 23rd of September 
63 B.C., the year of Cicero's consulship and of Catiline's conspiracy. 
He came of a family of good standing, long settled at Velitrae 
(Velletri\ but his father was the first of the family to obtain a 
curule magistracy at Rome and senatorial dignity. His mother, 
however, was Ati? : daughter of Julia, the wife of M. Atius 
Balbus, and sister of J ulius Ca esar, and it was this connexion with 
the great dictator which determined his career. In his fifth 
year (58 B.C.) his father died; about a year later his mother 

1 On the name see Neumann, in Pauly-Wissowa's Reaiencyao- 
pddie f. cl. alterth., s.v.. 2374. 



912 



AUGUSTUS 



remarried, and the young Octavius passed under her care to that 
of his stepfather, L. Marcius Philippus. At the age of twelve (51 
B.C.) he delivered the customary funeral panegyric on his grand- 
mother Julia, his first public appearance. On the 1 8th of October 
48 (or ? 47) B.c he assumed the " toga virilis " and was elected 
into the pontifical college, an exceptional honour which he no 
doubt owed to his great-uncle, now dictator and master of Rome. 
In 46 B.C. he shared in the glory of Caesar's African triumph, 
and in 45 he was made a patrician by the senate, and designated 
as one of Caesar's " masters of the horse " for the next year. 
In the autumn of 45, Caesar, who was planning his Parthian 
campaign, sent his nephew to study quietly at the Greek colony of 
Apollonia, in Illyria. Here the news of Caesar's murder reached 
him and he crossed to Italy. On landing he learnt that Caesar 
had made him his heir and adopted him into the Julian gens, 
whereby he acquired the designation of Gaius Julius Caesar 
Octavianus. The inheritance was a perilous one; his mother 
and others would have dissuaded him from accepting it, but he, 
confident in his abilities, declared at once that he would under- 
take its obligations, and discharge the sums bequeathed by the 
dictator to the Roman people. Mark Antony had possessed 
himself of Caesar's papers and effects, and made light of his 
young nephew's pretensions. Brutus and Cassius paid him little 
regard, and dispersed to their respective provinces. Cicero, 
much charmed at the attitude of Antonius, hoped to make use of 
him, and flattered him to the utmost, with the expectation, 
however, of getting rid of him as soon as he had served his purpose. 
Octavianus conducted himself with consummate adroitness, 
making use of all competitors for power, but assisting none. 
Considerable forces attached themselves to him. The senate, 
when it armed the consuls against Antonius, called upon him for 
assistance ; and he took part in the campaign in which Antonius 
was defeated at Mutina (43 B.C.). The soldiers of Octavianus 
demanded the consulship for him, and the senate, though now 
much alarmed, could not prevent his election. He now effected 
a coalition with Antonius and Lepidus, and on the 27th of Nov- 
ember 43 B.C. the three were formally appointed a triumvirate 
for the reconstitution of the commonwealth for five years. 
They divided the western provinces among them, the east being 
held for the republic by Brutus and Cassius. They drew up a 
list of proscribed citizens, and caused the assassination of three 
hundred senators and two thousand knights. They further 
confiscated the territories of many cities throughout Italy, and 
divided them among their soldiers. Cicero was murdered at 
the demand of Antonius. The remnant of the republican party 
took refuge either with Brutus and Cassius in the East, or with 
Sextus Pompeius, who had made himself master of the seas. 

Octavianus and Antonius crossed the Adriatic in 42 B.C. to 
reduce the last defenders of the republic. Brutus and Cassius 
were defeated, and fell at the battle of Philippi. War soon broke 
out between the victors, the chief incident of which was the 
siege and capture by famine of Perusia, and the alleged sacrifice 
of three hundred of- its defenders by the young Caesar at the 
altar of his uncle. But peace was again made between them 
(40 B.C.). Antonius married Octavia, his rival's sister, and took 
for himself the eastern half of the empire, leaving the west to 
Caesar. Lepidus was reduced to the single province of Africa. 
Meanwhile Sextus Pompeius made himself formidable by cutting 
off the supplies of grain from Rome. The triumvirs were obliged 
to concede to him the islands in the western Mediterranean. 
But Octavianus could not allow the capital to be kept in alarm 
for its daily sustenance. He picked a quarrel with Sextus, and 
when his colleagues failed to support him, undertook to attack 
him alone. Antonius, indeed, came at last to his aid, in return 
for military assistance in the campaign he meditated in the East. 
But Octavianus was well served by the commander of his fleet, 
M. Vipsanius Agrippa. Sextus was completely routed, and 
driven into Asia, where he perished soon afterwards (36 B.C.). 
Lepidus was an object of contempt to all parties, and Octavianus 
and Antonius remained to fight for supreme power. 

The five years (36-31 B.C.) which preceded the decisive en- 
counter between the two rivals were wasted by Antony in fruitless 



campaigns, and in a dalliance with Cleopatra which shocked 
Roman sentiment. By Octavian they were employed in strength- 
ening his hold on the West, and his claim to be regarded as the 
one possible saviour of Rome and Roman civilization. His 
marriage with Livia (38 B.C.) placed by his side a sagacious 
counsellor and a loyal ally, whose services were probably as 
great as even those of his trusted friend Marcus Agrippa. With 
their help he set himself to win the confidence of a public still 
inclined to distrust the author of the proscriptions of 43 b.c. 
Brigandage was suppressed in Italy, and the safety of the Italian 
frontiers secured against the raids of Alpine tribes on the north- 
west and of Illyrians on the east, while Rome was purified and 
beautified, largely with the help of Agrippa (aedile in 33 B.C.). 
Meanwhile, indignation at Antony's un-Roman excesses, and 
alarm at Cleopatra's rumoured schemes of founding a Greco- 
Oriental empire, were rapidly increasing. In 32 B.C. Antony's 
repudiation of his wife Octavia, sister of Octavian, and the dis- 
covery of his will, with its clear proofs of Cleopatra's dangerous 
ascendancy, brought matters to a climax, and war was declared, 
not indeed against Antony, but against Cleopatra. 

The decisive battle was fought on the 2nd of September 31 B.C. 
at Actium on the Epirot coast, and resulted in the almost total, 
destruction of Antony's fleet and the surrender of his land forces. 
Not quite a year later (Aug/ 1, 30 B.C.) followed the capture 
of Alexandria and the deaths by their own hands of Antony and 
Cleopatra. On the nth of January 29 B.C. the restoration of 
peace was marked by the closing of the temple of Janus for the 
first time for 200 years. In the summer Octavian returned to 
Italy, and in August celebrated a three days' triumph. He was 
welcomed, not as a successful combatant in a civil war, but as the 
man who had vindicated the sovereignty of Rome against its 
assailants, as the saviour of the republic and of his fellow-citizens, 
above all as the restorer of peace. 

He was now, to quote his own words, " master of all things," 
and the Roman world looked to him for some permanent settle- 
ment of the distracted empire. His first task was the re-establish- 
ment of a regular and constitutional government, such as had 
not existed since Julius Caesar crossed the Rubicon twenty 
years before. To this task he devoted the next eighteen months 
(Aug. 20-Jan. 27 B.C.). In the article on Rome : History (q.v.), 
his achievements are described in detail, and only a brief 
summary need be given here. The " principate," to give the 
new form of government its most appropriate name, was a 
compromise thoroughly characteristic of the combination of 
tenacity of purpose with cautious respect for forms and conven- 
tions which distinguished its author. The republic was restored; 
senate, magistrates and assembly resumed their ancient func- 
tions; and the public life of Rome began to run once more in 
the familiar grooves. The triumvirate with its irregularities 
and excesses was at an end. The controlling authority, which 
Octavian himself wielded, could not indeed be safely dispensed 
with. But henceforward he was to exercise it under constitu- 
tional forms and limitations, and with the express sanction of 
the senate and people. Octavian was legally invested for a 
period of ten years with the government of the important 
frontier provinces, with the sole command of the military and 
naval forces of the state, and the exclusive control of its foreign 
relations. At home it was understood that he would year by 
year be elected consul, and enjoy the powers and pre-eminence 
attached to the chief magistracy of the Roman state. Thus 
the republic was restored under the presidency and patronage 
of its " first citizen " (princeps civitatis). 

In acknowledgment of this happy settlement and of his 
other services further honours were conferred upon Octavian. 
On the 13th of January 27 B.C., the birthday of the restored 
republic, he was awarded the civic crown to be placed over the 
door of his house, in token that he had saved his fellow-citizens 
and restored the Republic. Four days later (Jan. 17) the senate 
conferred upon him the cognomen of Augustus. 

But it was not only the machinery of government in Rome 
that needed repair. Twenty years of civil war and confusion 
had disorganized the empire, and the strong hand of Augustus, 



AUGUSTUS 



9 J 3 



as he must now be called, could alone restore confidence and 
order. Towards the end of 27 B.C. he left Rome for Gaul, and 
from that date until October 19 B.C. he was mainly occupied 
with the reorganization of the provinces and of the provincial 
administration, first of all in the West and then in the East. 
It was during his stay in Asia (20 B.C.) that the Parthian king 
Phraates voluntarily restored the Roman prisoners and standards 
taken at Carrhae (53 B.C.), a welcome tribute to the respect 
inspired by Augustus, and a happy augury for the future. In 
October 19 B.C. he returned to Rome, and the senate ordered 
that the day of his return (Oct. 12) should thenceforward be 
observed as a public holiday. The period of ten years for which 
his imperium had been granted him was nearly ended, and 
though much remained to be done, very much had been accom- 
plished. The pacification of northern Spain by the subjugation 
of the Astures and Cantabri, the settlement of the wide territories 
added to the empire by Julius Caesar in Gaul — the " New Gaul," 
or the " long-haired Gaul " (Gallia Comata) as it was called by 
way of distinction from the old province of Gallia Narbonensis 
(see Gaul) — and the re-establishment of Roman authority 
over the kings and princes of the Near East, were achievements 
'which fully justified the acclamations of senate and people. 

In 18 B.C. Augustus's imperium was renewed for five years, 
and his tried friend Marcus Agrippa, now his son-in-law, was 
associated with him as a colleague. From October of 19 B.C. 
till the middle of 16 B.C. Augustus's main attention was given 
to Rome and to domestic reform, and to this period belong 
such measures as the Julian law " as to the marriage of. the 
orders." In June of 17 B.C. the opening of the new and better 
age, which he had worked to bring about, was marked by the 
celebration in Rome of the Secular games. The chief actors in 
the ceremony were Augustus himself and his colleague Agrippa, 
— while, as the extant record tells us, the processional hymn, 
chanted by youths and maidens first before the new temple of 
Apollo on the Palatine and then before the temple of Jupiter 
on the Capitol, was composed by Horace. The hymn, the 
well-known Carmen Saeculare, gives fervent expression to the 
prevalent emotions of joy and gratitude. 

In the next year (16 B.C.), however, Augustus was suddenly 
called away from Rome to deal with a problem which engrossed 
much of his attention for the next twenty-five years. The 
defeat of Marcus Lollius, the legate commanding on the Rhine, 
by a horde of German invaders, seems to have determined 
Augustus to take in hand the whole question of the frontiers 
of the empire towards the north, and the effective protection 
of Gaul and Italy. The work was entrusted to Augustus's 
step-sons Tiberius and Drusus. The first step was the annexation 
of Noricum and Raetia (16-15 B.C.), which brought under Roman 
control the mountainous district through which the direct 
routes lay from North Italy to the upper waters of the Rhine 
and the Danube. East of Noricum Tiberius reduced to order 
for the time the restless tribes of Pannonia, and probably 
established a military post at Carnuntum on the Danube. To 
Drusus fell the more ambitious task of advancing the Roman 
frontier line from the Rhine to the Elbe, a work which occupied 
him until his death in Germany in 9 B.C. In 13 B.C. Augustus 
had returned to Rome; his return, and the conclusion of his 
second period of rule, were commemorated by the erection of 
one of the most beautiful monuments of the Augustan age, the 
Ara Pacis Augustae (see Roman Art, PI. II, III). His, imperium 
was renewed, again for five years, and in 12 B.C., on the death of 
his former fellow-triumvir Lepidus, he was elected Pontifex 
Maximus. But this third period of his imperium brought with it 
losses which Augustus must have keenly felt. Only a few months 
after his reappointment as Augustus's colleague, Marcus Agrippa, 
his trusted friend since boyhood, died. As was fully his due, 
his funeral oration was pronounced by Augustus, and he was 
buried in the mausoleum near the Tiber built by Augustus for 
himself and his family. Three years later his brilliant step-son 
Drusus died on his way back from a campaign in Germany, in 
which he had reached the Elbe. Finally in 8 B.C. he lost the 
comrade who next to Agrippa had been the most intimate 



friend and counsellor of his early manhood, Gaius Cilnius Mae- 
cenas, the patron of Virgil and Horace. 

For the moment Augustus turned, almost of necessity, to his 
surviving step-son. Tiberius was associated with him as Agrippa 
had been in the tribunician power, was married against his 
will to Julia, and sent to complete his brother Drusus's work in 
Germany (7-6 B.C.). But Tiberius was only his step-son, and, 
with all his great qualities, was never a very lovable man. 
On the other hand, the two sons of Agrippa and Julia, Gaius 
and Lucius, were of his own blood and evidently dear to him. 
Both had been adopted by Augustus (17B.C.). In 6 B.C. Tiberius, 
who had just received the tribunician power, was transferred 
from Germany to the East, where the situation in Armenia 
demanded attention. His sudden withdrawal to Rhodes has 
been variously explained, but, in part at least, it was probably 
due to the plain indications which Augustus now gave of his 
wish that the young Caesars should be regarded as his heirs. 
The elder, Gaius, now fifteen years old (5 B.C.), was formally 
introduced to the people as consul-designate by Augustus 
himself, who for this purpose resumed the consulship (12th) 
which he had dropped since 23 B.C., and was authorized to take 
part in the deliberations of the senate. Three years later 
(2 B.C.) Augustus, now consul for the 13th and last time, paid a 
similar compliment to the younger brother Lucius. In 1 B.C. 
Gaius was given proconsular imperium, and sent to re-establish 
order in Armenia, and a few years afterwards (a.d. 2) Lucius 
was sent to Spain, apparently to take command of the legions 
there. But the fates were unkind; Lucius fell sick and died 
at Marseilles on his way out, and in the next year (a.d. 3) Gaius, 
wounded by an obscure hand in Armenia, started reluctantly 
for home, only to die in Lycia. Tiberius alone was left, and 
Augustus, at once accepting facts, formally and finally declared 
him to be his colleague and destined successor (a.d. 4) and 
adopted him as his son. 

The interest of the last ten years of Augustus's life centres 
in the events occurring on the northern frontier. The difficult 
task of bringing the German tribes between the Rhine and the 
Elbe under Roman rule, commenced by Drusus in 13 B.C., had 
on his death been continued by Tiberius (9-6 B.C.). During 
Tiberius's retirement in Rhodes no decisive progress was made, 
but in a.d. 4 queries on a large scale were resumed. From
Velleius Paterculus, who himself served in the war, we learn 
that in the first campaign Roman authority was restored over 
the tribes between the Rhine and the Weser, and that the Roman 
forces, instead of returning as usual to their headquarters on 
the Rhine, went into winter-quarters near the source of the 
Lippe. In the next year (a.d. 5) the Elbe was reached by the 
troops, while the fleet, after a hazardous voyage, arrived at 
the mouth of the same river and sailed some way up it. Both 
feats are deservedly commemorated by Augustus himself in the 
Ancyran monument. To complete the conquest of Germany 
and to connect the frontier with the line of the Danube, it 
seemed that only one thing remained to be done, to break the 
power of the Marcomanni and their king Maroboduus. In the 
spring of a.d. 6 preparations were made for this final achieve- 
ment; the territory of the Marcomanni (now Bohemia) was 
to be invaded simultaneously by two columns. One, starting 
apparently from the headquarters of the army of Upper Germany 
at Mainz, was to advance by way of the Black Forest and attack 
Maroboduus on the west; the other, led by Tiberius himself, 
was to start from the new military base at Carnuntum on the 
Danube and operate from the south-east. 

But the attack was never delivered, for at this moment, in 
the rear of Tiberius, the whole of Pannonia and Dalmatia burst 
into a blaze of insurrection. The crisis is pronounced by Suetonius 
to have been more serious than any which had confronted Rome 
since the Hannibalic war, for it was not merely the loss of a 
province but the invasion of Italy that was threatened, and 
Augustus openly declared in the senate that the insurgents 
might be before Rome in ten days. He himself moved to 
Ariminum to be nearer the seat of war, recruiting was vigorously 
carried on in Rome and Italy, and legions were summoned from 



914 



AUGUSTUS I. 



Moesia and even from Asia. In the end, and not including the 
Thracian cavalry of King Rhoemetalces, a force of 15 legions 
with an equal number of auxiliaries was employed. Even so 
the task of putting down the insurrection was difficult enough, 
and it was not until late in the summer of a.d. 9, after three years 
of fighting, that Germanicus, who had been sent to assist Tiberius, 
ended the war by the capture of Andetrium in Dalmatia. 

Five days later the news reached Rome of the disaster to Varus 
and his legions, in the heart of what was to have been the new 
province of Germany beyond the Rhine. The disaster was 
avowedly due entirely to Varus's incapacity and vanity, and 
might no doubt have been repaired by leaders of the calibre of 
Tiberius and Germanicus. Augustus, however, was now seventy- 
two, the Dalmatian outbreak had severely tried his nerve, and 
now for the second time in three years the fates seemed to pro- 
nounce clearly against a further prosecution of his long-cherished 
scheme of a Roman Germany reaching to the Elbe. 

All that was immediately necessary was done. Recruiting 
was pressed forward in Rome, and first Tiberius and then 
Germanicus were despatched to the Rhine. But the German 
leaders were too prudent to risk defeat, and the Roman generals 
devoted their attention mainly to strengthening the line of the 
Rhine. 

The defeat of Varus, and the tacit abandonment of the plans 
of expansion begun twenty-five years before, are almost the last 
events of importance in the long principate of Augustus. The 
last five years of his life (a.d. 10-14) were untroubled by war 
or disaster. Augustus was ageing fast, and was more and more 
disinclined to appear personally in the senate or in public. Yet 
in a.d. 13 he consented, reluctantly we are told, to yet one more 
renewal of his imperium for ten years, stipulating, however, that 
his step-son Tiberius, himself now over fifty, should be associated 
with himself on equal terms in the administration of the empire. 
Early in the same year (January 16, a.d. 13) the last triumph 
of his principate was celebrated. Tiberius was now in Rome, 
the command on the Rhine having been given to Germanicus, 
who went out to it immediately after his consulship (a.d. 12), 
and the time had come to celebrate the Dalmatian and Pannonian 
triumph, which the defeat of Varus had postponed. Augustus 
witnessed the triumphal procession, and Tiberius, as it turned 
from the Forum to ascend the Capitol, halted, descended from 
his triumphal car, and did reverence to his adopted father. 

One last public appearance Augustus made in Rome. During 
a.d. 13 he and Tiberius conducted a census of Roman citizens, 
the third taken by his orders; the first having been in 28 B.C. 
at the very outset of his rule. The business of the census lasted 
over into the next year, but on the nth of May, a.d. 14, before 
a great crowd in the Campus Martius, Augustus took part in the 
solemn concluding ceremony of burying away out of sight .the old 
age and inaugurating the new. The ceremony had been full 
of significance in 28 B.C., and now more than forty years later 
it was given a pathetic interest by Augustus himself. When the 
tablets containing the vows to be offered for the welfare of the 
state during the next lustrum were handed to him, he left the 
duty of reciting them to Tiberius, saying that he would not take 
vows which he was never destined to perform. 

It was apparently at the end of June or early in July that 
Augustus left Rome on his last journey. Travelling by road 
to Astura (Torre Astura) at the southern point of the little bay 
of Antium, he sailed thence to Capri and to Naples. On his way 
at Puteoli, the passengers and crew of a ship just come from 
Alexandria cheered the old man by their spontaneous homage, 
declaring, as they poured libations, that to him they owed life, 
safe passage on the seas, freedom and fortune. 

At Naples, in spite of increasing disease, he bravely sat out 
a gymnastic contest held in his honour, and then accompanied 
Tiberius as far as Beneventum on his way to Brundusium and 
Illy ri cum. On his return he was forced by illness to stop at 
Nola, his father's old home. Tiberius was hastily recalled and 
had a last confidential talk on affairs of state. Thenceforward, 
says Suetonius, he gave no more thought to such great affairs. 
He bade farewell to bis friends, inquired after the health of 



Drusus's daughter who was ill, and then quietly expired in the 
arms of the wife who for more than fifty years had been his most 
intimate and trusted guide and counsellor, and to whom his 
last words were an exhortation to " live mindful of our wedded 
life." He died on the 19th of August, a.d. 14, in the same room 
in which his father had died before him, and on the anniversary 
of his entrance upon his first consulship fifty-seven years before 
(43 B.C.). The corpse was carried to Rome in slow procession 
along the Appian Way. On the day of the funeral it was borne 
to the Campus Martius on the shoulders of senators and there 
burnt. The ashes were reverently collected by Livia, and placed 
in the mausoleum by the Tiber which her husband had built 
for himself and his family. The last act was the formal decree 
of the senate by which Augustus, like his father Julius before 
him, was added to the number of the gods recognized by the 
Roman state. 

If we except writers like Voltaire who could see in Augustus 
only the man who had destroyed the old republic and extin- 
guished political liberty, the verdict of posterity on Augustus 
has varied just in proportion as his critics have fixed their 
attention, mainly, on the means by which he rose to power, 
or the use which he made of the power when acquired. The" 
lines of argument followed respectively by friendly and hostile 
contemporaries immediately after his death (Tac. Ann. i. 9, 10) 
have been followed by later writers with little change. But of 
late years, our increasing mistrust of the current gossip about 
him, and our increased knowledge of the magnitude of what 
he actually accomplished, have conspicuously influenced the 
judgments passed upon him. We allow the faults and crimes 
of his early manhood, his cruelties and deceptions, his readiness 
to sacrifice everything that came between him and the end 
he had in view. On the other hand, a careful study of what 
he achieved between the years 38 B.C., when he married Livia, 
and his death in a.d. 14, is now held to give him a claim to rank, 
not merely as an astute and successful intriguer, or an accom- 
plished political actor, but as one of the world's great men, a 
statesman who conceived and carried through a scheme of 
political reconstruction which kept the empire together, secured 
peace and tranquillity, and preserved civilization for more than 
two centuries. 

Bibliography. — The most comprehensive work on Augustus and 
his age is that of V. Gardthausen, Augustus und seine Zeit (2 vols., 
Leipzig, 1891-1904), which deals with all aspects of Augustus's life, 
vol. ii. consisting of elaborate critical and bibliographical notes. 
See also histories of Rome generally, and among special works: — 
E. S. Shuckburgh, Augustus (London, 1903; reviewed by F. T. 
Richards in Class. Rev. vol. xviii.), containing the text of the Monu- 
mentum Ancyranum (see also Gardthausen, book xiii.) ; J. B. Firth, 
Augustus Caesar (London, 1903), in " Heroes of the Nations " 
.series; O. Seeck, " Kaiser Augustus " (Monographien zur Welt- 
geschichte, xvii., 1902), nine essays on special problems, e.g. the 
campaigns of Mutina, Perusia and against Sextus Pompeius, "das 
Augustische Zeitalter"; A. Dumeril, " Auguste et la fondation de 
l'empire romain," in the Annates de la Fac. des lett. de Bordeaux 
(1890); a suggestive monograph on the reforms of Augustus in 
relation to the decrease of population is Jules Ferlet's L' Abaissement 
de la natalite & Rome (Paris, 1902). (H. F. P.) 

AUGUSTUS I. (1526-1586), elector of Saxony, was the younger 
son of Henry, duke of Saxony, and consequently belonged to the 
Albertine branch of the Wettin family. Born at Freiberg on the 
31st of July 1526, and brought up as a Lutheran, he received a 
good education and studied at the university of Leipzig. When 
Duke Henry died in 1541 he decreed that his lands should be 
divided equally between his two sons, but as his bequest was 
contrary to law, it was not carried out, and the dukedom passed 
almost intact to his elder son, Maurice. Augustus, however, 
remained on friendly terms with his brother, and to further his 
policy spent some time at the court of the German king, Ferdinand 
I., in Vienna. In 1544 Maurice secured the appointment of his 
brother as administrator of the bishopric of Merseburg; but 
Augustus was very extravagant and was soon compelled to return 
to the Saxon court at Dresden. Augustus supported his brother 
during the war of the league of Schmalkalden, and in the policy 
which culminated in the transfer of the Saxon electorate from 
John Frederick I., the head of the Ernestine branch of the Wettin 



]• 



AtfGtfiSTUS' II. 



915 



family, to Maurice. On the 7 th of October 1548 Augustus was 
married at Torgau to Anna, daughter of Christian III., king of 
Denmark, and took up his residence at Weissenfels. But he 
soon desired a more imposing establishment. The result was 
that Maurice made more generous provision for his brother, 
who acted as regent of Saxony in 1552 during the absence of the 
elector. Augustus was on a visit to Denmark when by Maurice's 
death in July 1553 he became elector of Saxony. 

The first care of the new elector was to come to terms with 
John Frederick, and to strengthen his own hold upon the electoral 
position. This object was secured by a treaty made at Naum- 
burg in February 1 554, when, in return for the grant of Altenburg 
and other lands, John Frederick recognized Augustus as elector 
of Saxony. The elector, however, was continually haunted by 
the fear that the Ernestines would attempt to deprive him of 
the coveted dignity, and his policy both in Saxony and in Ger- 
many was coloured by this fear. In imperial politics Augustus 
acted upon two main principles: to cultivate the friendship of 
the Habsburgs, and to maintain peace between the contending 
religious parties. To this policy may be traced his share in 
bringing about the religious peace of Augsburg in 1555, his 
tortuous conduct at the diet of Augsburg eleven years later, 
and his reluctance to break entirely with the Calvinists. On 
one occasion only did he waver in his allegiance to the Habsburgs. 
In 1568 a marriage was arranged between John Casimir, son of 
the elector palatine, Frederick III., and Elizabeth, a daughter 
of Augustus, and for a time it seemed possible that the Saxon 
elector would support his son-in-law in his attempts to aid the 
revolting inhabitants of the Netherlands. Augustus also entered 
into communication with the Huguenots; but his aversion to 
foreign complications prevailed, and the incipient friendship 
with the elector palatine soon gave way to serious dislike. 
Although a sturdy Lutheran the elector hoped at one time to 
unite the Protestants, on whom he continually urged the necessity 
of giving no cause of offence to their opponents, and he favoured 
the movement to get rid of the clause in the peace of Augsburg 
concerning ecclesiastical reservation, which was offensive to 
many Protestants. His moderation, however, prevented him 
from joining those who were prepared to take strong measures 
to attain this end, and he refused to jeopardize the concessions 
already won. 

The hostility between the Albertines and the Ernestines 
gave serious trouble to Augustus. A preacher named Matthias 
Flacius held an influential position in ducal Saxony, and taught 
a form of Lutheranism different from that taught in electoral 
Saxony. This breach was widened when Flacius began to make 
personal attacks on Augustus, to prophesy his speedy downfall, 
and to incite Duke John Frederick to make an effort to recover 
his rightful position. Associated with Flacius was a knight, 
William of Grumbach, who, not satisfied with words only, made 
inroads into electoral Saxony and sought the aid of foreign 
powers in his plan to depose Augustus. After some delay 
Grumbach and his protector, John Frederick, were placed under 
the imperial ban, and Augustus was entrusted with its execution. 
His campaign in 1 567 was short and successful. John Frederick 
surrendered, and passed his time in prison until his death in 
1595; Grumbach was taken and executed; and the position of 
the elector was made quite secure. 

The form of Lutheranism taught in electoral Saxony was 
that of Melanchthon, and many of its teachers and adherents, 
who were afterwards called Crypto-Calvinists, were favoured by 
the elector. When Augustus, freed from the fear of an attack 
by the Ernestines, became gradually estranged from the elector 
palatine and the Calvinists, he seemed to have looked with 
suspicion upon the Crypto-Calvinists, who did not preach the 
pure doctrines of Luther. Spurred on by his wife the matter 
reached a climax in 1574, when letters were discovered, which, 
while revealing a hope to bring over Augustus to Calvinism, 
cast some aspersions upon the elector and his wife. Augustus 
ordered the leaders of the Crypto-Calvinists to be seized, and they 
were tortured and imprisoned. A strict form of Lutheranism 
was declared binding upon all the inhabitants of Saxony, and 



many persons were banished from the country. In 1576 he 
made a serious but unsuccessful attempt to unite the Protestants 
upon the basis of some articles drawn up at Torgau, which in*. 
culcated a strict form of Lutheranism. The change in Saxony, 
however, made no difference to the attitude of Augustus on 
imperial questions. In 1576 he opposed the proposal of the 
Protestant princes to- make a grant for the Turkish War con- 
ditional upon the abolition of the clause concerning ecclesiastical 
reservation, and he continued to support the Habsburgs. 

Much of the elector's time was devoted to extending his 
territories. In 1573 he became guardian to the two sons of John 
William, duke of Saxe- Weimar, and in this capacity was able 
to add part of the county of Henneberg to electoral Saxony. 
His command of money enabled him to take advantage of the 
poverty of his neighbours, and in this way he secured Vogtland 
and the county of Mansfeld. In 1555 he had appointed one of 
his nominees to the bishopric of Meissen, in 1561 he had secured 
the election of his son Alexander as bishop of Merseburg, and 
three years later as bishop of Naumburg; and when this prince 
died in 1565 these bishoprics came under the direct rule of 
Augustus. 

As a ruler of Saxony Augustus was economical and enlightened. 
He favoured trade by encouraging Flemish emigrants to settle 
in the country, by improving the roads, regulating the coinage 
and establishing the first posts. He was specially interested in 
benefiting agriculture, and added several fine buildings to the 
city of Dresden. His laws were numerous and comprehensive. 
The constitution of 1572 was his work, and by these laws the 
church, the universities and the police were regulated, the 
administration of justice was improved, and the raising of taxes 
placed upon a better footing (see Saxony) . 

In October 1585 the electress Anna died, and a few weeks 
later Augustus married Agnes Hedwig, a daughter of Joachim 
Ernest, prince of Anhalt. His own death took place at Dresden 
on the 21st of January 1586, and he was buried at Freiberg. 
By his first wife he had fifteen children, but only four of these 
survived him, among whom was his successor, the elector 
Christian I. (1 560-1 591). Augustus was a covetous, cruel and 
superstitious man, but these qualities were redeemed by his 
political caution and his wise methods of government. He 
wrote a small work on agriculture entitled Kunsllich Obst- 
und Gartenbiichlein. 

See C. W. Bottiger and T. Flathe, Geschichte Sachsens, Band ii. 
(Gotha, 1870) ; M. Ritter, Deutsche Geschichte im Zeitalter der Gegen- 
reformation, Band i. (Stuttgart, 1890) ; R. Calinich, Kampf und 
Untergang des Melanchthonismus in Kursachsen (Leipzig, 1866); 
J. Falke, Geschichte des Kurfursten August in volkswirtschaftlicher 
Beziehung (Leipzig, 1868); J. Janssen, Geschichte des Deutschen 
Volks seit dem Ausgang des Mittelalters (Freiburg, 1885-1894); 
W. Wenck, Kurfiirst Moritz und Herzog August (Leipzig, 1874). 

AUGUSTUS II., king of Poland, and, as Frederick Augustus 
I., elector of Saxony (1670-1733), second son of John George III., 
elector of Saxony, was born at Dresden on the 12th of May 1670. 
He was well educated, spent some years in travel and in fighting 
against France, and on account of his immense strength was 
known as " the Strong." On the death of his brother, John 
George IV., in 1694, he became elector of Saxony, and in 1695 
and 1696 led the imperial troops against the Turks, but without 
very much success. When John Sobieski died in 1696, Augustus 
was a candidate for the Polish throne, and in order to further 
his chances became a Roman Catholic, a step which was strongly 
resented in Saxony. By a lavish expenditure of money, and by 
his promptness in entering the country, he secured his election 
and coronation in September 1697, and his principal rival F. L. 
de Bourbon, prince of Conti, abandoned the contest and returned 
to France. Augustus continued the war against the Turks for 
a time, and being anxious to extend his influence and to find a 
pretext for retaining the Saxon troops in Poland, made an 
alliance in 1699 with Russia and Denmark against Charles XII. 
of Sweden. The Poles would not assist, and at the head of the 
Saxons Augustus invaded Livonia, but for various causes the 
campaign was not a success, and in July 1702 he was defeated 
by Charles at Klissow. Augustus was then deposed in Poland, 



i6 



AUGUSTUS III.— AULIC COUNCIL 



and after holding Warsaw for a short time he fled to Saxony. 
The alliance with Russia was renewed and in reply Charles 
invaded Saxony in 1706, and compelled the elector to sign the 
treaty of Altranstadt in September of that year, to recognize 
Stanislaus Leszczynski as his successor in Poland, and to abandon 
the Russian alliance. During the War of the Spanish Succession, 
Augustus fought with the imperialists in the Netherlands, but 
after the defeat of Charles XII. at Poltawa in July 1709, he 
turned his attention to the recovery of Poland. Declaring the 
treaty of Altranstadt void and renewing his alliance with Russia 
and Denmark, he quickly recovered the Polish crown. He then 
attacked Swedish Pomerania. He was handicapped by the 
mutual jealousy of the Saxons and the Poles, and a struggle 
broke out in Poland which was only ended when the king pro- 
mised to limit the number of his army in that country to 18,000 
men. Peace was made with Sweden in December 17 19 at 
Stockholm after the death of Charles XII., and Augustus was 
recognized as king of Poland. His remaining years were spent 
in futile plans to make Poland a hereditary monarchy, to 
weaken the power of the Saxon nobles, and to gain territory 
for his sons in various parts of Europe. He was a man of ex- 
travagant and luxurious tastes, and, although he greatly improved 
the city of Dresden, he cannot be called a good ruler. He 
sought to govern Saxony in an absolute fashion, and, in spite 
of his declaration that his conversion to Roman Catholicism 
was personal only, assisted the spread of the teachings of Rome. 
His wife was Christine Eberhardine, a member of the Hohen- 
zollern family, who left him when he became a Roman Catholic, 
and died in 1727. Augustus died at Warsaw on the 1st of 
February 1733, leaving a son Frederick Augustus, who succeeded 
him in Poland and Saxony, and many illegitimate children, 
among whom was the famous general, Maurice of Saxony, 
known as Marshal Saxe (g.v.). 

See Otwikowski, History of Poland under Augustus II. (Cracow, 
1849) ; F. Forster, Die Hofe und Kabinette Europas im achtzehnten 
Jahrhundert (Potsdam, 1839) ; Jarochowski, History of Augustus II. 
(Posen, 1856-1874); C. W. Bcittiger and T. Flathe, Geschichte des 
Kurstaates und Konigreichs Sachsen (Gotha, 1867-1873). 

AUGUSTUS III., king of Poland, and, as Frederick Augustus 
II., elector of Saxony (1696-1763), the only legitimate son of 
Augustus II. (" the Strong "), was born at Dresden on the 17th 
of October 1696. Educated as a Protestant, he followed his 
father's example by joining the Roman Catholic Church in 1712, 
although his conversion was not made public until 17 17. In 
August 1 7 19 he married Maria Josepha, daughter of the emperor 
Joseph I., and seems to have taken very little part in public 
affairs until he became elector of Saxony on his father's death 
in February 1733. He was then a candidate for the Polish 
crown; and having purchased the support of the emperor 
Charles VI. by assenting to the Pragmatic Sanction, and that 
of the czarina Anne by recognizing the claim of Russia to Cour- 
land, he was elected king of Poland in October 1733. Aided 
by the Russians, his troops drove Stanislaus Leszczynski from 
Poland; Augustus was crowned at Cracow in January 1734, 
and was generally recognized as king at Warsaw in June 1736. 
On the death of Charles VI. in October 1740, Augustus was 
among the enemies of his daughter Maria Theresa, and, as a 
son-in-law of the emperor Joseph I., claimed a portion of the 
Habsburg territories. In 1742, however, he was induced to 
transfer his support to Maria Theresa, and his troops took part 
in the struggle against Frederick the Great during the Silesian 
wars, and again when the Seven Years' War began in 1756. 
Saxony was in that year attacked by the Prussians, and with 
so much success that not only was the Saxon army forced to 
capitulate at Pima in October, but the elector, who fled to 
Warsaw, made no attempt to recover Saxony, which remained 
under the dominion of Frederick. When the treaty of Huberts- 
burg was concluded in February 1763, he returned to Saxony, 
where he died on the 5th of October 1763. He left five sons, 
the eldest of whom was his successor in Saxony, Frederick 
Christian; and five daughters, one of whom was the wife of 
Louis, the dauphin of France, and mother of Louis XVI. Another 



daughter was the wife of Charles III., king of Spain, but she 
predeceased her father. Augustus, who showed neither talent 
nor inclination for government, was content to leave Poland 
under the influence of Russia, and Saxony to the rule of his 
ministers. He took great interest in music and painting, and 
added to the collection of art treasures at Dresden. 

See C. W. Bottiger and T. Flathe, Geschichte des Kurstaates und 
Konigreichs Sachsen (Gotha, 1867-1873); R. Ropell, Polen um die 
Mitte des 18. Jahrhunderts (Gotha, 1876). 

AUGUSTUSBAD, a watering-place of Germany, in the king- 
dom of Saxony, 10 m. E. from Dresden, close to Radeberg, 
in a pleasant valley. Pop. 900. It has five saline chalybeate 
springs, used both for drinking and bathing, and specific in 
feminine disorders, rheumatism, paralysis and neuralgia. The 
spa is largely frequented in summer and has agreeable public 
rooms and gardens. 

AUK, a name commonly given to several species of sea-fowl. 
A special interest attaches to the great auk {Alca impennis), 
owing to its recent extinction and the value of its eggs to 
collectors. (See Garefowl; also Guillemot, Puffin, Razor- 
bill.) 

AULARD, FRANCOIS VICTOR ALPHONSE (1849- ), 
French historian, was born at Montbron in Charente in 1849. 
Having obtained the degree of doctor of letters in 1877 with a 
Latin thesis upon C. Asinius Pollion and a French one upon 
Giacomo Leopardi (whose works he subsequently translated into 
French), he made a study of parliamentary oratory during the 
French Revolution, and published two volumes upon Les 
Orateurs de la constituante (1882) and upon Les Orateurs de la 
legislative et de la convention (1885). With these works, which 
were reprinted in 1905, he entered a fresh field, where he soon 
became an acknowledged master. Applying to the study of the 
French Revolution the rules of historical criticism which had 
produced such rich results in the study of ancient and medieval 
history, he devoted himself to profound research in the archives, 
and to the publication of numerous most important contribu- 
tions to the political, administrative and moral history of that 
marvellous period. Appointed professor of the history of the 
French Revolution at the Sorbonne, he formed the minds of 
students who in their turn have done valuable work. To him 
we owe the Recueil des actes du comite de salut public , (vol. i., 1889; 
vol. xvi., 1904); La SociiU des Jacobins; recueil de documents 
pour Vhistoire du club des Jacobins de Paris (6 vols., 1889-1897); 
and Paris pendant la reaction thermidorienne et sous le directoire, 
recueil de documents pour Vhistoire de I'esprit public d Paris 
(5 vols., 1898-1902), which was followed by an analogous collec- 
tion for Paris sous le consulat (2 vols., 1903-1904). For the 
Societe de 1'Histoire de la Revolution Francaise, which brought 
out under his supervision an important periodical publication 
called La Revolution francaise, he produced the Registre des 
deliberations du consulat provisoire (1894), and L'Etat de la 
France en Van VIII et en Van IX, with the reports of the 
prefects (1897), besides editing various works or memoirs written 
by men of the Revolution, such as J. C. Bailleul, Chaumette, 
Fournier (called the American), Herault de Sechelles, and 
Louvet de Couvrai. But these large collections of documents 
are not his entire output. Besides a little pamphlet upon 
Danton, he has written a Histoire politique de la Revolution 
francaise (1901), and a number of articles which have been 
collected in volumes under the title Eludes et lemons sur la Revolu- 
tion francaise (5 vols., 1893-1908). In a volume entitled Taine, 
historien de la Revolution franc aise (1 908), Aulardhas submitted the 
method of the eminent philosopher to a criticism, severe, perhaps 
even unjust, but certainly well-informed. This is, as it were, 
the " manifesto " of the new school of criticism applied to the 
political and social history of the Revolution (see Les Annates 
Re.volutionnaires, June 1908). 

See A. Mathiez, " M. Aulard, historien et professeur," in the 
Revue de la Revolution francaise (July 1908). (C. B.*) 

AULIC COUNCIL (Reichshofrat) , an organ of the Holy Roman 
Empire, originally intended for executive work, but acting 
chiefly as a judicature, which worked from 1497 to 1806. In the 



AULIE-ATA— AULOS 



9 1 ? 



early middle ages the emperor had already his consiliarii ; 
but his council was a fluctuating body of personal advisers. 
In the 14th century there first arose an official council, with 
permanent and paid members, many of whom were legists. 
Its business was largely executive, and it formed something of a 
ministry; but it had also to deal with petitions addressed to the 
king, and accordingly it acted as a supreme court of judicature. 
It was thus parallel to the king's council, or concilium continuum, 
of medieval England; while by its side, during the 15th century, 
stood the Kammergericht, composed of the legal members of the 
council, in much the same way as the Star Chamber stood 
beside the English council. But the real history of the Aulic 
Council, as that term was understood in the later days of the 
Empire, begins with Maximilian I. in 1497-1498. In these years 
Maximilian created three organs (apparently following the 
precedent set by his Burgundian ancestors in the Netherlands) — 
a Hofrat, a H of hammer for finance, and a Hofkanzlei. Primarily 
intended for the hereditary dominions of Maximilian, these 
bodies were also intended for the whole Empire ; and the 
Hofrat was to deal with " all and every business which may 
flow in from the Empire, Christendom at large, or the king's 
hereditary principalities." It was thus to be the supreme 
executive and judicial organ, discharging all business except 
that of finance and the drafting of documents; and it was 
intended to serve Maximilian as a point d'appui for the monarchy 
against the system of oligarchical committees, instituted by 
Berthold, archbishop of Mainz. But it was difficult to work such 
a body both for the Empire and for the hereditary principalities; 
and under Ferdinand I. it became an organ for the Empire alone 
(circ. 1558), the hereditary principalities being removed from its 
cognizance. As such an imperial organ, its composition and 
powers were fixed by the treaty of Westphalia of 1648. (1) It 
consisted of about 20 members — a president, a vice-president, 
the vice-chancellor of the Empire, and some 18 other members. 
These came partly from the Empire at large, partly (and in 
greater numbers) from the hereditary lands of the emperor. 
There were two benches, one of the nobles, one of doctors of 
civil law; six of the members must be Protestants. The council 
followed the person of the emperor, and was therefore stationed 
at Vienna; it was paid by the emperor, and he nominated its 
members, whose office terminated with his life — an arrangement 
which made the council more dependent than it should have been 
on the emperor's will. (2) Its powers were nominally both 
executive and judicial, (a) Its executive powers were small: 
it gradually lost everything except the formal business of in- 
vestiture with imperial fiefs and the confirmation of charters, 
its other powers being taken over by the Geheimrdte. These 
Geheimrdte, a narrow body of secret counsellors, had already 
become a determinate concilium by 1527; and though at first 
only concerned with foreign affairs, they acquired, from the 
middle of the 16th century onwards, the power of dealing with 
imperial affairs in lieu of the Aulic Council. (6) In its judicial 
aspect, the Aulic Council, exercising the emperor's judicial 
powers on his behalf, and thus succeeding, as it were, to the old 
Kammergericht, had exclusive cognizance of matters relating 
to imperial fiefs, criminal charges against immediate vassals 
of the Empire, imperial charters, Italian affairs, and cases 
" reserved " for the emperor. In all other matters, the Aulic 
Council was a competitor for judicial work with the Imperial 
Chamber 1 (Reichskammergerichl, a tribunal dating from the 
great diet of Worms of 1495: see under Imperial Chamber). 
It was determined in 1648 that the one of these two judicial 
authorities which first dealt with a case should alone have com- 
petence to pursue it. An appeal lay from the decision of the 
council to the emperor, and judgment on appeal was given by 
those members of the council who had not joined in the original 
decision, though in important cases they might be afforced by 
members of the diet. Neither the council nor the chamber could 

1 The Aulic Council is the private court of the emperor, with its 
members nominated by him; the Imperial Chamber is the public 
court of the Empire, with its members nominated by the estates of 
the Empire. 



deal with cases of outlawry, except to prepare such cases for the 
decision of the diet. To-day the archives of the Aulic Council are 
in Vienna, though parts of its records have been given to the 
German states which they concern. 

Authorities. — R. Schroder, Lehrbuch der deutschen Rechts- 
geschichte (Leipzig, 1904), gives the main facts; S. Adler, Die 
Organisation dcr Centralverwaltung unter Maximilian I. (Leipzig, 
1886), deals with Maximilian's reorganization of the Council; and 
J. St. Putter, Historiscke Enhvickelung der heutigen Staatsverfassung 
des Teutschen Reichs (Gottingen, 1 798-1 799), may be consulted for its 
development and later form. (E.Br.) 

AULIE-ATA, a town and fort of Russian Turkestan, province 
of Syr-darya, 152 m. N.E. of Tashkent, on the Talas river, at 
the western end of the Alexander range, its altitude being 5700 ft. 
The inhabitants are mostly Sarts and Tajiks, trading in cattle, 
horses and hides. Pop. (1897) 12,006. 

AULIS, an ancient Boeotian town on the Euripus, situated 
on a rocky peninsula between two bays, near the modern village 
of Vathy, about 3 m. S. of Chalcis. Its fame was due to the 
tradition that it was the starting-place of the Greek fleet before 
the Trojan War, the scene of the sacrifice of Iphigenia. The 
temple of Artemis was still to be seen in the time of Pausanias. 

AULNOY (or Aunoy), MARIE CATHERINE LE JUMEL DE 

BARNEVILLE DE LA MOTTE, Baronne d' (c. 1650-1705), 

French author, was born about 1650 at Barneville near Bourg- 

Achard (Eure). She was the niece of Marie Bruneau des Loges, 

the friend of Malherbe and of J. G. de Balzac, who was called 

the " tenth Muse." She married on the 8th of March 1666 

Francois de la Motte, a gentleman in the service of Cesar, due de 

Vendome, who became Baron d'Aulnoy in 1654. With her 

mother, who by a second marriage had become marquise de 

Gudaigne, she instigated a prosecution for high treason against 

her husband. The conspiracy was exposed, and the two women 

saved themselves by a hasty flight to England. Thence they 

went (February 1679) to Spain, but were eventually allowed 

to return to France in reward for secret services rendered to 

the government. Mme. d'Aulnoy died in Paris on the 14th of 

January 1705. She wrote f&iry tales, Contes nouvelles ou les 

Fees d la mode (3 vols., 1698), in the manner of Charles Perrault. 

This collection (24 tales) included L'Oiseau bleu, Finette Cendron, 

La Chatte blanche and others. The originals of most of her 

admirable tales are to be found in the Pentamerone (1637) of 

Giovanni Battista Basile. Other works are : L'Histoired'Hippo- 

lyte, comte de Duglas (1690), a romance in the style of Madame 

de la Fayette, though much inferior to its model; Mimoires 

de la cour d'Espagne (1679-1681); and a Relation du voyage 

d'Espagne (i690or 1691) in the form of letters, edited in 1874-1876 

as La Cour et la ville de Madrid by Mme. B. Carey; Histoire de 

Jean de Bourbon (1692); Memoires sur la cour de France (1692); 

MSmoires de la cour d' Angleterre (1695). Her historical writings 

are partly borrowed from existing records, to which she adds 

much that must be regarded as fiction, and some vivid descriptions 

of contemporary manners. 

The Diverting Works of the Countess d'Anois, including some 
extremely untrustworthy " Memoirs of her own life," were printed 
in London in 1707. The Fairy Tales of Madame d'Aulnoy, with an 
introduction by Lady Thackeray Ritchie, appeared in 1892. For 
biographical particulars see M. de Lescure's introduction to the 
Conies des Fees (1881). 

AULOS (Gr. av\6s; Lat. tibia; Egyptian hieroglyphic, 
Ma-it ; medieval equivalents, shalm, chalumeau, schalmei, 
hautbois), in Greek antiquities, a class of wood- wind instruments 
with single or with double reed mouthpiece and either cylindrical 
or conical bore, thus corresponding to both oboe and clarinet. 
In its widest acceptation the aulas was a generic term for in- 
struments consisting of a tube in which the air column was set 
in vibration either directly by the lips of the performer, or through 
the medium of a mouthpiece containing a single or a double reed. 
Even the pipes of the pan-pipes {syrinx polycalamus, 1 o-vpiyl- 
woXvuaXa/jos) were sometimes called auloi (av\oi). The 
aulos is also the earliest prototype of the organ, which, by gradual 
assimilation of the principles of syrinx and bag-pipe, reached 
1 See Pollux, Onom. iv. 69. 



918 



AULOS 



the stage at which it became known as the Tyrrhenian aulos 
(Pollux iv. 70) or the hydraulos, according to the method of 
compressing the wind supply (see Organ: Early History ; and 
Syrinx). The aulos in its earliest form, the reed pipe, during 
the best classical period had a cylindrical bore (xoiXia) 
like that of the modern clarinet, and therefore had the acoustic 
properties of the stopped pipe, whether the air column was set in 
vibration by means of a single or of a double reed, for the mouth- 
piece does not affect the harmonic series. 1 To the acoustic 
properties of open or stopped pipes are due those essential 
differences which underlie the classification of modern wind 
instruments. A stopped pipe produces its fundamental tone 
one octave lower than the tone of an open pipe of corresponding 
length, and overblows the harmonics of the twelfth, and of the 
third above the second octave of the fundamental tone, i.e. 
the odd numbers of the series; whereas the open pipe gives the 
whole series of harmonics, the octave, the twelfth, the double 
octave, and the third above it, &c. 

To produce the diatonic scale throughout the octaves of its 
compass, the stopped pipe requires eleven lateral holes in the 
side of the pipe, at appropriate distances from each other, and 
from the end of the pipe, whereas the open pipe requires but 
six. The acoustic properties of the open pipe can only be secured 
in combination with a reed mouthpiece by making the bore 
conical. The late Romans (and therefore we may perhaps 
assume the Greeks also, since the Romans acknowledge their 
indebtedness to the Greeks in matters relating to musical in- 
struments, and more especially to the cithara and aulos) under- 
stood the acoustic principle utilized to-day in making wind 
instruments, that a hole of small diameter nearer the mouthpiece 
may be substituted for one of greater diameter in the theoretically 
correct position. This is demonstrated by the 4th- century 
grammarian Macrobius, who says (Comm. in Somn. Scip. ii. 4, 5) : 
" Nee secus probamus in tibiis, de quarum foraminibus vicinis 
inflantis ori sonus acutus emittitur, de longinquis autem et 
termino proximis gravior; item acutior per patentiora foramina, 
gravior per angusta " (see Bassoon). Aristotle gives directions 
for boring holes in the aulos, which would apply only to a pipe 
of cylindrical bore (Probl. xix. 23). At first the aulos had but 
three or four holes; to Diodorus of Thebes is due the credit of 
having increased this number (Pollux iv. 80). Pronomus, the 
musician, and teacher of Alcibiades (5th century B.C.), further 
improved the aulos by making it possible to play on one pair of 
instruments the three musical scales in use at his time, the Dorian, 
the Phrygian, and the Lydian, whereas previously a separate 
pair of pipes had been used for each scale (Pausanias ix. 12. 5; 
Athenaeus xiv. 31). These three modes would require a compass 
of a tenth in order to produce the fundamental octave in each. 

There are two ways in which this increased compass might 
have been obtained: (1) by increasing the number of holes 
and covering up those not required, (2) by means of contrivances 
for lowering the pitch of individual notes as required. We have 
evidence that both means were known to the Greeks and Romans. 
The simplest device for closing holes not in use was a band of 
metal left free to slide round the pipe, and having a hole bored 
through it corresponding in diameter with the hole in the pipe. 
Each hole was provided with a band, which was in some cases 
prevented from slipping down the pipe by narrow fixed rings 
of metal. The line on fig. 1 between r and s is thought to 
have been one of these rings. 

Some pipes had two holes pierced through the bands and the 
bone, in such a manner that only one could be exposed at a 
time. This is clearly shown in the diagram (fig. 1) of fragments 
of an aulos from the museum at Candia, for which the writer is 
greatly indebted to Professor John L. Myres, by whom measured 
drawings were made from the instrument in 1893. These 
highly interesting remains, judging from the closed end (5), 
seem to belong to a side-blown reed-pipe similar to the Maenad 
pipes in the Castellani collection at the British Museum, illus- 

1 See Friedrich Zamminer, Die Musik und die musikalischen 
Instrumente in ihrer Beziehung zu den Gesetzen der Akustik (Giessen, 
1855). P- 3°5 



trated below; they are constructed like modern flutes, but 
played by means of a reed inserted into the lateral embouchure. 

In the Candia pipe, it seems likely that Nos. 1 and 2 represented 
the bell end, slightly expanded, No. 3 joining the broken end of 
No. 2 at /; there being a possible fit at the other end at 5 with a 
in No. 4 (the drawings must in this case be imagined as reversed 
for parts 3 and 4), and No. 5 joining on to No. 4 at k. 

According to Professor Myres there are fragments of a pair 
of pipes in the Cyprus Museum of precisely the same construction 
as the one in Candia. In the drawing, the shape and relative 
position of the holes on the circumference is approximate only, 
but their position lengthways is measured. 

Bands of silver were found on the ivory pipes from Pompeii 2 
(fig. 2), as well as on two pipes belonging to the Castellani 
collection (fig. 4) and on one from Halicarnassus, in the British 
Museum. In order to enable the performer to use these bands 



/ 






wm 



a 



.r\ \-r^ 



n 



8ont..thvt 
fironzt " 



Scale of Inches 



^ 




(From a drawing by Prof. John L. Myres.) 

Fig. 1. — Diagram of the Fragments of an Aulos (Candia Mus.). 

a, Triple wrapping of bronze as 
well as slide. 
Slide with hole. 



b 

c, Slides with two holes not un- 

covered together. 

d, Slides with two holes not un- 

covered together, one hole 
at back. 

e, Slide. 

/, Slide missing. [holes. 

g, Slide missing, scars of slide 
h, Slide. 
i and j, Slide. 
k, Socket. 

/, Male half of joint. 
m, n 0, Slides, the top hole being 
in the slide only. 



p and q, Slides, with two holes ; 
the small hole shown is in the 
pipe, there being a corre- 
sponding hole in the slide at 
the back. 

r, Bronze covering (and slide?). 

s, Male joint. 

/, The wavy line shows the 
extreme length of fragment. 

u, 13 mm. inside diameter, 14 
mm. outside diameter. 

w, Engraved lines and conical 
form of bronze covering. 
Wavy line shows extreme 

length of fragment. 
Stopped end of pipe with 
engraved lines. 



x, 



The line between r and s is either a turned ring or part of bronze 
cover. The double lines to the right of / are engraved lines. 

conveniently, a contrivance such as a little ring, a horn or a 
hook termed keras (/cepas) was attached to the band. 8 

Thirteen of the bands on the Pompeian pipes still have sockets 
which probably originally contained kerata. Pollux (iv. 80) 
mentions that Diodorus of Thebes, in order to increase the 
range of the aulos, made lateral channels for the air (TKayiai 
68oi). These consisted of tubes inserted into the holes in the 
bands for the purpose of lengthening the column of air, and 
lowering individual notes at will, the sound being then produced 
at the extremity of the tube, instead of at the surface of the 
pipe. It is possible that some of the double holes in the slides 
of the Candia pipe were intended for the reception of these 
tubes. These lateral tubes form the archetype of the modern 
crook or piston. 4 The mouthpiece of the aulos was called zeugos 

2 These pipes were discovered during the excavations in 1867, 
and are now in the museum at Naples. Excellent reproductions and 
descriptions of them are given in " The Aulos or Tibia," by Albert 
A. Howard, Harvard Studies, vol. iv. (Boston, 1893), pi. ii. and 
PP- 48-55- 

3 For illustrations of auloi provided with these contrivances, see 
illustration (fig. 2) of an aulos from Pompeii; a relief in Vatican, 
No. 535 ;_ Helbig's Wandgemalde, Nos. 56, 69, 730, 765, &c. 

4 For illustrations of 6Soi showing the holes at the ends of the 
tubes, see Description des marbres antiques du Musee Campana, by 
H. d'Escamps, pi. 25 ; Wilhelm Froehner's Catalogue of the Louvre, 



AULOS 



919 



(feO-yos), 1 the reed tongue glossa* or glotta (yKSkrcra or yKuTTa), 
and the socket into which the reed was fixed glottis 3 (yKonris). 
The double reed was probably used at first, being the simplest 
form of mouthpiece; the word zeugos, moreover, signifies a 
pair of like things. There is, however, no difficulty in accepting 
the probability that a single beating reed or clarinet mouthpiece 
was used by the Greeks, since the ancient Egyptians used it 
with the as-it or arghoul (q.v.). 

The beak-shaped mouthpiece of a pipe found at Pompeii 
(fig. 3) has all the appearance of the beak of the clarinet, having, 
on the side not shown, the lay on which to 
fix a single or beating reed. 4 It may, how- 
ever, have been the cap of a covered reed, 
or even a whistle mouthpiece in which the 
lip does not show in the photograph. It is 
difficult to form a conclusion without seeing 
the real instrument. On a mosaic of Monnus 
in Treves 5 is represented an aulos which also 
appears to have a beak-shaped mouthpiece. 
The upper part of the aulos, as in the 
Pompeian pipes, frequently had the form of 
a flaring cup supported on a pear-shaped 
bulb, respectively identified as the holmos 
(oX/ws) and the hypholmion (v<f>6\niov), the 
support of the holmos. An explanation of 
the original nature and construction of the 
bulb and flaring cup, so familiar in the 
various representations of the aulos, and in 
the real instruments found in Pompeii, is 
provided by an ancient Egyptian flute 
belonging to the collection of G. Maspero, 
illustrated and described by Victor Loret. 6 
Loret calls the double bulb the beak mouth- 
piece of the instrument, and describes its 
construction; it consists of a piece of reed 
of larger diameter than that of the flute, 
and eight centimetres long; this reed has 
been forcibly compressed a little more than 
half way down by means of a ligature of 
twine, thus reducing the diameter from 6 
mm. to 4 mm. The end of the pipe, 
covered by rows of waxed thread, fits into 
the end of the smaller bulb, to which it was 
also bound by waxed thread exactly as in 
the Elgin pipe at the British Museum, 
described below. There is no indication of 
the manner in which the pipe was sounded, and Loret assumes 
that there was once a whistle or flageolet mouthpiece. To the 
present writer, however, it seems probable that the constricted 
diameter between the two bulbs formed a socket into which 
the double reed or straw was inserted, and that, in this case 
at least, the reed was not taken into the mouth, but vibrated 
in the upper bulb or air-chamber. This simple contrivance was 
probably also employed in the earliest Greek pipes, and was 
later copied and elaborated in wood, bone or metal, the upper 
bulb being made shorter and developing into the flaring cup, 
in order that the reeds might be taken directly into the mouth. 
During the best period of Greek music the reeds were taken 
directly into the mouth 7 and not enclosed in an air-chamber. 

No. 378; Glyptothek Museum at Munich, No. 188; Albert A. 
Howard, " The Aulos or Tibia," Harvard Studies, iv. (Boston, 1893), 
pi. 1, No. 1. 

1 For a description of the reed calamus from which pipe and 
mouthpiece were made see Theophrastus, Hist. Plant, iv. 11. 

2 Aeschines 86. 29; Aristotle, H.A. 6, io, 9, &c. 

3 Lucian, Harm. 1. 

4 Cf. article Mouthpiece. 

5 See Antike Denkmdler, Deutsches archaol. Inst., Berlin, 1891, 
vol. i. pi. 49. 

6 See " Les Flutes egyptiennes antiques," Journal asiatique, 
8th ser. vol. xiv. (Paris, 1889), pp. 212-215. 

'See Aristotle, De Audib. p. 802 b, 18, and p. 804 a; Festus, 
ed. Mueller, p. 116. 



V 



(Drawn from a photo by 
Brogi.l 

Fig. 2. — Roman 
Ivory Aulos found at 
Pompeii (Naples 
Mus.),showingslides 
and rings. 



(From a photo by Brogi.) 

Fig. 3. — Beak 
mouthpiece. Found 
at Pompeii (Naples 
Mus.). 



The two pipes were kept in position while the fingers stopped 
the holes and turned the bands by means of the (fropfida (Lat. 
capistrum) , a bandage encircling mouth and cheeks, and having 
holes through which the reed-mouthpiece passed into the mouth 
of the performer ; the phorbeia also relieved the pressure of the 
breath on the cheeks and lips, 8 which is 
felt more especially by performers on oboe 
and bassoon at the present day. 

In the pair of wooden pipes belonging to 
the Elgin collection at the British Museum, 
one of the bulbs, partly broken, but pre- 
served in the same case as the' pipes, was 
fastened to the pipes by means of waxed 
thread, the indented lines being still visible 
on the rim of the bulb. The aulos was 
kept in a case called sybene 9 (o-vfirjvrj) or 
aulotheke 10 (avKodrjicri) , and the little bag or 
case in which the delicate reeds were carried 
was known by the name of glottokomeion 10 
(yKoTTOKOfielov) . u Two Egyptian flute 
cases are extant, one in the Louvre, 12 and 
the other in the museum at Leiden. The 
latter case is of sycamore wood, cylindrical 
in shaDe, with a stopper of the same wood ; 
there is no legend or design upon it. The 
case contained seven pipes, five pieces of 
reed without bore or holes, and three pieces 
of straw suitable for making double-reed 
mouthpieces. 13 

Aristoxenus gives the full compass of a single pipe or pair of 
pipes as over three octaves:—" For doubtless we should find an 
interval greater than the above mentioned three octaves between 
the highest note of the soprano clarinet (aulos) and the lowest 
note of the bass-clarinet (aulos); and again between the highest 
note of a clarinet phyer performing with the speaker open, and 
the lowest note of a clarinet player performing with the speaker 
closed." 14 ; 

This, according to the tables of Alypius, would correspond to 
the full range of the Greek scales, a little over three octaves 

from <e= |— to J&=EEz. It is evident that the ancient 

Greeks obtained this full compass on the aulos by means of 
the harmonics. Proclus (Comm. in Alcibiad. chap. 68) states 
that from each hole of the pipe at least three tones could be 
produced. Moreover, classic writers maintain that if the per- 
former press the zeugos or the glottai of the pipes, a sharper 
tone is produced. 15 This is exactly how a performer on a 
modern clarinet or oboe produces the higher harmonics of the 
instrument. 16 The small bore of the aulos in comparison to its 
length facilitated the production of the harmonics (cf . Zamminer 
p. 218), as does also the use of a small hole near the mouthpiece, 
called in Greek syrinx (avpi.y£) and in the modern clarinet 
the " speaker," which when open enables the performer to over- 
blow with ease the first harmonic of the lowest fundamental 

8 See Albert A. Howard, op. cit. p. 29, and Dr Hugo Riemann, 
Gesch. d. Musik, Bd. i. T. I, p. m (Leipzig, 1904). 

9 Pollux, Onomasticon, vii. 153. 

10 Hesychius. 

11 Pollux ii. 108, vii. 153, x. 153-154; A. A. Howard, op. cit. pp. 
26-27. An illustration of the little bag is given in Denkmaler des 
klassischen Altertums, by August Baumeister, vol. i. p. 554, fig. 591. 

12 Two Egyptian pipes now in the Louvre were found in a case 
ornamented with a painting of a female musician playing a double 
pipe. See E. de Rouge, Notice sommaire des monuments egyptiens 
exposes dans les galeries du Louvre, p. 87. 

13 See Victor Loret, " Les Flutes egyptiennes antiques," in Journal 
asiatique, vol. xiv. (Paris, 1889), pp. 199, 200 and 201 (note), pp. 207, 
211 and 217, and Conrad Leemans, Description raisonnee des monu- 
ments egyptiens du Musee d'Antiquites de Leyde, p. 132, No. 489; 
contents of case Nos. 474-488. 

14 Aristoxenus, Harm. bk. i. 20 and. 21, H. S. Macran's edition 
with translation (Oxford, 1902), p. 179. 

15 Aristotle, De audib. p. 804. a-. Porphyry, ed. Wallis, p. 249; ibid. 
p. 252. 

16 Zamminer, op. cit. p. 301. 



920 



AUMALE 



tones. To Mr Albert A. Howard of Harvard University is due 
the credit of having identified the syrinx of the aulos with the 
speaker of the clarinet. 1 This assumption is. doubtless correct, 
and is supported by classical grammarians, 2 who state that the 
syrinx was one of the holes of the aulos. It renders quite clear 
certain passages in Aristoxenus, Aristotle and Plutarch, and a 
scholion to Pindar's 12th Pythian, which before were difficult 
to understand (see Syrinx). 

The aulos or tibia existed in a great number of varieties 
enumerated by Pollux (Onomasl. iv. 74 et seq.) and Athenaeus 




Fig. 4. — The Plagiaulos. Castellani Collection (Maenad Pipes), 
British Museum. 

(iv. 76 et seq.). They fall into two distinct classes, the single and 
the double pipes. There were three principal single pipes, the 
monaulos, the plagiaulos and the syrinx monocalamos. The 
double pipes were used by the great musicians of ancient Greece, 
and notably at the musical contests at Delphi, and what has been 
said above concerning the construction of the aulos refers 
mainly to the double pipes. The monaulos, a single pipe of 
Egyptian origin, which, by inference, we assume to have been 
played from the end by means of a reed, 
(\ may have been the archetype of the oboe 
or clarinet. The plagiaulos photinx or tibia 
obliqua, invented by the Libyans (Pollux iv. 
74) , or, according to Pliny (vii. 204) , by Midas 
of Phrygia, was held like the modern flute, 
but was played by means of a mouthpiece 
containing a reed. Three of the existing 
pipes at the British Museum (the two in 
the Castellani collection, and the pipe from 
Halicarnassus) belong to this type. The 
mouthpiece projects from the side of the 
pipe and communicates with the main bore 
by means of a slanting passage; the end 
nearest the mouthpiece is stopped as in the 
modern flute; in the latter, however, the 
embouchure is not closed by the lips when 
playing, and therefore the flute has the 
acoustic properties of the open pipe, whereas 



the plagiaulos ^^ing a reed mouthpiece gave 



Fig. 5. — Ancient 
Greek Double Pipes. 
Elgin Collection, 
British Museum. 



I, 
I \ 1 the harmonics Wa closed pipe. The double 

III \ 1 pipes existed in five sizes according to pitch, 

in the days of Aristoxenus, who, in a treatise 

on the construction of the auloi (Hepl avh&v 

Tpr/creojs) , unfortunately not extant, 3 divides 

them thus: — 

(1) Parthenioi auloi {■Ka.p6kvioia.vKoi), 
the maiden's auloi, corresponding to the 
soprano compass. 

(2) Paidikoi auloi (ttcuSikoi av\oi), the 
boy's pipes or alto auloi, used to accompany boys' songs and 
also in double pairs at feasts. 

(3) Kitharisterioi auloi (Ki0apioTi?pioi avKol), used to accom- 
pany the cithara. 

(4) Teleioi auloi, the perfect aulos, or tenor's pipes; also 
known as the pythic auloi (tv6lkoI avKoi); used for the paeans 
and for solos at the Pythean games (without chorus) . It was the 
pythic auloi and the kitharisterioi auloi more especially which were 
provided with the speaker (syrinx) in order to improve the 
harmonic notes (see Syrinx). 

1 Op. cit. p. 32-35. 

2 See Etymologicum magnum (Augsburg, 1848), s.v. " Syrinx." 

3 See Athenaeus xiv. 634, who quotes from Didymus. 



(5) Hyperteleioi auloi (vrepTtheioi avKoi) or andreioi auloi 
(avSpeloL avkoi) (see Athenaeus iv. 79), the bass-auloi. 

The Phrygian pipes or auloi Elymoi 4 were made of box- wood 
and were tipped with horn; they were double pipes, but differed 
from all others in that the two pipes were unequal in length and 
in the diameter of their bores 5 ; sometimes one of the pipes was 
curved upwards and terminated in a horn bell 6 ; they seem 
to have had a conical bore, if representations on monuments are 
to be trusted. We may conclude that the "archetype of the oboe 
with conical bore was not unknown to the Greeks; it was 
frequently used by the Etruscans and Romans, and appears on 
many bas-reliefs, mural paintings and other monuments. For 
illustrations see Wilhelm Froehner, Les M usees de France, pi. iii., 
" Marsyas playing the double pipes." There the bore is decidedly 
conical in the ratio of at least 1 : 4 between the mouthpiece and 
the end of the instrument; the vase is Roman, from the south 
of France. See also Bulletino della Commissione Archeologica 
Comunale di Roma, Rome, 1879, vol. vii., 2nd series, pi. vii. 
and p. 1 19 et seq., " Le Nozze di Elena e Paride," from a bas-relief 
in the monastery of S.Antonio on the Esquiline; Wilhelm Zahn, 
Die schonsten Ornamente und die merkwurdigsten Gemdlde aus 
Pompeji, Herkulaneum und Stabiae (German and French), vol. 
iii., pi. 43 and 51 (Berlin, 1828-1859). 

For further information on the aulos, consult Albert A. Howard, 
"The Aulos or Tibia," Harvard Studies, iv., 1893; Frangois A. 
Gevaert, Histoire de la musique dans Vantiquite, vol. ii. p. 273 et seq. ; 
Carl von Jan's article " Flote " in August Baumeister's Denkmaler 
des klassiscken Altertums (Munich, 1884-1888), vol. i. ; Dr Hugo 
Riemann, Handbuch der Musikgeschichte, Bd. I. T. 1, pp. 93-112 
(Leipzig, 1904) ; Caspar Bartholinus, De Tibiis Veterum (Amster- 
dam, 1779). (K. S.) 

AUMALE, HENRI EUGENE PHILIPPE LOUIS D'ORLEANS, 
Due d' (1822-1897), French prince and statesman, fifth son 
of Louis Philippe, duke of Orleans, afterwards king of the French, 
and of Marie Amelie, princess of the Two Sicilies, was born at 
Paris on the 16th of January 1822. While still young he in- 
herited a large fortune from the prince de Conde. Brought up 
by his parents with great simplicity, he was educated at the 
college of Henri IV., on leaving which at the age of seventeen 
he entered the army with the rank of a captain of infantry. 
He distinguished himself during the conquest of Algeria, and 
was appointed governor of that colony, in which capacity he 
received the submission of the amir Abd-el-Kader. After the 
revolution of 1848 he retired to England and busied himself with 
historical and military studies, replying in 1861 by a Letter upon 
the History of France to Prince Napoleon's violent attacks upon 
the house of Orleans. On the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian 
War he volunteered for service in the French army, but his offer 
was declined. Elected deputy for the Oise department, he 
returned to France, and succeeded to the fauteuil of the comte 
de Montalembert in the French Academy. In March 1872 he 
resumed his place in the army as general of division; and in 1873 
he presided over the court-martial which condemned Marshal 
Bazaine to death. About this period, being appointed com- 
mandant of the VII. army corps at Besancon, he retired from 
political life, and in 1879 became inspector-general of the army. 
By the act of exception passed in 1883 all members of families 
that had reigned in France serving in the army were deprived 
of their military positions; consequently the due d'Aumale 
was placed on the unemployed supernumerary list. Subse- 
quently, in 1886, another law was promulgated which expelled 
from French territory the heads of former reigning families, 
and provided that henceforward all members of those families 
should be disqualified for any public position or function, and 
for election to any public body. The due d'Aumale protested 
energetically, and was himself expelled. By his will of the 3rd 
of June 1884, however, he had bequeathed to the Institute of 
France his Chantilly estate, with all the art-collection he had 
gathered there. This generosity led the government to withdraw 
the decree of exile, and the duke returned to France in 1889. 

4 Pollux iv. 74. 

5 Servius ad Aen. ix. 615. 

6 Tibullus ii. 85; Virg. Aen. xi. 735; Ovid, Met. iii. 533, 
Ex Ponto i. I. 39. 



AUMALE— AUNGERVYLE 



921 



He died at Zucco in Sicily on the 7th of May 1897. Of his 
marriage, contracted in 1844 with his first cousin, Caroline de 
Bourbon, daughter of the prince of Salerno, were born two sons: 
the prince de Conde (d. 1866), and the due de Guise (d. 1872). 
The due d'Aumale's principal literary work was an Histoire des 
princes de Conde, which he left unfinished. 

See Georges Picot, M. le due d'Aumale (Paris, 1898); Ernest 
Daudet, Le due d'Aumale (Paris, 1898). (M. P.*) 

AUMALE, a town of northern France, in the department of 
Seine -Inferieure, on the left bank of the Bresle, 47 m. N.E. 
of Rouen on the Northern railway. Pop. (1906) 1999. The 
church is an interesting building of the 16th and 17th centuries, 
and has a portal attributed to Jean Goujon. The town has glass 
and steel works. 

The territory of Aumale (Albemarle, Aubemale, Aumerle; 
Lat. Alba Maria) in Normandy, a dependency of the archbishopric 
of Rouen, was granted to Odo of Champagne, brother-in-law 
of William the Conqueror, who founded the first line of counts 
of Aumale. Hawise (Hadwide, Havoise or Avoie), countess of 
Aumale, after the death of her first husband William de Mande- 
ville, earl of Essex (d. 11 89), married William des Forts (de Fors, 
or de Fortz; Lat. de Fortibus), a military adventurer who had been 
one of the commanders of the fleet under Richard I. during his 
first crusade. He died in 1195, and his widow married Baldwin 
de Betun, who became count of Aumale in her right. He died 
in 1213, and in 1214 William de Fortibus, son of Hawise by her 
second husband, was confirmed by King John in all his mother's 
laryis. Meanwhile, however, the territory of Aumale shared 
the fate of the rest of Normandy, and was annexed to the French 
crown by King Philip Augustus; but the title of earl of Albe- 
marle, derived from it, continued to be borne in England by 
William de Fortibus, and was passed on to his heirs (see Albe- 
marle). Aumale itself was conferred by Philip Augustus as an 
appanage on his son Philip. It was subsequently granted by 
Louis VIII. to Simon, count of Dammartin, whose daughter, 
Jeanne, countess of Dammartin, transferred it, together with 
the countship of Ponthieu, to the house of Castile, by her 
marriage with Ferdinand III., king of Castile, called the Saint 
(1238). It then remained in the possession of a branch of her 
descendants bearing the name of Ponthieu, until it passed to the 
house of Harcourt on the marriage of Blanche of Ponthieu with 
John, count of Harcourt (1340). Marie d'Harcourt (d. 1476), 
heiress of Aumale, married Anthony of Lorraine, count of 
Vaudemont, and Aumale was created a duchy in the peerage 
of France for Claude and Francis of Lorraine in 1547. By the 
marriage of Anne of Lorraine with the duke of Nemours in 
161 8 the duchy of Aumale passed to the house of Savoy-Nemours. 
In 1686 Marie Jeanne Baptiste, duchess of Nemours and of 
Aumale, and wife of Charles Emmanuel II., duke of Savoy, 
sold Aumale to Louis XIV., who gave it to his natural son, the 
duke of Maine. After the death of that prince, the dukedom 
devolved upon his brother, the count of Toulouse, subsequently 
passing to the latter's son, the duke of Penthievre, whose daughter 
married the duke of Orleans. Since the reign of Louis Philippe, 
king of the French, the title of duke of Aumale has been borne 
by a son of the duke of Orleans. 

AUMONT, the name of a family which played an important 
part in French history. The origin of the name is uncertain, 
but it has usually been derived from Aumont, now a small 
commune in the department of the Somme. The family was 
of great antiquity, a Jean, sire d'Aumont, having accompanied 
Louis IX. on crusade. It was already powerful in the 14th 
century, and during the English wars of that period its members 
fought in the armies of the kings of France. Towards the end 
of the century, the family took the part of the dukes of Burgundy, 
but returned to the side of France on the death of Charles the 
Bold. Jean d'Aumont, lieutenant-general to the king of France 
in the government of Burgundy, rendered important services 
to Louis XII. and Francis I. Another Jean d'Aumont (d. 159s), 
a marshal of France and knight of the order of the Holy Ghost 
since its institution in 1578, fought against the Huguenots 
under the last of the Valois kings; but he was among the first to 



recognize Henry IV., and was appointed governor of Champagne 
and of Brittany, where he had to fight against the League. His 
grandson Antoine (1601-1669) was also a marshal of France 
(1651), governor of Paris (1662), duke and peer (1665). Louis 
Marie Augustin, due d'Aumont (1 709-1 782), was a celebrated 
collector of works of art. Louis Marie Celeste d'Aumont, due de 
Piennes, afterwards due d'Aumont (1762-1831), emigrated 
during the Revolution and served in the army of the royalists, 
as also in the Swedish army. During the Hundred Days he 
effected a descent upon Normandy in the Bourbon interest, 
and succeeded in capturing Bayeux and Caen. 

AUNCEL (from the Anglo-Fr. auncelle, a confused derivation 
from l' auncelle, Ital. lancella, a little balance), a balance formerly 
used in England; now, in dialectical use, a term for the weighing 
of meat by hand instead of by scales. 

AUNDH, a native state of India, in the Deccan division of 
Bombay, ranking as one of the Satara Jagirs. Its area is 447 
sq. m.; its population was 63,921 in 1901, showing a decrease 
of 2% in the decade. Estimated revenue £9422. The chief, 
whose title is Pant Pratinidhi, is a Brahman by caste. The 
state has suffered severely from plague. The town of Aundh 
is situated 26 m. S.E. of Satara. Pop. about 3500. 

AUNGERVYLE, RICHARD (1287-1345), commonly known as 
Richard de Bury, English bibliophile, writer and bishop, was 
born near Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, on the 24th of January 
1287. He was the son of Sir Richard Aungervyle, who was 
descended from one of William the Conqueror's soldiers, settled 
in Leicestershire, where the family came into possession of the 
manor of Willoughby. His education was undertaken by his 
uncle, John de Willoughby, and after leaving the grammar 
school of his native place he was sent to Oxford, where he is 
said to have distinguished himself in philosophy and theology. 
John Pits 1 says, but apparently without authority, that he 
became a Benedictine monk. He was made tutor to Prince 
Edward of Windsor (afterwards Edward III.), and, according 
to Dibdin, inspired him with some of his own love of books. 
He was mixed up with the sordid intrigues which preceded 
the deposition of Edward II., and supplied Queen Isabella and 
Mortimer in Paris with money in 1325 from the revenues of 
Guienne, of which province he was treasurer. For some time 
he had to hide in Paris from the officers sent by Edward II. to 
apprehend him. On the accession of Edward III. his services 
were rewarded by rapid promotion. He was cofferer to the 
king, treasurer of the wardrobe and afterwards clerk of the 
privy seal. The king, moreover, repeatedly recommended him 
to the pope, and twice sent him, in 1330 and 1333, as ambassador 
to the papal court, then in exile at Avignon. On the first of 
these visits he made the acquaintance of a fellow bibliophile in 
Petrarch, who records his impression (Epist. Famil. lib. iii. 
Ep. 1 ) of the Englishman as "not ignorant of literature and . . . 
from his youth up curious beyond belief of hidden things." 
He asked him for information about Thule, but Aungervyle, 
who promised information when he should once more be at home 
among his books, never sent any answer, in spite of repeated 
enquiries. The pope, John XXII.,- made him his principal 
chaplain, and presented him with a rochet in earnest of the 
first vacant bishopric in England. 

During his absence from England he was made (1333) dean of 
Wells. In September of the same year the see of Durham fell 
vacant, and the king overruled the choice of the monks, who had 
elected and actually installed their sub-prior, Robert de Gray- 
stanes, in favour of Aungervyle. In February 1334 he was 
made lord treasurer, an appointment he exchanged later in 
the year for that of lord chancellor. This charge he resigned 
in the next year, and, after making arrangements for the protec- 
tion of his northern diocese from an expected inroad of the 
Scots, he proceeded in July 1336 to France to attempt a settle- 
ment of the claims in dispute between Edward and Philip. In 
the next year he served on three commissions for the defence 
of the northern counties. In June 1338 he was once more sent 
abroad to secure peace, but within a month of his appointment 
1 De III. Angl. Script. (1619, p. 467). 



922 



AUNT SALLY— AURANGZEB 



Edward himself landed in Flanders to procure allies for his ap- 
proaching campaign. Aungervyle accompanied him to Coblenz 
to his meeting with the emperor Louis IV., and in the 
next year was sent to England to raise money. This seems 
to have been his last visit to the continent. In 1340 and 1342 
he was again engaged in trying to negotiate peace with the 
Scots, but from this time his life appears to have passed quietly 
in the care of his diocese and in the accumulation of a library. 

He sent far and wide in search of manuscripts, rescuing many 
treasures from the charge of ignorant and neglectful monks. 
" No dearness of price," he says, " ought to hinder a man from 
the buying of books, if he has the money demanded for them, 
unless it be to withstand the malice of the seller or to await a 
more favourable opportunity of buying." It is to be supposed 
that Richard de Bury sometimes brought undue pressure to 
bear on the owners, for it is recorded that an abbot of St Albans 
bribed him to secure his influence for the house by four valuable 
books, and that de Bury, who procured certain coveted privileges 
for the monastery, bought from him thirty-two other books, 
for fifty pieces of silver, far less than their normal price. The 
record of his passion for books, his Philobiblon, was completed 
on his fifty-eighth birthday, the 24th of January 1345, and he 
died on the 14th of April (May, according to Adam Murimuth) 
of that year. He gives an account (chapter viii.) of the 
unwearied efforts made by himself and his agents to collect 
books. In the eighteenth chapter he records his intention of 
founding a hall at Oxford, and in connexion with it a library 
of which his books were to form the nucleus. He even details the 
rules to be observed for the lending and care of the books, and 
he had already taken the preliminary steps for the foundation. 
The bishop died, however, in great poverty, and it seems likely 
that his collection was dispersed immediately after his death. 
But the traditional account is that the books were sent to the 
Durham Benedictines at Oxford, and that on the dissolution 
of the foundation by Henry VIII. they were divided between 
Duke Humphrey of Gloucester's library, Balliol College and 
Dr George Owen. Only two of the volumes are known to be 
in existence; one is a copy of John of Salisbury's works in the 
British Museum, and the other some theological treatises by 
Anselm and others in the Bodleian. 

The chief authority for the bishop's life is William de Chambre 
(printed in Wharton's Anglia Sacra, 1691, and in Historiae 
Dunelmensis scriptores tres, Surtees Soc. 1839), who describes 
him as an amiable and excellent man, charitable in his diocese, 
and the liberal patron of many learned men, among these being 
Thomas Bradwardine, afterwards archbishop of Canterbury, 
Richard Fitzralph, afterwards archbishop of Armagh, the 
enemy of the mendicant orders, Walter Burley, who translated 
Aristotle, John Mauduit the astronomer, Robert Holkot and 
Richard de Kilvington. John Bale 1 and Pits 2 mention other 
works of his, Epistolae Familiar es and Oraliones ad Principes. 
The opening words of the Philobiblon and the Epistolae as given 
by Bale represent those of the Philobiblon and its prologue, 
so that he apparently made two books out of one treatise. It is 
possible that the Orationes may represent a letter book of 
Richard de Bury's, entitled Liber Epistolaris quondam domini 
Ricardi de Bury, Episcopi Dunelmensis, now in the possession 
of Lord Harlech. This MS., the contents of which are fully 
catalogued in the Fourth Report (1874) of the Historical MSS. 
Commission (Appendix, pp. 379-397), contains numerous letters 
from various popes, from the king, a correspondence dealing 
with the affairs of the university of Oxford, another with the 
province of Gascony, beside some harangues and letters evidently 
kept as models to be used on various occasions. 

It has often been asserted that the Philobiblon itself was not 
written by Richard de Bury at all, but by Robert Holkot. This 
assertion is supported by the fact that in seven of the extant 
MSS. of Philobiblon it is ascribed to Holkot'in an introductory 
note, in these or slightly varying terms: Incipit prologus in 
philobiblon ricardi dunelmensis episcopi que libru composuit 

1 Script. III. Maj. Brit. cent. v. No. 69. 

2 De III. Angl. Script. (1619, p. 468). 



Robertus holcote de ordine predicatorum sub nomine dicti episcopi. 
The Paris MS. has simply Philobiblon olchoti anglici, and does 
not contain the usual concluding note of the date when the book 
was completed by Richard. As a great part of the charm of 
the book lies in the unconscious record of the collector's own 
character, the establishment of Holkot's authorship would 
materially alter its value. A notice of Richard de Bury by his 
contemporary Adam Murimuth {Conlinuatio Chronicarum, Rolls 
Series, 1889, p. 171) gives a less favourable account of him than 
does William de Chambre, asserting that he was only moder- 
ately learned, but desired to be regarded as a great scholar. 

The original Latin text was printed at Cologne (1473), Spires 
(1483), Paris (1500), Oxford (1598 and 1599), &c. It was first trans- 
lated into English by J. B. Inglis in 1832, and into French by Hippo- 
lyte Cocheris in 1856. The best translation is that by Mr E. C. 
Thomas, accompanying the Latin text, with full biographical and 
bibliographical introductions (1888). Other editions are in the 
King's Classics (1902) and for the Grolier Club (New York, 1889, 
ed. A. W. West). 

AUNT SALLY, the English name for a game popular at 
fairs, race-courses and summer resorts. It consists in throwing 
hard balls, of wood or leather-covered yarn, at puppets dressed 
to represent different characters, originally a grotesque female 
figure called " Aunt Sally," with the object of smashing a clay 
pipe which is inserted either in the mouth or forehead of the 
puppet. In France the game is popular under the name jeu de 
massacre. In a variation of the pastime the mark consists of a 
living person's head thrust through a hole in a sheet of canvas. In 
case of a hit a second shy is allowed, or a small prize is given. 

AURA (from the Gr. for " breath " or " breeze "), a term used 
in old days to denote a supposed ethereal emanation from a 
volatile substance; applied later to the " electrical aura," or 
air-current caused by electrical discharge; in epilepsy (q.v.) 
to one of its premonitory symptoms; and in spiritualism to 
a mysterious light associated with the presence of spirit-forms. 
See also Aureola. 

AURANGABAD, or Aurungabad, a city of India, in the 
dominions of the nizam of Hyderabad, north-west division, 
situated 138 m. from Poona, 207 from Bombay via Poona, 
and 270 from Hyderabad on the river Kaum. It gives its name 
to a district. It was founded in 1610, under the name of Fatch- 
nagar, by Malik Ambar, an Abyssinian, who had risen from the 
condition of a slave to great influence. Subsequently it became 
the capital of the Mogul conquests in the south of India. Aurang- 
zeb, who erected here a mausoleum to his wife which has been 
compared to the Taj at Agra, made the city the seat of his 
government during his viceroyalty of the Deccan, and gave 
it the name of Aurangabad. It thus grew into the principal 
city of an extensive province of the same name, stretching 
westward to the sea, and comprehending nearly the whole of 
the territory now comprised within the northern division of the 
presidency of Bombay. Aurangabad long continued to be the 
capital of the succession of potentates bearing the modern title 
of nizam, after those chiefs became independent of Delhi. They 
abandoned it subsequently, and transferred their capital to 
Hyderabad, when the town at once began to decline. Aurangabad 
is a railway station on the Hyderabad-Godavari line, 435 m. from 
Bombay. In 1901 the population, with military cantonments, 
was 36,837, showing an increase of 8 % in the decade. It has a 
cotton mill. 

The district of Aurangabad has an area of 6172 sq. m. The 
population in 1901 was 721,407. It contains the famous caves 
of Ajanta, and also the battlefield of Assaye. 

AURANGZEB (1618-1707), one of the greatest of the Mogul 
emperors of Hindustan, was the third son of Shah Jahan, and 
was born in November 1618. His original name, Mahommed, 
was changed by his father, with whom he was a favourite, into 
Aurangzeb, meaning ornament of the throne, and at a later 
time he assumed the additional titles of Mohi-eddin, reviver of 
religion, and Alam-gir, conqueror of the world. At a very early 
age, and throughout his whole life, he manifested profound 
religious feeling perhaps instilled into him in the course of his 
education uniff some of the strictest Mahommedan doctors. 



AURAY— AURELIAN 



923 



He was employed, while very young, in some of his father's 
expeditions into the country beyond the Indus, gave promise 
of considerable military talents, and was appointed to the 
command of an army directed against the Uzbegs. In this 
campaign he was not completely successful, and soon after was 
transferred to the army engaged in the Deccan. Here he gained 
several victories, and in conjunction with the famous general, 
Mir Jumla, who had deserted from the king of Golconda, he 
seized and plundered the town of Hyderabad, which belonged to 
that monarch. His father's express orders prevented Aurangzeb 
from following up this success, and, not long after, the sudden 
and alarming illness of Shah Jahan turned his thoughts in 
another direction. Of Shah Jahan's four sons, the eldest, Dara, 
a brave and honourable prince, but disliked by the Mussulmans 
on account of his liberality of thought, had a natural right to the 
throne. Accordingly, on the illness of his father, he at once 
seized the reins of government and established himself at Delhi. 
The second son, Shuja, governor of Bengal, a dissolute and 
sensual prince, was dissatisfied, and raised an army to dispute 
the throne with Dara. The keen eye of Aurangzeb saw in this 
conjuncture of events a favourable opportunity for realising his 
own ambitious schemes. His religious exercises and temperate 
habits gave him, in popular estimation, a great superiority 
over his brothers, but he was too politic to put forward his claims 
openly. He made overtures to his younger brother Murad, 
governor of Gujarat, representing that neither of their elder 
brothers was worthy of the kingdom, that he himself had no 
temporal ambition, and desired only to place a fit monarch on 
the throne, and then to devote himself to religious exercises and 
make the pilgrimage to Mecca. He therefore proposed to unite 
his forces to those of Murad, who would thus have no difficulty 
in making himself master of the empire while the two elder 
brothers were divided by their own strife. Murad was completely 
deceived by these crafty representations, and at once accepted the 
offer. Their united armies then moved northward. Meanwhile 
Shah Jahan had recovered, and though Dara resigned the crown 
he had seized, the other brothers professed not to believe in their 
father's recovery, and still pressed on. Shuja was defeated by 
Dara's son, but the imperial forces under Jaswant Singh were 
completely routed by the united armies of Aurangzeb and 
Murad. Dara in person took the field against his brothers, 
but was defeated and compelled to fly. Aurangzeb then, by a 
clever stroke of policy, seized the person of his father, and threw 
him into confinement, in which he was kept for the remaining 
eight years of his life. Murad was soon removed by assassination, 
and the way being thus cleared, Aurangzeb, with affected reluct- 
ance, ascended the throne in August 1658. He quickly freed 
himself from all other competitors for the imperial power. Dara, 
who again invaded Gujarat, was defeated and closely pursued, 
and was given up by the native chief with whom he had taken, 
refuge. He was brought up to Delhi, exhibited to the people, 
and assassinated. Shuja, who had been a second time defeated 
near Allahabad, was attacked by the imperial forces under Mir 
Jumla and Mahommed, Aurangzeb's eldest son, who, however, 
deserted and joined his uncle. Shuja was defeated and fled to 
Arakan, where he perished; Mahommed was captured, thrown 
into the fortress of Gwalior, and died after seven years' con- 
finement. No similar contest disturbed Aurangzeb's long 
reign of forty-six years, which has been celebrated, though with 
doubtful justice, as the most brilliant period of the history of 
Hindustan. The empire certainly was wealthy and of enormous 
extent, for there were successively added to it the rich kingdoms 
of Bijapur and Golconda, but it was internally decaying ahd 
ready to crumble away before the first vigorous assault. Two 
causes principally had tended to weaken the Mogul power. 
The one was the intense bigotry and intolerant policy of Aurang- 
zeb, which had alienated the Hindus and roused the fierce ani- 
mosity of the haughty Rajputs. The other was the rise and 
rapid growth of the Mahratta power. Under their able leader, 
Sivaji, these daring freebooters plundered in every direction, 
nor could all Aurangzeb's efforts avail to subdue them. For the 
last twenty-six years of bJs life Aurangzeb was engaged in wars 



in the Deccan, and never set foot in his own capital. At the 
close of the long contest the Mogul power was weaker, the 
Mahratta stronger than at first. Still the personal ability and 
influence of the emperor were sufficient to keep his realms intact 
during his own life. His last years were embittered by remorse, 
by gloomy forebodings, and by constant suspicion, for he had 
always been in the habit of employing a system of espionage, 
and only then experienced its evil effects. He died on the 3rd 
of March 1707 at Ahmadnagar, while engaged on an extensive 
but unfortunate expedition against the Mahrattas. 

See Lane-Poole, Aurangzib, " Rulers of India " series (1893). 

AURAY, a town of France near the mouth of the Auray river, 
in the department of Morbihan, 12 m. W. of Vannes on the 
railway between that town and Lorient. Pop. (1906) 5241. 
Its port, which is formed by the channel of the river and divides 
the town into two parts, is frequented by coasting and fishing 
vessels. The principal buildings are the church of St Esprit 
(13th century) now secularized; the Renaissance church of 
St Gildas; the town-hall (18th century) ; and, at a short distance 
from the town, the Carthusian monastery, now a deaf and dumb 
institute, on the site of the battle of 1364, at which Charles of 
Blois was defeated by John of Montfort (see Bkittany: History). 
Adjoining the Chartreuse is a small chapel in which are preserved 
the bones of the Royalists captured by the Republicans in a battle 
fought near the spot in 1 795. In the neighbourhood is the church 
of Sainte Anne d'Auray, one of the principal places of pilgrimage 
in Brittany. Auray is one of the chief centres in France for 
oyster-breeding, and carries on boat-building and sardine-fishing. 

AURELIA, VIA, an ancient highroad of Italy, the date of 
the construction of which is unknown. It ran from Rome to 
Alsium, where it reached the sea, and thence along the south-west 
coast of Italy, perhaps originally only as far as Cosa, and was 
later extended to Vada Volaterrana, and in 109 B.C. to Genua 
and Dertona by means of the Via Aemilia, though a coast road 
as far as Genua at least must have existed long before. The name 
is applied in the Antonine Itinerary to these extensions, and even 
to the prolongation to Aries. Its line is in the main closely 
followed by the modern coast highroad; cf., however, for the 
section between Cosa and Populonia, O. Cuntz in Jahreshefte 
des Osterr. arch. Instituts, vii. (1904), 54.- (T. As.) 

AURELIAN [Lucius Domitius AuRELiANUs],one of the greatest 
of the Roman soldier emperors, was born at Sirmium in Pannonia 
between A.d. 212-214. He was of humble origin, but nothing 
definite is known of his family. He had always shown great 
enthusiasm for a military career, and so distinguished himself 
in the campaigns in which he took part that on one occasion 
he received a public vote of thanks. At the same time he was 
proclaimed consul elect, and adopted by Ulpius Crinitus, military 
governor of Illyria and Thrace. On the death of the emperor 
Claudius II. Gothicus (2 70) , Aurelian was proclaimed his successor 
with the universal approval of the soldiers. His first task was 
to continue the war which had been begun by Claudius against 
the Goths. He drove them out of Moesia across the Danube, 
where he left them in possession of Dacia, which he did not think 
himself able to retain; the name was transferred to Moesia, 
which was then called Dacia Aureliani. The chronology, how- 
ever, of Aurelian's reign is very confused, and the abandonment 
of Dacia is placed by some authorities towards its close. He 
next entered upon campaigns against the Juthungi, Alamanni, 
and other Germanic tribes, over whom, after a severe defeat 
which was said to have imperilled the very existence of the empire, 
he at length obtained a complete victory. Having thus secured 
the Rhine and Danube frontiers, he turned his energies towards 
the east, and in 271 set out on his expedition against Zenobia, 
queen of Palmyra (q.v.). At the same time he crushed two 
pretenders to the throne — Firmus and Tetricus. Firmus, 
a wealthy merchant of Seleucia, had proclaimed himself emperor 
of Egypt. Aurelian, who was at the time in Mesopotamia, 
hastened thither, and ordered him to be seized and put to death. 
Tetricus, who had been proclaimed emperor in the west after 
the death of Gallienus, and left undisturbed by Claudius II., still 
ruled over Gaul, Spain and Britain. A decisive battle was fought 



924 



AURELIANUS— AURICH 



near the modern Chalons, in which Tetricus was defeated. The 
restoration of the unity of the empire was thus complete. In 
274 a brilliant triumph, adorned by the persons of Zenobia and 
Tetricus, was celebrated at Rome. 

Aurelian now turned his attention to the internal affairs of 
the empire. He introduced sumptuary laws; relieved the poor 
by distributions of bread and meat, proceeded with great severity 
against informers and embezzlers; began the construction of 
various public works and buildings; and proclaimed a general 
amnesty for political crimes. The restoration and enlargement 
of the walls of Rome, commenced by him, was not completed 
till the reign of Probus. An attempt to restore the standard 
of the coinage is said to have caused a revolt of the workmen 
and officials connected with the mint, which was only put down 
with the loss of 7000 soldiers. It has been suggested that this 
was really an attempt at revolution incited by the senate and 
praetorian guards, the opportunity being found in disturbances 
resulting from opposition to the attempted reform, which by 
themselves could hardly have assumed such serious proportions. 
Aurelian's restless spirit was not long able to endure a life of 
inaction in the city. Towards the end of 274, he started on an 
expedition against the Persians, halting in Thrace by the way. 
While on the march between Heracleia and Byzantium, at the 
beginning of the following year, he was assassinated through 
the treachery of his secretary Eros, who, in order to escape the 
discovery of his own irregularities, incited certain officers against 
the emperor by showing them a forged list, on which their names 
appeared as marked out for death. 

Aurelian well deserved the title of restorer of the empire, and 
it must be remembered that he lived in an age when severity was 
absolutely necessary. He was a great soldier and a rigid but 
just disciplinarian. In more favourable circumstances he would 
have been a great administrator. He displayed a fondness 
for pomp and show on public occasions; he was the first Roman 
emperor to wear the diadem, and assumed the title of Lord and 
God on medals. 

The chief authority for the events of Aurelian's reign is his life 
by Vopiscus, one of the writers of the " Augustan History "; it is 
founded on Greek memoirs and certain journals deposited in the 
Ulpian library at Rome. See L. Homo, Le Regne de Vempereur 
Aurelien (1904), and Groag's art. in Pauly-Wissowa, Realencyclo- 
padie, v. 1347 foil. 

AURELIANUS, CAELIUS, a physician of Sicca in Numidia, 
who probably flourished in the 5th century a.d., although some 
place him two or even three centuries earlier. In favour of the 
later date is the nature of his Latin, which shows a strong 
tendency to the Romance, and the similarity of his language 
to that of Cassius Felix, also an African medical writer, who 
about 450 wrote a short treatise, chiefly based on Galen. We 
possess a translation by Aurelianus of two works of Soranus 
of Ephesus (2nd century), the chief of the " methodist " school 
of medicine, on chronic and acute maladies— Tardae or Chronicae 
Passiones, in five, and Celeres or Acutae Passiones in three books. 
The translation, which is especially valuable since the original 
has been lost, shows that Soranus possessed considerable practical 
skill in the diagnosis of ordinary and even of exceptional diseases. 
It is also important as containing numerous references to the 
methods of earlier medical authorities. We also possess con- 
siderable fragments of his Medicinales Responsiones, also adapted 
from Soranus, a general treatise on medicine in the form of 
question and answer; it deals with rules of health (salutaria 
praecepta) and the pathology of internal diseases (ed. Rose, 
Anecdota Graeca et Latina, ii., 1870). Where it is possible to 
compare Aurelianus's translation with the original — as in a 
fragment of his Gynaecia with Soranus's Hepl yvvcuntiuiv 
Ilafla.'i' — it is found that it is literal, but abridged. There is 
apparently no MS. of the treatises in existence. (Editions: 
Amman, 1709; Haller, 1774.) 

AURELLE DE PALADINES, LOUIS JEAN BAPTISTE D' 
(1804-1877), French general, was born at Malzieu, Lozere, on 
the 9th of January 1804. He was educated at St Cyr, and 
entered the army as sub-lieutenant of foot in 1824. He served 
with distinction in Algeria between 1841 and 1848, becoming 



lieut.-colonel and an officer of the Legion of Honour; took part ~ 
in the Roman campaigns of 1848 and 1849, and was made colonel. 
He served as general of brigade throughout the Crimean War of 
1854-56, being promoted general of division and commander of 
the Legion of Honour. During the campaign in Lombardy in 
1 859he commanded at Marseilles, and superintended the despatch 
of men and stores to the seat of war, and for his services he was 
made a grand officer of the Legion of Honour. Placed on the 
reserve list in 1869, he was recalled to the Marseilles command 
on the outbreak of the Franco-German War of 1870-71. After 
the first capture of Orleans by the Germans, he was appointed 
by the Government of National Defence, in November 1870, 
to the command of the Army of the Loire. He was at first very 
successful against von der Tann-Rathsamhausen, winning the 
battle of Coulmiers and compelling the Germans to evacuate 
Orleans, but the capitulation of Metz had set free additional 
German troops to oppose him, and, after his defeat at Beaune la 
Rolande and subsequent unsuccessful fighting near Orleans, 
resulting in its recapture by the Germans in December, Aurelle 
retreated into the Sologne and was superseded. After the armis- 
tice he was elected to the National Assembly by the departments 
both of Allier and Gironde. He sat for Allier and was one of 
the fifteen officers chosen to assist in the peace negotiations. 
He was decorated with the grand cross of the Legion of Honour, 
and was given the command at Bordeaux, but retired in 1872. 
Elected a life senator in 1875, he supported the monarchical 
majority of 1876. He died at Versailles on the 17th of December 
1877. He was the author of La Premiere Armee de la Loire, 
published in 1872. 

AUREOLA, Aureole (diminutive of Lat. aura, air) , the radiance 
of luminous cloud which, in paintings of sacred personages, is 
represented as surrounding the whole figure. In the earliest 
periods of Christian art this splendour was confined to the figures 
of the persons of the Godhead, but it was afterwards extended 
to the Virgin Mary and to several of the saints. The aureola, 
when enveloping the whole body, is generally oval or elliptical 
in form, but is occasionally circular or quatrefoil. When it is 
merely a luminous disk round the head, it is called specifically 
a nimbus, while the combination of nimbus and aureole is called 
a glory. The strict distinction between nimbus and aureole is 
not commonly maintained, and the latter term is most frequently 
used to denote the radiance round the heads of saints, angels 
or persons of the Godhead. The nimbus in Christian art appeared 
first in the 5th century, but practically the same device was 
known still earlier, though its history is obscure, in non-Christian 
art. Thus (though earlier Indian and Bactrian coins do not show 
it) it is found with the gods on some of the coins of the Indian 
kings Kanishka, Huvishka and Vasudeva, 58 B.C. to a.d. 41 
(Gardner's Cat. of Coins of Greek and Scythic Kings of Bactria 
and India, Brit. Mus. 1886, plates 26-29). And its use has been 
traced through the Egyptians to the Greeks and Romans, 
representations of Trajan (arch of Constantine) and Antoninus 
Pius (reverse of a medal) being found with it. In the circular 
form it constitutes a natural and even primitive use of the idea 
of a crown, modified by an equally simple idea of the emanation 
of light from the head of a superior being, or by the meteorological 
phenomenon of a halo. The probability is that all later associations 
with the symbol refer back to an early astrological origin (cf. 
Mithras), the person so glorified being identified with the sun 
and represented in the sun's image; so the aureole is the Hvareno 
of Mazdaism. From this early astrological use the form of 
" glory " or " nimbus " has been adapted or inherited under 
new beliefs. 

AURICH, a town of Germany, in the Prussian province of 
Hanover, chief town of the district of East Friesland, on the 
Ems- Jade canal, 18 m. N.W. from Emden by rail. Pop. (1900) 
6013. It is built in the Dutch style, and lies in a sandy but 
fertile plain, surrounded by pleasant promenades which have 
taken the place of the old fortifications. It has a palace, formerly 
the residence of the counts of East Friesland and now used as 
government offices, a Roman Catholic and two Protestant 
churches, a gymnasium, and four libraries. There are breweries 



AURICLE— AURIFABER 



925 



and small manufactories of paper and tobacco. Close by is the 
Upstallsboom, the hill of oath and liberty, where every year at 
Whitsuntide representatives of the seven Frisian coast lands 
assembled to deliberate. 

See W'iarda, Bruchstiicke zur Geschichte der Stadt Aurich (Emden, 
1835)- 

AURICLE (from Lat. diminutive of auris, ear) , the external ear 
in animals, or an analogous part in plants, &c, From a supposed 
resemblance to the ear of a dog, the term was applied to the 
upper cavities of the heart. The adjective " auricular " is 
more specially used in the phrase " auricular confession " (see 
Confession), i.e. private. 

AURICULA {Primula auricula), an Alpine plant, which has 
been an inmate of British gardens for about three hundred 
years, and is still prized by florists as a favourite spring flower. 
It loves a cool soil and shady situation. The florists' varieties 
are grown in rich composts, for the preparation of which number- 
less receipts have been given; but many of the old nostrums are 
now exploded, and a more rational treatment has taken their 
place. Thus Mr Douglas writes {Hardy Florists' Flowers) : — ■ 

" There is no mystery, as some suppose, about the potting, any 
more than there is about the potting material. The compost should 
consist of turfy loam four parts, leaf-mould one part, sharp river or 
silver sand one part, and a few bits of broken charcoal mixed with it. 
The pots to be used should be from 3 to 4J in. in diameter, inside 
measure; about I in. of potsherds should be placed in the bottom 
of each pot, and over this some fibrous turf, from which the fine 
particles of earth have been removed. The old soil should be shaken 
from the roots of the plants to be potted; and before potting cut off, 
if necessary, a portion of the main root. In potting press the soil 
rather firmly around the roots." 

Auriculas are best grown in a cold frame mounted on legs 
about 2 ft. from the ground, and provided with hinged sashes. 
A graduated stage formed of wood battens 6 in. broad, with a 
rise of 2 in., should be fixed so as to take each one row of pots, 
with the plants standing at about 15 in. from the glass; the 
spaces between the shelves should be closed, while the top board 
of the back and the front should be hinged so as to be let down 
when desired for ventilation, the sashes, too, being movable for 
the same purpose, and also to afford facilities for examining 
and attending to the plants. This frame should face the north 
from May to October, and south in winter. No protection 
will be needed except in very severe frosts, when two or three 
thicknesses of garden mats may be thrown over the glass, and 
allowed to remain on until the soil is thawed, should it become 
frozen. 

Auriculas may be propagated from seed, which is to be sown as 
soon as ripe, in July or August, in boxes, kept under cover, and 
exposed only to the rays of the morning sun. When seed has 
been saved from the finer sorts, the operation is one of consider- 
able nicety, as it not unfrequently happens that the best seedlings 
are at first exceedingly weak. They generally flower in the 
second or third year, a few good sorts being all that can be 
expected from a large sowing. The established varieties are 
increased by taking off the offshoots, an operation performed at 
the time of potting in July or the beginning of August. But 
some varieties are very shy in producing offsets. 

The original of the auricula is a hardy perennial herb, of 
dwarf habit, bearing dull yellowish blossoms. This and the 
commoner forms raised from seed, as well as one or two double 
forms, are interesting hardy border flowers. The choice florists' 
varieties are divided into five classes: — the green-edged, with the 
margins of the flowers green; the grey-edged, with the green 
margins powdered with meal so as to appear to be coloured grey; 
the white-edged, with the mealy powder so dense as to cover the 
green; the selfs, which have none of the green variegation of 
margin seen in the foregoing, but are of some distinct colour, 
as purple, maroon, &c, but have, like the preceding, a white 
paste surrounding the eye ; and the alpines, which resemble the 
selfs in not having any green marginal variegation, but differ 
in having a yellow centre more or less dense. The individual 
flowers of the first three groups of florists' auriculas show four 
distinct circles: — first the eye or tube, which should have the 



stamens lying in it, but sometimes has the pin-headed stigma 
instead, which is a defect; second, the paste or circle of pure 
white surrounding the eye; third, the body colour, a circle of 
some dark tint, as maroon or violet, which feathers out more or 
less towards the edge, but is the more perfect the less it is so 
feathered, and is quite faulty if it breaks through to the outer 
circle; fourth, the margin, which is green or grey or white. 
These circles should be about equal in width and clearly defined, 
and the nearer they are to this standard the more perfect is the 
flower. In the group of selfs the conditions are the same, except 
that there is no margin, and consequently the body colour, 
which should be uniform in tone, extends to the edge. In the 
alpines there should be no paste or white surrounding the eye, 
but this space should be either golden-yellow or creamy-yellow, 
which makes two subdivisions in this group; and the body 
colour is more or less distinctly shaded, the edges being of a paler 
hue. There is besides a group of laced alpines, in which a distinct 
and regular border of colour surrounds each of the marginal 
lobes. 

The following is a selection of the best varieties cultivated 
in 1909: — 

Green-edged. — Abbe Liszt, Abraham Barker, Shirley Hibberd, 
Prince Charming, Mrs Henwood. 

Grey-edged. — Amy Robsart, George Lightbody, Marmion, Olym- 
pus, George Rudd, Richard Headly. 

White-edged.-^ Acme, Conservative, Heather Bell, Mrs Dodson, 
Rachel, Smiling Beauty. 

Selfs. — Andrew Miller, Gerald, Mikado, Mrs Phillips, Mrs Potts, 
Harrison Weir. 

Alpines. — Argus, Dean Hole, Duke of York, Firefly, Flora Mclvor, 
Mrs Douglas, Mrs Markham, Perfection, Phyllis, Rosy Morn, The 
Bride, Teviotdale. 

AURIFABER (the latinized form of Goldschmidt), a surname 
borne by three prominent men of the Reformation period in 
Germany. 

i. Andreas (1514-1559) was a physician of some repute, but 
through his influence with Albert of Brandenburg, last grand- 
master of the Teutonic order, and first Protestant duke of 
Prussia, became an outstanding figure in the controversy 
associated with Andreas Osiander (q.v.) whose daughter he had 
married. 

2. Joannes (Vratislaviensis ; 1517-1568), the younger 
brother of Andreas, was born at Breslau on the 30th of January 
1 51 7, and educated at Wittenberg, where he formed a close and 
lasting friendship with Melanchthon. After graduating in 1538 
he spent twelve years as docent at the university, and having 
then received his doctorate of divinity, was appointed professor 
of divinity and pastor of the church of St Nicholas at Rostock. 
He distinguished himself by his conciliatory disposition, earned 
the special confidence of Duke John Albert of Mecklenburg, and 
took a leading part in 1552 in drawing up the constitution of 
the Mecklenburg church. He also settled some religious disputes 
in the town of Liibeck. In 1553 Duke Albert of Prussia, anxious 
to heal the differences in the Prussian church caused by the 
discussion of Osiander's doctrines, invited him to Konigsberg, 
and in the following year appointed him professor of divinity 
and president of the Samland diocese. Joannes, however, 
found it impossible to conciliate all parties, and in 1565 returned 
to Breslau, where, in 1567, he became pastor in the church of 
St Elizabeth and inspector of the Lutheran churches and schools. 
He died on the 19th of October 1568. 

3. Joannes (Vinariensis; 1 519-1575), was born in the 
county of Mansfeldt in 1 519. He studied at Wittenberg where 
he heard the lectures of Luther, and afterwards became tutor 
to Count Mansfeldt. In the war of 1 544-45 he accompanied the 
army as field-preacher, and then lived with Luther as his .famulus 
or private secretary, being present at his death in 1546. In the 
following year he spent six months in prison with John Frederick, 
elector of Saxony, who had been captured by the emperor, 
Charles V. He held for some years the office of court -preacher 
at Weimar, but owing to theological disputes was compelled 
to resign this office in 1561. In 1566 he was appointed to the 
Lutheran church at Erfurt, and there remained till his death 



926 



AURIGA— AUROCHS 



in November 1575. Besides taking a share in the first collected 
or Jena edition of Luther's works (1556), Aurifaber sought out 
and published at Eisleben in 1564-1565 several writings not 
included in that edition. He also published Luther's Letters 
(1556, 1565), and Table Talk (1566). This popular work, which 
has given him most of his fame, is unfortunately but a second 
or third hand compilation. 

See G. Kawerau's art. in Herzog-Hauck's Realencyk, fur prot. 
Theologie, and the literature there cited. 

AURIGA (the " charioteer " or " waggoner "), in astronomy, a 
constellation of the northern hemisphere, found in the catalogues 
of Eudoxus (4th century B.C.) and Aratus (3rd century B.C.). It 
was symbolized by the Greeks as an old man in a more or less 
sitting posture, with a goat and her kids in his left hand, and 
a bridle in his right. The ancient Greeks associated this con- 
stellation with many myths. Some assume it to be Erichthonius, 
son of Athena and Hephaestus, who was translated to the skies 
by Zeus on account of his invention of chariots or coaches. 
Others assume it to be Myrtilus, a son of Hermes and Clytie, 
and charioteer to Oenomaus, who was placed in the heavens by 
Hermes. Another myth has it to be Olenus, a son of Hephaestus, 
and father of Aega and Helice, two nymphs who nursed Zeus. 
Ptolemy catalogued fourteen stars, Tycho Brahe twenty-seven, 
and Hevelius forty in this constellation. Interesting stars 
are: a Aurigae or Capella (the goat), one of the brightest 
stars in the heavens, determined by Newall and Campbell to be 
a spectroscopic binary; /3 Aurigae, a star of the second magnitude 
also a spectroscopic binary; e Aurigae, an irregularly variable 
star; and Nova Aurigae, a " new " star discovered by Anderson 
in 1892, and afterwards found on a photographic plate exposed 
at Harvard in December 1891. Several fine star clusters also 
appear in this constellation. 

AURILLAC, a town of central France, capital of the depart- 
ment of Cantal, 140 m. N.N.E. of Toulouse, on the Orleans rail- 
way between Figeac and Murat. Pop. (1906) 14,097. Aurillac 
stands on the right bank of the Jordanne, and is dominated 
from the north-west by the Roc Castanet, crowned by the castle 
of St Etienne, the keep of which dates from the nth century. 
Its streets are narrow and uninteresting, with the exception of 
one which contains, among other old houses, that known as the 
Maison des Consuls, a Gothic building of the 16th century, 
decorated with sculptured stone-work. Aurillac owes its origin 
to an abbey founded in the 9th century by St Geraud, and the 
abbey-church, rebuilt in the 17th century in the Gothic style, 
is the chief building in the town. The former college, which 
dates from the 17 th century, is now occupied by a museum and 
a library. There is a statue of Pope Silvester II., born near 
Aurillac in 930 and educated in the abbey, which soon afterwards 
became one of the most famous schools of France. Aurillac 
is the seat of a prefect, and its public institutions include tribunals 
of first instance and of commerce, a chamber of commerce, a 
lycee, training-colleges and a branch of the Bank of France. 
The chief manufactures are wooden shoes and umbrellas, and 
there is trade in cheese and in the cattle and horses reared in 
the neighbourhood. 

AURISPA,. GIOVANNI (c. 1370-1459), one of the learned 
Italians of the 15th century, who did so much to promote the 
revival of the study of Greek in Italy, was born at Noto in 
Sicily. In 1418 he visited Constantinople, where he remained 
for some years, perfecting his knowledge of Greek and searching 
for ancient MSS. His efforts were rewarded by the acquisition 
of some 250 MSS., with which he returned to Venice. Here he 
is said to have been obliged to pawn his treasures for 50 gold 
florins to provide for his immediate wants. Cosimo de' Medici, 
hearing of his embarrassment, redeemed the MSS. and summoned 
the owner to Florence. In 1438, at the council of Basel, Aurispa 
attracted the attention of Pope Eugenius IV., who made him his 
secretary; he held a similar position under Nicholas V., who 
presented him to two lucrative abbacies. He died at Ferrara. 
Considering his long life and reputation Aurispa produced little: 
Latin translations of the commentary of Hierocles on the golden 
verses of Pythagoras (1474) and of Philisci Consolaturia ad 



Ciceronem from Dio Cassius (not published till 1510); and, 
according to Gesner, a translation of the works of Archimedes. 
Aurispa's reputation rests upon the extensive collection of MSS. 
copied and distributed by him, and his persistent efforts to 
revive and promote the study of ancient literature. 

AUROCHS (from Lat. urus, the wild ox, and " ox ") or Ueus, 
the name of the extinct wild ox of Europe (Bos taurus primi- 
genius), which after the disappearance of that animal became 
transferred to the bison. According to the German Freiherr 
von Herberstein (1486-1566), in his Moscovia, of which an Italian 
translation was published ±X Venice in 1550, the aurochs survived 
in Poland (and probably also in Hungary) during the latter 
middle ages. In this work appear woodcuts — rude but char- 
acteristic and unmistakable — of two distinct types of European 
wild cattle; one the aurochs, or ur, and the other the bison. 
As Herberstein had travelled in Poland, it is probable that he 
had seen both species alive, and the drawings were most likely 
executed under his own direction. It has indeed been suggested 
that the figure of the aurochs was taken from a domesticated 
ox, but this is a mistaken idea. Not the least important feature 
of the work of Herberstein is the application of the name aurochs 
to the wild ox, as distinct from the bison. The locality where 
aurochs survived in Herberstein's time was the forest of Jakto- 
zowka, situated about 55 kilometres west-south-west of Warsaw, 
in the provinces of Bolemow and Sochaczew. From other 
evidence it appears that the last aurochs was killed in this forest 
in the year 1627. Herberstein describes the colour of the aurochs 
as black, and this is confirmed by another old picture of the 
animal. Gesner's figure of the aurochs, or as he calls it " thur," 
given in the Icones to his History of Animals, was probably 
adapted from Herberstein's. It may be added that an ancient 
gold goblet depicts the hunting and taming of the wild aurochs. 

As a wild animal, then, the aurochs appears to have ceased 
to exist in the early part of the 17th century; but as a species 
it survives, for the majority of the domesticated breeds of 
European cattle are its descendants, all diminished in point of 
size, and some departing more widely from the original type 
than others. Aurochs' calves were in all probability captured 
by the early inhabitants of Britain and the continent and tamed; 
and from these, with perhaps an occasional blending of wild 
blood, are descended most European breeds of cattle. 

Much misconception, however, has prevailed as to which 
breeds are the nearest to the ancestral wild stock. At one time 
this position was supposed to be occupied by the white half -wild 
cattle of Chillingham and other British parks. These white 
breeds are, however, partial albinos; and such semi-albinos are 
always the result of domestication and could not have arisen 
in the wild state. Moreover, park-cattle display evidence of 
their descent from dark-coloured breeds by the retention of red 
or black ears and brown or black muzzles. In the Chillingham 
cattle the ears are generally red, although sometimes black, 
and the muzzle is brown; while in the breed at Cadzow Chase 
Lanarkshire, both ears and muzzle are black, and there are 
usually flecks of black on the head and forequarters. It is further 
significant that, in the Chillingham herd, dark-coloured calves, 
which are weeded out, make their appearance from time to 
time. 

A very ancient British breed is the black Pembroke; and when 
this breed tends to albinism, the ears and muzzle, and more rarely 
the fetlocks, remain completely black, or very dark grey, although 
the colour elsewhere is whitish, more or less flecked and blotched 
with pale grey. In the shape and curvature of the horns, which 
at first incline outwards and forwards, and then bend somewhat 
upwards and inwards, this breed of cattle resembles the aurochs 
and the (by comparison) dwarfed park-breeds. Moreover, in 
both the Pembroke and the park-breeds the horns are light- 
coloured with black tips. 

Evidence as to the affinity between these breeds is afforded by 
the fact that a breed of cattle very similar to that at Chillingham 
was found in Wales in the 10th century; these cattle being 
white with red ears. Individuals of this race survived till at 
least 1850 in Pembroke, where they weie at one time kept 



AURORA— AURORA POLARIS 



927 



perfectly pure as a part of the regular farm-stock. Until a 
period comparatively recent, they were relatively numerous, and 
were driven in droves to the pasturages of the Severn and the 
neighbouring markets. Their whole essential characters are the 
same as those of the cattle at Chillingham. Their horns are 
white, tipped with black, and extended and turned upwards in 
the manner distinctive of the park-breed. The inside of the ears 
and the muzzle are black, and the feet are black to the fetlock 
joint. The skin is unctuous and of a deep-toned yellow colour. 
Individuals of the race were sometimes born entirely black, and 
then were not to be distinguished from the common Pembroke 
cattle of the mountains. 

It is thus evident that park-cattle are an albino offshoot 
from the ancient Pembroke black breed, which, from their soft 
and well-oiled skins, are evidently natives of a humid climate, 
such as that of the forests in which dwelt the wild aurochs. 
This disposes of a theory that they are descendants of a white 
sacrificial breed introduced into Britain by the ancient Romans. 

The Pembroke and park-cattle are, however, by no means the 
sole descendants of the aurochs, the black Spanish fighting-bulls 
claiming a similar descent. This breed shows a light-coloured 
line along the spine, which was characteristic of the aurochs. 
It has also been suggested that the Swiss Siemental cattle are 
nearly related to the aurochs. The latter was a gigantic animal, 
especially during the Pleistocene period; the skulls and limb- 
bones discovered in the brick-earths and gravels of the Thames 
valley and many other parts of England having belonged to 
animals that probably stood six feet at the shoulder. (R.L.*) 

AURORA (perhaps through a form ausosa from Sansk. ush, 
to burn ; the common idea of " brightness " suggests a connexion 
with aurum, gold), the Roman goddess of the dawn, correspond- 
ing to the Greek goddess Eos. According to Hesiod (Theog. 271) 
she was the daughter of the Titan Hyperion and Thea (or Eury- 
phassa), and sister of Helios and Selene. By the Titan Astraeus, 
she was the mother of the winds Zephyrus, Notus and Boreas, 
of Hesperus and the stars. Homer represents her as rising 
every morning from the couch of Tithonus (by whom she was 
the mother of Emathion and Memnon), and drawn out of the 
east in a chariot by the horses Lampus and Phaethon to carry 
light to gods and men (Odyssey, xxiii. 253); in Homer, she aban- 
dons her course when the sun is fully risen (or at the latest at 
mid-day, Iliad, ix. 66), but in later literature she accompanies 
the sun all day and thus becomes the goddess of the daylight. 
From the roseate shafts of light which herald the dawn, she 
bears in Homer the epithet " rosy-fingered." The conception of 
a dawn-goddess is common in primitive religions, especially in • 
the Vedic mythology, where the deity Usas is closely parallel to 
the Greco-Roman; see Paul Regnaud, Le Rig-Veda in Annales 
du musee Guimet, vol. i. c. 6 (Paris, 1892). She is also represented 
as the lover of the hunter Orion (Odyssey, v. 121), the representa- 
tive of the constellation that disappears at the flush of dawn, 
and the youthful hunter Cephalus, by whom she was the mother 
of Phaethon (Apollodorus iii. 14. 3). In works of art, Eos is 
represented as a young woman, fully clothed, walking fast 
with a youth in her arms; or rising from the sea in a chariot 
drawn by winged horses; sometimes, as the goddess who dis- 
penses the dews of the morning, she has a pitcher in each hand. 
In the fresco-painting by Guido Reni in the Rospigliosi palace 
at Rome, Aurora is represented strewing flowers before the 
chariot of the sun. Metaphorically the word Aurora was used 
(e.g. Virg. Aen. viii. 686, vii. 606) for the East generally. 

AURORA, a city of Kane county, Illinois, U.S.A., in the 
N.E. part of the state, on the Fox river, about 37 m. W. of 
Chicago. Pop. (1890) 19,688; (1900) 24,147, of whom 5075 were 
foreign-born; (1910) 29,807. Aurora is served by the Chicago, 
Burlington & Quincy, the Chicago & North-Western, the Elgin, 
Joliet & Eastern, and the Illinois, Iowa and Minnesota rail- 
ways, and is connected with Chicago by an electric line. The 
city has a soldiers' memorial hall, erected by popular sub- 
scription, and a Carnegie library. Aurora is an important manu- 
facturing centre; among its manufactures are railway cars — 
the shops of the Chicago, Burlington & Quincy railway being 



here — flour and cotton, carriages, hardware specialties, corsets, 
suspenders, stoves and silver-plate. In 1905 the city's factory 
products were valued at $7,329,028, an increase of 30 % in 5 years. 
The municipality owns and operates the water-works and electric- 
lighting plants. The first settlement in the vicinity of Aurora 
was made in 1834. In 1845 the village of East Aurora was 
incorporated, and West Aurora was incorporated nine years later. 
In 1853 the two villages were united under a city charter, which 
was superseded by a revised charter in 1887. 

AURORA, a city of Lawrence county, Missouri, U.S.A., 
275 m. S.W. of St Louis, on the St Louis & San Francisco, and 
the St Louis, Iron Mountain & Southern railways. Pop.(i89o) 
3482; (1900) 6191; (1910) 4148. It is situated near a lead and 
zinc mining region, where surface lead was discovered in 1873 
and systematic mining began in 1887; among the cities of the 
state it is second to Joplin in mineral importance, and has large 
ironworks and flour-mills; mining machinery also is manu- 
factured. Farming and fruit-growing are carried on in the 
surrounding country, and Aurora is the place from which the 
products are shipped. Aurora was platted in 1870 and was 
chartered as a city in 1886. 

AURORA, a village of Cayuga county, New York, U.S.A., on 
Cayuga Lake, 16 m. S.W. of Auburn. Pop. (1905) 623; (1910) 
493 • It is served by the Lehigh Valley railway. Aurora is a beau- 
tiful place and a popular summer resort, but it is best known as 
the seat of Wells College, a non-sectarian college for women, 
founded in 1868 by Henry Wells (1805-1878), of the Wells 
Fargo Express Company, and liberally endowed by Edwin B. 
Morgan (1806-1881), also connected with the same company, 
and by others. At Aurora are also the Somes school (a prepara- 
tory school for boys), founded in 1798 and until 1904 known as 
the Cayuga Lake Academy, and the Wells school (a preparatory 
school for girls). The village has a public library. Aurora was 
settled in 1789 chiefly by residents of New England, and was 
incorporated in 1905. 

AURORA POLARIS (Aurora Borealis and Australis, Polar 
Light, Northern Lights), a natural phenomenon which occurs 
in many forms, some of great beauty. 

1. Forms. — Various schemes of classification have been 
proposed, but none has met with universal acceptance; the 
following are at least the principal types. (1) Arcs. These 
most commonly resemble segments of circles, but are not in- 
frequently elliptical or irregular in outline. The ends of arcs 
frequently extend to the horizon, but often one or both ends 
stop short of this. Several arcs may be visible at the same 
time. Usually the under or concave edge of the arc is the more 
clearly defined, and adjacent to it the sky often seems darker 
than elsewhere. It is rather a disputed point whether this dark 
segment — through which starlight has been seen to pass — • 
represents a real atmospheric condition or is merely a contrast 
effect. (2) Bands. These may be nearly straight and regular 
in outline, as if broken portions of arcs; frequently they are 
ribbon-like serpentine forms showing numerous sinuosities. 
(3) Rays. Frequently an arc or band is visibly composed of 
innumerable short rays separated by distinctly less luminous 
intervals. These rays are more or less perpendicular to the arc 
or band; sometimes they are very approximately parallel to 
one another, on other occasions they converge towards a point. 
Longer rays often show an independent existence. Not in- 
frequently rays extend from the upper edge of an arc towards 
the zenith. Combinations of rays sometimes resemble a luminous 
fan, or a series of fans, or part of a hollow luminous cylinder. 
Rays often alter suddenly in length, seeming to stretch down 
towards the horizon or mount towards the zenith. This accounts 
for the description of aurora as " Merry Dancers." (4) Curtains 
or Draperies. This form is rare except in Arctic regions, where 
it is sometimes fairly frequent. It is one of the most imposing 
forms. As a rule the higher portion is visibly made up of rays, 
the light tending to become more continuous towards the lower 
edge; the combination suggests a connected whole, like a 
curtain whose alternate portions are in light and shade. The 
curtain often shows several conspicuous folds, and the lower 



928 



AURORA POLARIS 



edge often resembles frilled drapery. At several stations in 
Greenland auroral curtains have been observed when passing 
right overhead to narrow to a thin luminous streak, exactly as 
a vertical sheet of light would seem to do to one passing under- 
neath it. (5) Corona. A fully developed corona is perhaps the 
finest form of aurora. As the name implies, there is a sort of 
crown of light surrounding a comparatively or wholly dark 
centre. Farther from the centre the ray structure is usually 
prominent. The rays may he very close together, or may 
be widely separated from one another. (6) Patches. During 
some displays, auroral light appears in irregular areas or patches, 
which sometimes bear a very close resemblance to illuminated 
detached clouds. (7) Diffused Aurora. Sometimes a large 
part of the sky shows a diffuse illumination, which, though 
brighter in some parts than others, possesses no definite outlines. 
How far the different forms indicate real difference in the nature 
of the phenomenon, and how far they are determined by the 
position of the observer, it is difficult to say. Not infrequently 
several different forms are visible at the same time. 

2. Isochasms. — Aurora is seldom observed in low latitudes. 
In the southern hemisphere there is comparatively little in- 
habited land in high latitudes and observational data are few; 
thus little is known as to how the frequency varies with latitude 
and longitude. Even in the northern hemisphere there are large 
areas in the Arctic about which little is known. H. Fritz (2) 
has, however, drawn a series of curves which are believed to give 
a good general idea of the relative frequency of aurora throughout 




the northern hemisphere. Fritz' curves, shown in the illustration, 
are termed isochasms, from the Greek word employed by Aris- 
totle to denote aurora. Points on the same curve are supposed 
to have the same average number of auroras in the year, and 
this average number is shown adjacent to the curve. Starting 
from the equator and travelling northwards we find in the 
extreme south of Spain an average of only one aurora in ten 
years. In the north of France the average rises to five a year; 
in the north of Ireland to thirty a year; a little to the north of 
the Shetlands to one hundred a year. Between the Shetlands 



and Iceland we cross the curve of maximum frequency, and 
farther north the frequency diminishes. The curve of maximum 
frequency forms a slightly irregular oval, whose centre, the 
auroral pole, is according to Fritz at about 8i° N. lat., 70 W. 
long. Isochasms reach a good deal farther south in America 
than in Europe. In other words, auroras are much more 
numerous in the southern parts of Canada and in the United 
States than in the same latitudes of Europe. 

3. Annual Variation.— Table I. shows the annual variation 
observed in the frequency of aurora. It has been compiled from 
several authorities, especially Joseph Lovering (4) and Sophus 
Tromholt ( 5) . The monthly figures denote the percentages of the 
total number seen in the year. The stations are arranged in 
order of latitude. Individual places are first considered, then 
a few large areas. 

The Godthaab data in Table I. are essentially those given by 
Prof. A. Paulsen (6) as observed by Kleinschmidt in the winters 
of 1865 to 1882, supplemented by Lovering's data for summer. 
Starting at the extreme north, we have a simple period with a 
well-marked maximum at midwinter, and no auroras during 
several months at midsummer. This applies to Hammerfest, 
Jakobshavn, Godthaab and the most northern division of 
Scandinavia. The next division of Scandinavia shows a transi- 
tion stage. To the south of this in Europe the single maximum 
at mid-winter is replaced by two maxima, somewhere about the 
equinoxes. 

4. In considering what is the real significance of the great differ- 
ence apparent in Table I. between higher and middle latitudes, a 
primary consideration is that aurora is seldom seen until the sun is 
some degrees below the horizon. There is no reason to suppose that 
the physical causes whose effects we see as aurora are in existence 
only when aurora is visible. Until means are devised for detecting 
aurora during bright sunshine, our knowledge as to the hour at 
which these causes are most frequently or most powerfully in opera- 
tion must remain incomplete. But it can hardly be doubted that 
the differences apparent in Table I. are largely due to the influence 
of sunlight. In high latitudes for several months in summer it is 
never dark, and consequently a total absence of visible aurora is 
practically inevitable. Some idea of this influence can be derived 
from figures obtained by the Swedish International Expedition of 
1882-1883 at Cape Thorsden, Spitsbergen, lat. 78 28' N. (7). The 
original gives the relative frequency of aurora for each degree of 
depression of the sun below the horizon, assuming the effect of twi- 
light to be nil {i.e. the relative frequency to be 100) when the de- 
pression is 18-5° or more. The following are a selection of the 
figures: — ■ 

Angle of depression . . 4-5° 7-5° 10-5° 12-5° 15-5°. 

Relative frequency . . 0-3 9-3 44-9 74-5 95-9. 

These figures are not wholly free from uncertainties, arising from 

true diurnal and annual variations in the frequency, but they give 

a good general idea of the influence of twilight. 

If sunlight and twilight were the sole cause of the apparent annual 
variation, the frequency would have a simple period, with a maxi- 
mum at midwinter and a minimum at midsummer. This is what 
is actually shown by the most northern stations and districts in 
Table I. When we come, however, below 65 lat. in Europe the 
frequency near the equinoxes rises above that at midwinter, and 
we have a distinct double period, with a principal minimum at mid- 
summer and a secondary minimum at midwinter. In southern 
Europe— where, however, auroras are too few to give smooth results 
in a limited number of years— in southern Canada, and in the 
United States, the difference between the winter and summer 
months is much reduced. Whether there is any real difference 
between high and mean latitudes in the annual frequency of the 
causes rendered visible by aurora, it is difficult to say. The Scan- 
dinavian data, from the wealth of observations, are probably the 
most representative, and even in the most northern district of 
Scandinavia the smallness of the excess of the frequencies in Decem- 
ber and January over those in March and October suggests that 
some influence tending to create maxima at the equinoxes has largely 
counterbalanced the influence of sunlight and twilight in reducing 
the frequency at these seasons. 

5. Fourier Analysis. — With a view to more minute examination, 
the annual frequency can be expressed in Fourier series, whose terms 
represent waves, whose periods are 12, 6, 4, 3, &c. months. This 
has been done by Lovering (4) for thirty-five stations. The nature of 
the results will best be explained by reference to the formula given 
by Lovering as a mean from all the stations considered, viz. : — 

8-33+3-03 sin (30i + ioo°52') +2-53 sin (6oi+309°5')+o-i6 sm 

(90«+2i3°3i') +0-56 sin (i20i+i62°45')-|-o-27 sin (i5o/+32°38'). 

The total number of auroras in the year is taken as 100, and t denote! 

the time, in months, that has elapsed since the middle of January. 



AURORA 





Fig. i.— TWO TYPES OF AURORAL ARCS. 




Fig. 2.— TWO TYPES OF AURORAL RAYS. 



(From the Internationale Pohrforschung, 1882-1883, by permission of the 
Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaflen, Vienna.) 



Plate II. 



AURORA 




Fig. 3— AURORAL BANDS. 




Fig. 5.— AURORAL CORONA. 



AURORA POLARIS 

Table I. — Annual Frequency (Relative). 



929 



Place. 


Latitude. 


Jan. 


Feb. 


March. 


April. 


May. 


June. 


July. 


Aug. 


Sept. 


Oct. 


Nov. 


Dec. 


Hammerfest 



7°i 


20-9 


17-6 


8-8 

















4-4 


9-9 


17-6 


20-9 


Jakobshavn 


69 


14-6 


13-0 


9-2 


o-5 


. 











9 


2 


15 


1 


18-4 


20-0 


Godthaab .... 


64 


15-5 


12-4 


97 


4-9 











1-2 


8 


7 


13 


3 


17-0 


17-4 


St Petersburg . 


60 


6-5 


91 


16-8 


13-8 


3-5 


1-2 


1-4 


5-9 


13 


8 


13 


1 


7-6 


7-3 


Christiania 


60 


8-6 


u-4 


14-0 


1 1 -2 


o-6 





0-2 


6-5 


14 


6 


12 


2 


10-3 


10-3 


Upsala 


60 


8-4 


12-9 


14-9 


7-4 


0-7 


0-2 


0-4 


7"i 


12 


4 


14 


3 


10-7 


10-7 


Stockholm 


59 


7-9 


IO-O 


H-7 


16-4 


3'8 


O-O 


o-o 


5-6 


12 


9 


11 


4 


10-0 


7-3 


Edinburgh .... 


56 


9-5 


12-6 


140 


9-5 


3-4 


0-0 


i-7 


6-o 


12 





13 


5 


n-8 


5-2 


Berlin 


52 1 


7-0 


io-8 


16-4 


15-5 


n-4 


o-6 


2-9 


2-9 


6 


5 


13 


2 


8-5 


4-1 


London .... 


51* 


8-6 


10-5 


IO-2 


10-7 


4-0 


I-I 


1-9 


5-6 


14 


5 


16 


9 


9-6 


6-4 


Quebec 


47, 


3-6 


14-8 


8-3 


14-2 


4-1 


5-9 


77 


5-9 


II 


2 


12 


4 


7-7 


4-1 


Toronto .... 


43? 


5-4 


9-5 


87 


n-8 


9-0 


6-2 


8-0 


6-4 


8 


5 


11 


1 


8-7 


6-7 


Cambridge, Mass. 


42 i 


5-i 


8-2 


n-8 


10-2 


6-4 


5-1 


10-3 


8-5 


13 


3 


9 


2 


6-8 


5-1 


New Haven, Conn. 


4ii 


7-7 


7-3 


8-9 


8-2 


7-6 


57 


8-9 


8-1 


II 


9 


7 


6 


io-6 


7-5 


Scandinavia 


N. of 68i° 


16-4 


13-8 


14-8 


1-6 


o-o 


o-o 


o-o 


0-4 


7 


8 


15 


1 


14-4 


15-7 


,, 


68i° to 65 


15-3 


14-6 


13-7 


2-9 


o-o 


o-o 


o-o 


i-i 


9 


7 


14 


b 


14-0 


14-1 




65°to6iJ° 


13-2 


12-3 


14-5 


5-4 


0-2 


o-o 


0-0 


2-8 


13 


1 


14 


2 


12-8 


"•5 




6ii° to 58 


9-5 


II-2 


13-5 


109 


1-3 


0-1 


0-4 


5-7 


13 


6 


13 


8 


10-4 


9-6 


,, 


S. of 58 


8-2 


n-9 


12-6 


13-3 


i-5 


0-1 


o-6 


4-9 


14 


9 


13 


5 


10-3 


8-2 


New York State . . 


45° to 4 oi° 


6-3 


7-4 


9-1 


II-O 


7-4 


6-6 


8-8 


10-4 


n-7 


9-7 


6-2 


5-4 



Putting t = o, 1, &c, in succession, we get the percentages of the total 
number of auroras which occur in January, February, and so on. 
The first periodic term has a period of twelve, the second of six 
months, and similarly for the others. The first periodic term is 
largest when ;X30° + ioo° 52' = 450°. This makes / = n-6 months 
after the middle of January, otherwise the 3rd of January, approxi- 
mately. The 6-month term has the earliest of its two equal 
maxima about the 26th of March. These two are much the most 
important of the periodic terms. The angles ioo°52',309°5', &c.,are 
known as the phase angles of the respective periodic terms, while 
3-03, 2-53, &c, are the corresponding amplitudes. Table II. gives 
a selection of Lovering's results. The stations are arranged according 
to latitude. 

Table II. 



Station. 



Jakobshavn . 
Godthaab 
St Petersburg . 
Christiania . 
Upsala .... 
Stockholm . 
Makerstown (Scotland) 
Great Britain 
Toronto .... 
Cambridge, Mass. . 
New Haven, Conn. 
New York State. 



Annual Term. 


6-Month Term. 


4-Month Term. 


Amp. 


Phase. 


Amp. 


Phase. 


Amp. 


Phase. 


10-40 



123 


I-I3 



206 


1-41 



333 


8-21 


in 


1-54 


316 


0-64 


335 


2-81 


96 


5-99 


309 


o-57 


208 


4-83 


116 


4.99 


317 


0-76 


189 


5-41 


119 


4-57 


322 


o-86 


296 


3-68 


91 


5-80 


303 


i-3i 


180 


5-79 


102 


4-47 


310 


2-00 


342 


3-87 


126 


4-24 


287 


0-40 


73 


0-18 


12 


2-13 


260 


0-52 


305 


1-02 


262 


2-84 


339 


1-28 


253 


0-99 


183 


1 02 


313 


o-57 


197 


1-34 


264 


2-29 


325 


o-54 


157 



Speaking generally, the annual term diminishes in importance 
as we travel south. North of 55° in Europe its phase angle seems 
fairly constant, not differing very much from the value no" in 
Lovering's general formula. The 6-month term is small, in the two 
most northern stations, but south of 60° N. lat. it is on the whole 
the most important term. Excluding Jakobshavn, the phase angles 
in the 6-month term vary wonderfully little, and approach the value 
309° in Lovering's general formula. North of lat. 50 the 4-month 
term is, as a rule, comparatively unimportant, but in the American 
stations its relative importance is increased. The phase angle, 
however, varies so much as to suggest that the term mainly repre- 
sents local causes or observational uncertainties. Lovering's general 
formula suggests that the 4-month term is really less important than 
the 3-month term, but he gives no data for the latter at individual 
stations. 

6. Sunlight is not the only disturbing cause in estimates of auroral 
frequency. An idea of the disturbing influence of cloud may be 
derived from some interesting results from the Cape Thorsden (7) 
observations. These show how the frequency of visible auroras 
diminished as cloud increased from o (sky quite clear) to 10 (sky 
wholly overcast). 

Grouping the results, we have: 

Amount of cloud . .0 1 to 3 4 to 6 7 to 9 10 

Relative frequency . . 100 82 57 46 8 

Out of a total of 1714 hours during which the sky was wholly overcast 
the Swedish expedition saw auroras on 17, occurring on 14 separate 
days, whereas 226 hours of aurora would have occurred out of an 
equal number of hours with the sky quite clear. The figures being 

II. 30 



based on only one season's observations are somewhat irregular. 
Smoothing them, Carlheim-Gyllenskold gives /= 100' — 7-36 as the 
most probable linear relation between c, the amount of cloud, and 
/, the frequency, assuming the latter to be 100 when there is no 
cloud. 

7. Diurnal Variation. — The apparent daily period at most 
stations is largely determined by the influence of daylight on 
the visibility. It is only during winter and in high latitudes that 
we can hope to ascertain anything directly as to the real diurnal 
variation of the causes whose influence is visible at night as 
aurora. Table III. gives particulars of the number of occasions 
when aurora was seen at each hour of 
the twenty-four during three expeditions 
in high latitudes when a special outlook 
was kept. 

The data under A refer to Cape 
Thorsden (78 28' N. lat., 15° 42' E. . 
long.), those under B to Jan Mayen (8) 
(71° o' N. lat., 8° 28' W. long.), both for 
the winter of 1882-1883. The data under 
C are given by H. Arctowski (9) for the 
"Belgica" Expedition in 1898. They may 
be regarded as applying approximately 
to the mean position of the " Belgica," 
or7o|° S.lat., 86i° W. long. The method 
of counting frequencies was fairly alike, 
at least in the case of A and B, but 
in comparing the different stations the 
data should be regarded as relative rather than absolute. 
The Jan Mayen data refer really to Gottingen mean time, but 
this was only twenty-three minutes late on local time. In 
calculating the percentages of forenoon and afternoon occur- 
rences half the entries under noon and midnight were assigned 
to each half of the day. Even at Cape Thorsden, the sun at mid- 
winter is only 11° below the horizon at noon, and its effect on the 
visibility is thus not wholly negligible. The influence of daylight 
is presumably the principal cause of the difference between the 
phenomena during November, December and January at Cape 
Thorsden and Jan Mayen, for in the equinoctial months the 
results from these two stations are closely similar. Whilst day- 
light is the principal cause of the diurnal inequality, it is not the 
only cause, otherwise there would be as many auroras in the 
morning (forenoon) as in the evening (afternoon). The number 
seen in the evening is, however, according to Table III., consider- ■ 
ably in excess at all seasons. Taking the whole winter, the 
percentage seen in the evening was the same for the " Belgica " 
as for Jan Mayen, i.e. for practically the same latitudes South 
and North. At Cape Thorsden from. November to January 
there seems a distinct double period, with minima near noon 
and midnight. The other months at Cape Thorsden show a 
single maximum and minimum, the former before midnight. 

11 



93° 



AURORA POLARIS 



The same phenomenon appears at Jan Mayen especially in 
November, December and January, and it is the normal state 
of matters in temperate latitudes, where the frequency is usually 
greatest between 8 and 10 p.m. An excess of evening over 
morning occurrences is also the rule, and it is not infrequently 
more pronounced than in Table III. Thus at Tasiusak (65 37' 
N. lat, 37 33' W. long.) the Danish Arctic Expedition (10) 
of 1904 found seventy-five out of every hundred occurrences 
to take place before midnight. 









Table III. — Diurnal Variation. 


















Feb., March, 


Sept. to March (N. Lat.). 


Hour. 


Dec. 


Nov. and Jan. 


Sept. and Oct. 


March to Sept. (S. Lat.). 


A 


B 


A 


B 


A 


B 


A 


B 


C 


1 


14 


7 


14 


8 


27 


23 


55 


38 


24 


2 


10 


6 


15 


6 


20 


25 


45 


37 


23 


3 


9 


4 


15 


5 


15 


21 


39 


30 


10 


4 


10 


5 


21 


7 


14 


18 


45 


30 


4 


5 


13 


5 


20 


3 


10 


10 


43 


18 


2 


6 


11 


3 


15 


4 


2 


3 


28 


10 


1 


7 


9 


2 


13 


3 


1 


2 


23 


7 





8 


5 


1 


6 


1 








11 


2 





9 


7 


2 


9 











16 


2 





10 


10 





5 











15 








11 


9 





6 











15 








Noon 


10 





4 











14 








1 


10 





6 











16 








2 


14 





IO 











24 








3 


18 


1 


20 


3 








38 


4 





4 


16 


7 


19 


7 


1 


1 


36 


15 





5 


12 


11 


22 


10 


5 


2 


39 


23 


3 


6 


14 


10 


21 


16 


8 


5 


43 


3i 


3 


7 


16 


13 


23 


16 


20 


9 


59 


38 


14 


8 


15 


12 


22 


18 


24 


24 


61 


54 


25 


9 


14 


15 


18 


17 


27 


28 


59 


60 


3i 


10 


12 


15 


19 


15 


31 


25 


62 


55 


29 


11 


10 


12 


18 


17 


33 


26 


61 


55 


26 


Midnight 


9 


9 


13 


11 


28 


22 


50 


42 


26 


Totals 


277 


140 


354 


167 


266 


244 


897 


551 


221 


Percentages — 




















Forenoon 


42 


28 


42 


25 


39 


46 


41 


35 


35 


Afternoon 


58 


72 


58 


75 


61 


54 


59 


65 


65 



8. The preceding remarks relate to auroras as a whole; the 
different forms differ considerably in their diurnal variation. Arcs, 
bands and, generally speaking, the more regular and persistent forms, 
show their greatest frequencies earlier in the night than rays or 
patches. Table IV. shows the percentages of e. (evening) and m. 
(morning) occurrences of the principal forms as recorded by the 
Arctic observers at Cape Thorsden, Jan Mayen and Tasiusak. 

Table IV. 





Arcs. 


Bands. 


Rays. 


Patches. 


Cape Thorsden . 
Jan Mayen . 
Tasiusak 


e. 


m. 


e. 


m. 


e. 


m. 


e. 


m. 


76 

78 
85 


24 
22 

15 


66 

68 
85 


34 
32 
15 


52 
60 

65 


48 
40 
35 


51 
60 
62 


49 
40 

38 



At Cape Thorsden diffused auroral light had percentages e. 65, 
m - 35, practically identical with those for bands. At Tasiusak, 
8 p.m. was the hour of most frequent occurrence for arcs and bands, 
whereas patches had their maximum frequency at 11 p.m. and rays 
at midnifiht. 

9. Lunar and other Periods. — The action of moonlight neces- 
sarily gives rise to a true lunar period in the 
visibility of aurora. The extent to which it 
renders aurora invisible depends, however, so 
much on the natural brightness of the aurora — 
which depends on the time and the place- — and 
on the sharpness of the outlook kept, that it is 
difficult to gauge it. Ekholm and Arrhenius( 11) 
claim to have established the existence of a true tropical lunar 
period of 27-32 days, and also of a 26-day period, or, as they make 
it, a 25-929-day period. A 26-day period has also been derived 
by J. Liznar (12), after an elaborate allowance for the disturbing 
effects of moonlight from the observations in 1882-1883 at 



Bossekop, Fort Rae and Jan Mayen. Neither of these periods 
is universally conceded. The connexion between aurora and 
earth magnetic disturbances renders it practically certain that 
if a 26-day or similar period exists in the one phenomenon it 
exists also in the other, and of the two terrestrial magnetism 
(q.v.) is probably the element least affected by external com- 
plications, such as the action of moonlight. 

10. Sun-spot Connexion. — The frequency of auroral displays 
is much greater in some years than others. At most places the 

variation in the frequency has 
shown a general similarity to 
that of sun-spots. Table V. 
gives contemporaneous data for 
the frequency of sun-spots and 
of auroras seen in Scandinavia. 
The sun-spot data prior to 1902 
are from A. Wolfer's table in 
the Met. Zeitschrift for 1902, 
p. 195; the more recent data 
are from his quarterly lists. All 
are observed frequencies, derived 
after Wolf's method; maxima 
and minima are in heavy type. 
The auroral data are from 
Table E of Tromholt's cata- 
logue (5), with certain modifica- 
tions. In Tromholt's yearly data 
the year commences with July. 
This being inconvenient for com- 
parison with sun-spots, use was 
made of his monthly values to 
obtain corresponding data for 
years commencing with January. 
The Tromholt-Schroeter data 
for Scandinavia as a whole com- 
menced with 1 761; the figures 
for earlier years were obtained 
by multiplying the data for 
Sweden by 1-356, the factor 
being derived by comparing 
the figures for Sweden alone and for the whole of Scandinavia 
from July 1761 to June 1783. 

In a general way Table V. warrants the conclusion that years 
of many sun-spots are years of many auroras, and years of few 
sun-spots years of few auroras; but it does not disclose any 
very definite relationship between the two frequencies. The 
maxima and minima in the two phenomena in a good many 
cases are not found in the same years. On the other hand, there 
is absolute coincidence in a number of cases, some of them very 
striking, as for instance the remarkably low minima of 18 10 and 
1823. 

11. During the period 1764 to 1872 there have been ten years of 
maximum, and ten of minimum, in sun-spot frequency. Taking; 
the three years of greatest frequency at each maximum, and the 
three years of least frequency at each minimum, we get thirty years 
of many and thirty of few sun-spots. Also we can split the period 
into an earlier half, 1764 to 1817, and a later half, 1818 to 1872, 
containing respectively the earlier five and the later five of the above 
groups of sun-spot maximum and minimum years. The annual 
means derived from the whole group, and the two sub-groups, of 
years of many and few sun-spots are as follows : — 



Years of 


1764-1872. 


1764-1817. 


1818-1872. 


Spots. 


Auroras. 


Spots. 


Auroras. 


Spots. 


Auroras. 


Many sun-spots. 
Few „ 


93-4 
13-4 


99.9 
6i-5 


86-7 
13-6 


70-7 
51-6 


IOO-I 

i3-i 


129-1 
71-3 



In each case the excess of auroras in the group of years of many 
sun-spots is decided, but the results from the two sub-periods do 
not harmonize closely. The mean sun-spot frequency for the group 
of years of few sun-spots is almost exactly the same for the two sub- 
periods, but the auroral frequency for the later group is nearly 
40 % in excess of that for the earlier, and even exceeds the auroral 



AURORA POLARIS 



93 1 



frequency in the years of many sun-spots in the earlier sub-period. 
This inconsistency, though startling at first sight, is probably more 
apparent than real. It is almost certainly due in large measure to 
a progressive change in one or both of the units of frequency. In 
the case of sun-spots, A. Schuster (13) has compared J. R. Wolf and 
A. Wolfer's frequencies with data obtained by other observers for 
areas of sun-spots, and his figures show unquestionably that the unit 
in one or other set of data must have varied appreciably from time 
to time. Wolf and VVolfer have, however, aimed persistently at 
securing a definite standard, and there are several reasons for 
believing that the change of unit has been in the auroral rather than 
the sun-spot frequency. R. Rubenson (14), from whom Tromholt 
derives his data for Sweden, seems to accept this view, assigning the 
apparent increase in auroral frequency since i860 to the institution 
by the state of meteorological stations in 1859, and to the increased 
interest taken in the subject since 1865 by the university of Upsala. 
The figures themselves in Table V. certainly point to this conclusion, 
unless we are prepared to believe that auroras have increased enor- 
mously in number. If, for instance, we compare the first and the 
last three 11 -year cycles for which Table V. gives complete data, we 
obtain as yearly means : — 



1 749-1 781 
1 844-1 876 



Sun-spots 56-4 
55-8 



Auroras 77-5 

,, II2-2 



The mean sun-spot frequencies in the two periods differ by only 
I %, but the auroral frequency in the later period is 45 % in excess 
of that in the earlier. 

The above figures would be almost conclusive if it were not for 
the conspicuous differences that exist between the mean sun-spot 
frequencies for different 11-year periods. Schuster, who has con- 
sidered the matter very fully, has found evidence of the existence of 
other periods — notably 8-4 and 4-8 years — in addition to the recog- 
nized period of 11-125 years, and he regards the difference between 
the maxima in successive 11-year periods as due at least partly 
to an overlapping of maxima from the several periodic terms. This 
cannot, however, account for all the fluctuations observed in sun-spot 
frequencies, unless other considerably longer periods exist. There 
has been at least one 33-year period during which the mean value of 
sun-spot frequency has been exceptionally low, and, as we shall see, 
there was a corresponding remarkable scarcity of auroras. The 
period in question may be regarded as extending from 1794 to 1826 
inclusive. Comparing it with the two adjacent periods of thirty-three 
years, we obtain the following for the mean annual frequencies: — 



33-Year Period. 


Sun-spots. 


Auroras. 


1761-1793 
1 794- 1 826 
1827-1859 


65-6 
20-3 
56-1 


76-1 

39-5 

84-4 



12. The association of high auroral and sun-spot frequencies 
shown in Table V. is not peculiar to Scandinavia. It is shown, for 
instance, in Loomis's auroral data, which are based on observation. 
at a variety of European and American stations (Ency. Brit. 9th ed. 
art. Meteorology, Table XXVIII.). It does not seem, however, to 
apply universally. Thus at Godthaab we have, according to Adam 
Paulsen (IS), comparing 3-year periods of few and many sun-spots : — 



3- Year Period. 


Total Sun-spot 
Frequency. 


Total Nights 
of Aurora. 


1 865-1 868 
1869-1872 
1876-1879 


48 

339 

23 


274 
138 

273 



The years start in the autumn, and 1 865-1 868 includes the three 
winters of 1865 to '66, '66 to '67, and '67 to '68. Paulsen also gives 
data from two other stations in Greenland, viz. Ivigtut (1869 to 
1879) and Jakobshavn (1873 to 1879), which show the same pheno- 
menon as at Godthaab in a prominent fashion. Greenland lies to 
the north of Fritz's curve of maximum auroral frequency, and the 
suggestion has been made that the zone of maximum frequency 
expands to the south as sun-spots increase, and contracts again as 
they diminish, the number of auroras at a given station increasing 
or diminishing as the zone of maximum frequency approaches to 
or recedes from it. This theory, however, does not seem to fit all the 
facts and stands in want of confirmation. 

13. Auroral Meridian. — It is a common belief that the summit 
of an auroral arc is to be looked for in the observer's magnetic 
meridian. On any theory it would be rather extraordinary if 
this were invariably true. In temperate latitudes auroral arcs 
are seldom near the zenith, and there is reason to believe them 
at very great heights. In high latitudes the average height is 
probably less, but the direction in which the magnetic needle 



Table V. 



Year. 


Frequency. 


Year. 


Frequency. 


Yesr. 


Frequency. 


Year. 


Frequ 


ency. 




Sun-spot. 


Auroral. 




Sun-spot. 


Auroral. 




Sun-spot. 


Auroral. 


Sun-spot. 


Auroral. 


1749 


80-9 


103 


1789 


1181 


89 


1829 


67-0 


93 


1869 


73-9 


160 


1750 


83 


4 


134 


1790 


89-9 


90 


1830 


71 


132 


1870 


1391 


\H 


1751 


47 


7 


53 


1791 


66-6 


54 


1831 


47-8 


89 


1871 


III-2 


1752 


47 


8 


in 


1792 


6o-o 


64 


1832 


27-5 


54 


1872 


IOI-7 


200 


1753 


30 


7 


96 


1793 


46-9 


29 


1833 


8-5 


79 


1873 


66-3 


189 


1754 


12 


2 


65 


1794 


41-0 


37 


1834 


13-2 


81 


1874 


44-7 


158 


1755 


9 


6 


34 


1795 


21-3 


34 


1835 


56-9 


58 


1875 


17-1 


133 


1756 


10 


2 


60 


1796 


16-0 


37 


1836 


I2I-5 


98 


1876 


n-3 


137 


1757 


32 


4 


83 


1797 


6-4 


61 


1837 


138-3 


137 


1877 


12-3 


126 


1758 


47 


6 


80 


1798 


41 


35 


1838 


103-2 


159 


1878 


3-4 






1759 


54 





"3 


1799 


6-8 


28 


1839 


85-8 


165 


1879 


6-0 






1760 


62 


9 


86 


1800 


H-5 


30 


1840 


63-2 


82 


1880 


32-3 






1761 


85 


9 


124 


1 801 


34-0 


34 


1841 


36-8 


75 


1881 


54-3 






1762 


61 


2 


114 


1802 


45-° 


65 


1842 


24-2 


91 


1882 


59-7 






1763 


45 


1 


89 


1803 


43-i 


73 


1843 


10-7 


66 


1883 


63-7 






1764 


36 


4 


107 


1804 


47-5 


101 


1844 


15-0 


81 


1884 


63-5 






1765 


20 


9 


76 


1805 


42-2 


85 


1845 


40-1 


26 


1885 


52-2 






1766 


11 


4 


51 


1806 


28-1 


62 


1846 


6i-5 


50 


1886 


25-4 






1767 


37 


8 


68 


1807 


IO-I 


42 


1847 


98-5 


63 


1887 


n-i 






1768 


69 


8 


80 


1808 


8-i 


20 


1848 


124-3 


107 


1888 


6-8 






1769 


106 


1 


89 


1809 


2-5 


20 


1849 


95-9 


131 


1889 


6-3 






1770 


100 


8 


83 


1810 


00 


4 


1850 


66-5 


95 


1890 


7-i 






i77i 


81 


6 


62' 


i8n 


1-4 


13 


1851 


64-5 


60 


1891 


35-6 






1772 


66 


5 


38 


1812 


5-0 


11 


1852 


54-2 


92 


1892 


73-0 






1773 


34 


8 


58 


1813 


12-2 


18 


1853 


39-o 


65 


1893 


84-9 






1774 


3° 


6 


98 


1814 


13-9 


17 


1854 


20-6 


64 


1894 


78-0 






1775 


7 





33 


1815 


35-4 


10 


1855 


6-7 


49 


1895 


64-0 






1776 


19 


8 


17 


1816 


45-8 


33 


1856 


4-3 


46 


1896 


41-8 






1777 


92 


5 


64 


1817 


41-1 


60 


1857 


22-8 


38 


1897 


26-2 






1778 


154 


4 


59 


1818 


3°-4 


74 


1858 


54-8 


88 


1898 


26-7 






1779 


125 


9 


60 


1819 


23-9 


43 


1859 


93-8 


131 


1899 


12-1 






1780 


84 


8 


67 


1820 


15-7 


62 


i860 


95-7 


119 


1900 


9-5 






1781 


68 


1 


103 


1821 


6-6 


37 


1861 


77-2 


127 


1901 


2-7 






1782 


38 


5 


67 


1822 


4-0 


33 


1862 


59-i 


135 


1902 


50 






1783 


22 


8 


70 


1823 


1-8 


13 


1863 


44-0 


135 


1903 


24-4 






1784 


10 


2 


78 


1824 


8-5 


14 


1864 


47-0 


124 


1904 


42-0 






1785 


24 


1 


83 


1825 


16-6 


40 


1865 


3°-5 


119 


1905 


62-8 






1786 


82 


9 


136 


1826 


36-3 


58 


1866 


16-3 


130 


1906 


53-8 






1787 


132 





115 


1827 


497 


79 


1867 


7-3 


127 


1907 


62-0 






1788 


130-9 


97 


1828 


62-5 


60 


1868 


37-3 


144 


1908 


48-5 







93 * 



AURORA POLARIS 



points changes rapidly with change of latitude and longitude, 
and has a large diurnal variation. Thus there must in general 
be a difference between the observer's magnetic meridian — 
answering to the mean position of the magnetic needle at his 
station — and the direction the needle would have at a given hour, 
if undisturbed by the aurora, at any spot where the phenomena 
which the observer sees as aurora exist. 

Very elaborate observations have been made during several 
Arctic expeditions of the azimuths of the summits of auroral arcs. 
At Cape Thorsden (7) in 1882-18S3 the mean azimuth derived from 
371 arcs was 24 12' W.,or 11 "27' to theW. of the magnetic meridian. 
As to the azimuths in individual cases, 130 differed from the mean by 
less than io°, 118 by from 10° to 20°, 82 by from 20° to 30 , 21 by 
from 30 to 40 , 14 by from 40 to 50°; in six cases the departure 
exceeded 50 , and in one case it exceeded 70°. Also, whilst the 
mean azimuths deduced from the observations between 6 a.m. and 
noon, between noon and 6 p.m., and between 6 p.m. and midnight, 
were closely alike, their united mean being 22-4° W. of N. (or E.of S.), 
the mean derived from the 113 arcs observed between midnight and 
6 a.m. was 47-8° W. At Jan Mayen (8) in 1882-1883 the mean 
azimuth of the summit of the arcs was 28-8° W. of N., thus approach- 
ing much more closely to the magnetic meridian 29-9° W. As to 
individual azimuths, 113 lay within io° of the mean, 37 differed by 
from io° to 20°, 18 by from 20° to 30 , 6 by from 30° to 40 , whilst 
6 differed by over 40°. Azimuths were also measured at Jan Mayen 
for 338 auroral bands, the mean being 22-0° W., or 7-9° to the east 
of the magnetic meridian. Combining the results from arcs and 
bands, Carlheim-Gyllenskold gives the " anomaly " of the auroral 
meridian at Jan Mayen as 5-7° E. At the British Polar station of 
1882, Fort Rae (62* 23' N. lat., 115° 44' W. long.), he makes it 
15-7° W. At Godthaab in 1 882-1 883 the auroral anomaly was, 
according to Paulsen, 15-5° E., the magnetic meridian lying 57-6° W. 
of the astronomical. 

14. Auroral Zenith. — Another auroral direction having appar- 
ently a close relation to terrestrial magnetism is the imaginary line 
drawn to the eye of an observer from the centre of the corona — i.e. 
the point to which the auroral rays converge. This seems ingeneral 
to be nearly coincident with the direction of the dipping needle. 

Thus at Cape Thorsden (7) in 1 882-1 883 the mean of a considerable 
number of observations made the angle between the two directions 
only 1° 7', the magnetic inclination being 80° 35', whilst the coronal 
centre had an altitude of 79° 55' and lay somewhat to the west of the 
magnetic meridian. Even smaller mean values have been found 
for the angle between the auroral and magnetic " zeniths " — as the 
two directions have been called — e.g. 0° 50' at Bossekop (16) in 
1838-1839, and o° 7' at Treurenberg (17) (79 55' N. lat., 16° 51' E. 
long.) in 1899-1900. 

15. Relations to Magnetic Storms. — That there is an intimate 
connexion between aurora when visible in temperate latitudes 
and terrestrial magnetism is hardly open to doubt. A bright 
aurora visible over a large part of Europe seems always accom- 
panied by a magnetic storm and earth currents, and the largest 
magnetic storms and the most conspicuous auroral displays 
have occurred simultaneously. Noteworthy examples are afforded 
by the auroras and magnetic storms of August 28-29 an d Sep- 
tember 1-2, 1859; February 4, 1872; February 13-14 and 
August 12, 1892; September 9, 1898; and October 31, 1903. 
On some of these occasions aurora was brilliant in both the 
northern and southern hemispheres, whilst magnetic disturbances 
were experienced the whole world over. In high latitudes, 
however, where both auroras and magnetic storms are most 
numerous, the connexion between them is much less uniform. 
Arctic observers, both Danish and British, have repeatedly 
reported displays of aurora unaccompanied by any special 
magnetic disturbance. This has been more especially the case 
when the auroral light has been of a diffused character, showing 
only minor variability. When there has been much apparent 
movement, and brilliant changes of colour in the aurora, magnetic 
disturbance has nearly always accompanied it. In the Arctic, 
auroral displays seem sometimes to be very local, and this 
may be the explanation. On the other hand, Arctic observers 
have reported an apparent connexion of a particularly defi- 
nite character. According to Paulsen (18), during the Ryder 
expedition in 1891-1892, the following phenomenon was seen 
at least twenty times by Lieut. Vedel at Scoresby Sound (70 27' 
N. lat., 26 10' W. long.). An auroral curtain travelling with 
considerable velocity would approach from the south, pass right 
overhead and retire to the north. As the curtain approached, 
the compass needle always deviated to the west, oscillated as 



the curtain passed the zenith, and then deviated to the east. 
The behaviour of the needle, as Paulsen points out, is exactly 
what it should be if the space occupied by the auroral curtain 
were traversed by electric currents directed upwards from the 
ground. The Danish observers at Tasiusak (10) in 1898-1899 
observed this phenomenon occasionally in a slightly altered 
form. At Tasiusak the auroral curtain after reaching the zenith 
usually retired in the direction from which it had come. The 
direction in which the compass needle deviated was west or east, 
according as the curtain approached from the south or the 
north; as the curtain retired the deviation eventually diminished. 

Kr. Birkeland (19), who has made a special study of magnetic dis- 
turbances in the Arctic, proceeding on the hypothesis that they arise 
from electric currents in the atmosphere, and who has thence at- 
tempted to deduce the position and intensity of these currents, 
asserts that whilst in the case of many storms the data were in- 
sufficient, when it was possible to fix the position of the mean line of 
flow of the hypothetical current relatively to an auroral arc, he 
invariably found the directions coincident or nearly so. 

16. In the northern hemisphere to the south of the zone of 
greatest frequency, the part of the sky in which aurora most 
generally appears is the magnetic north. In higher latitudes 
auroras are most often seen in the south. The relative frequency 
in the two positions seems to vary with the hour, the type of 
aurora, probably with the season of the year, and possibly with 
the position of the year in the sun-spot cycle. 

At Jan Mayen (8) in 1882-1883, out of 177 arcs whose position was 
accurately determined, 44 were seen in the north, their summits 
averaging 38-5° above the northern horizon; 88 were seen in the 
south, their average altitude above the southern horizon being 33-5°; 
while 45 were in the zenith. At Tasiusak (10) in 1898-1899 the 
magnetic directions of the principal types were noted separately. 
The results are given in Table VI. 

Table VI. 



Direc- 
tion. 


Absolute Number for each Type. 


Percentage 
from all 
Types. 


Arcs. 


Bands. 


Curtains. 


Rays. 


Patches. 


N. 


9 


16 


5 


15 


4 


10 


N.E. 


9 


13 


2 


20 


4 


9 


E. 


3 


11 


2 


26 


3 


9 


S.E. 


5 


6 


1 


10 


7 


6 


S. 


45 


43 


1 


16 


15 


24 


s.w. 


9 


9 


2 


12 


13 


9 


w. 


3 


11 


2 


22 


6 


9 


N.W. 


2 


8 


2 


8 


5 


5 



Table VI. accounts for only 81 % of the total displays; of the 
remainder 15% appeared in the zenith, while 4 % covered the 
whole sky. Auroral displays generally cover a considerable 
area, and are constantly changing, so the figures are necessarily 
somewhat rough. But clearly, whilst the arcs and bands, and 
to a lesser extent the patches, showed a marked preference for 
the magnetic meridian, the rays showed no such preference. 

At Cape Thorsden (7) in 1 882-1 883 auroras as a whole were 
divided into those seen in the north and those seen in the south. 
The variation throughout the twenty-four hours in the percentage 
seen in the south was as follows : — 



Hour. 


0-3 • 


3-6. 


6-9. 


9-12. 


A.M. 

P.M. 


69 

55 


55 
70 


44 
65 


35 
65 



The mean from the whole twenty-four hours is sixty-three. 
Between 3 A.M. and 3 p.m. the percentage of auroras seen in the 
south thus appears decidedly below the mean. 

17. The following data for the apparent angular width of arcs 
were obtained at Cape Thorsden, the arcs being grouped accord- 
ing to the height of the lower edge above the horizon. Group I. 
contained thirty arcs whose altitudes did not exceed n° 45'; 
Group II. thirty arcs whose altitudes lay between 12 and 35°; 
and Group III, thirty arcs whose altitudes lay between 36° and 80 . 



Group. 



Greatest width 
Least , , 
Mean 



I. 



II- 5c 
i-o° 

3-45° 



II. 



12-0" 

o-75° 
4-6° 



III. 



21-0 
2-0° 

6-9° 



There is here a distinct tendency for the width to increase With the 
altitude. At the same time, arcs near the horizon often appeared 
wider than others near the zenith. Furthermore, GyHenskold says 
that when arcs mounted, as they not infrequently did, from the 
horizon, their apparent width might go on increasing right up to the 



AURORA POLARIS 



933 



zenith, or it might increase until an altitude of about 45° was reached 
and then diminish, appearing much reduced when the zenith was 
reached. Of course the phenomenon might be due to actual change 
in the arc, but it is at least consistent with the view that arcs are of 
two kinds, one form constituting a layer of no great vertical depth 
but considerable real horizontal width, the other form having little 
horizontal width but considerable vertical depth, and resembling 
to some extent an auroral curtain. 

18. According to numerous observations made at Cape Thors- 
den, the apparent angular velocity of arcs increases on the 
average with their altitude. Dividing the whole number of arcs, 
156, whose angular velocities were measured into three numerically 
equal groups, according to their altitude, the following were the 
results in minutes of arc per second of time (or degrees per minute 
of time) : — 



Group. 


I. 


II. 


III. 


All. 


Mean altitude . 
Greatest velocity . 
Mean velocity . 


10-5° 

4-81 

, 0-48 


34-6° 
15-12 
2-42 


72-3° 

109-09 

8-67 


3-86 



Each group contained auroras which appeared stationary. The 
intervals to which the velocities referred were usually from five to 
ten minutes, but varied widely. The velocity 10909 was much the 
largest observed, the next being 52-38; both were from observations 
lasting under half a minute. 

19. In 1 882-1 883 the direction of motion of arcs was from north 
to south in 62% of the cases at Jan Mayen, and in 58% of the 
cases at Cape Thorsden. This seems the more common direction 
in the northern hemisphere, at least for stations to the south of the 
zone of maximum frequency, but a considerable preponderance of 
movements towards the north was observed in Franz Joseph Land 
by the Austrian Expedition of 1872-1874. The apparent motion of 
arcs is sometimes of a complicated character. One end only, for 
example, may appear to move, as if rotating round the other; or 
the two ends may move in opposite directions, as if the arc were 
rotating about a vertical axis through its summit. 

20. Height. — If an auroral arc represented a definite self- 
luminous portion of space of small transverse dimensions at a 
uniform height above the ground, its height could be accurately 
determined by observations made with theodolites at the two 
ends of a measured base, provided the base were not too short 
compared to the height. If a very long base is taken, it becomes 
increasingly open to doubt whether the portions of space emitting 
auroral light to the observers at the two ends are the same. 
There is also difficulty in ensuring that the observations shall 
be simultaneous, an important matter especially when the 
apparent velocity is considerable. If the base is short, definite 
resul ts can hardly be hoped for unless the height is very moderate. 
Amongst the best-known theodolite determinations of height are 
those made at Bossekop in Norway by the French Expedition of 
1838-1839 (16) and the Norwegian Expedition of 188 2-1883, an d 
those made in the latter year by the Swedes at Cape Thorsden 
and the Danes at Godthaab. At Bossekop and Cape Thorsden 
there were a considerable proportion of negative or impossible 
parallaxes. Much the most consistent results were those obtained 
at Godthaab by Paulsen (15). The base was 5-8 km. (about 
3§ miles) long, the ends being in the same magnetic meridian, 
on opposite sides of a fiord, and observations were confined to 
this meridian, strict simultaneity being secured by signals. 
Heights were calculated only when the observed parallax 
exceeded 1°, but this happened in three-fourths of the cases. 
The calculated heights — all referring to the lowest border of the 
aurora — varied from o-6 to 67-8 km. (about 0-4 to 42 m.), 
the average being about 20 km. (12m.). Regular arcs were 
selected in most cases, but the lowest height obtained was for 
a collection of rays forming a curtain which was actually situated 
between the two stations. 

In 1885 Messrs Garde and Eherlin made similar observations at 
Nanortalik near Cape Farewell in Greenland, but using a base of only 
1250 metres (about | m.). Their results were very similar to Paul- 
sen's. On one occasion twelve observations, extending over half an 
hour, were made on a single arc, the Calculated heights varying in a 
fairly regular fashion from 1-6 to 12-9 km. (about I to 8 m.). The 
calculated horizontal distances of this arc varied between 5 and 
24 km. (about 3 and 15 m.), the motion being sometimes towards, 
sometimes away from the observers, but not apparently exceeding 
3 km. (nearly 2 m.) per minute. Heights of arcs have often been 
calculated from the apparent altitudes at stations widely apart in 
Europe or America. The heights calculated in this way for the under 



surface of the arc, have usually exceeded 100 m. ; some have been 
much in excess of this figure. None of the results so obtained can 
be accepted without reserve, but there are several reasons for believ- 
ing that the average height in Greenland is much below that in lower 
latitudes. Heights have been calculated in various less direct ways, 
by observing for instance the angular altitude of the summit of an arc 
and the angular interval between its extremities, and then making 
some assumption such as that the portion visible to an observer 
may be treated as a circle whose centre lies over the so-called auroral 
pole. The mean height calculated at Arctic stations, where careful 
observations have been made, in this or analogous ways, has varied 
from 58 km. (about 36 m.) at Cape Thorsden (Gyllenskold) to 227 km. 
(about 141 m.) at Bossekop (Bravais). The height has also been 
calculated on the hypothesis that auroral light has its source where 
the atmospheric pressure is similar to that at which most brilliancy 
is observed when electric discharges pass in vacuum tubes. Esti- 
mates on this basis have suggested heights of the order of 50 km. 
(about 31 m.). There are, of course, many uncertainties, as the con- 
ditions of discharge in the free atmosphere may differ widely from 
those in glass vessels. If the Godthaab observations can be trusted, 
auroral discharges must often occur within a few miles of the earth's 
surface in Arctic regions. In confirmation of this view reference 
may be made to a number of instances where observers — e.g. General 
Sabine, Sir John Franklin, Prof. Selim Lemstrom, Dr David Walker 
(at Fort Kennedy in 1858-1859), Captain Parry (Fort Bowen, 1825) 
and others — have seen aurora below the clouds or between themselves 
and mountains. One or two instances of this kind have even been 
described in Scotland. Prof. Cleveland Abbe (20) has given a full 
historical account of the subject to which reference may be made 
for further details. 

21. Brightness. — In auroral displays the brightness often varies 
greatly over the illuminated area and changes rapidly. Estimates 
of the intensity of the light have been based on various arbitrary 
scales, such for instance as the size of type which the observer can 
read at a given distance. The estimate depends in the case of reading 
type on the general illumination. In other cases scales have 
been employed which make the result mainly depend on the brightest 
part of the display. At Jan Mayen (8) in 1882-1883 a scale was 
employed running from 1, taken as corresponding to the brightness 
of the milky way, to 4, corresponding to full moonlight. The 
following is an analysis of the results obtained, showing the number 
of times the different grades were reached : — 



Scale of 
Intensity. 


1. 


2. 


3- 


4- 


Mean 
Intensity. 


Arcs . . . 
Bands . . 
Rays . . . 
Corona . . 


27 
46 

3° 

3 


53 

83 

116 

14 


13 

49 

138 

12 


1 

22 
28 
12 


l-8 7 
2-24 

2-21 
2-81 



On one or two occasions at Jan Mayen auroral light is described as 
making the full moon look like an ordinary gas jet in presence of 
electric light, whilst rays could be seen crossing and brighter than 
the moon's disk. Such extremely bright auroras seem very rare, 
however, even in the Arctic. There is a general tendency for both 
bands and rays to appear brightest at their lowest parts; arcs 
seldom appear as bright at their summits as nearer the horizon. It 
is not unusual for arcs and bands to look as if pulses or waves of 
light were travelling along them; also the direction in which these 
pulses travel does not seem to be wholly arbitrary. Movements to 
the east were twice as numerous at Jan Mayen and thrice as numerous 
at Traurenberg as movements to the west. In some cases changes 
of intensity take place round the auroral zenith, simulating the effect 
that would be produced by a cyclonic rotation of luminous matter. 
In the case of isolated patches the intensity often waxes and wanes 
as if a search-light were being thrown on and turned off. 

22. Colour. — The ordinary colour of aurora is white, usually 
with a distinct yellow tint in the brighter forms, but silvery white 
when the light is faint. When the light is intense and changing 
rapidly, red is not infrequently present, especiaDy towards the 
lower edge. Under these circumstances, green is also sometimes 
visible, especially towards the zenith. Thus a bright auroral 
ray may seem red towards the foot and green at its summit, 
with yellow intervening. In some cases the green may be only 
a contrast effect. Other colours, e.g. violet, have occasionally 
been noticed but are unusual. 

23 . Spectrum. — The spectrum of aurora consists of a number of 
lines. Numerous measurements have been made of the wave- 
lengths of the brightest. One line, in the yellow green, is so 
dominant optically as often to be described as the auroral line. 
Its wave-length is probably very near 5571 tenth-metres, and it 
is very close to, if not absolutely coincident with, a prominent 
line in the spectrum of krypton. This line is so characteristic 
that its presence or absence is the usual criterion for deciding 



934- 



AURUNCI 



whether an atmospheric light is aurora. The Swedish Expedi- 
tion (17) of 1 899-1 902, engaged in measuring an arc of the 
meridian in Spitsbergen, were unusually well provided spectro- 
graphically, and succeeded in taking photographs of aurora in 
conjunction with artificial lines — chiefly of hydrogen — which led 
to results claiming exceptional accuracy. In the spectrograms 
three auroral rays — including the principal one mentioned 
above — were pre-eminent. For the two shorter wave-lengths, 
for whose measurement he claims the highest precision, the 
observer, J. Westman, gives the values 4276-4 and 3913-5. In 
addition, he assigns wave-lengths for 156 other auroral lines 
between wave-lengths 5205 and 3513. The following table gives 
the wave-lengths of the photographically 'brightest of these, 
retaining four significant figures in place of Westman's five. 

Table VII. 



4830 


4489 


4329 


3997 


3861 


4709 


4420 


4242 


3986 


3804 


4699 


4371 


4230 


3947 


3793 


4661 


4356 


4225 


3937 


3704 


4560 


4344 


4078 


3880 


3607 


4550 


4337 


4067 


3876 


3589 



There are a number of optically bright lines of longer wave- 
length. For the principal of these Angot (1) gives the following 
wave-lengths (unit 1 nn or iXio -9 metre): — 630, 578, 566, 

535, 523, 5°°- 

Out of a total of 146 auroral lines, with wave-lengths longer 
than 3684 tenth-metres, Westman identifies 82 with oxygen or 
nitrogen lines at the negative pole in vacuum discharges. Amongst 
the lines thus identified are the two principal auroral lines having 
wave-lengths 4276-4 and 3913-5. The interval considered by 
Westman contains at least 300 oxygen and nitrogen lines, so 
that approximate coincidence with a number of auroral lines 
was almost inevitable, and an appreciable number of the coin- 
cidences may be accidental. E. C. C Baly (21), making use of the 
observations of the Russian expedition in Spitsbergen in 1899, 
accepts as the wave-lengths of the three principal auroral lines 
5570, 4276 and 3912; and he identifies all three and ten other 
auroral lines ranging between 5570 and 3707 with krypton lines 
measured by himself. In addition to these, he mentions other 
auroral lines as very probably krypton lines, but in their case 
the wave-lengths which he quotes from Paulsen (22) are given to 
only three significant figures, so that the identification is more 
uncertain. The majority of the krypton lines which Baly identi- 
fies with auroral lines require for their production a Leyden jar 
and spark gap. 

If, as is now generally believed, aurora represents some form of 
electrical discharge, it is only reasonable to suppose that the auroral 
lines arise from atmospheric gases. The conditions, however, as 
regards pressure and temperature under which the hypothetical 
discharges take place must vary greatly in different auroras, or even 
sometimes in different parts of the same aurora. Further, auroras 
are often possessed of rapid motion, so that conceivably spectral lines 
may receive small displacements in accordance with Doppler's 
principle. Thus the differences in the wave-lengths of presumably 
the same lines as measured by different Arctic observers may be 
only partly due to unfavourable observational conditions. Many 
of the auroral lines seen in any single aurora are exceedingly faint, 
so that even their relative positions are difficult to settle with high 
precision. 

24. Whether or not auroral displays are ever accompanied by a 
characteristic sound is a disputed question. If sound waves originate 
at the seat of auroral displays they seem hardly likely to be audible 
on the earth, unless the aurora comes very low and great stillness 
prevails. It is thus to the Arctic one looks for evidence. According 
to Captain H. P. Dawson (26), in charge of the British Polar Station 
at Fort Rae in 1882-1883, " The Indians and voyageurs of the 
Hudson Bay Company, who often pass their nights in the open, say 
that it [sound] is not uncommon . . . there can be no doubt that 
distinct sound does occasionally accompany certain displays of 
aurora." On the one occasion when Captain Dawson says he heard it 
himself, " the sound was like the swishing of a whip or the noise 
produced by a sharp squall of wind in the upper rigging of a ship, 
and as the aurora brightened and faded so did the sound which 
accompanied it." If under these conditions the sound was really 
due to the aurora, the latter, as Captain Dawson himself remarks, 
must have been pretty close. 

25. Usually the electric potential near the ground is positive 



compared to the earth and increases with the height (see Atmo- 
spheric Electricity). Several Arctic observers,however,especially 
Paulsen (18) have observed a diminution of positive potential, or 
even a change to negative, for which they could suggest no explana- 
tion except the presence of a bright aurora. Other Arctic observers 
have failed to find any trace of this phenomenon. If it exists, it is 
presumably confined to cases when the auroral discharge comes 
unusually low. 

26. Artificial Phenomena resembling Aurora. — At Sodankyla, the 
station occupied by the Finnish Arctic Expedition of 1882-1883, 
Selim Lemstrom and Biese (23) described and gave drawings of 
optical phenomena which they believed to be artificially produced 
aurora. A number of metallic points, supported on insulators, were 
connected by wires enclosing several hundred square metres on the 
top of a hill. Sometimes a Holtz machine was employed, but even 
without it illumination resembling aurora was seen on several 
occasions, extending apparently to a considerable height. In the 
laboratory, Kr. Birkeland (19) has produced phenomena bearing 
a striking resemblance to several forms of aurora. His apparatus 
consists of a vacuum vessel containing a magnetic sphere — intended 
to represent the earth — and the phenomena are produced by sending 
electric discharges through the vessel. 

27. Theories. — A great variety of theories have been advanced 
to account for aurora. All or nearly all the most recent regard it 
as some form of electrical discharge. Birkeland (l9) supposes the 
ultimate cause to be cathode rays emanating from the sun ; C. Nord- 
mann (24) replaces the cathode rays by Hertzian waves; while 
Svante Arrhenius (25) believes that negatively charged particles are 
driven through the sun's atmosphere by the Maxwell-Bartoli re- 
pulsion of light and reach the earth's atmosphere. For the size and 
density of particles which he considers most likely, Arrhenius cal- 
culates the time required to travel from the sun as forty-six hours. 
By modifying the hypothesis as to the size and density, times 
appreciably longer or shorter than the above would be obtained. 
Cathode rays usually have a velocity about a tenth that of light, 
but in exceptional cases it may approach a third of that of light. 
Hertzian waves have the velocity of light itself. On either Birke- 
land's or Nordmann's theory, the electric impulse from the sun acts 
indirectly by creating secondary cathode rays in the earth's atmo- 
sphere, or ionizing it so that discharges due to natural differences 
of potential are immensely facilitated. The ionized condition 
must be supposed to last to a greater or less extent for a good many 
hours to account for aurora being seen throughout the whole night. 
The fact that at most places the morning shows a marked decay of 
auroral frequency and intensity as compared to the evening, the 
maximum preceding midnight by several hours, is certainly favour- 
able to theories which postulate ionization of the atmosphere by 
some cause or other emanating from the sun. 

Authorities. — The following works are numbered according 
to the references in the text: — (1) A. Angot, Les Aurores polaires 
(Paris, 1895) ; (2) H. Fritz, Das Polarlicht (Leipzig, 1881) ; (3) Svante 
August Arrhenius, Lehrbuch der kosmischen Physik; (4) Joseph 
Lovering, " On the Periodicity of the Aurora Borealis," Mem. 
American Acad. vol. x. (1868); (5) Sophus Tromholt, Catalog der in 
Norwegen bis Juni 1878 beobachteten Nordlichter; (6) Observations 
Internationales polaires (1 882-1 883), Expedition Danoise, tome i. 
" Aurores boreales "; (7) Carlheim-Gyllenskold, " Aurores boreales" 
in Observations faites au Cap Thorsden Spitzberg par I 'expedition 
suedoise, tome ii. 1; (8) " Die Osterreichische Polar Station Jan 
Mayen " in Die Internationale Polarforschung, 1882-1883, Bd. ii. 
Abth. I ; (9) Henryk Arctowski, " Aurores australes " in Expedition 
antarctique beige . . . Voyage du S. Y. "Belgica" ; (10) G. C.Amdrup, 
Observations . . . faites par V expedition danoise; H. Ravn, Obser- 
vations de I'aurore boreale de Tasiusak; (11) K. Sven. Vet.-Akad. 
Hand. Bd. 31 , Nos. 2, 3, &c. ; (12) Sitz. d. k. Akad. d. Wiss. (Vienna), 
Math. Naturw. Classe, Bd. xcvii. Abth. iia, 1888; (13) Proc. Roy. 
Soc, 1906, lxxvii. A, 141 ; (14) Kongl. Sven. Vet.-Akad. Hand. Bd. 15, 
No. 5, Bd. 18, No. 1; (15) Bull. Acad. Roy. Danoise, 1889, p. 67; 
(16) Voyages . . . pendant les annees 1838, 183$ et 1840 sur . . . la 
Recherche, "Aurores boreales," by MM.Lottin, Bravais, &c. ; (17) 
Missions scientifiques . . . au Spitzberg . . . en 1899-1902, Mission 
suedoise, tome ii. VIII Section, C. "Aurores boreales"; (18) Bull. 
Acad. R. des Sciences de Danemark, 1894, p. 148; (19) Kr. Birkeland, 
Expedition norvegienne 1899-1900 pour V etude des aurores boreales 
(Christiania, 1901) ; (20) Terrestrial Magnetism, vol. iii. (1898), 
PP- 5< 53, 149; (2l) Astrophysical Journal, 1904, xix. p. 187; (22) 
Rapports presenthau Conrges International de Physique reuni h. Paris, 
1900, iii. 438; (23) Expedition polaire finiandaise (1882-1884), tome 
iii.; (24) Charles Nordmann, Theses presentees d, la Faculte des 
Sciences de Paris (1903); (25) Terrestrial Magnetism, vol. 10, 1905, 
p. I ; (26) Observations of the International Polar Expeditions 1882- 
1883 Fort Rae . . . by Capt.-H. P. Dawson, R.A. (C. Ch.) 

AURUNCI, the name given by the Romans to a tribe which 
in historical times occupied only a strip of coast on either side 
of the Mons Massicus between the Volturnus and the Liris, 
although it must at an earlier period have extended over a 
considerably wider area. Their own name for themselves in 



AUSCULTATION— AUSONIUS 



935 



the 4th century B.C. was Ausones, and in Greek writers we find 
the name Ausbnia applied to Latium and Campania (see Strabo 
v. p. 247; Aristotle, Pol. iv. (vii.) 10; Dion. Hal. i. 72), while in 
the Augustan poets (e.g. Virgil, Aen. vii. 705) it is used as one of 
many synonyms for Italy. In history the tribe appears only 
for a brief space, from 340 to 295 B.C. (Mommsen, C.I.L. x. 
pp. 451, 463, 465), and their struggle with the Romans ended 
in complete extermination; their territory was parcelled out 
between the Latin colonies of Cales (Livy viii. 16) and Suessa 
Aurunca (id. ix. 28) which took the place of an older town called 
Ausona (id. ix. 25; viii. 15), and the maritime colonies Sinuessa 
(the older Vescia) and Minturnae (both in 295 B.C., Livy x. 21). 
The coin formerly attributed to Suessa Aurunca on the strength 
of its supposed legend Aurunkud has now been certainly referred 
to Naples (see R. S. Conway, Italic Dialects, 145, and Verner's 
law in Italy, p. 78, where the change of j to r is explained as 
probably due to the Latin conquest). Seeing that the tribe 
was blotted out at the beginning of the 3rd century B.C., we can 
scarcely wonder that no record of its speech survives; but its 
geographical situation and the frequency of the co-suffix in that 
strip of coast (besides Aurunci itself we have the names Vescia, 
Mons Massicus, Marica, Clanica and Caedicii; see Italic 
Dialects, pp. 283 f.) rank them beyond doubt with their neighbours 
the Volsci (q.v.). (R. S. C.) 

AUSCULTATION (from Lat. auscultate, to listen), a term in 
medicine, applied to the method employed by physicians for 
determining, by the sense of hearing, the condition of certain 
internal organs. The ancient physicians appear to have practised 
a kind of auscultation, by which they were able to detect the 
presence of air or fluids in the cavities of the chest and abdomen. 
Still no general application of this method of investigation was 
resorted to, or was indeed possible, till the advance of the study 
of anatomy led to correct ideas regarding the locality, structure 
and uses of the various organs of the body, and the alterations 
produced in them by disease. In 1761 Leopold Auenbrugger 
(1 722-1809), a Viennese physician, published his Inventum 
Novum, describing the art of percussion in reference more 
especially to diseases of the chest. This consisted in tapping 
with the fingers the surface of the body, so as to elicit sounds 
by which the comparative resonance of the subjacent parts or 
organs might be estimated. Auenbrugger's method attracted 
but little attention till the French physician J. N. Corvisart 
(1755-1828) in 1808 demonstrated its great practical importance, 
and then its employment in the diagnosis of affections of the 
chest soon became general. Percussion was originally practised 
in the manner above mentioned (immediate percussion), but 
subsequently the method of mediate percussion was introduced 
by P. A. Piorry (1 794-1879). It is accomplished by placing 
upon the spot to be examined some solid substance, upon which 
the percussion strokes are made with the fingers. For this 
purpose a thin oval piece of ivory (called a pleximeter, or stroke- 
measurer) may be used, with a small hammer; but one or more 
fingers of the left hand applied flat upon the part answer equally 
well, and this is the method which most physicians adopt. 
Percussion must be regarded as a necessary part of auscultation, 
particularly in relation to the examination of the chest; for 
the physician who has made himself acquainted with the normal 
condition of that part of the body in reference to percussion is 
thus able to recognize by the ear alterations of resonance pro- 
duced by disease. But percussion alone, however important 
in diagnosis, could manifestly convey only limited and imperfect 
information, for it could never indicate the nature or extent of 
functional disturbance. 

In 1819 the distinguished French physician R. T. H. Laennec 
(.1 781-1826) published his Traits de V auscultation mediate, 
embodying the present methods of auscultatory examination, 
and venturing definite conclusions based on years of his own 
study. He also invented the stethoscope (crriQos, the breast, 
and oTcoxeiv, to examine) . Since then many men have widened 
the scope of auscultation, notably Skoda, Wintrich, A. Geigel, 
Th. Weber and Gerhardt. According to Laennec the essential 
of a good stethoscope was its capability of intensifying the tone 



vibrations. But since his time the opinion of experts on thia 
matter has somewhat changed, and there are now two definite 
schools. The first and older condemns the resonating stethoscope, 
maintaining that the tones are bound to be altered; the second 
and younger school warmly advocates its use. In America, 
more than elsewhere, there is a type of phonendoscope much used 
by the younger men, which has the advantage that it can be 
used when the older type of instrument fails, viz. when the 
patient is recumbent and too ill to be moved. By slipping it 
beneath the patient's back a fairly accurate idea of the breathing 
over the bases of the lungs behind can often be obtained. 

Stethoscopes have been made of many forms and materials. 
They usually consist of a hollow stem of wood, hard rubber 
or metal, with an enlarged tip slightly funnel-shaped at one end, 
and an ear-plate with a hole in the middle, fastened perpendicu- 
larly to the other end. To enable the instrument to be more 
conveniently carried, the ear-plate can be unscrewed from the 
tube. The length of the stem of the instrument is of minor 
importance, but its bore should be as nearly as possible that of 
the entrance of the external ear. A flexible stethoscope in 
general use both in England and America transmits the sound 
from a funnel 'through tubes to the ears of the observer. This 
is the common form of a binaural resonating stethoscope. It is 
convenient and gives a loud tone, but is condemned by the 
older school, who say that the resonance is confusing, and that 
the slightest movement in handling gives rise to perplexing 
murmurs. Nevertheless, it is this form of instrument which 
has by far the greatest vogue. It is probable, however, that the 
most skilled physicians of all find a special use in each form, the 
monaural non-resonating type being more sensitive to high- 
pitched sounds, and of greater assistance in differentiating 
the sounds and murmurs of the heart, the ordinary binaural 
form being more useful in examining the lungs and other organs. 
In using the stethoscope, it must be applied very carefully, so 
that the edge of the funnel makes an air-tight connexion with 
the skin, and in the monaural form the ear must be but lightly 
applied to the ear-plate, not pressing heavily on the patient. 

The numerous diseases affecting the lungs can now be recog- 
nized and discriminated from each other with a precision which, 
but for auscultation and the stethoscope, would have been 
altogether unattainable. The same holds good in the case of 
the heart, whose varied and often complex forms of disease can, 
by auscultation, be identified with striking accuracy. But in 
addition to these its main uses, auscultation is found to render 
great assistance in the investigation of many obscure internal 
affections, such as aneurysms and certain diseases of the oesoph- 
agus and stomach. To - the accoucheur the stethoscope yields 
valuable aid in the detection of some forms of uterine tumours, 
and especially in the diagnosis of pregnancy — the only evidence 
now accepted as absolutely diagnostic of that condition being 
the hearing of the foetal heart sounds. 

AUSONIUS, DECIMUS MAGNUS (c. 310-395), Roman poet 
and rhetorician, was born at Burdigala [Bordeaux], He received 
an excellent education, especially in grammar and rhetoric, but 
confesses that his progress in Greek was unsatisfactory. Having 
completed his studies, he practised for some time as an advocate, 
but his inclination lay in the direction of teaching. He set 
up (in 334) a school of rhetoric in his native place, which was 
largely attended, his most famous pupil being Paulinus,afterwards 
bishop of Nola. After thirty years of this work, he was summoned 
by Valentinian to the imperial court, to undertake the education 
of Gratian, the heir-apparent. The prince always entertained 
the greatest regard for his tutor, and after his accession bestowed 
upon him the highest titles and honours, culminating in the consul- 
ship (379). After the murder of Gratian (383), Ausonius retired 
to his estates near Burdigala. He appears to have been a (not 
very enthusiastic) convert to Christianity. He died about 395. 

His most important extant works are: in prose, Gratiamm 
Actio, an address of thanks to Gratian for his elevation to the 
consulship; Periochae, summaries of the books of the Iliad and 
Odyssey; and one or two epistolae; in verse, Epigrammata, 
including several free translations from the Greek Anthology; 



,93 6 



AUSSIG— AUSTEN 



Ephemeris, the occupations of a day ; Parentalia and Commemo- 
ratio Professorum Burdigalensium, on deceased relatives and 
literary friends ; Epitaphia, chiefly on the Trojan heroes ; 
Caesares, memorial verses on the Roman emperors from Julius 
Caesar to Elagabalus ; Ordo Nobilium Urbium, short poems 
on famous cities ; Ludus Seplem Sapienlum, speeches delivered 
by the Seven Sages of Greece ; Idyllia, of which the best-known 
are the Mosella, a descriptive poem on the Moselle, and the in- 
famous Cento Nuptialis. We may also mention Cupido Cruciatus, 
Cupid on the cross ; Technopaegion, a literary trifle consisting 
of a collection of verses ending in monosyllables ; Eclogarum 
Liber, on astronomical and astrological subjects ; Epistolae, 
including letters to Paulinus and Symmachus ; lastly, Prae- 
fatiunculae, three poetical epistles, one to the emperor Theo- 
dosius. Ausonius was rather a man of letters than a poet; his 
wide reading supplied him with material for a great variety of 
subjects, but his works exhibit no traces of a true poetic spirit ; 
even his versification, though ingenious, is frequently defective. 
There are no MSS. containing the whole of Ausonius's works. 
Editio princeps, 1472; editions by Scaliger 1575, Souchay 1730, 
Schenkl 1883, Peiper 1886; cf. Mosella, Booking 1845, de la Ville 
de Mirmont (critical edition with translation) 1889, and De Ausonii 
Mosella, 1892, Hosius 1894. See Deydou, Un Poite bordelais 
(1868) ; Everat, De Ausonii Operibus (1885); Jullian, Ausone et 
Bordeaux (1893); C. Verrier and R. de Gourmont, Les Epigrammes 
d' Ausone ^translation with bibliography, 1905); R. Pichon, Les 
Derniers Ecrivains profanes (1907). 

AUSSIG (Czech Ousti nod Labem), a town of Bohemia, Austria, 
68 m. N. of Prague by rail. Pop. (1900) 37,255, mostly German. 
It is situated in a mountainous district, at the confluence of the 
Biela and the Elbe, and, besides being an active river port, is an 
important junction of the northern Bohemian railways. Aussig 
has important industries in chemicals, textiles, glass and boat- 
building, and carries on an active trade in coal from the neigh- 
bouring mines, stone and stoneware, corn, fruit and wood. It 
was the birthplace of the painter, Raphael Mengs (1728-1779). 
Aussig is mentioned as a trading centre as early as 993. It was 
made a city by Ottokar II. in the latter part of the 13th century. 
In 1423 it was pledged by King Sigismund to the elector 
Frederick of Meissen, who occupied it with a Saxon garrison. 
In 1426 it was besieged by the Hussites, who on the 16th of June, 
though only 25,000 strong, defeated a German army of 70,000, 
which had been sent to its relief, with great slaughter. The 
town was stormed and sacked next day. After lying waste for 
three years, it was rebuilt in 1429. It suffered much during the 
Thirty Years' and Seven Years' Wars, and in 1830 it had only 
1400 inhabitants. Not far from Aussig is the village of Kulm, 
where, on the 29th and 30th of August 1813, a battle took place 
between the French under Vandamme and an allied army of 
Austrians, Prussians and Russians. The French were defeated, 
and Vandamme surrendered with his army of 10,000 men. 

AUSTEN, JANE (1775-1817), English novelist, was born on 
the 16th of December 1775 at the parsonage of Steventon, 
in Hampshire, a village of which her father, the Rev. George 
Austen, was rector. She was the youngest of seven children. 
Her mother was Cassandra Leigh, niece of Theophilus Leigh, 
a dry humorist, and for fifty years master of Balliol, Oxford. 
The life of no woman of genius could have been more uneventful 
than Miss Austen's. She did not marry, and she never left home 
except on short visits, chiefly to Bath. Her first sixteen years 
were spent in the rectory at Steventon, where she began early 
to trifle with her pen, always jestingly, for family entertainment. 
In 1 80 1 the Austens moved to Bath, where Mr Austen died in 
'805, leaving only Mrs Austen, Jane and her sister Cassandra, 
to whom she was always deeply attached, to keep up the home ; 
his sons were out in the world, the two in the navy, Francis 
William and Charles, subsequently rising to admiral's rank. 
In 1805 the Austen ladies moved to Southampton, and in 1809 
to Chawton, near Alton, in Hampshire, and there Jane Austen 
remained till 1817, the year of her death, which occurred at 
Winchester, on July 18th, as a memorial window in the cathedral 
testifies. 

During her placid life Miss Austen never allowed her literary 



work to interfere with her domestic duties : sewing much aiid 
admirably, keeping house, writing many letters and reading 
aloud. Though, however, her days were quiet and her area 
circumscribed, she saw enough of middle-class provincial society 
to find a basis on which her dramatic and humorous faculties 
might build, and such was her power of searching observation 
and her sympathetic imagination that there are not in English 
fiction more faithful representations of the life she knew than 
we possess in her novels. She had no predecessors in this genre. 
Miss Austen's " little bit (two inches wide) of ivory " on which 
she worked " with so fine a brush " — her own phrases — was her 
own invention. 

Her best-known, if not her best work, Pride and Prejudice, 
was also her first. It was written between October 1796 and 
August 1797, although, such was the blindness of publishers, 
not issued until 181 3, two years after Sense and Sensibility, 
which was written, on an old scenario called " Eleanor and 
Marianne," in 1797 and 1798. Miss Austen's inability to find 
a publisher for these stories, and for Northanger Abbey, written 
in 1798 (although it is true that she sold that MS. in 1803 for 
£10 to a Bath bookseller, only, however, to see it locked away 
in a safe for some years, to be gladly resold to her later), seems 
to have damped her ardour ; for there is no evidence that 
between 1798 and 1809 she wrote anything but the fragment 
called " The Watsons," after which year she began to revise 
her early work for the press. Her other three books belong 
to a later date — Mansfield Park, Emma and Persuasion being 
written between 1811 and 1816. The years of publication were 
Sense and Sensibility, 181 1 ; Pride and Prejudice, 1813 ; Mans- 
field Park, 1814 ; and Emma, 1816 — all in their author's lifetime. 
Persuasion and Northanger Abbey were published posthumously 
in 1818. All were anonymous, agreeably to their author's 
retiring disposition. 

Although Pride and Prejudice is the novel which in the mind 
of the public is most intimately associated with Miss Austen's 
name, both Mansfield Park and Emma are finer achievements — 
at cnce riper and richer and more elaborate. But the fact that 
Pride and Prejudice is more single-minded, that the love story, 
of Elizabeth Bennet and D'Arcy is not only of the book but is 
the book (whereas the love story of Emma and Mr Knightley 
and Fanny Price and Edmund Bertram have parallel streams), 
has given Pride and Prejudice its popularity above the others 
among readers who are more interested by the course of romance 
than by the exposition of character. Entirely satisfactory as is 
Pride and Prejudice so far as it goes, it is, however, thin beside 
the niceness of analysis of motives in Emma and the wonderful 
management of two housefuls of young lovers that is exhibited 
in Mansfield Park. 

It has been generally agreed by the best critics that Miss 
Austen has never been approached in her own domain. No one 
indeed has attempted any close rivalry. No other novelist has 
so concerned herself or himself with the trivial daily comedy of 
small provincial family life, disdaining equally the assistance 
offered by passion, crime and religion. Whatever Miss Austen 
may have thought privately of these favourite ingredients of 
fiction, she disregarded all alike when she took her pen in hand. 
Her interest was in life's little perplexities of emotion and con- 
duct; her gaze was steadily ironical. The most untoward 
event in any of her books is Louisa's fall from the Cobb at Lyme 
Regis, in Persuasion ; the most abandoned, Maria's elopement 
with Crawford, in Mansfield Park. In pure ironical humour 
Miss Austen's only peer among novelists is George Meredith, 
and indeed Emma may be said to be her Egoist, or the Egoist his 
Emma. But irony and fidelity to the fact alone would not have 
carried her down the ages. To these gifts she allied a perfect 
sense of dramatic progression and an admirably lucid and 
flowing prose style which makes her stories the easiest reading. 

Recognition came to Miss Austen slowly. It was not until 
quite recent times that to read her became a necessity of culture. 
But she is now firmly established as an English classic, standing 
far above Miss Burney (Madame d'Arblay) and Miss Edgeworth, 
who in her day were the popular women novelists of real life, 



AUSTERLITZ 



937 



while Mrs Radclifie and " Monk" Lewis, whose supernatural 
fancies' Northanger Abbey was written in part to ridicule, are no 
longer anything but names. Although, however, she has become 
only lately a household word, Miss Austen had always her pane- 
gyrists among the best intellects — such as Coleridge, Tennyson, 
Macaulay, Scott, Sydney Smith, Disraeli and Archbishop 
Whately, the last of whom may be said to have been her dis- 
coverer. Macaulay, whose adoration of Miss Austen's genius 
was almost idolatrous, considered Mansfield, Park her greatest 
feat; but many critics give the palm to Emma. Disraeli read 
Pride and Prejudice seventeen times. Scott's testimony is often 
quoted: " That young lady had a talent for describing the 
involvements, feelings and characters of ordinary life which 
is to me the most wonderful I have ever met with. The big 
bow-wow I can do myself like any one going; but the exquisite 
touch which renders commonplace things and characters inter- 
esting from the truth of the description and the sentiment is 
denied to me." 

Many monographs on Miss Austen have been written, in addition 
to the authorized Life by her nephew J. E. Austen Leigh in 1870, 
and the collection of her Letters edited by Lord Brabourne in 1884. 
The chief books on her and around her are Jane Austen, by S. F. 
Maiden (1889); Jane Austen, by Goldwin Smith (1890); Jane 
Austen: Her Contemporaries and Herself, by W. H. Pollock; Jane 
Austen: Her Homes and Her Friends, by Constance Hill 
(1902); Jane Austen and Her Times, by G. E. Mitton (1905); Jane 
Austens Sailor Brothers, by J. H. and E. C. Hubback (1906); and 
the essay on her in Lady Richmond (Thackeray) Ritchie's Book of 
Sibyls (1883). (E. V. L.) 

AUSTERLITZ (Czech Slavkov), a town of Austria, in Moravia, 
15 m. E.S.E. of Briinn by rail. Pop. (1900) 3145, mostly Czech. 
It contains a magnificent palace belonging to the prince of 
Kaunitz-Rietberg, and a beautiful church. 

The great battle in which the French under Napoleon I. 
defeated the Austrians and Russians on the 2nd of December 
1805, was fought in the country to the west of Austerlitz, the 
position of Napoleon's left wing being almost equi-distant from 
Brunn and from Austerlitz. The wooded hills to the northward 
throw out to the south and south-west long spurs, between 
which are the low valleys of several rivers and brooks. The 




Emeiy Walker. jc 

scene of the most important fighting was the Pratzen plateau. 
The famous " lakes " in the southern part of the field were 
artificial ponds, which have long since been drained. On the 
west or Briinn side of the Goldbach is another and lower ridge, 
which formed in the battle the first position of the French right 
and centre. On the other wing is the mass of hills from which 



the spurs and streams descend: here the Olmutz-Brunn road 
passes. The road from Briinn to Vienna, Napoleon's presumed 
line of retreat, runs in a southerly direction, and near the village 
of Raigern (3 m. west of Monitz) is very close to the extreme 
right of the French position, a fact which had a great influence 
on the course of the battle. (The course of events which led 
to the action is described under Napoleonic Campaigns.) 
Napoleon, falling back before the advance of the allied Austrians 
and Russians from Olmiitz, bivouacked west of the Goldbach, 
whilst the allies, holding, near Austerlitz, the junction of the 
roads from Olmiitz and from Hungary, formed up in the valleys 
east of the Pratzen heights. The cavalry of both sides remained 
inactive, Napoleon's by express order, the enemy's seemingly 
from mere negligence, since they had 177 squadrons at their 
disposal. Napoleon, having determined to fight, as usual called 
up every available battalion; the splendid III. corps of Davout 
only arrived upon the field after a heavy march, late on the night 
of December 1st. The plan of the allies was to attack Napoleon's 
right, and to cut him off from Vienna, and their advanced guard 
began, before dark on the 1st of December, to skirmish towards 
Telnitz. At that moment Napoleon was in the midst of his 
troops, thousands of whom had made their bivouac-straw into 
torches in his honour. The glare of these seemed to the allies to 
betoken the familiar device of lighting fires previous to a retreat, 
and thus confirmed them in the impression which Napoleon's 
calculated timidity had given. Thus encouraged, those who 
desired an immediate battle soon gained the upper hand in the 
councils of the tsar and the emperor Francis. The attack orders 
for the 2nd of December (drawn up by the Austrian general 
Weyrother, and explained by him to a council of superior 
officers, of whom some were hostile, the greater part indifferent, 
and the chief Russian member, General Kutusov, asleep) gave the 
five columns and the reserve, into which the Austro-Russian 
army was organized, the following tasks: the first and second 
(Russians) to move south-westward behind the Pratzen ridge 
towards Telnitz and Sokolnitz; the third (Russian) to cross the 
southern end of the plateau, and come into line on the right of 
the first two; the fourth (Austrians and Russians under Kolo- 
wrat) on the right of the third to advance towards Kobelnitz. 
An Austrian advanced guard preceded the 1st and 2nd columns. 
Farther still on the right the 5 th column (cavalry under Prince 
John of Liechtenstein) was to hold the northern part of the 
plateau, south of the Briinn-Olmutz road; across the road itself 
was the corps of Prince Bagration, and in rear of Liechtenstein's 
corps was the reserve (Russians under the grand-duke Constan- 
tine). Thus, the farther the four main columns penetrated into 
the French right wing, the wider would the gap 'become between 
Bagration and Kolowrat, and Liechtenstein's squadrons could 
not form a serious obstacle to a heavy attack of Napoleon's 
centre. The whole plan was based upon defective information 
and preconceived ideas; it has gone down to history as a classical 
example of bad generalship, and its author Weyrother, who was 
perhaps nothing worse than a pedant, as a charlatan. 

Napoleon, on the other hand, with the exact knowledge of the 
powers of his men, which was the secret of his generalship, 
entrusted nearly half of his line of battle to a division (Legrand's) 
of Soult's corps, which was to be supported by Davout, some 
of whose brigades had marched, from Vienna, 90 m. in forty-eight 
hours. But the ground which this thin line was to hold against 
three columns of the enemy was marshy and densely intersected 
by obstacles, and the III. corps was the best in the Grande 
Armie, while its leader was perhaps the ablest of all Napoleon's 
marshals. The rest of the army formed in the centre and left. 
'' Whilst they march to turn my right," said Napoleon in the 
inspiriting proclamation which he issued on the eve of the battle, 
" they present me their flank," and the great counterstroke 
was to be delivered against the Pratzen heights by the French 
centre. This was composed of Soult's corps, with Bernadotte's 
in second line. On the left, around the hill called by the French 
the Santon (which was fortified) was Lannes' corps, supported 
by the cavalry reserve under Murat. The general reserve 
consisted of the Guard and Oudinot's grenadiers. 



938 



AUSTIN 



The attack of the allies was begun by the first three columns, 
which moved down from their bivouacs behind the Pratzen 
plateau before dawn on the 2nd, towards Telnitz and Sokolnitz. 
The Austrian advanced guard engaged at daybreak, and the 
French in Telnitz made a vigorous defence; both parties were 
reinforced, and Legrand drew upon himself, in fulfilling his 
mission, the whole weight of the allied attack. The contest was 
long and doubtful, but the Russians gradually drove back Legrand 
and a part of Davout's corps; numerous attacks both of infantry 
and cavalry were made, and by the successive arrival of reinforce- 
ments each side in turn received fresh impetus. Finally, at 
about 10 a.m., the allies were in possession of the villages on the 
Goldbach from Sokolnitz southwards, and Davout's line of 
battle had reformed more than a mile to rearward, still, however, 
maintaining touch with the French centre on the Goldbach at 
Kobelnitz. Between the two lines the fighting continued almost 
to the close of the battle. With 12,500 men of all arms the 
Marshal held in front of him over 40,000 of the enemy. 

In the centre, the defective arrangements of the allied staff had 
delayed the 4th column (Kolowrat), the line of march of which 
was crossed by Liechtenstein's cavalry moving in the opposite 
direction. The objective of this column was Kobelnitz, and the 
two emperors and Kutusov accompanied it. The delay had, how- 
ever, opened a gap between Kolowrat and the 3rd column on his 
left; and towards this gap, and the denuded Pratzen plateau, 
Napoleon sent forward St Hilaire's division of Soult's corps for 
the decisive attack. Kutusov was pursuing this march to the south- 
west when he was surprised by the swift advance of Soult's men 
on the plateau itself. Napoleon had here double the force of the 
allies; Kutusov, however, displayed great energy, changed front 
to his right and called up his reserves. The French did not win 
the plateau without a severe struggle. St Hilaire's (the right 
centre) division was fiercely engaged by Kolowrat's column, 
General Miloradovich opposed the left centre attack under 
Vandamme, but the French leaders were two of the best fighting 
generals in their army. The rearmost troops of the Russian 2nd 
column, not yet committed to the fight on the Goldbach, made a 
bold counter stroke against St Hilaire's right flank, but were 
repulsed, and Soult now turned to relieve the pressure on DavOut 
by attacking Sokolnitz. The Russians in Sokolnitz surrendered, 
an opportune cavalry charge further discomfited the allied left, 
and the Pratzen plateau was now in full possession of the French. 
Even the Russian Guard failed to shake Vandamme's hold. 
In the meanwhile Lannes and Murat had been engaged in the 
defence of the Santon. Here the allied leaders displayed the 
greatest vigour, but they were unable to drive back the French. 
The cavalry charges in this quarter are celebrated in the history 
of the mounted arm; and Kellermann, the hero of Marengo, won 
fresh laurels against the cavalry of Liechtenstein's command. 
The French not only held their ground, but steadily advanced and 
eventually forced back the allies on Austerlitz, thereby barring 
their retreat on Olmutz. The last serious attempt of the allies 
in the centre led to some of the hardest fighting of the day; 
the Russian Imperial Guard under the grand-duke Constantine 
pressed closely upon St Hilaire and Vandamme on the plateau, 
and only gave way when the French Guard and the Grenadiers 
came into action. After the " Chevalier Guards " had been 
routed by Marshal Bessieres and the Guard cavalry, the allies 
had no more hope of victory; orders had already been sent to 
Buxhowden, who commanded the three columns engaged against 
Davout, to retreat on Austerlitz. No further attempt was made 
on the plateau, which was held by the French from Pratzen to 
the Olmutz road. The allied army was cut in two, and the last 
confused struggle of the three Russian columns on the Goldbach 
was one for liberty only. The fighting in Telnitz was perhaps 
the hardest of the whole battle, but the inevitable retreat, 
every part of which was now under the fire of the French on the 
plateau, was terribly costly. Soult now barred the way to 
Austerlitz, and the allies turned southward towards Satschan. 
As they retreated, the ice of the Satschan pond was broken up 
by the French artillery, and many of the fugitives were drowned. 
In the twelve hours from 7 a.m. to nightfall, the 65,000 French 



troops had lost 6800 men, or about 10%; the allies (82,500 
engaged) had 12,200 killed and wounded, and left in the enemy's 
hands 15,000 prisoners (many wounded) and 133 guns. 

AUSTIN, ALFRED (1835- ), English poet-laureate, was 
born at Headingley, near Leeds, on the 30th of May 1835. His 
father, Joseph Austin, was a merchant of the city of Leeds; 
his mother, a sister of Joseph Locke, M.P. for Honiton. Mr 
Austin was educated at Stonyhurst, Oscott, and London Univer- 
sity, where he graduated in 1853. He was called to the bar four 
years later, and practised as a barrister for a short time; but in 
1 86 1, after two comparatively false starts in poetry and fiction, 
he made his first noteworthy appearance as a writer with a 
satire called The Season, which contained incisive lines, and 
was marked by some promise both in wit and observation. 
In 1870 he published a volume of criticism, The Poetry of the 
Period, which was again conceived in a spirit of satirical invec- 
tive, and attacked Tennyson, Browning, Matthew Arnold and 
Swinburne in no half-hearted fashion. The book aroused some 
discussion at the time, but its judgments were extremely un- 
critical. In 1881 Mr Austin returned to verse with a tragedy, 
Savonarola, to which he added Soliloquies in 1882, Prince 
Lucifer in 1887, England's Darling in 1896, The Conversion of 
Winckeltnann in 1897, &c. A keen Conservative in politics, for 
several years he edited The National Review, and wrote leading 
articles for The Standard. On Tennyson's death in 1892 it was 
felt that none of the then living poets, except Swinburne or 
William Morris, who were outside consideration on other 
grounds, was of sufficient distinction to succeed to the laurel 
crown, and for several years no new poet-laureate was nominated. 
In the interval the claims of one writer and another were much 
canvassed, but eventually, in 1896, Mr Austin was appointed. 
As poet-laureate, his occasional verses did not escape adverse 
criticism; his hasty poem in praise of the .Jameson Raid in 
1896 being a notable instance. The most effective characteristic 
of Mr Austin's poetry, as of the best of his prose, is a genuine 
and intimate love of nature. His prose idylls, The Garden that 
I love and In Veronica's Garden, are full of a pleasant, open-air 
flavour, which is also the outstanding feature of his English 
Lyrics. His lyrical poems are wanting in spontaneity and 
individuality, but many of them possess a simple, orderly 
charm, as of an English country lane. He has, indeed, a true 
love of England, sometimes not without a suspicion of insularity, 
but always fresh and ingenuous. A drama by him, Flodden 
Field, was acted at His Majesty's theatre in 1903. 

AUSTIN, JOHN (1790-1859), English jurist, was born on the 
3rd of March 1790. His father was the owner of flour mills at 
Ipswich and in the neighbourhood, and was in good circumstances. 
John was the eldest of five brothers. One of his brothers, 
Charles (1 799-1874), obtained great distinction at the bar. 
John Austin entered the army at a very early age; he is said 
to have been only sixteen. He served with his regiment under 
Lord William Bentinck in Malta and Sicily. He seems to have 
liked his profession, and to have joined in the amusements and 
even in the follies of his brother officers. Yet it appears from a 
journal kept by him at the time that he occupied himself with 
studies of a far more serious kind than is common amongst 
young officers in the army. He notes having read in the course 
of one year Dugald Stewart's Philosophical Essays, Drummond's 
Academical Questions, Enfield's History of Philosophy, and 
Mitford's History of Greece, and upon all of these he makes 
observations which disclose much thought and a capacity for 
criticism which must have come from extensive reading else- 
where. The prevailing note of this journal is one of bitter 
self-depreciation. He says in it that the retrospect of the past 
year (1811) "has hardly given rise to one single feeling of 
satisfaction," and farther on he says that " indolence, always 
the prominent vice of my character," has " assumed over me 
an empire I almost despair of shaking off." It is difficult to 
believe that a man only just of age, whose serious reading 
consisted of such books, and who (as appears from the same 
journal) was in the habit of turning to the classics as an alter- 
native, could have deserved the reproach of indolence. 



AUSTIN 



939 



In 1812, he resigned his commission in the army, and returned 
home. He then began to read law in the chambers of a barrister. 
He was called to the bar in the year 1818, and joined the Norfolk 
circuit, but he never obtained any large practice, and he finally 
retired from the bar in 1825. In 18 19 he married Sarah Taylor 
(see Austin, Sarah). 

Although Austin had failed to attain success at the bar it was 
not long before he had an opportunity of exercising his abilities 
and in a manner peculiarly suited to his particular turn of mind. 
In 1826 a number of eminent men were engaged in the foundation 
of University College, and it was determined to establish in it a 
chair of jurisprudence. This chair was offered to Austin and he 
agreed to accept it. As he was not called upon to begin his 
lectures immediately, he resolved to proceed to Germany in 
order to prepare himself for his duties by studying the method 
of legal teaching pursued at German universities. He resided 
first at Heidelberg, and afterwards at Bonn, where he lived 
on terms of intimacy with such distinguished lawyers as Savigny 
and K. J. A. Mittermaier, and such eminent men q£ letters as 

Niebuhr, Brandis, Schlegel and A. W. Heffter. He began 
lecturing in 1828, and at first was not without encouragement. 
His class was a peculiarly brilliant one. It included a number 
of men who afterwards became eminent in law, politics and 
philosophy — Sir George Cornewall Lewis, Charles Buller, 
Charles Villiers, Sir Samuel Romilly and his brother Lord 
Romilly, Edward Strutt afterwards Lord Belper, Sir William 
Erie and John Stuart Mill were all members of his class. 
All of these have left on record expressions of the profound 
admiration which the lectures excited in the minds of those who 
heard them. But the members of his class, though exceptional 
in quality, were few in number, and as there was no fixed salary 
attached to the professorship, Austin could not afford to remain 
in London, and in 1832 he resigned. , In that year he published 
his Province of Jurisprudence determined, being the first ten of 
his delivered lectures compressed into six. 

There is ample testimony that Austin's lectures were very 
highly appreciated by those who heard them. Their one fault 
was that they were over-elaborated. In his desire to avoid 
ambiguity, he repeats his explanations and qualifications to an 
extent which must have tired his hearers. Nevertheless the 
lectures excited an admiration which almost amounted to 
enthusiasm. Nor was Austin's influence confined to his lectures. 
Sir William Erie says in a letter written to him in 1844, " The 
interchange of mind with you in the days of Lincoln's Inn I 
regard as a deeply important event in my life, and I ever 
remember your friendship with thankfulness and affection." 
John Stuart Mill, whose views on political subjects were entirely 
opposed to those of Austin, spoke of him after his death as the 
man " to whom he (Mill) had been intellectually and morally 
most indebted," and he expressed the opinion " that few men 
had contributed more by their individual influence, and their 
conversation, to the formation and growth of the most active 
minds of the generation." 

In 1833 a royal commission was issued to draw up a digest of 
criminal law and procedure. Of this commission Austin was a 
member. The first report was signed by all the commissioners, 
and was presented in June 1834. Nevertheless it appears from 
some notes made at the time that Austin, though he thought it 
his duty to sign the report, strongly objected to some passages 
which it contained. It is pretty obvious from the nature of 
these objections that nothing would have satisfied him short of 
a complete recasting of the criminal law, whereas what the 
commissioners were ordered to produce was not a code but a 
digest. Probably Austin felt, as Mr Justice Wills felt some 
years later, that the anomalies which a code would remove 
would " choke a digest." 

In 1834 the benchers of the Inner Temple appointed Austin 
to give lectures on the " General Principles of Jurisprudence 
and International Law." He delivered a few lectures in the 
spring of that year, but in June the course was by order of the 
benchers suspended on account of the smallness of the attend- 
ance, and it was never resumed. He then went to live with his 



wife and only child Lucie (afterwards Lady Duff-Gordon) at 
Boulogne. Here he remained for about a year and a half. He 
then accepted an appointment offered him by Sir James Stephen 
to go as royal commissioner to Malta in conjunction with Mr 
(afterward Sir Gedrge) Cornewall Lewis, to inquire into the 
nature and extent of the grievances of which the natives of that 
island complained. 

The Austins remained in Malta until July 1838. After their 
return they lived a good deal abroad, and in 1844 they settled 
in Paris, where they remained until driven out of France by 
the revolution of 1848. They then took a house at Weybridge, 
and there Austin remained until his death in December 1859. 
He was urged by his friends to publish a second edition of the 
Province of Jurisprudence, which was then out of print, and he 
went so far as to allow a prospectus to be issued by Mr Murray 
of an extended work on " The Principles and Relations of 
Jurisprudence and Ethics." But nothing came of it. 

In 1842 Austin published in the Edinburgh Review an attack 
upon Friedrich List's system of trade protection (Das nationale 

System der politischen Okonomie). Ana m 1859 ne pubnsnea a 
pamphlet entitled " A Plea for the Constitution." This was 
occasioned by the publication of Lord Grey's essay on" Parlia- 
mentary Government." Its main object was to show that the 
consequences to be anticipated from Parliamentary Reform 
were all of them either impossible of realization or mischievous. 
He thought any attempt on the part of the poorer classes to 
improve their position was barred by the inexorable laws of 
political economy ; and that if they obtained power they would 
only use it to plunder the rich; whilst, on the other hand, he seems 
not to have had any suspicion that the " proprietary class " 
were likely to disregard the interests of the poor. He thinks 
that political power is safest in the hands of those possessed 
of hereditary or acquired property; and that without property 
even intelligence and knowledge afford no presumption of 
political capacity. Undoubtedly Austin was a utilitarian in the 
Benthamite sense, and remained so to the end of his life. It 
must be remembered that Bentham's sole and immutable test 
of human action was the greatest happiness of the greatest 
number. This is a principle which an aristocrat may adopt if 
he chooses, no less than a democrat; an individualist no less 
than a socialist; and there is nothing in the " Plea for the 
Constitution " which contravenes this. But Austin thought, 
and in this no doubt he differed from Bentham, that the mass 
of the people did not know their own interests so well as " an 
aristocracy of independent gentlemen " who might be trusted 
to provide for the wants of all classes alike. 

Austin's position as a jurist is much more difficult to estimate. 
Twice his influence appeared likely to produce some impression 
upon English law, but upon both occasions it lasted only a short 
time, and never extended very far. The men whom he influenced 
were very eminent, but in numbers they were few. As a rule, 
students for the bar never at any time paid any attention to his 
teaching. The first published lectures were almost forgotten 
when Mr (afterwards Sir Henry) Maine was appointed to lecture 
on jurisprudence at the Inner Temple. Both in his private and 
public lectures Maine constantly urged upon his hearers the 
importance of Austin's analytical inquiries into the meaning of 
legal terms. He used to say that it was Austin's inquiries 
which had made a philosophy of law possible. Undoubtedly 
Maine's influence revived for a short time the interest in Austin's 
teaching. Maine was lecturing about the time of Austin's death, 
and in 1861 Mrs Austin published a second edition of the Province 
of Jurisprudence, and this was followed soon after by two 
volumes which contained in addition in a fragmentary form the 
remaining lectures delivered at University College and other 
notes {Lectures on Jurisprudence; or The Philosophy of Positive 
Law). 

It cannot be said that Austin's views of jurisprudence have 
had, as yet, any visible influence whatever on the study of 
English law. But if we consider what it was that Austin en- 
deavoured to teach, it can hardly be said that the subject is one 
which a lawyer can with impunity neglect. He proposes to 



94° 



AUSTIN 



distinguish law from morals; to explain the notions which 
have been entertained of duty, right, liberty, injury, punish- 
ment and redress; and their connexion with, and relations to, 
sovereignty; to examine the distinction between rights in rem 
and rights in personam, and between rights ex contractu and 
rights ex delicto ; and further to determine the meaning of 
such terms as right, obligation, injury, sanction, person, thing, 
act and forbearance. These are some of the terms, notions 
and distinctions which Austin endeavoured to explain. They 
are daily in the mouth of every practising lawyer. The only 
portion of Austin's work which has attracted much attention 
of recent years is his conception of sovereignty, and his dictum 
that all laws properly so called must be considered as sanctioned 
expressly or tacitly by the sovereign. This has been indignantly 
denied. It has been considered enough to justify this denial 
to point out that there are in existence states where the seat 
of sovereignty, and the ultimate source of law, cannot be accur- 
ately indicated. But this criticism is entirely misplaced; 
for as pointed out by Maine (Early History of Institutions, 
Lecture xii.), in an elaborate discussion of Austin's views, 
which in the main he accepts, what Austin was engaged upon 
was not an inquiry into the nature of sovereignty as it is found 
to exist, but an inquiry into what was the connexion between 
the various forms of political superiority. And this inquiry 
was undertaken in order to enable him to distinguish the province 
of jurisprudence properly so called from the province of morality; 
an inquiry which was hopeless unless the connexion just stated 
was clearly conceived. Austin's views of sovereignty, therefore, 
was an abstraction, useless it is true for some purposes, but by 
no means useless for others. "There is," as Maine says, "not 
the smallest necessity for accepting all the conclusions of these 
great writers (i.e. Bentham and Austin) with implicit deference, 
but there is the strongest necessity for knowing what these con- 
clusions are. They are indispensable, if for no other object, 
for the purpose of clearing the head." These last words exactly 
express the work which Austin set himself to do. It was to clear 
his own head, and the heads of his hearers, that he laboured so 
hard. As Austin once said of himself, his special vocation was 
that of untying intellectual knots. The disentangling of classifica- 
tions and distinctions, the separation of real from accidental 
distinctions, the analysis of ideas confusedly appxehended, these 
(as has been truly said) were the characteristics of Austin's 
work which specially distinguished him. Austin thought that this 
somewhat irksome task was a necessary preliminary both to the 
study of law as a science, and to the production of a code. It 
is a curious reflection that whilst the lectures in which these 
inquiries were begun (though not completed) excited the ad- 
miration of his contemporaries, hardly any one now thinks 
such inquiries worth pursuing. 

The Lectures on Jurisprudence were reviewed by J. S. Mill in the 
Edinburgh Review of October 1863, a nd this review is republished 
in Mill's Dissertations and Discussions, vol. 3, p. 206. Professor 
Jethro Brown has published (1906) an edition of Austin's earlier 
lectures, in which they are stated in an abbreviated form. There 
is a sketch of his life by his widow in the preface to the Lectures on 
Jurisprudence, which she published after his death. (W. Ma.) 

AUSTIN, SARAH (1793-1867), English author, was born in 
1793, the daughter of John Taylor (d. 1826), a wool-stapler and 
a member of the well-known Taylor family of Norwich. Her great 
grandfather, Dr John Taylor (1694-1761), had been pastor of the 
Presbyterian church there, and wrote a once famous polemical 
work on The Scripture Doctrine of Original Sin (1738), which 
called forth celebrated treatises by Jonathan Edwards on Original 
Sin. Her mother, Susannah Cook, was an exceedingly clever 
woman who transmitted both her beauty and her talent to her 
daughter. Their friends included Dr Alderson and his daughter 
Mrs Opie, Henry Crabbe Robinson, the Gurneys and Sir James 
Mackintosh. Sarah Taylor married in 1820 John Austin (q.v.). 
They lived in Queen Square, Westminster, where Mrs. Austin, 
whose tastes, unlike her husband's, were extremely sociable, 
gathered round her a large circle, Jeremy Bentham, James Mill 
and the Grotes being especially intimate. She received many 
Italian exiles, who found a real friend in her. In 1821 was born 



her only child, Lucie, afterwards Lady Duff-Gordon. Mrs. 
Austin never attempted any considerable original wort , con- 
tenting herself chiefly with translations, of which the most 
important are the History of the Reformation in Germany and 
the History of the Popes (1840), from the German of Leopold von 
Ranke, Report on the State of Public Instruction in Prussia (1834) 
from the French of V. Cousin, and F. W. Carove's The Story 
without an End (1864). After her husband's death in 1859 she 
edited his Lectures on Jurisprudence. She also edited the 
Memoirs of Sydney Smith (1855) an d Lady Duff-Gordon's 
Letters from Egypt (1865). She died at Weybridge on the 8th of 
August 1867. 

See Three Generations of Englishwomen (18S8), by her grand- 
daughter, Mrs Janet Ross. 

AUSTIN, STEPHEN FULLER (1 793-1836), American pioneer, 
was born in Austinville, Wythe county, Virginia, on the 3rd of 
November 1793. He was the son of Moses Austin (1767-1821), 
a native of Durham, Connecticut, who in 1820 obtained from 
Mexico a grant of land for an American colony in Texas, but died 
before he could carry out his project. The son was educated 
in New London, Connecticut, and at Transylvania University, 
Lexington, Kentucky, and settled in Missouri, where he was a 
member of the territorial legislature from 1813 to 1819. In 
1819 he removed to Arkansas Territory, where he was appointed 
a circuit judge. After his father's death he obtained a con- 
firmation of the Texas grants from the newly established Mexican 
government, and in 1821-1823 he established a colony of several 
hundred American families on the Brazos river, the principal town 
being named, in his honour, San Felipe de Austin. He was a 
firm defender of the rights of the Americans in Texas, and in 
1833 he was sent to the city of Mexico to present a petition from 
a convention in Texas praying for the erection of a separate 
state government. While there, despairing of success for his 
petition, he wrote home recommending the organization of a 
state without waiting for the consent of the Mexican congress. 
This letter falling into the hands of the Mexican government, 
Austin, while returning home, was arrested at Saltillo, carried 
as a prisoner back to Mexico, and imprisoned for a year without 
trial. Returning to Texas in 1835, he found the Texans in armed 
revolt against Mexican rule, and was chosen commander-in-chief 
of the revolutionary forces, but after failing to take San Antonio 
he resigned the command, for which he had never considered 
himself fitted, and in November 1835 went to the United States as 
a commissioner to secure loans and supplies, and to learn the 
position the United States authorities would be likely to take 
in the event of a declaration of Texan independence. He suc- 
ceeded in raising large sums, and received assurances that satisfied 
him that Americans would look with great favour on an inde- 
pendent Texas. Returning to Texas in the summer of 1836, 
he became a candidate, rather reluctantly, for the presidency 
of the newly established republic of Texas, but was defeated by 
Samuel Houston, under whom he was secretary of state until his 
sudden death on the 7th of December 1836. 

See A Comprehensive History of Texas, edited by D. G. Wooten 
(2 vols., Dallas, 1898). 

AUSTIN, a city and the county-seat of Mower county, 
Minnesota, U.S.A., on the Red Cedar river and Turtle creek, 
(by rail) 105 m. S. of Minneapolis and 100 m. from St Paul. 
Pop. (1900) 5474; (1905, state census) 6489 (913 foreign-born); 
(1910, U.S. census) 6960. It is served by the Chicago 
Great Western and the Chicago, Milwaukee & St Paul railways. 
Austin is the seat of the Southern Minnesota Normal College 
and Austin School of Commerce (1896), and has a Carnegie 
library, court house and city hall. It is a market for live-stock, 
and for dairy and farm products, and has slaughtering and 
packing establishments, flour mills, creameries and cheese 
factories, canning and preserving factories, carriage works, ' 
a flax fibre mill and grain elevators. Brick, tile, sewer-pipe, 
and hydraulic cement are manufactured, and there are railway 
repair shops. A valuable water-power is utilized for manu- 
facturing purposes. Fresh-water pearls of considerable value 



AUSTIN— AUSTRALIA 



94 1 



and beauty are found in the Red Cedar river. The city owns 
and operates its own water-supply system and electric-lighting 
plant. Austin was settled in 1855, was incorporated as a village 
in 1868, and was chartered as a city in 1873. 

AUSTIN, the capital of Texas, U.S.A., and the county-seat 
of Travis county, on the N. bank of the Colorado river, near 
the centre of the state and about 145 m. W.N.W. of Houston. 
Pop. (1800) 14,575; ( I 9°o) 22 > 2 58, of whom 5822 were negroes; 
(1910 census) 29,860. Austin is served by the Houston & 
Texas Central, the International & Great Northern, and the 
Missouri, Kansas & Texas railways. The city is built on high 
bluffs 40-1 20 ft. above the river, which is spanned here by a bridge, 
built in 1874. The Texas State Capitol, a handsome building 
of red Texas granite, with a dome 318 ft. high, cost more than 
$3,500,000, and stands in a square in the centre of the city. 
It was built (1881-1888) by Chicago capitalists in exchange for 
a land grant of 3,000,000 acres. It is in the form of a Greek cross, 
with an extreme length of 556-5 ft. and an extreme width of 
288-8 ft. Next to the National Capitol at Washington, it is 
the largest capitol building in the United States, and it is said 
to be one of the ten largest buildings in the world. Austin 
is the seat of the University of Texas (opened in 1883; co- 
educational) ; the medical department of the state university 
is at Galveston, and the departments in Austin are the college 
of arts, department of education, department of engineering, 
department of law, school of pharmacy, and school of nursing. 
The government of the university is vested in a board of eight 
regents nominated by the governor and appointed with the 
advice and consent of the state senate. At Austin are also 
state institutions and asylums for the insane, the blind, the 
coloured deaf and blind; the state school for the deaf and dumb; 
the state Confederate home; the Confederate woman's home 
(1907 ; for wives and widows of Confederate soldiers and sailors), 
maintained by the Daughters of the Confederacy; St Mary's 
Academy (Roman Catholic, under the supervision of the 
Sisters of the Holy Cross, founded 1875, chartered 1886); St 
Edward's College (Roman Catholic, chartered 1885); the Austin 
Presbyterian Theological Seminary (Presbyterian Church, 
South), opened in 1902 by the Synod of Texas, and after 1905 
partly controlled by the Synod of Arkansas; Tillotson College 
(a negro school under Congregational control, founded by the 
American Missionary Association, chartered in 1877, and opened 
in 1881); and Samuel Huston College (for negroes; Methodist 
Episcopal; opened in 1900 and named in honour of an Iowan 
benefactor). The principal newspapers of Austin are the 
Statesman (Democratic, established in 1871), a morning paper, 
and the Tribune (Democratic, established in 1891), an evening 
paper. The Quarterly of the Texas State Historical Society is 
published here. Austin is the principal trade and jobbing centre 
for central and western Texas, is an important market for live- 
stock, cotton, grain and wool, and has extensive manufactories 
of flour, cotton-seed oil, leather goods, lumber and wooden 
ware; the value of the factory product in 1905 was $1,569,353, 
being 105-2 % more than in 1900. The city owns and operates 
its water-supply system. In 1890-1893 one of the largest dams 
in the world, an immense structure of granite masonry, 1200 ft. 
long. 60-70 ft. high, and 18 to 66 ft. thick, was constructed 
across the Colorado river 2 m. above the city for the pur- 
pose of supplying water and power, creating a reservoir (ZaJte 
M'Donald) about 30 m. long. Freshets in the spring of 1900, 
however, undermined the wall, and on the 7 th of April the dam 
broke with a resulting loss of several lives and about $1,000,000 
worth of property. The rebuilding of the dam was projected 
in 1 907 . Austin was first settled in 1 838 and was named Waterloo, 
but in 1839, when it was chosen as the site of the capital of the 
Republic of Texas, it was renamed in honour of Stephen F. 
Austin, one of its founders. Under the influence of General Sam 
Houston the capital was for a time in 1842-1845 removed from 
Austin to Houston, but in 1845 an ordinance was passed making 
Austin the capital, and it remained the state capital after Texas 
entered the Union, although Huntsville and Tehuacana Springs 



to be chosen in its place. The first Anglo-American settlement 
in Texas, established on the Brazos river in 1823 by members of 
the Austin colony, was San Felipe de Austin now San Felipe. 
In 1909 Austin adopted a commission form of government. 

AUSTRALASIA, a term used by English geographers in a 
sense nearly synonymous with the Oceania of continental writers. 
It thus comprises all the insular groups which extend almost con- 
tinuously from the south-eastern extremity of Asia to more than 
half-way across the Pacific. Its chief divisions are Malaysia 
with the Philippines; Australia with Tasmania and New 
Zealand; Melanesia, that is, New Guinea, New Britain, New 
Ireland, Admiralty, the Solomons, New Hebrides, Santa Cruz, 
Fiji, Loyalties and New Caledonia; Micronesia, that is, the 
Ladrones, Pelew and Carolines, with the Marshall and Gilbert 
groups; lastly, Polynesia, that is, Samoa, Tonga, Cook, Tahiti, 
the Marquesas, Ellice, Hawaii and all intervening clusters. 
The term is so far justified in that it harmonizes better than 
Oceania did with the names of the other continents, and also 
embodies the two essential facts that it is a south-eastern 
extension of Asia, and that its central and most important 
division is the great island-continent of Australia. In a more 
restricted sense the term Australasia corresponds to the large 
division including Australia, Tasmania and New Zealand. 

See Australasia, 2 vols. Stanford Compendium Series, new issue 
(London, 1907-1908). 

AUSTRALIA, the only continent entirely in the southern 
hemisphere. It lies between 10° 39' and 39° 1 1|' S., and between 
113 5' and 153 16' E. Its greatest length is 2400 m. from 
east to west, and the greatest breadth 197 1 m. from north to 
south. The area is, approximately, 2,946,691 sq. m., with a 
coast line measuring about 8850 m. This is equal to 1 m. to 
each 333 sq. m. of land, the smallest proportion of coast shown 
by any of the continents. 

Physical' Geography 
Physiography. — The salient features of the Australian 
continent are its compact outline, the absence of navigable 
rivers communicating with the interior, the absence of 
active volcanoes or snow-capped mountains, its character. 
isolation from other lands, and its antiquity. Some of 
the most profound changes that have taken place on this globe 
occurred in Mesozoic times, and a great portion of Australia 
was already dry land when vast tracts of Europe and Asia 
were submerged; in this sense, therefore, Australia has been 
rightly referred to as one of the oldest existing land surfaces. 
It has been described as at once the largest island and the 
smallest continent on the globe. The general contours exemplify 
the law of geographers in regard to continents, viz. as to their 
having a high border around a depressed interior, and the highest 
mountains on the side of the greatest ocean. On the N. 
Australia is bounded by the Timor Sea, the Arafura Sea and 
Torres Strait; on the E. by the Pacific Ocean; on the S. by 
Bass Strait and the Southern Ocean; and on the W. by the 
Indian Ocean. It stands up from the ocean depths in three 
fairly well-marked terraces. The basal plain of these terraces 
is the bed of the ocean, which on the Pacific side has an average 
depth of 15,000 ft. From this profound foundation rise 
Australia, New Guinea and Melanesia, in varying slopes. The 
first ledge rising from the ocean floor has a depth averaging 
8000 ft. below sea-level. The outer edge of this ledge is roughly 
parallel to the coast of Western Australia, and more than 150 m. 
from the land. Round the Australian Bight it continues parallel 
to the coast, until south of Spencer Gulf (the basal ledge still 
averaging 8000 ft. in depth) it sweeps southwards to lat. 55°, 
and forms a submarine promontory 1000 m. long. The edge 0/ 
the abysmal area comes close to the eastern coasts of. Tasmania 
and New South Wales, approaching to within 60 m. of Cape 
Howe. The terrace closest to the land, known as the continental 
shelf, has an average depth of 600 ft., and connects Australia, 
New Guinea, and Tasmania in one unbroken sweep. Compared 
with other continents, the Australian continental shelf is ex.- 



in 1S50 and Houston fn 1S72 attempted in popular elections I tremely narrow, and there are points on the eastern coast where 



942 



AUSTRALIA 



[GEOGRAPHY 



the land plunges down to oceanic depths with an abruptness 
rarely paralleled. Off the Queensland coast the shelf broadens, 
its outer edge being lined by the seaward face of the Great 
Barrier Reef. From Torres Strait to Dampier Land the shelf 
spreads out, and connects Australia with New Guinea and the 
Malay Archipelago. An elongation of the shelf to the south joins 
Tasmania with the mainland. The vertical relief of the land 
above the ocean is a very important factor in determining the 
climate as well as the distribution of the fauna and flora of a 
continent. 

The land mass of Australia rises to a mean height much less than 
that of any other continent; and the chief mountain systems are 
parallel to, and not far from, the coast-line. Thus, taking the con- 
tinent as a whole, it may be described as a plateau, fringed by a low- 
lying well-watered coast, with a depressed, and for the most part 
arid, interior. A great plain, covering quite 500,000 sq. m., occupies 
a position a little to the east of a meridional line bisecting the con- 
tinent, and south of the 22nd degree, but portions of it stretch 
upwards to the low-lying country south of the Gulf of Carpentaria. 
The contour of the continent in latitude 30 ° 5' is as follows: — a 
short strip of coastal plain ; then a sharp incline rising to a mountain 
range 4000 ft. above sea-level, at a distance of 40 m. from the coast. 
From this a gently-sloping plateau extends to almost due north of 
Spencer Gulf, at which point its height has fallen almost to sea- 
level. Then there is a gentle rise to the low steppes, 500 to 1000 ft. 
above sea-level. A further gentle rise in the high steppes leads to 
the mountains of the West Australian coast, and another strip of 
low-lying coastal land to the sea. 

With a circumference of 8000 m. Australia presents a contour 
wonderfully devoid of inlets from the sea except on its northern 
shores, where the coast-line is largely indented. The Gulf of Car- 
pentaria, situated in the north, is enclosed on the east by the pro- 
jection of Cape York, and on the west by Arnheim Land, and forms 
the principal bay on the whole coast, measuring about 6° of long, 
by 6° of lat. Farther to the west, Van Diemen's Gulf, though much 
smaller, forms a better-protected bay, having Melville Island between 
it and the ocean ; while beyond this, Queen's Channel and Cambridge 
Gulf form inlets about 14 50' S. On the north-west of the continent 
the coast-line is much broken, the chief indentations being Admiralty 
Gulf, Collier Bay and King Sound, on the shores of Tasman Land. 
Western Australia, again, is not favoured with many inlets, Exmouth 
Gulf and Shark's Bay being the only bays of any size. The same 
remark may be made of the rest of the sea-board ; for, with the 
exception of Spencer Gulf, the Gulf of St Vincent and Port Phillip 
on the south, and Moreton Bay, Hervey Bay and Broad Sound on 
the east, the coast-line is singularly uniform. There are, however, 
numerous spacious harbours, especially on the eastern coast, which 
are referred to in the detailed articles dealing with the different 
states. The Great Barrier Reef forms the prominent feature off 
the north-east coast of Australia ; its extent from north to south is 
1200 m., and it is therefore the greatest of all coral reefs. The 
channel between the reef and the coast is in places 70 m. wide and 
400 ft. deep. There are a few clear openings in the outer rampart 
which the reef presents to the ocean. These are opposite to the 
large estuaries of the Queensland rivers, and might be thought to 
have been caused by fresh water from the land. The breaks are, 
however, some 30 to 90 m. away from land and more probably were 
caused by subsidence; the old river-channels known to exist below 
sea-level, as well as the former land connexion with New Guinea, seem 
to point to the conditions assumed in Darwin's well-known subsidence 
theory, and any facts that appear to be inconsistent with the theory 
of a steady and prolonged subsidence are explainable by the assump- 
tion of a slight upheaval. 

With the exception of Tasmania there are no important islands 
belonging geographically to Australia, for New Guinea, Timor and 
other islands of the East Indian archipelago, though not removed 
any great distance from the continent, do not belong to its system. 
On the east coast there are a few small and unimportant islands. 
In Bass Strait are Flinders Island, about 800 sq. m. in area, Clarke 
Island, and a few other small islands. Kangaroo Island, at the 
entrance of St Vincent Gulf, is one of the largest islands on the 
Australian coast, measuring 80 m. from east to west with an average 
width of 20 m. Numerous small islands lie off the western coast, 
but none has any commercial importance. On the north coast are 
Melville and Bathurst Islands; the former, which is 75 m. long and 
38 m. broad, is fertile and well watered. These islands are opposite 
Port Darwin, and to the westward of the large inlet known as 
Van Diemen's Gulf. In the Gulf of Carpentaria are numerous 
islands, the largest bearing the Dutch name of Groote Eylandt. 

Along the full length of the eastern coast extends a succession 
of mountain chains. The vast Cordillera of the Great Dividing 
Kloun- Range originates in the south-eastern corner of the con- 

lalas. tinent, and runs parallel with and close to the eastern 

shore, through the states of Victoria and New South Wales, 
right up to the far-distant York Peninsula in Queensland. In 
Victoria the greatest elevation is reached in the peaks of Mount 
Bogong (6508 ft.) and Mount Feathertop (6303 ft.), both of which 



lie north of the Dividing Range; in the main range Mount Hotham 
(6100 ft.) and Mount Cobberas (6025 ft.) are the highest summits. 
In New South Wales, but close to the Victorian border, are found the 
loftiest peaks of Australia, Mount Kosciusco and Mount Townsend, 
rising to heights of 7328 and 7260 ft. respectively. The range is here 
called the Muniong, but farther north it receives the name of Monaro 
Range; the latter has a much reduced altitude, its average being 
only about 2000 ft. As the tableland runs northward it decreases 
both in height and width, until it narrows to a few miles only, with an 
elevation of scarcely 1500 ft. ; under the name of the Blue Mountains 
the plateau widens again and increases in altitude, the chief peaks 
being Mount Clarence(4000 ft.), Mount Victoria (3525 ft.), and Mount 
Hay (3270 ft.). The Dividing Range decreases north of the Blue 
Mountains, until as a mere ridge it divides the waters of the coastal 
rivers from those flowing to the Darling. The mass widens out once 
more in the Liverpool Range, where the highest peak, Mount Oxley, 
reaches 4500 ft., and farther north, in the New England Range, 
Ben Lomond reaches an elevation of 5000 ft. Near the Queensland 
border, Mount Lindsay, in the Macpherson Range, rises to a height 
of 5500 ft. In the latitude of Brisbane the chain swerves inland; 
no other peak north of this reaches higher than Mount Bartle Frere 
in the Bellenden Ker Range (5438 ft.). The Southern Ocean system 
of the Victorian Dividing Range hardly attains to the dignity of 
high mountains. An eastern system in South Australia touches at 
a few points a height of 3000 ft. ; and the Stirling Range, belonging 
to the south-western system of South Australia, reaches to 2340 ft. 
There are no mountains behind the Great Australian Bight. On 
the west the Darling Range faces the Indian Ocean, and extends 
from Point D'Entrecasteaux to the Murchison river. North of the 
Murchison, Mount Augustus and Mount Bruce, with their connecting 
highlands, cut off the coastal drainage from the interior; but no 
point on the north-west coast reaches a greater altitude than 4000 ft. 
Several minor ranges, the topography of which is little known, 
extend from Cambridge Gulf, behind a very much broken coast-line, 
to Limmen Bight on the Gulf of Carpentaria. Nothing is more 
remarkable than the contrast between the aspect of the coastal 
ranges on the north-east and on the south-east of the continent. The 
higher Australian peaks in the south-east look just what they are, the 
worn and denuded stumps of mountains, standing for untold ages 
above the sea. Their shoulders are lifted high above the tree-line. 
Their summits stand out gaunt and lonely in an unbroken solitude. 
Having left the tree-line far behind him, nothing is visible to the 
traveller for miles around but barren peaks and torn crags in in- 
describable confusion. A verdure of herbage clothes the valleys 
that have been scooped from the summits downwards. But there are 
no perpetual snow-fields, no glaciers creep down these valleys, and 
no alpine hamlets ever appear to break the monotony. The moun- 
tains of the north-east, on the contrary, are clothed to their summits 
with a rich and varied flora. Naked crags, when they do appear, lift 
themselves from a sea of green, and a tropical vegetation, quite 
Malaysian in character, covers everything. 

The absence of active volcanoes in Australia is a state of things, 
in a geological sense, quite new to the continent. Some of the 
volcanoes of the western districts of Victoria have been in eruption 
probably subseauent to the advent of the black-fellow. In some 
instances the cones are quite intact, and the beds of ash and scoriae 
are as yet almost unaffected by denuding agencies. Late in the 
Tertiary period vast sheets of lava poured from many points of the 
Great Dividing Range of eastern Australia. But it is notable that 
all recent volcanic action was confined to a wide belt parallel to 
the coast. No evidences of recent lava flows can be found in the 
interior over the great alluvial plain, the Lower, or the Higher 
Steppes. Nor has the continent, as a whole, in recent times been 
subjected to any violent earth tremors; though in 1873, to the 
north of Lake Amadeus, in central Australia, Ernest Giles records 
the occurrence of earthquake shocks violent enough to dislodge con- 
siderable rock masses. 

Australia possesses one mountain which, though not a volcano, 
is a " burning mountain." This is Mount Wingen, situated in a spur 
of the Liverpool Range and close to the town of Scone. Its fires 
are not volcanic, but result from the combustion of coal some 
distance underground, giving off much smoke and steam; geologists 
estimate that the burning has been going on for at least 800 years. 

The coastal belt of Australia is everywhere well watered, with 
the exception of the country around the Great Australian Bight 
and Spencer Gulf. Flowing into the Pacific Ocean on the Rivers. 
east coast there are some fine rivers, but the majority have 
short and rapid courses. In Queensland a succession of rivers falls 
into the Pacific from Cape York to the southern boundary of the 
state. The Burdekin is the finest of these, draining an area of 
53,500 sq. m., and emptying into Upstart Bay; it receives numerous 
tributaries in its course, and carries a large body of fresh water even 
in the driest seasons. The Fitzroy river is the second in point of 
size; it drains an area of 55,600 sq. m., and receives several tributary 
streams during its course to Keppel Bay. The Brisbane river, 
falling into Moreton Bay, is important chiefly from the fact that the 
city of Brisbane is situated on its banks. In New South Wales there 
are several important rivers, the largest of which is the Hunter, 
draining 1 1,000 sq. m., and having a course of 200 m. Taking them 
from north to south, the principal rivers are the Richmond, Clarence, 



GEOLOGY] 



AUSTRALIA 



943 



Macleay, Hastings, Manning, Hunter, Hawkesbury and Shoalhaven. 
The Snowy river has the greater part of its course in New South 
Wales, but its mouth and the last 120 m. are in Victoria. The other 
rivers worth mentioning are the Yarra, entering the sea at Port 
Phillip, Hopkins and Glenelg. The Murray (q.v.), the greatest river 
of Australia, debouches into Lake Alexandrina, and thence into the 
sea at Encounter Bay in South Australia. There are no other rivers 
of importance in South Australia, but the Torrens and the Gawler 
may be mentioned. Westward of South Australia, on the shores of 
the Australian Bight, there is a stretch of country 300 m. in length 
unpierced by any streams, large or small, but west of the bight, 
towards Cape Leeuwin, some small rivers enter the sea. The south- 
west coast is watered by a few streams, but none of any size; 
amongst these is the Swan, upon which Perth, the capital of Western 
Australia, is built. Between the Swan and North-West Cape the 
principal rivers are the Greenough, Murchison and Gascoyne; on 
the north-west coast, the Ashburton, Fortescue and De Grey ; and in 
the Kimberley district, the Fitzroy, Panton, Prince Regent and the 
Ord. In the Northern Territory are several fine rivers. TheVictoria 
river is navigable for large vessels for a distance of about 43 m. from 
the sea, and small vessels may ascend for another 80 m. The Fitz- 
maurice, discharging into the estuary of the Victoria, is also a large 
stream. The Daly, which in its upper course is called the Katherine, 
is navigable for a considerable distance, and small vessels are able 
to ascend over 100 m. The Adelaide, discharging into Adam Bay, 
has been navigated by large vessels for about 38 m., and small vessels 
ascend still farther. The South Alligator river, flowing into Van 
Diemen's Gulf, is also a fine stream, navigable for over 30 m. by large 
vessels ; the East Alligator river, falling into the same gulf, has been 
navigated for 40 m. Besides those mentioned, there are a number 
of smaller rivers discharging on the north coast, and on the west 
shore of the Gulf of Carpentaria the Roper river discharges itself 
into Limmen Bight. The Roper is a magnificent stream, navigable 
for about 75 or 80 m. by vessels of the largest tonnage, and light 
draught vessels can ascend 20 m. farther. Along the portion of the 
south shore of the Gulf of Carpentaria which belongs to Queensland 
and the east coast, many large rivers discharge their waters, amongst 
them the Norman, Flinders, Leichhardt, Albert and Gregory on the 
southern shore, and the Batavia, Archer, Coleman, Mitchell, Staaten 
and Gilbert on the eastern shore. The rivers flowing into the Gulf 
of Carpentaria, as well as those in the Northern Territory, drain 
country which is subject to regular monsoonal rains, and have the 
general characteristics of sub-tropical rivers. 

The network of streams forming the tributaries of the Darling 
and Murray system give an idea of a well-watered country. The 
so-ca//ed rivers have a strong flow on/y after heavy rams, and some 
of them do not ever reach the main drainage fine. Flood waters 
disappear often within a distance of a few miles, being absorbed by 
porous soil, stretches of sand, and sometimes by the underlying 
bed-rocks. In many cases the rivers as they approach the main 
stream break up into numerous branches, or spread their waters over 
vast flats. This is especially the case with the tributaries of the 
Darling on its left bank, where in seasons of great rains these rivers 
overspread their banks and flood the flat country for miles around 
and thus reach the main stream. Lieutenant John Oxley went down 
the Lachlan (1817) during one of these periods of flood, and the great 
plains appeared to him to be the fringe of a vast inland sea. As a 
matter of fact, they are an alluvial deposit spread out by the same 
flood waters. The great rivers of Australia, draining inland, carve 
out valleys, dissolve limestone, and spread out their deposit over 
the plains when the waters become too sluggish to bear their burden 
farther. From a geological standpoint, the Great Australian Plain 
and the fertile valley of the Nile have had a similar origin. Taking 
the Lachlan as one type of Australian river, we find it takes its rise 
amongst the precipitous and almost unexplored valleys of the Great 
Dividing Range. With the help of its tributaries it acts as a denud- 
ing agent for 14,000 sq. m. of country, and carries its burden of 
sediment westwards. A point is reached about 200 m. from the 
Dividing Range, where the river ceases to act as a denuding agent, 
and the area of deposition begins, at a level of 250 ft. above the sea, 
but before the waters can reach the ocean they have still to travel 
about 1000 m. 

The Darling is reckoned amongst the longest rivers in the world, 
for it is navigable, part of the year, from Walgett to its confluence 
with the Murray, 1758 m., and then to the sea, a further distance of 
587 m. — making in all 2345 m. of navigable water. But this gives 
no correct idea of the true character of the Darling, for it can hardly 
be said to drain its own watershed. From the sources of its various 
tributaries to the town of Bourke, the river may be described as 
draining a watershed. But from Bourke to the sea, 550 m. in a direct 
line, the river gives rather than receives water from the country it 
flows through. 

The annual rainfall and the area of the catchment afford no 
measure whatever as to the size of a river- in the interior of Australia. 
The discharge of the Darling river at Bourke does not amount to 
more than 10 % of the rainfall over the country which it drains. 
It was this remarkable fact which first led to the idea that, as the 
rainfall could not be accounted for either by evaporation or by the 
river discharge, much of the 90 % unaccounted for must sink into 
the ground, and in part be absorbed by some underlying bed-rock. 



All Australian rivers, except the Murray and the Murrumbidgee, 
depend entirely and directly on the rainfall. They are flooded after 
rain, and in seasons of drought many of them, especially the tribu- 
taries of the Darling, become chains of ponds. Springs which would 
equalize the discharge of rivers by continuing to pour water into 
their beds after the rainy season has passed seem entirely absent 
in the interior. Nor are there any snowfields to feed rivers, as in the 
other continents. More remarkable still, over large tracts of country 
the water seems disposed to flow away from, rather than to, the 
river-beds. As the low-lying plains are altogether an alluvial deposit, 
the coarser sediments accumulate in the regions where the river first 
overflows its banks to spread out over the plains. The country 
nearest the river receiving the heaviest deposit becomes in this way 
the highest ground, and so continues until a " break-away " occurs, 
when a new river-bed is formed, and the same process of deposition 
and accumulation is repeated. As the general level of the country 
is raised by successive alluvial deposits, the more ancient river-beds 
become buried, but being still connected with the newer rivers at 
some point or other, they continue to absorb water. This under- 
ground network of old river-beds underlying the great alluvial plains 
must be filled to repletion before flood waters will flow over the 
surface. It is not surprising, therefore, that comparatively little of 
the rainfall over the vast extent of the great central plain ever reaches 
the sea by way of the river systems; indeed these systems as 
usually shown on the maps leave a false impression as to the actual 
condition of things. 

The great alluvial plain is one of Australia's most notable inland 
features; its extent is upwards of 500,000 sq. m., lying east of 
I 35° W. and extending right across the continent from steppes. 
the Gulf of Carpentaria to the M urray river. The interior 
of the continent west of 135 and north of the Musgrave ranges is 
usually termed by geographers the Australian Steppes. It is entirely 
different in all essential features from the great alluvial plains. Its 
prevailing aspect is characterized by flat and terraced hills, capped 
by desert sandstone, with stone-covered flats stretching over 
long distances. The country round Lake Eyre, where some of the 
land is actually below sea-level, comes under this heading. The 
higher steppes, as far as they are known, consist of Ordovician and 
Cambrian rocks, with an average elevation of 1500 to 3000 ft. above 
sea-level. Over this country water-courses are shown on maps. 
These run in wet seasons, but in every instance for a short distance 
only, and sooner or later they are lost in sand-hills, where their 
waters disappear and a line of stunted gum-trees (Eucalyptus roslrata) 
is all that is present to indicate that there may be even a soakage to 
mark the abandoned course. The steppes cover a surface of 400,000 
sq. m., and from this vast expanse not a drop of* the scanty rai'nfa// 
reaches the sea; there is no leading drainage system and there are 
no rivers. Another notable feature of the interior is the so-called 
lake area, a district stretching to the north of Spencer Gulf. These 
lakes are expanses of brackish waters that spread or Lakes. 
contract as the season is one of drought or rain. In 
seasons of drought they are hardly more than swamps and mud flats, 
which for a time may become a grassy plain, or desolate coast en- 
crusted with salt. The country around is the dreariest imaginable, 
the surface is a dead level, there is no heavy timber and practically 
no settlement. Lake Torrens, the largest of these depressions, some- 
times forms a sheet of water 100 m. in length. To the north again 
stretches Lake Eyre, and to the west Lake Gairdner. Some of these 
lake-beds are at or slightly below sea-level, so that a very slight 
depression of the land to the south of them would connect much of 
the interior with the Southern Ocean. (T. A. C.) 

Geology. — The states of Australia are divided by natural bound- 
aries, which separate geographical areas having different characters, 
owing, mainly, to their different geological structures. Hence the 
general stratigraphical geology can be most conveniently summarized 
for each state separately, dealing here with the geological history of 
Australia as a whole. Australia is essentially the fragment of a great 
plateau land of Archean rocks. It consists in the main of an Archean 
block or " coign, "which still occupies nearly the whole of the western 
half of the continent, outcrops in north-eastern Queensland, forms 
the foundation of southern New South Wales and eastern Victoria, 
and is exposed in western Victoria, ; n Tasmania, and in the western 
flank of the Southern Alps of New Zealand. These areas of Archean 
rocks were doubtless once continuous. But they have been separated 
by the foundering of the Coral Sea and the Tasman Sea, which 
divided the continent of Australia from the islands of the Australasian 
festoon; and the foundering of the band across Australia, from the 
Gulf of Carpentaria, through western Queensland and western New 
South Wales, to the lower basin of the Murray, has separated the 
Archean areas of eastern and western Australia. The breaking up 
of the old Archean foundation block began in Cambrian and Ordo- 
vician times. A narrow Cambrian sea must have extended across 
central Australia from the Kimberley Goldfield in the riorth-west, 
through Tempe Downs and the Macdonnell chain in central Australia , 
to the South Australian highlands, central Victoria at Mansfield, 
and northern Tasmania. Cambrian rocks occur in each of these 
districts, and they are best developed in the South Australian high- 
lands, where they include a long belt of contemporary glacial de- 
posits. Marine Ordovician rocks were deposited along the same 
general course. They are best developed in the Macdonnell chain in 



944 



AUSTRALIA 



[GEOLOGY 




central Australia and in Victoria, where the fullest sequence is 
known ; while they also extended north-eastward from Victoria 
into New South Wales, where, as yet, no Cambrian rocks have been 
found. The Silurian system was marked by the retreat of the sea 
from central Australia; but the sea still covered a band across 
Victoria, from the coast to the Murray basin, passing to the east of 
Melbourne. This Silurian sea was less extensive than the Ordovician 
in Victoria ; but it appears to have been wider in New South Wales 
and in Queensland. The best Silurian sequence is in New South 
Wales. Silurian rocks are well developed in western Tasmania, and 
the Silurian sea must have washed the south-western corner of the 
continent, if the rocks of the Stirling Range be rightly identified as 
of this age. 

The Devonian system includes a complex series of deposits, which 
are of most interest in eastern Australia. This period was marked 
by intense earth movements, which affected the whole of the east 
Australian highlands. The Lower Devonian beds are in the main 
terrestrial, or coarse littoral deposits, and volcanic rocks. The 
Middle Devonian was marked by the same great transgression as in 
Europe and America; it produced inland seas, extending into 
Victoria, New South Wales and Queensland, in which were deposited 
limestones with a rich coral fauna. The Upper Devonian was a 
period of marine retreat; the crustal disturbances of the Lower 
Devonian were renewed and great quartz-pebble beaches were 
formed on the rising shore lines, producing the West Coast Range 
conglomerates of Tasmania, and the similar rocks to the south-east 
of Mansfield in Victoria. Intrusions of granitic massifs in the 
Devonian period formed the primitive mountain axis of Victoria, 
which extends east and west across the state and forms the nucleus 
of the Victorian highlands. Similar granitic intrusions occurred in 
New South Wales and Queensland, and built up a mountain chain, 



Gm^yVfeUccra 



which ran north and south across the continent; its worn-down 
stumps now form the east Australian highlands. 

The Carboniferous period began with a marine transgression, 
enabling limestones to form in Tasmania and New South Wales; 
and at the same time the sea first got in along the western edge of 
the western plateau, depositing the Carboniferous rocks of the 
Gascoyne basin and the coastal plain of north-western Australia. 
The Upper Carboniferous period was in the main terrestrial, and 
during it were laid down the coal-seams of New South Wales; they 
are best developed in the basin of the Hunter river, and they extend 
southward, covered by Mesozoic deposits, beyond Sydney. The 
Coal Measures become narrower in the south, until, owing to the 
eastward projection of the highlands, the Lower Palaeozoic rocks 
reach the coast, The coal-seams must have been formed in well- 
watered, lowland forests, at the foot of a high mountain range, built 
up by the Devonian earth movements. The mountains both in 
Victoria and New South Wales were snow-capped, and glaciers 
flowed down their flanks and laid down Carboniferous glacial deposits, 
which are still preserved in basins that flank the mountain ranges, 
such as the famous conglomerates of Bacchus Marsh, Heathcote 
and the Loddon valley in Victoria, and cf Branxton and other 
localities in New South Wales. The age of the glacial deposits is 
later than the Glossopteris flora and occurs early in the time of the 
Gangamopteris flora. Kitson's work in Tasmania shows that there 
also the glacial beds may be correlated with the lower or Greta Coal 
Measures of New South Wales. 

The Permian deposits are best developed in New South Wales 
and Tasmania, where their characters show the continuation of the 
Carboniferous conditions. The Mesozoic begins with a Triassic lai.d 
period in the mainland of Australia; while the islands of the Aus- 
tralasian festoon contain the Triassic marine limestones, which fringe 



CLIMATE] 



AUSTRALIA 



945 



the whole of the Pacific. The Triassic beds are best known in New 
South Wales, where round Sydney they include a series of sandstones 
and shales. They also occur in northern Tasmania. 

The Jurassic system is represented by two types. In Victoria, 
Tasmania, northern New South Wales and Queensland, there are 
Jurassic terrestrial deposits, containing the coal seams of Victoria, 
of the Clarence basin of north-eastern New South Wales, and of the 
Ipswich series in Queensland; the same beds range far inland on 
the western slopes of the east Australian highlands in New South 
Wales and Queensland and they occur, with coal-seams, at Leigh's 
Creek, at the northern foot of the South Australian highlands. They 
are also preserved in basins on the western plateau, as -shown by 
brown coal deposits passed through in the Lake Phillipson bore. 
The second and marine type of the Jurassics occurs in Western 
Australia, on the coastal, plain skirting the western foot of the western 
plateau. 

The Cretaceous period was initiated by the subsidence of a large 
area to the south of the Gulf of Carpentaria, whereby a Lower 
Cretaceous sea spread southward, across western Queensland, 
western New South Wales and the north-eastern districts of South 
Australia. In this sea were laid down the shales of the Rolling 
Downs formation. The sea does not appear to have extended com- 
pletely across Australia, breaking it into halves, for a projection 
from the Archean plateau of Western Australia extended as far east 
as the South Australian highlands, and thence probably continued 
eastward, till it joined the Victorian highlands. The Cretaceous sea 
gradually receded and the plains of the Rolling Downs formation 
formed on its floor were covered by the sub-aerial and lacustrine 
deposits of the Desert Sandstone. 

The Kainozoic period opened with fresh earth movements, the 
most striking evidence of which are the volcanic outbreaks all round 
the Australian coasts. These movements in the south-east formed 
the Great Valley of Victoria, which traverses nearly the whole of 
the state between the Victorian highlands to the north, and the 
Jurassic sandstones of the Otway Ranges and the hills of south 
Gippsland. In this valley were laid down, either in Eocene or Oli- 
gocene times, a great series of lake beds and thick accumulations of 
brown coal. Similar deposits, of approximately the same age, occur 
in Tasmania and New Zealand ; and at about the same time there 
began the Kainozoic volcanic period of Australasia. The first 
eruptions piled up huge domes of lavas rich in soda, including the 
geburite-dacites and solvsbergites of Mount Macedon in Victoria, 
and the kenyte and tephrite domes of Dunedin, in New Zealand. 
These rocks were followed by the outpouring of the extensive older 
basalts in the Great Valley of Victoria and on the highlands of 
eastern Victoria, and also in New South Wales and Queensland. 
Then followed a marine transgression along most of the southern 
coast of Australia. The sea encroached far on the land from the 
Great Australian Bight and there formed the limestones of the 
Nullarbor Plains. The sea extended up the Murray basin into the 
western plains of New South Wales. Farther east the sea was 
interrupted by the still existing land-connexion between Tasmania 
and Victoria; but beyond it, the marine deposits are found again, 
fringing the coasts of eastern Gippsland and Croajingolong. These 
marine deposits are not found anywhere along the eastern coast of 
Australia; but they occur, and reach about the same height above 
sea-level, in New Guinea, and are widely developed in New Zealand. 
No doubt eastern Australia then extended far out into the Tasman 
Sea. The great monoclinal fold which formed the eastern face of the 
east Australian highlands, west of Sydney, is of later age. After 
this marine period was brought to a close the sea retreated. Tas- 
mania and Victoria were separated by the foundering of Bass 
Strait, and at the same time the formation of the rift valley of 
Spencer Gulf, and Lake Torrens, isolated the South Australian 
highlands from the Eyre Peninsula and the Westralian plateau. 
Earth movements are still taking place both along Bass Strait 
and the Great Valley of South Australia, and apparently along the 
whole length of the southern coast of Australia. 

The Flowing Wells of Central Australia. — The clays of the Rolling 
Downs formation overlie a series of sands and drifts, saturated with 
water under high pressure, which discharges at the surface as a 
flowing well, when a borehole pierces the impermeable cover. The 
first of these wells was opened at Kallara in the west of New South 
Wales in 1880. In 1882, Dr W. L. Jack concluded that western 
Queensland might be a deep artesian basin. The Blackball bore, put 
down at his advice from 1885 to 1888, reached a water-bearing layer 
at the depth of 1645 ft. and discharged 291 ,000 gallons a day. It was 
the first of the deep artesian wells of the continent. As the plains on 
the Rolling Downs formation are mostly waterless, the discovery 
of this deep reservoir of water has been of great aid in the develop- 
ment of central Australia. In Queensland to the 30th of June 1904, 
973 wells had been sunk, of which 596 were flowing wells, and the 
total flow was 62,635,722 cub. ft. a day. The deepest well is that 
at Whitewood, 5046 ft. deep. In New South Wales by the 30th of 
June 1903, the government had put down 101 bores producing 66 
flowing wells and 22 sub-artesian wells, with a total discharge of 
54,000,000 gallons a day; and there were also 144 successful private 
wells. In South Australia there are 38 deep bores, from 20 of which 
there is a flow of 6,250,000 gallons a day. 

The wells were first called artesian in the belief that the ascent of 



the water in them was due to the hydrostatic pressure of water at a 
higher level in the Queensland hills. The well-water was supposed 
to have percolated underground, through the Blythesdale Braystone, 
which outcrops in patches on the eastern edge of the Rolling Downs 
formation. But the Blythesdale Braystone is a small local formation, 
unable to supply all the wells that have been sunk; and many of 
the wells derive their water from the Jurassic shales and mudstones. 
The difference in level between the outcrop of the assumed eastern 
intake and of the wells is often so small, in comparison with their 
distance apart, that the friction would completely sop up the whole 
of the available hydrostatic head. Many of the well-waters contain 
gases; thus the town of Roma is lighted by natural gas which 
escapes from its well. The chemical characters of the well-waters, 
the irregular distribution of the water-pressure, the distribution of 
the underground thermal gradients, and the occurrence in some of 
the wells of a tidal rise and fall of a varying period, are facts which 
are not explained on the simple hydrostatic theory. J. W. Gregory 
has maintained {Dead Heart of Australia, 1906, pp. 273-341) that 
the ascent of water in these wells is due to the tension of the included 
gases and the pressure of overlying sheets of rocks, and that some 
of the water is of plutonic origin. 1 (J. W. G.) 

Climate. — The Australian continent, extending over 28 of 
latitude, might be expected to show a considerable diversity of 
climate. In reality, however, it experiences fewer climatic 
variations than the other great continents, owing to its distance 
(28°) from the Antarctic circle and (11°) from the equator. 
There is, besides, a powerful determining cause in the uniform 
character and undivided extent of its dry interior. The plains 
and steppes already described lie either within or close to the 
tropics. They present to the fierce play of the sun almost a 
level surface, so that during the day that surface becomes 
intensely heated and at night gives off its heat by radiation. 
Ordinarily the alternate expansion and contraction of the 
atmosphere which takes place under such circumstances would 
draw in a supply of moisture from the ocean, but the heated 
interior, covering some 900,000 sq. m., is so immense, that the 
moist air from the ocean does not come in sufficient supply, nor 
are there mountain chains to intercept the clouds which from 
time to time are formed; so that two-fifths of Australia, com- 
prising a region stretching from the Australian Bight to 20 S. 
and from 117 to 142 E., receives less than an average of 10 in. 
of rain throughout the year, and a considerable portion of this 
region has less than 5 in. No part of Victoria and very little of 
Queensland and New South Wales lie within this area. The 
rest of the continent may be considered as well watered. The 
north-west coast, particularly the portions north of Cambridge 
Gulf and the shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria, are favoured 
with an annual visitation of the monsoon from December to 
March, penetrating as far as 500 m. into the continent, and 
sweeping sometimes across western and southern Queensland 
to the northern interior of -New South Wales. It is this tropical 
downpour that fills and floods the rivers flowing into Lake Eyre 
and those falling into the Darling on its right bank. The whole 
of the east coast of the continent is well watered. From Cape 
York almost to the tropic of Capricorn the rainfall exceeds 50 in. 
and ranges to over 70 in. At -Brisbane the fall is 50 in., and 
portions of the New South Wales coast receive a like quantity, 
but speaking generally the fall is from 30 in. to 40 in. The 
southern shores of the continent receive much less rain. From 
Cape Howe to Melbourne the fall may be taken at from 30 in. 
to 40 in., Melbourne itself having an average of 25-6 in. West 
of Port Phillip the fall is less, averaging 20 in. to 30 in., diminish- 
ing greatly away from the coast. Along the shores of Encounter 
Bay and St Vincent and Spencer Gulfs, the precipitation ranges 
from 10 to 20 in., the yearly rainfall at Adelaide is a little less 
than 21 in., while the head of Spencer Gulf is within the 5 to 
10 in. district. The rest of the southern coast west as far as 
124° E., with the exception of the southern projection of Eyre 
Peninsula, which receives from 10 to 20 in., belongs to the 

1 The literature of the geology of Australia is enumerated, to 
1884, in the bibliography by Etheridge and Jack. A general sum- 
mary of the stratigraphical geology was given by R. Tate, Rep. 
Austral. Assoc. Adv. Sci. vol. v. (1893), pp. 1-69. References to the 
chief sources of information regarding the states is given under each 
of them. A geological map of the whole continent, on the scale of 
50 m. to the inch, was compiled by A. Everett, and issued in 1887 in 
six sheets, by the Geological Survey of Victoria. 



94 b 



AUSTRALIA 



[CLIMATE 



district with from 5 to 10 in. annual rainfall. The south-western 
angle of the continent, bounded by a line drawn diagonally 
from Jurien river to Cape Riche, has an average of from 30 to 
40 in. annual rainfall, diminishing to about 20 to 30 in. in the 
country along the diagonal line. The remainder of the south 
and west coast from 124° E. to York Sound in the Kimberley 
district for a distance of some 150 m. inland has a fall ranging 
from 10 to 20 in. The 10 to 20 in. rainfall band circles across 
the continent through the middle of the Northern Territory, 
embraces the entire centre and south-west of Queensland, with 
the exception of the extreme south-western angle of the state, 
and includes the whole of the interior of New South Wales to a 
line about 200 m. from the coast, as well as the western and 
northern portions of Victoria and South Australia south of the 
Murray. 

The area of Australia subject to a rainfall of from 10 to 20 in. is 
843,000 sq. m. On the seaward side of this area in the north and 
east is the 20 to 30 in. annual rainfall area, and still nearer the sea 
are the exceptionally well-watered districts. The following table 
shows the area of the rainfall zones in square miles : — 



Rainfall. 
Under 10 inches 
10 to 20 ,, 
20 to 30 ,, 
30 to 40 
40 to 50 ,, 
50 to 60 ,, 
60 to 70 „ 
Over 70 



Total 



Rainfall Areas 

in sq. m. 

1,219,600 

843,100 

399,900 

225,700 

140,300 

47,900 

56,100 

14,100 

2,946,700 



The tropic of Capricorn divides Australia into two parts. Of these 
the northern or intertropical portion contains 1,145,000 sq. m., com- 
prising half of Queensland, the Northern Territory, and the north- 
western divisions of Western Australia. The whole of New South 
Wales. Victoria and South Australia proper, half of Queensland, and 
more than half of Western Australia, comprising 1,801,700 sq. m., 
are without the tropics. In a region so extensive very great varieties 
of climate are naturally to be expected, but it may be stated as a 
general law that the climate of Australia is milder than that of 
corresponding lands in the northern hemisphere. During July, which 
is the coldest month in southern latitudes, one-half of Australia has 
a mean temperature ranging from 45 to 61°, and the other half from 
62 ° to 8o D . The following are the areas subject to the various average 
temperatures during the month referred to: — 

Temperature Area 

Fahr. in sq. m. 

45°-50° 18,800 

50°-55° 506,300 

55°-6o° 681,800 

6o°-65° 834,400 

65°--o° 515.000 

70°-75° 275,900 

75°-8o° 24,500 

The temperature in December ranges from 6o° to above 95 Fahr., 
half of Australia having a mean temperature below 84 . Dividing 
the land into zones of average summer temperature, the following 
are the areas which would fall to each : — 

Area 
in sq. m. 

67,800 

63,700 

352,300 

439.200 

733.6oo 

85 "-90- 57°.6oo 

90°-95° 584.100 

95 and over 135,400 

Judging from the figures just given, it must be conceded that a 
considerable area of the continent is not adapted for colonization by 
European races. The region with a mean summer temperature in 
excess of 95° Fahr. is the interior of the Northern Territory north 
of the 20th parallel; and the whole of the country, excepting the 
seaboard, lying between the meridians of 120 and 140°, and north 
of the 25th parallel, has a mean temperature in excess of 90° Fahr. 

The area of Australia is so large that the characteristics of its 
climate will not be understood without reference to the individual 
„ states. About one-half of the colony of Queensland lies 

laad ' m 'he tropics, the remaining area lying between the 
tropic and 29 S. The temperature, however, has a daily 
range less than that of other countries under the same isothermal 
lines. This circumstance is due to the sea-breezes, which blow with 



Temperature 


Fa 


hr. 


60 ° 


-6,S° 


65° 


-70° 


70 u 


-75° 


75 u 


-80° 


80 ° 


-«5" 



great regularity, and temper what would otherwise be an excessive 
heat. The hot winds which prevail during the summer in some of 
the other colonies are unknown in Queensland. Of course, in a 
territory of such large extent there are many varieties of climate, 
and the heat is greater along the coast than on the elevated lands of 
the interior. In the northern parts of the colony the high tem- 
perature is very trying to persons of European descent. The mean 
temperature at Brisbane, during December, January and February, 
is about 76°, while during the months of June, July and August it 
averages about 60°. Brisbane, however, is situated near the extreme 
southern end of the colony, and its average temperature is con- 
siderably less than that of many of the towns farther north. Thus 
the winter in Rockhampton averages nearly 65°, while the summer 
heat rises almost to 85°; and at Townsville and Norman ton the 
average temperature is still higher. The average rainfall along the 
coast is high, especially in the north, where it ranges from 60 to 70 in. 
per annum, and along a strip of country south from Cape Melville to 
Rockingham Bay the average rainfall exceeds 70 in. At Brisbane 
the rainfall is about 50 in., taking an average of forty years. A large 
area of the interior is watered to the extent of 20 to 30 in. per annum, 
but in the west and south, more remote than from 250 to 300 m., 
there is a rainfall of less than 20 in. 

Climatically, New South Wales is divided into three marked 
divisions. The coastal region has an average summer temperature 
ranging from 78 ° in the north to 67 ° in the south, with New 
a winter temperature of from 59 to 52 . Taking the South 
district generally, the difference between the mean Wales. 
summer and mean winter temperatures may be set down 
as averaging not more than 20 °, a range smaller than is found in 
most other parts of the world. Sydney, situated in latitude 33°5i'S., 
has a mean temperature of 62-9° Fahr., which corresponds with that 
of Barcelona in Spain and of Toulon in France, the former of these 
being in latitude 41° 22' N. and the latter in 43 °j' N. At Sydney 
the mean summer temperature is 70-8° Fahr., and that of winter 
53-9°. The range is thus 16-9° Fahr. At Naples, where the mean 
temperature for the year is about the same as at Sydney, the summer 
temperature reaches a mean of 74-4°, and the mean of winter 
is 47-6°, with a range 26-8°. The mean temperature of Sydney 
for a long series of years was spring 62 °, summer 71°, autumn 64 , 
winter 54 . 

Passing from the coast to the tableland, a distinct climatic region 
is entered. Cooma, with a mean summer temperature of 65-4°, and 
a mean winter temperature of 41-4°, may be taken as illustrative 
of the climate of the southern tableland, and Armidale of the 
northern. The yearly average temperature of the latter is scarcely 
65'5°, while the summer only reaches 67-7°, and the winter falls 

t0 44-4°- 

The climatic conditions of the western districts of the state are 
entirely different from those of the other two regions. The summer 
is hot, but on the whole the climate is very healthy. The town of 
Bourke, lying on the upper Darling, may be taken as an example of 
many of the interior districts, and illustrates peculiarly well the 
defects as well as the excellencies of the climate of the whole region. 
Bourke has exactly the same latitude as Cairo, yet its mean summer 
temperature is 1-3° less, and its mean annual temperature 4 less 
than that of the Egyptian city. New Orleans, also on the same 
parallel is, 4 hotter in summer. As regards winter temperature 
Bourke leaves little to be desired. The mean winter reading of 
the thermometer is 54-7, and accompanied as this is by clear skies 
and an absence of snow, the season is both pleasant and in- 
vigorating. The rainfall of New South Wales ranges from an annual 
average of 64 in. at various points on the northern coast, and at 
Kiandra in the Monaro district, to 9 in. at Milparinka in the trans- 
Darling district. The coastal districts average about 42 in. per 
annum, the tablelands 32 in., and the western interior has an average 
as low as 20 in. At Sydney, the average rainfall, since observations 
were commenced, has been 50 in. 

The climate of Victoria does not differ greatly from that of New 
South Wales. The heat, however, is generally less intense in summer, 
and the cold greater in winter. Melbourne, which stands victoria. 
in latitude 37° 50' S., has a mean temperature of 57-3°, 
and therefore corresponds with Washington in the United States, 
Madrid, Lisbon and Messina. The difference between summer and 
winter is, however, less at Melbourne than at any of the places men- 
tioned, the result of a long series of observations being spring 57 , 
summer 65-3°, autumn 58-7°, and winter 49-2°. The highest recorded 
temperature in the shade at Melbourne is 110-7°, and the lowest 
27°, but it is rare for the summer heat to exceed 85°, or for the winter 
temperature in the daytime to fall below 40°. Bailarat, the second 
city of Victoria, lies above 100 m. west from Melbourne at a height 
of 1400 ft. above sea-level. It has a minimum temperature of 29°, 
and a maximum of 104-5°, the average yearly mean being 54-1°. 
The rainfall of Melbourne averages 25-58 in., the mean number of 
rainy days being 131. 

South Australia proper extends over 26 degrees of latitude, and 
naturally presents considerable variations of climate. The coldest 
months are June, July and August, during which the south 
temperature is very agreeable, averaging 53-6°, 51-7°, Australia. 
and 54° in those months respectively. On the plains 
slight frosts occur occasionally, and ice is sometimes seen on the 



FAUNA AND FLORA] 



AUSTRALIA 



947 



highlands. In summer the sun has great power, and the temperature 
reaches ioo° in the shade, with hot winds blowing from the interior. 
The weather on the whole is remarkably dry. At Adelaide there are 
on an average 120 rainy days per annum, with a mean rainfall of 
20-88 in. The country is naturally very healthful, as evidence of 
which may be mentioned that no great epidemic has ever visited 
the state. 

Western Australia has practically only two seasons, the winter 
or wet season, which commences in April and ends in October, and 
Western *-^ e summer or dry season, which comprises the remainder 
Australia. °^ tne Y ear - During the wet season frequent and heavy 
rains fall, and thunderstorms, with sharp showers, occur 
in the summer, especially on the north-west coast, which is some- 
times visited by hurricanes of great violence. In the southern and 
early-settled parts of the state the mean temperature is about 64°, 
but in the more northern portions the heat is excessive, though the 
dryness of the atmosphere makes it preferable to moist tropical 
climates. The average rainfall at Perth is 33 in. per annum. 

The climate of the Northern Territory is extremely hot, except 
on the elevated tablelands ; altogether, the temperature of this part 
of the continent is very similar to that of northern Queensland, and 
the climate is not favourable to Europeans. The rainfall in the 
extreme north, especially in January and February, is very heavy, 
and the annual average along the coast is about 63 in. The whole 
of the peninsula north of 15° S. has a rainfall considerably exceeding 
40 in. This region is backed by a belt of about 100 m. wide, in 
which the rainfall is from 30 to 40 in., from which inwards the 
rainfall gradually declines until between Central Mount Stuart and 
Macdonnell ranges it falls to between 5 and 10 in. 

Fauna and Flora. — The origin of the fauna and flora of 
Australia has attracted considerable attention. Much accumu- 
lated evidence, biological and geological, has pointed to a 
southern extension of India, an eastern extension of South 
Africa, and a western extension of Australia into the Indian 
Ocean. The comparative richness of proteaceous plants in 
Western Australia and South Africa first suggested a common 
source for these primitive types. Dr H. O. Forbes drew attention 
to a certain community amongst birds and other vertebrates, 
invertebrates, and amongst plants, on all the lands stretching 
towards the south pole. A theory was therefore propounded 
that these known types were all derived from a continent which 
has been named Antarctica. The supposed continent extended 
across the south pole, practically joining Australia and South 
America. Just as we have evidence of a former mild climate in 
the arctic regions, so a similar mild climate has been postulated 
for Antarctica. Modern naturalists consider that many of the 
problems of Australia's remarkable fauna and flora can be best 
explained by the following hypothesis: — The region now covered 
by the antarctic ice-cap was in early Tertiary times favoured 
by a mild climate ; here lay an antarctic continent or archipelago. 
From an area corresponding to what is now South America 
there entered a fauna and flora, which, after undergoing modifica- 
tion, passed by way of Tasmania to Australia. These immigrants 
then developed, with some exceptions, into the present Australian 
flora and fauna. This theory has advanced from the position 
of a disparaged heresy to acceptance by leading thinkers. The 
discovery as fossil, in South America, of primitive or ancestral 
forms of marsupials has given it much support. One of these, 
Prothylacinus, is regarded as the forerunner of the marsupial 
wolf of Tasmania. An interesting link between divergent 
marsupial families, still living in Ecuador, the Coenolestes, is 
another discovery of recent years. On the Australian side the 
fact that Tasmania is richest in marsupial types indicates the 
gate by which they entered. It is not to be supposed that this 
antarctic element, to which Professor Tate has applied the name 
Euronolian, entered a desert barren of all life. Previous to its 
arrival Australia doubtless possessed considerable vegetation 
and a scanty fauna, chiefly invertebrate. At a comparatively 
recent date Australia received its third and newest constituent. 
The islands of Torres Strait have been shown to be the denuded 
remnant of a former extension of Cape York peninsula in North 
Queensland. Previous to the existence of the strait, and across 
its site, there poured into Australia a wealth of Papuan forms. 
Along the Pacific slope of the Queensland Cordillera these 
found in soil and climate a congenial home. Among the plants 
the wild banana, pepper, orange and mangosteen, rhododendron, 
epiphytic orchids and the palm; among mammals the bats and 



rats; among birds the cassowary and rifle birds; and among 
reptiles the crocodile and tree snakes, characterize this element. 
The numerous facts, geological, geographical and biological, 
which when linked together lend great support to this theory, 
have been well worked out in Australia by Mr Charles Hedley 
of the Australian Museum, Sydney. 

The zoology of Australia and Tasmania presents a very con- 
spicuous point of difference from that of other regions of the globe, 
in the prevalence of non-placental mammalia. The vast Fauna 
majority of the mammalia are provided with an organ in 
the uterus, by which, before the birth of their young, a vascular 
connexion is maintained between the embryo and the parent animal. 
There are two orders, the Marsupialia and the Monotremata, which 
do not possess this organ; both these are found in Australia, to 
which region indeed they are not absolutely confined. 

The geographical limits of the marsupials are very interesting. 
The opossums of America are marsupials, though not showing 
anomalies as great as kangaroos and bandicoots (in their feet) , and 
Myrmecobius (in the number of teeth). Except the opossums, no 
single living marsupial is known outside the Australian zoological 
region. The forms of life characteristic of India and the Malay 
peninsula come down to the island of Bali. Bali is separated from 
Lombok by a strait not more than 15 m. wide. Yet this narrow 
belt of water is the boundary line between the Australasian and the 
Indian regions. The zoological boundary passing through the Bali 
Strait is called " Wallace's line," after the eminent naturalist who 
was its discoverer. He showed that not only as regards beasts, but 
also as regards birds, these regions are thus sharply limited. Aus- 
tralia, he pointed out, has no woodpeckers and no pheasants, which 
are widely-spread Indian birds. Instead of these it has mound- 
making turkeys, honey-suckers, cockatoos and brush-tongued lories, 
all of which are found nowhere else in the world. 

The marsupials constitute two-thirds of all the Australian species 
of mammals. It is the well-known peculiarity of this order that the 
female has a pouch or fold of skin upon her abdomen, in which she 
can place the young for suckling within reach of her teats. The 
opossum of America is the only species out of Australasia which is 
thus provided. Australia is inhabited by at least no different species 
of marsupials, which is about two-thirds of the known species ; these 
have been arranged in five tribes, according to the food they eat, 
viz., the grass-eaters (kangaroos), the root-eaters (wombats), the 
insect-eaters (bandicoots), the flesh-eaters (native cats and rats), 
and the fruit-eaters (phalangers). 

The kangaroo (Macropus) lives in droves in the open grassy 
plains. Several smaller forms of the same general appearance are 
known as wallabies, and are common everywhere. The kangaroo 
and most of its congeners show an extraordinary disproportion of 
the hind limbs to the fore part of the body. The rock wallabies again 
have short tarsi of the hind legs, with a long pliable tail for climbing, 
like that of the tree kangaroo of New Guinea, or that of the jerboa. 
Of the larger kangaroos, which attain a weight of 200 lb and more, 
eight species are named, only one of which is found in Western 
Australia. Fossil bones of extinct kangaroo species are met with; 
these kangaroos must have been of enormous size, twice or thrice that 
of any species now living. 

There are some twenty smaller species in Australia and Tasmania, 
besides the rock wallabies and the hare kangaroos; these last are 
wonderfully swift, making clear jumps 8 or 10 ft. high. Other 
terrestrial marsupials are the wombat (Phascolomys) , a large, clumsy, 
burrowing animal, not unlike a pig, which attains a weight of from 
60 to 100 lb; the bandicoot (Perameles) , a rat-like creature whose 
depredations annoy the agriculturist; the native cat (Dasyurus), 
noted robber of the poultry yard; the Tasmanian wolf (Thylacinus) , 
which preys on large game; and the recently discovered Notoryctes, 
a small animal which burrows like a mole in the desert of the interior. 
Arboreal species include the well-known opossums {Phalanger) ; the 
extraordinary tree- kangaroo of the Queensland tropics; the flying 
squirrel, which expands a membrane between the legs and arms, and 
by its aid makes long sailing jumps from tree to tree; and the native 
bear (Phascolarctos), an animal with no affinities to the bear, and 
having a long soft fur and no tail. 

The Myrmecobius of Western Australia is a bushy-tailed ant-eater 
about the size of a squirrel, and from its lineage and structure of 
more than passing interest. It is, Mivart remarks, a survival of a 
very ancient state of things. It had ancestors in a flourishing con- 
dition during the Secondary epoch. Its congeners even then lived 
in England, as is proved by the fact that their relics have been found 
in the Stonesfield oolitic rocks, the deposition of which is separated 
from that which gave rise to the Paris Tertiary strata by an abyss 
of past time which we cannot venture to express even in thousands 
of years. . . 

We pass on to the other curious order of non-placental mammals, 
that of the Monotremata, so called from the structure of their organs 
of evacuation with a single orifice, as in birds. Their abdominal 
bones are like those of the marsupials ; and they are furnished with 
pouches for their young, but have no teats, the milk being distilled 
into their pouches from the mammary glands. Australia and 
Tasmania possess two animals of this order — the echidna, or spiny 



94« 



AUSTRALIA 



[FAUNA AND FLORA 



ant-eater (hairy in Tasmania), and the Platypus anatinus, the duck- 
billed water mole, otherwise named the Ornithorhynchus paradoxus. 
This odd animal is provided with a bill or beak, which is not, like that 
of a bird, affixed to the skeleton, but is merely attached to the skin 
and muscles. 

Australia has no apes, monkeys or baboons, and no ruminant 
beasts. The comparatively few indigenous placental mammals, 
besides the dingo or wild dog — which, however, may have come from 
the islands north of this continent — are of the bat tribe and of the 
rodent or rat tribe. There are four species of large fruit-eating bats, 
called flying foxes, twenty of insect-eating bats, above twenty of 
land-rats, and five of water-rats. The sea produces three different 
seals, which often ascend rivers from the coast, and can live in 
lagoons of fresh water; many cetaceans, besides the " right whale " 
and sperm whale; and the dugong, found on the northern shores, 
which yields a valuable medicinal oil. 

The birds of Australia in their number and variety of species 
may be deemed some compensation for its poverty of mammals; 
yet it will not stand comparison in this respect with regions of Africa 
and South America in the same latitudes. The black swan was 
thought remarkable when discovered, as belying an old Latin 
proverb. There is also a white eagle. The vulture is wanting. Sixty 
species of parrots, some of them very handsome, are found in Aus- 
tralia The emu corresponds with the African and Arabian ostrich, 
the rhea of South America, and the cassowary of the Moluccas and 
New Guinea. In New Zealand this group is represented by the 
apteryx, as it formerly was by the gigantic moa, the remains of which 
have been found likewise in Queensland. The graceful Menura 
superba, or lyre-bird, with its tail feathers spread in the shape of a 
lyre, is a very characteristic form. The mound-raising megapodes, 
the bower-building satin-birds, and several others, display peculiar 
habits. The honey-eaters present a great diversity of plumage. 
There are also many kinds of game birds, pigeons, ducks, geese, 
plovers and quails. The ornithology of New South Wales and 
Queensland is more varied and interesting than that of the other 
provinces. 

As for reptiles, Australia has a few tortoises, all of one family, and 
not of great size. The " leathery turtle," which is herbivorous, and 
yields abundance of oil, has been caught at sea off the Illawarra 
coast so large as 9 ft. in length. The saurians or lizards are numerous, 
chiefly on dry sandy or rocky ground in the tropical region. The 
great crocodile of Queensland has been known to attain a length of 
30 ft. ; there is a smaller one about 6 ft. in length to be met with 
in the shallow lagoons of the interior of the Northern Territory. 
Lizards occur in great profusion and variety. The monitor, or fork- 
tongued lizard, which burrows in the earth, climbs and swims, is said 
to grow to a length of 8 to 9 ft. This species and many others do 
not extend to Tasmania. The monitor is popularly known as the 
goanna, a name derived from the iguana, an entirely different animal. 
There are about twenty kinds of night-lizards, and many which 
hibernate. One species can utter a cry when pained or alarmed, 
and the tall-standing frilled lizard can lift its forelegs, and squat or 
hop like a kangaroo. There is also the Moloch horridus of South 
and Western Australia, covered with tubercles bearing large spines, 
which give it a very strange aspect. This and some other lizards 
have power to change their colour, not only from light to dark, but 
over some portions of their bodies, from yellow to grey or red. 
Frogs of many kinds are plentiful, the brilliant green frogs being 
especially conspicuous and noisy. Australia is rich in snakes, and 
has more than a hundred different kinds. Most of these are venomous, 
but all are not equally dreaded. Five rather common species are 
certainly deadly — the death adder, the brown, the black, the superb 
and the tiger snakes. During the colder months these reptiles remain 
in a torpid state. No certain cure has been or is likely to be dis- 
covered for their poison, but in less serious cases strychnine has 
been used with advantage. In tropical waters a sea snake is found, 
which, though' very poisonous, rarely bites. Among the inoffensive 
species are counted the graceful green " tree snake," which pursues 
frogs, birds and lizards to the topmost branches of the forest ; also 
several species of pythons, the commonest of which is known as the 
carpet snake. These great reptiles may attain a length of 10 ft. ; 
they feed on small animals which they crush to death in their 
folds. 

The Australian seas are inhabited by many fishes of the same genera 
as exist in the southern parts of Asia and Africa. Of those peculiar 
to Australian waters may be mentioned the arripis, represented by 
what is called among the colonists a salmon trout. A very fine fresh- 
water fish is the Murray cod, which sometimes weighs 100 lb; and 
the golden perch, found in the same river, has rare beauty of colour. 
Among the sea fish, the schnapper is of great value as an article of 
food, and its weight comes up to 50 lb. This is the Pagrus unicolor, of 
the family of Sparidae, which includes also the bream. Its colours are 
beautiful, pink and red with a silvery gloss; but the male as it grows 
old takes on a singular deformity of the head, with a swelling in the 
shape of a monstrous human-like nose. These fish frequent rocky shoals 
off the eastern coast and are caught in numbers outside Port Jackson 
for the Sydney market. Two species of mackerel, differing some- 
what from the European species, are also caught on the coasts. The 
so-called red garnet, a pretty fish, with hues of carmine and blue 
stripes on its head, is much esteemed for the table. The Trigla 



polyommata, or flying garnet, is a greater beauty, with its body of 
crimson and silver, and its large pectoral fins, spread like wings, of 
a rich green, bordered with purple, and relieved by a black and white 
spot. Whiting, mullet, gar-fish, rock cod and many others known 
by local names, are in the lists of edible fishes belonging to New South 
Wales and Victoria. Oysters abound on the eastern coast, and on 
the shelving banks of a vast extent of the northern coast the pearl 
oyster is the source of a considerable industry. 

Two existing fishes may be mentioned as ranking in interest with 
the Myrmecobius (ant-eater) in the eyes of the naturalist. These are 
the Ceratodus Forsteri and the Port Jackson shark. The " mud- 
fish " of Queensland {Ceratodus Forsteri) belongs to an ancient order 
of fishes — the Dipnoi, only a few species of which have survived from 
past geological periods. The Dipnoi show a distinct transition 
between fishes and amphibia. So far the mud-fish has been found 
only in the Mary and the Burnett rivers. Hardly of less scien- 
tific interest is the Port Jackson shark (Heterodontus) . It is a 
harmless helmeted ground-shark, living on molluscs, and almost 
the sole survivor of a genus abundant in the Secondary rocks of 
Europe. 

The eastern parts of Australia are very much richer both in their 
botany and in their zoology than any of the other parts. This is due 
in part to the different physical conditions there prevail- Flora. 

ing and in part to the invasion of the north-eastern 
portion of the continent by a number of plants characteristically 
Melanesian. This element was introduced via Torres Strait, and 
spread down the Queensland coast to portions of the New South 
Wales littoral, and also round the Gulf of Carpentaria, but has 
never been able to obtain a hold in the more arid interior. It has 
so completely obliterated the original flora, that a Queensland coast 
jungle is almost an exact replication of what may be seen on the 
opposite shores of the straits, in New Guinea. This wealth of plant 
life is confined to the littoral and the coastal valleys, but the central 
valleys and the plateaux have, if not a varied flora, a considerable 
wealth of timber trees in every way superior to the flora inland in the 
same latitudes. In the interior there is little change in the general 
aspect of the vegetation, from the Australian Bight to the region 
of Carpentaria, where the exotic element begins. Behind the 
luxuriant jungles of the sub-tropical coast, once over the main range, 
we find the purely Australian flora with its apparent sameness and 
sombre dulness. Physical surroundings rather than latitude deter- 
mine the character of the flora. The contour lines showing the 
heights above sea-level are the directions along which species spread 
to form zones. Putting aside the exotic vegetation of the north 
and east coast-line, the Australian bush gains its peculiar character 
from the prevalence of the so-called gum-trees (Eucalyptus) and the 
acacias, of which last there are 300 species, but the eucalypts above 
all are everywhere. Dwarfed eucalypts fringe the tree-limit on 
Mount Kosciusco, and the soakages in the parched interior are in- 
dicated by a line of the same trees, stunted and straggling. Over 
the vast continent from Wilson's Promontory to Cape York, north, 
south, east and west — where anything can grow — there will be found 
a gum-tree. The eucalypts are remarkable for the oil secreted in 
their leaves, and the large quantity of astringent resin #f their bark. 
This resinous exudation (Kino) somewhat resembles gum, hence 
the name " gum " tree. It will not dissolve in water as gums do, 
but it is soluble in alcohol, as resin usually is. Many of the gum- 
trees throw off their bark, so that it hangs in long dry strips from 
the trunk and branches, a feature familiar in " bush " pictures. 
The bark, resin and " oils " of the eucalyptus are well known as 
commercial products. As early as 1866, tannic acid, gallic acid, 
wood spirit, acetic acid, essential oil and eucalyptol were produced 
from various species of eucalyptus, and researches made by Aus- 
tralian chemists, notably by Messrs. Baker and Smith of the Sydney 
Technical College, have brought to light many other valuable pro- 
ducts likely to prove of commercial value. The genus Eucalyptus 
numbers more than 150 species, and provides some of the most 
durable timbers known. The iron-bark of the eastern coast uplands 
is well known (Eucalyptus sideroxylon) , and is so called from the 
hardness of the wood, the bark not being remarkable except for its 
rugged and blackened aspect. Samples of this timber have been 
studied after forty-three years' immersion in sea-water. Portions 
most liable to destruction, those parts between the tide marks, were 
found perfectly sound, and showed no signs of the ravages of marine 
organisms. Other valuable timber trees of the eastern portion of 
the continent are the blackbutt, tallow-wood, spotted gum, red 
gum, mahogany, and blue gum, eucalyptus; and the turpentine 
(Syncarpialaurifolia), which has proved to be more resistant to the 
attacks of teredo than any other timber and is largely used in wharf 
construction in infested waters. There are also several extremely 
valuable soft timbers, the principal being red cedar (Cedrela Toona), 
silky oak (Grevillea robusta), beech and a variety of teak, with several 
important species of pine. The red gum forests of the Murray 
valley and the pine forests bordering the Great Plains are important 
and valuable. In Western Australia there are extensive forests of 
hardwood, principally jarrah (Eucalyptus marginata), a very durable 
timber; 14,000 sq. m. of country are covered with this species. 
Jarrah timber is nearly impervious to the attacks of the teredo, and 
there is good evidence to show that, exposed to wear and weather, or 
placed under the soil, or used as submarine piles, the wood remained 



POPULATION] 



AUSTRALIA 



949 



intact after nearly fifty years' trial. The following figures show the 
high density of Australian timber: — 

Australian Specific 

timber. gravity. 

Jarrah I-I2 

Grey iron-bark l-l8 

Red iron-bark 1-22 

Forest oak I-2I 

Tallow wood 1-23 

Mahogany I -20 

Grey gum -917 

Red gum -995 

European Specific 

timber. gravity. 

Ash -753 

Beech -690 

Chestnut -535 

British oak -99 

The resistance to breaking or rupture of Australian timber is very 
high; grey iron-bark with a specific gravity of I- 18 has a modulus 
of rupture of 17,900 lb per sq. in. compared with 11,800 lb for 
British oak with a specific gravity of -69 to -99. No Australian 
timber in the foregoing list has a less modulus than 13,100 lb per 
sq. in. 

Various " scrubs " characterize the interior, differing very widely 
from the coastal scrubs. " Mallee " scrub occupies large tracts of 
South Australia and Victoria, covering probably an extent of 
16,000 sq. m. The mallee is a species of eucalyptus growing 12 to 
14 ft. high. The tree breaks into thin stems close to the ground, and 
these branch again and again, the leaves being developed umbrella- 
fashion on the outer branches. The mallee scrub appears like a forest 
of dried osier, growing so close that it is not always easy to ride 
through it. Hardly a leaf is visible to the height of one's head ; but 
above, a crown of thick leather-like leaves shuts out the sunlight. 
The ground below is perfectly bare, and there is no water. Nothing 
could add to the sterility and the monotony of these mallee scrubs. 
" Mulga " scrub is a somewhat similar thicket, covering large areas. 
The tree in this instance is one of the acacias, a genus distributed 
through all parts of the continent. Some species have rather elegant 
blossoms, known to the settlers as " wattle." They serve admirably 
to break the sombre and monotonous aspect of the Australian vege- 
tation. Two species of acacia are remarkable for the delicate and 
violet-like perfume of their wood — myall and yarran. The majority 
of the species of Acacia are edible and serve as reserve fodder for 
sheep and cattle. In the alluvial portions of the interior salsolaceous 
plants — saltbush, bluebush, cottonbush — are invaluable to the 
pastoralist, and to their presence the pre-eminence of Australia 
as a wool-producing country is largely due. 

Grasses and herbage in great variety constitute the most valuable 
element of Australian flora from the commercial point of view. The 
herbage for the most part grows with marvellous rapidity after a 
spring or autumn shower and forms a natural shelter for the more 
stable growth of nutritious grasses. 

Under the system of grazing practised throughout Australia it is 
customary to allow sheep, cattle and horses to run at large all the 
year round within enormous enclosures and to depend entirely upon 
the natural growth of grass for their subsistence. Proteaceous plants, 
although not exclusively Australian, are exceedingly characteristic 
of Australian scenery, and are counted amongst the oldest flowering 
plants of the world. The order is easily distinguished by the hard, 
dry, woody texture of the leaves and the dehiscent fruits. They 
are found in New Zealand and also in New Caledonia, their greatest 
developments being on the south-west of the Australian continent. 
Proteaceae are found also in Tierra del Fuego and Chile. They are 
also abundant in South Africa, where the order forms the most 
conspicuous feature of vegetation. The range in species is very 
limited, no one being common to eastern and western Australia. 
The chief genera are banksia (honeysuckle), and hakea (needle bush). 

The Moreton Bay pine (Araucaria Cunninghamii) is reckoned 
amongst the giants of the forest. The genus is associated with one 
long extinct in Europe. Moreton Bay pine is chiefly known by the 
utility of its wood. Another species, A. Bidwillii, or the bunya- 
bunya, afforded food in its nut-like seeds to the aborigines. A most 
remarkable form of vegetation in the north-west is the gouty-stemmed 
tree (Adansonia Gregorii), one of the Malvaceae. It is related closely 
to the famous baobab of tropical Africa. The " grass-tree " (Xan- 
Ihorrhoea), of the uplands and coast regions, is peculiarly Australian 
in its aspect. It is seen as a clump of wire-like leaves, a few feet in 
diameter, surrounding a stem, hardly thicker than a walking-stick, 
rising to a height of 10 or 12 ft. This terminates in a long spike 
thickly studded with white blossoms. The grass-tree gives as distinct 
a character to an Australian picture as the agave and cactus do to 
the Mexican landscape. With these might be associated the gigantic 
lily of Queensland (Nymphaea giganlea), the leaves of which float 
on water, and are quite 18 in. across. There is also a gigantic lily 
(Doryanthes excelsa) which grows to a height of 15 feet. The " flame 
tree is a most conspicuous feature of an Illawarra landscape, 
the largest racemes of crimson red suggesting the name. The 



waratah or native tulip, the magnificent flowering head of which, 
with the kangaroo, is symbolic of the country, is one of the Pro- 
teaceae. The natives were accustomed to suck its tubular flowers 
for the honey they contained. The " nardoo " seed, on which the 
aborigines sometimes contrived to exist, is a creeping plant, growing 
plentifully in swamps and shallow pools, and belongs to the natural 
order of Marsileaceae. The spore-cases remain after the plant is 
dried up and withered. These are collected by the natives, and are 
known over most of the continent as nardoo. 

No speculation of hypothesis has been propounded to account 
satisfactorily for the origin of the Australian flora. As a step 
towards such hypothesis it has been noted that the Antarctic, 
the South African, and the Australian floras have many types in 
common. There is also to a limited extent a European element 
present. One thing is certain, that there is in Australia a flora 
that is a remnant of a vegetation once widely distributed. Heer 
has described such Australian genera as Banksia, Eucalyptus, 
Grevillea and Hakea from the Miocene of Switzerland. Another 
point agreed upon is that the Australian flora is one of vast antiquity. 
There are genera so far removed from every living genus that many 
connecting links must have become extinct. The region extending 
round the south-western extremity of the continent has a peculiarly 
characteristic assemblage of typical Australian forms, notably a 
great abundance of the Proteaceae. This flora, isolated by arid 
country from the rest of the continent, has evidently derived its 
plant life from an outside source, probably from lands no longer 
existing. 

Political and Economic Conditions 

Population. 1 — The Australian people are mainly of British 
origin, only 3 J % of the population of European descent being 
of non-British race. It is certain that the aborigines (see the 
section on Aborigines below) are very much less numerous than 
when the country was first colonized, but their present numbers 
can be given for only a few of the states. At the census of 1901, 
48,248 aborigines were enumerated, of whom 7434 were in New 
South Wales, 652 in Victoria, 27,123 in South Australia, and 
6212 in Western Australia. The assertion by the Queensland 
authorities that there are 50,000 aborigines in that state is a 
crude estimate, and may be far wide of the truth. In South 
Australia and the Northern Territory a large number are outside 
the bounds of settlement, and it is probable that they are as 
numerous there as in Queensland. The census of Western 
Australia included only those aborigines in the employment 
of the colonists; and as a large part of this, the greatest of the 
Australian states, is as yet unexplored, it may be presumed that 
the aborigines enumerated were very far short of the whole 
number of persons of that race in the state. Taking all things 
into consideration, the aboriginal population of the continent 
may be set down at something like 1 80,000. Chinese, numbering 
about 30,000, are chiefly found in New South Wales, Queensland, 
Victoria, and the Northern Territory. Of Japanese there were 
3500, of Hindu and Sinhalese 4600, according to recent com- 
putation, but the policy of the Commonwealth is adverse to 
further immigration of other than whites. South Sea Islanders 
and other coloured races, numbering probably about 15,000, 
were in 1906 to be found principally in Queensland, but further 
immigration of Pacific Islanders to Australia is now restricted, 
and the majority of those in the country in 1906 were deported 
by the middle of 1907. 

At the close of 1906 the population of Australia was approxi- 
mately 4,120,000, exclusive of aborigines. The increase of 
population since 1871 was as follows: 1871,- 1,668,377; 1881, 
2,252,617; 1891, 3,183,237; 1901, 3,773,248. The expansion 
has been due mainly to the natural increase; that is, by reason 
of excess of births over deaths. Immigration to Australia has 
been very slight since 1891, owing originally to the stoppage of 
progress consequent on the bank crisis of 1893, and, subse- 
quently, to the disinclination of several of the state governments 
towards immigration and their failure to provide for the welfare 
of immigrants on their arrival. During 1906 a more rational 
view of the value of immigration was adopted by the various 
state governments and by the federal government, and immigra- 
tion to Australia is now systematically encouraged. Australia's 
gain of population by immigration, — i.e. the excess of the 

1 The statistical portion of this article includes Tasmania, which 
is a member of the Australian Commonwealth. 



95° 



AUSTRALIA 



[POPULATION 



inward over the outward movement of a population — since the 
discovery of gold in 1851, arranged in ten years periods, was 

1852-1861 520,713 

1862-1871 188,158 

1872-1881 223,326 

1882-1891 374,097 

1892-1901 2,377 

During the five years following the last year of the foregoing table, 
there was practically no increase in population by immigration. 

The birth rate averages 26-28 per thousand of the population 
and the death rate 12-28, showing a net increase of 14 per 
thousand by reason of the excess of births over deaths. The 
marriage rate varies as in other countries from year to year 
according to the degree of prosperity prevailing. In the five 
years 1 881- 1888 the rate was 8- 08 marriages (16-1 persons) per 
thousand of the population, declining to 6-51 in 1891-1895; in 
recent years there has been a considerable improvement, and 
the Australian marriage rate may be quoted as ranging between 
6-75 and 7-25. The death rate of Australia is much below that 
of European countries and is steadily declining. During the 
twenty years preceding the census of 1901 there was a fall in the 
death rate of 3-4 per thousand, of which, however, 1 per thousand 
is attributable to the decline in the birth rate, the balance being 
attributable to improved sanitary conditions. 

Territorial Divisions. — Australia is politically divided into 
five states, which with the island of Tasmania form the Common- 
wealth of Australia. The area of the various states is as follows: 

Sq. m. 

New South Wales 310,700 

Victoria •. . 87,884 

Queensland 668,497 

South Australia 903,690 

Western Australia 975,920 



Tasmania 



2,946,691 
26,215 



Commonwealth 2,972,906 

To the area of the Commonwealth shown in the table might be 
added that of New Guinea, 90,000 sq. m.; this would bring 
the area of the territory controlled by the Commonwealth to 
3,062,906 sq. m. The distribution of population at the close of 
1906 (4,118,000) was New South Wales 1,530,000, Victoria 
1,223,000, Queensland 534,000, South Australia 381,000, Western 
Australia 270,000, Tasmania 180,000. The rate of increase since 
the previous census was 1-5 % per annum, varying from 0-31 in 
Victoria to 2-06 in New South Wales and6-9in Western Australia. 

Australia contains four cities whose population exceeds 
100,000, and fifteen with over 10,000. The principal cities and 
towns are Sydney (pop. 530,000), Newcastle, Broken Hill, 
Parramatta, Goulburn, Maitland, Bathurst, Orange, Lithgow, 
Tamworth, Grafton, Wagga and Albury, in New South Wales; 
Melbourne (pop. 511,900), Ballarat, Bendigo, Geelong, Eagle- 
hawk, Warrnambool, Castlemaine, and Stawell in Victoria; 
Brisbane (pop. 128,000), Rockhampton, Maryborough, Towns- 
ville, Gympie, Ipswich, and Toowoomba in Queensland; 
Adelaide (pop. about 175,000), Port Adelaide and Port Pirie in 
South Australia; Perth (pop. 56,000), Fremantle, and Kal- 
goorlie in Western Australia; and Hobart (pop. 35,500) and 
Launceston in Tasmania. 

Defence. — Up to the end of the 19th century, little was 
thought of any locally-raised or locally-provided defensive forces, 
the mother-country being relied upon. But the Transvaal War 
of 1899-1902, to which Australia sent 63 10 volunteers (principally 
mounted rifles), and the gradual increase of military sentiment, 
brought the question more to the front, and more and more 
attention was given to making Australian defence a matter of 
local concern. Naval defence in any case remained primarily 
a question for the Imperial navy, and by agreement (1903, for 
ten years) between the British government and the governments 
of the Commonwealth (contributing an annual subsidy of 
£200,000) and of New Zealand (£40,000), an efficient fleet 
patrolled the Australasian waters, Sydney, its headquarters, 
being ranked as a first-class naval station. Under the agreement 



a royal naval reserve was maintained, three of the Imperial 
vessels provided being utilized as drill ships for crews recruited 
from the Australian states. At the end of 1908 the strength of 
the naval forces under the Commonwealth defence department 
was: permanent, 217, naval militia, 1016; the estimated 
expenditure for 1908-1909 being £63,531. In 1908-1909 a 
movement began for the establishment by Australia of a local 
flotilla of torpedo-boat destroyers, to be controlled by the 
Commonwealth in peace time, but subject to the orders of the 
British admiralty in war time, though not to be removed from the 
Australian coast without the sanction of the Commonwealth; 
and by 1909 three such vessels had been ordered in England 
preparatory to building others in Australia. The military 
establishment at the beginning of 1909 was represented by a 
small permanent force of about 1400, a militia strength of about 
17,000, and some 6000 volunteers, besides 50,000 members of 
rifle clubs and 30,000 cadets; the expenditure being (estim&te, 
1908-1909) £623,946. But a reorganization of the military 
forces, on the basis of obligatory national training, was already 
contemplated, though the first Bill introduced for this purpose by 
Mr Deakin's government (Sept. 1908) was dropped, and in 1909 
the subject was still under discussion. 

Religion. — There is no state church in Australia, nor is the 
teaching of religion in any way subsidized by the state. The 
Church of England claims as adherents 39 % of the population, 
and the Roman Catholic Church 22%; next in numerical 
strength are the Wesleyans and other Methodists, numbering . 
12%, the various branches of the Presbyterians 11%, Con- 
gregationalists 2 %, and Baptists 2 %. These proportions 
varied very little between 1881 and 1906, and may be taken 
as accurately representing the present strength of the various 
Christian denominations. Churches of all denominations are 
liberally supported throughout the states, and the residents of 
every settlement, however small, have their places of worship 
erected and maintained by their own contributions. 

Instruction. — Education is very widely distributed, and in 
every state it is compulsory for children of school ages to attend 
school. The statutory ages differ in the various states; in New 
South Wales and Western Australia it is from 6 to 13 years 
inclusive, in Victoria 6 to 12 years, in Queensland 6 to n years, 
and in South Australia 7 to 12 years inclusive. Religious in- 
struction is not imparted by the state-paid teachers in any state, 
though in certain states persons duly authorized by the religious 
organizations are allowed to give religious instruction to children 
of their own denomination where the parents' consent has been 
obtained. According to the returns for 1905 there were 7292 
state schools, with 15,628 teachers and 648,927 pupils, and the 
average attendance of scholars was 446,000. Besides state 
schools there were 2145 private schools, with 7825 teachers and 
137,000 scholars, the average number of scholars in attendance 
being 120,000. The census of 1901 showed that about 83% 
of the whole population and more than 91 % of the population 
over five years of age could read and write. There was, therefore, 
a residue of 9 % of illiterates, most of whom were not born in 
Australia. The marriage registers furnish another test of 
education. In 1905 only ten persons in every thousand married 
were unable to sign their names, thus proving that the number 
of illiterate adults of Australian birth is very small. 

Instruction at state schools is either free or at merely nominal 
cost, and high schools, technical colleges and agricultural colleges 
are maintained by appropriations from the general revenues 
of the states. There are also numerous grammar schools and 
other private schools. Universities have been established at 
Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide and Hobart, and are well equipped 
and numerously attended; they are in part supported by grants 
from the public funds and in part by private endowments 
and the fees paid by students. The number of students attend- 
ing lectures is about 2500 and the annual income a little over 
£100,000. The cost of public instruction in Australia averages 
about us. 4d. per inhabitant, and the cost per scholar in average 
attendance at state schools is £4:13: 9. 

Pastoral and Agricultural Industries, — The continent is 



INDUSTRY] 



AUSTRALIA 



951 



essentially a pastoral one, and the products of the flocks and 
herds constitute the chief element in the wealth of Australia. 
Practically the whole of the territory between the 145 meridian 
and the Great Dividing Range, as well as extensive tracts in 
the south and west, are a natural sheep pasture with climatic 
conditions and indigenous vegetation pre-eminently adapted 
for the growth of wool of the highest quality. Numerically 
the flocks of Australia represent one-sixth of the world's sheep, 
and in just over half a century (1851-1905) the exports of 
Australian wool alone reached the value of £650,000,000. During 
the same period, owing to the efforts of pastoralists to improve 
their flocks, there was a gradual increase in the weight of wool 
produced per sheep from 3jlb to an average of over 7ft. The 
cattle and horse-breeding industries are of minor importance 
as compared with wool-growing, but nevertheless represent a 
great source of wealth, with vast possibilities of expansion in the 
over-sea trade. The perfection of refrigeration in over-sea 
carriage, which has done so much to extend the markets for 
Australian beef and mutton, has also furthered the expansion 
of dairying, there being an annual output of over 160 million lb 
of butter, valued at £6,000,000; of this about 64 million lb, 
valued at £2,500,000, is exported annually to British markets. 

Next 'to the pastoral industry, agriculture is the principal 
source of Australian wealth. At the close of 1905 the area 
devoted to tillage was 9,365,000 acres, the area utilized for 
the production of breadstuffs being 6,270,000 acres or over 
two-thirds of the whole extent of cultivation. At first wheat 
was cultivated solely in the coastal country, but experience 
has shown that the staple cereal can be most successfully grown 
over almost any portion of the arable lands within the 20 to 40 in. 
rainfall areas. The value of Australian wheat and flour exported 
in 1905 was £5,500,000. 

Other important crops grown are — maize, 324,060 acres; oats, 
493,000 acres; other grains, 160,000 acres; hay, 1,367,000 
acres; potatoes, 119,000 acres; sugar-cane, 141,000 acres; 
vines, 65,000 acres; and other crops, 422,000 acres. The chief 
wheat lands are in Victoria, South Australia and New South 
Wales; the yield averages about 9 bushels to the acre; this 
low average is due to the endeavour of settlers on new lands 
to cultivate larger areas than their resources can effectively 
deal with; the introduction of scientific farming should almost 
double the yield. Maize and sugar-cane are grown in New South 
Wales and Queensland. The vine is cultivated in all the states, 
but chiefly in South Australia, Victoria and New South Wales. 
Australia produces abundant quantities and nearly all varieties 
of fruits; but the kinds exported are chiefly oranges, pine- 
apples, bananas and apples. Tobacco thrives well in New South ' 
Wales and Victoria, but kinds suitable for exportation are not 
largely grown. Compared with the principal countries of the 
world, Australia does not take a high position in regard to the 
gross value of the produce of its tillage, the standard of cultivation 
being for the most part low and without regard to maximum re- 
turns, but in value per inhabitant it compares fairly well; indeed, 
some of the states show averages which surpass those of many of 
the leading agricultural countries. For 1905 the total value of 
agricultural produce estimated at the place of production was 
£18,750,000 sterling, or about £4: 13 : 4 per inhabitant. 

Timber Industry. — Although the timbers of commercial value 
are confined practically to the eastern and a portion of the western 
coastal belt and a few inland tracts of Australia, they constitute 
an important national asset. The early settlement of heavily 
timbered country was characterized by wanton destruction 
of vast quantities of magnificent timber; but this waste is a 
thing of the past, and under the pressure of a demand for sound 
timber both for local use and for exportation, the various 
governments are doing much to conserve the state forests. 
In Western Australia, New South Wales, Tasmania and Queens- 
land there are many hundreds of well-equipped saw-mills affording 
employment to about 5000 men. The export of timber is in 
ordinary years valued at a million sterling and the total pro- 
duction at £2,250,000. 

Fisheries. — Excellent fish of many varieties abound in the 



Australian seas and in many of the rivers. In several of the 
states, fish have been introduced successfully from other 
countries. Trout may now be taken in many of the mountain 
streams. At one time whaling was an important industry on 
the coasts of New South Wales and Tasmania, and afterwards 
on the Western Australian coasts. The industry gravitated to 
New Zealand, and finally died out, chiefly through the wasteful 
practice of killing the calves to secure the capture of the mothers. 
Of late years whaling has again attracted attention, and a small 
number of vessels prosecute the industry during the season. 
The only source of maritime wealth that is now being sufficiently 
exploited to be regarded as an industry is the gathering of 
pearl-oysters from the beds off the northern and north-western 
coasts of the continent. In Queensland waters there are about 
300 vessels, and on the Western Australian coast about 450 
licensed craft engaged in the industry, the annual value of 
pearl-shell and pearls raised being nearly half a million sterling. 
Owing to the depletion of some of the more accessible banks, 
and to difficulties in connexion with the employment of coloured 
crews, many of the vessels have now gone farther afield. As 
the pearl-oyster is remarkably prolific, it is considered by experts 
that within a few years of their abandonment by fishing fleets 
the denuded banks will become as abundantly stocked as ever. 

Mineral Production. — Australia is one of the great gold 
producers of the world, and its yield in 1905 was about £16,000,000 
sterling, or one-fourth of the gold output of the world; Qola 

and the total value of its mineral production was 
approximately £25,000,000. Gold is found throughout Australia, 
and the present prosperity of the states is largely due to the 
discoveries of this metal, the development of other industries 
being, in a country of varied resources, a natural sequence to 
the acquisition of mineral treasure. From the date of its first 
discovery, up to the close of 1905, gold to the value of 
£460,000,000 sterling has been obtained in Australia. Victoria, 
in a period of fifty-four years, contributed about £273,000,000 
to this total, and is still a large producer, its annual yield being 
about 800,000 oz., 20,000 men being engaged in the search for 
the precious metal. Queensland's annual output is between 
750,000 and 800,000 oz.; the number of men engaged in gold- 
mining is 10,000. In New South Wales the greatest production 
was in 1852, soon after the first discovery of the precious metal, 
when the output was valued at £2,660,946; the production in 
1905 was about 270,000 oz., valued at £1,150,000. For many 
years Western Australia was considered to be destitute of mineral 
deposits of any value, but it is now known that a rich belt of 
mineral country extends from north to south. The first im- 
portant discovery was made in 1882, when gold was found in 
the Kimberley district; but it was not until a few years later 
that this rich and extensive area was developed. In 1887 gold 
was found in Yilgarn, about 200 m. east of Perth. This was the 
first of the many rich discoveries in the same district which have 
made Western Australia the chief gold-producer of the Australian 
group. In 1907 there were eighteen goldfields in the state, and 
it was estimated that over 30,000 miners were actively engaged 
in the search for gold. In 1905 the production amounted to 
1,983,000 oz., valued at £8,360,000. Tasmania is a gold producer 
to the extent of about 70,000 or 80,000 oz. a year, valued at 
£300,000 ; South Australia produces about 30,000 oz. 

Gold is obtained chiefly from quartz reefs, but there are still 
some important alluvial deposits being worked. The greatest 
development of quartz reefing is found in Victoria, some of the 
mines being of great depth. There are eight mines in the Bendigo 
district over 3000 ft. deep, and fourteen over 2500 ft. deep. In 
the Victoria mine a depth of 3750 ft. has been reached, and in 
Lazarus mine 3424 ft. In the Ballarat district a depth of 2520 
ft. has been reached in the South Star mine. In Queensland 
there is one mine 3156 ft. deep, and several others exceed 2000 ft. 
in depth. A considerable number of men are engaged in the 
various states on alluvial fields, in hydraulic sluicing, and 
dredging is now adopted for the winning of gold in river deposits. 
So far this form of winning is chiefly carried on in New South 
Wales, where there are about fifty gold-dredging plants in 



952 



AUSTRALIA 



[MINERALS 



successful operation. Over 70,000 men are employed in the 
gold-mining industry, more than two-thirds of them being 
engaged in quartz mining. 

Silver has been discovered in all the states, either alone or in the 
form of sulphides, antimonial and arsenical ores, chloride, bromide, 
_,. iodide and chloro-bromide of silver, and argentiferous 

ye ' lead ores, the largest deposits of the metal being found 

in the last-mentioned form. The leading silver mines are in New 
South Wales, the returns from the other states being compara- 
tively insignificant. The fields of New South Wales have proved to 
be of immense value, the yield of silver and lead during 1905 being 
£2,500,000, and the total output to the end of the year named over 
£40,000,000. The Broken Hill field, which was discovered in 1883, 
extends over 2500 sq. m. of country, and has developed into one of the 
principal mining centres of the world. It is situated beyond the 
river Darling, and close to the boundary between New South Wales 
and South Australia. The lodes occur in Silurian metamorphic 
micaceous schists, intruded by granite, porphyry and diorite, and 
traversed by numerous quartz reefs, some of which are gold-bearing. 
The Broken Hill lode is the largest yet discovered. It varies in 
width from 10 ft. to 200 ft., and may be traced for several miles. 
Although indications of silver abound in all the other states, no fields 
of great importance have yet been discovered. Up to the end of 
1904 Australia had produced silver to the value of £45,000,000. At 
Broken Hill mines about 11,000 miners are employed. 

Copper is known to exist in all the states, and has been mined 
extensively in South Australia, New South Wales, Queensland and 
Conner Tasmania. The low quotations which ruled for a number 

pp ' of years had a depressing effect upon the industry, and 
many mines once profitably worked were temporarily closed, but 
in 1906 there was a general revival. The discovery of copper had 
a marked effect on the fortunes of South Australia at a time when 
the young colony was surrounded by difficulties. The first important 
mine, the Kapunda, was opened up in 1842. It is estimated that at 
one time 2000 tons were produced annually, but the mine was closed 
in 1879. In 1845 the celebrated Burra Burra mine was discovered. 
This mine proved to be very rich, and paid £800,000 in dividends to 
the original owners. For a number of years, however, the mine has 
been suffered to remain untouched, as the deposits originally worked 
were found to be depleted. For many years the average output was 
from 10,000 to 13,000 tons of ore, yielding from 22 to 23% of copper. 
For the period of thirty years during which the mine was worked the 
production of ore amounted to 234,648 tons, equal to 51,622 tons of 
copper, valued at £4,749,924. The Wallaroo and Moonta mines, 
discovered in i860 and 1861, proved to be even more valuable than 
the Burra Burra, the Moonta mines employing at one time upwards 
of 1600 hands. The dividends paid by these mines amounted to 
about £1,750,000 sterling. The satisfactory price obtained during 
recent years has enabled renewed attention to be paid to copper 
mining in South Australia, and the production of the metal in 1905 
was valued at £470,324. The principal deposits of copper in New 
South Wales are found in the central part of the state between the 
Macquarie, Darling and Bogan rivers. Deposits have also been 
found in the New England and southern districts, as well as at Broken 
Hill, showing that the mineral is widely distributed throughout the 
state. The more important mines are those of Cobar, where the 
Great Cobar mine produces annually nearly 4000 tons of refined 
copper. In northern Queensland copper is found throughout the 
Cloncurry district, in the upper basin of the Star river, and the 
Herberton district. The returns from the copper fields in the state 
are at present a little over half a million sterling per annum, and 
would be still greater if it were not for the lack of suitable fuel for 
smelting purposes, which renders the economical treatment of the ore 
difficult ; the development of the mines is also retarded by the want 
of easy and cheaper communication with the coast. In Western 
Australia copper deposits have been worked for some years. Very 
rich lodes of the metal have been found in the Northampton, 
Murchison and Champion Bay districts, and also in the country to 
the south of these districts on the Irwin river. Tasmania is now the 
largest copper-producing state of the Commonwealth; in 1905 the 
output was over £672,010 and in earlier years even larger. The chief 
mines belong to the Mount Lyell Mining & Railway Co., and are 
situated on the west side of the island with an outlet by rail to 
Strahan on the west coast. The total value of copper produced in 
Australia up to the end of 1905 was £42,500,000 sterling, £24,500,000 
having been obtained in South Australia, £7,500,000 in New South 
Wales, £6,400,000 in Tasmania and over £3,500,000 in Queensland. 

Tin was known to exist in Australia from the first years of colon- 
ization. The wealth of Queensland and the Northern Territory 
y in in this mineral, according to the reports of Dr Jack, late 

Government geologist of the former state, and the late 
Rev. J. E. Tenison- Woods, appears to be very great. The most 
important tin-mines in Queensland are in the Herberton district, 
south-west of Cairns; at Cooktown, oh the Annan and Bloomfield 
rivers; and at Stanthorpe, on the border of New South Wales. 
Herberton and Stanthorpe have produced more than three-fourths 
of the total production of the state. Towards the close of the 19th 
century the production greatly decreased in consequence of the low 
price of the metal, but in 1899 a stimulus was given to the industry, 



and since then the production has increased very considerably, the 
output for 1905 being valued at £989,627. In New South Wales 
lode tin occurs principally in the granite and stream tin under the 
basaltic country in the extreme north of the state, at Tenterfield, 
Emmaville, Tingha, and in other districts of New England. The 
metal has also been discovered in the Barrier ranges, and many other 
places. The value of the output in 1905 was £226,110. The yield 
of tin in Victoria is very small, and until lately no fields of import- 
ance have been discovered; but towards the latter end of 1899 
extensive deposits were reported to exist in the Gippsland district 
— at Omeo and Tarwin. In South Australia tin-mining is unim- 
portant. In Western Australia the production from the tin-fields 
at Greenbushes and elsewhere was valued at £87,000. Tasmania 
during the last few years has attained the foremost position in the 
production of tin, the annual output now being about £363,000. 
The total value of tin produced in Australia is nearly a million 
sterling per annum, and the total production to the end of 1905 was 
£22,500,000, of which Tasmania produced about 40%, New South 
Wales one-third, Queensland a little more than a fourth. 

Iron is distributed throughout Australia, but for want of capital 
for developing the fields this industry has not progressed. In New 
South Wales there are, together with coal and limestone , 

in unlimited supply, important deposits of rich iron ores roa ' 

suitable for smelting purposes; and for the manufacture of steel of 
certain descriptions abundance of manganese, chrome and tungsten 
ores are available. The most extensive fields are in the Mittagong, 
Wallerawang and Rylstone districts, which are roughly estimated to 
contain in the aggregate 12,944,000 tons of ore, containing 5,853,000 
tons of metallic iron. Extensive deposits, which are being developed 
successfully, occur in Tasmania, it being estimated that there are, 
within easy shipping facilities, 17,000,000 tons of ore. Magnetite, 
or magnetic iron, the richest of all iron ores, is found in abundance 
near Wallerawang in New South Wales. The proximity of coal-beds 
now being worked should accelerate the development of the iron 
deposits, which, on an average, contain 41% of metal. Magnetite 
occurs in great abundance in Western Australia, together with 
haematite, which would be of enormous value if cheap labour were 
available. Goethite, limonite and haematite are found in New South 
Wales, at the junction of the Hawkesbury sandstone formation and 
the Wianamatta shale, near Nattai, and are enhanced in their value 
by their proximity to coal-beds. Near Lithgow extensive deposits of 
limonite, or clay-band ore, are interbedded with coal. Some samples 
of ore, coal and limestone, obtained in the Mittagong district, with 
pig-iron and castings manufactured therefrom, were exhibited at the 
Mining Exhibition in London and obtained a first award. 

Antimony is widely diffused throughout Australia, and is some- 
times found associated with gold. In New South Wales the principal 
centre of this industry is Hillgrove, near Armidale, where 
the Eleanora Mine, one of the richest in the state, is . er . 
situated. The ore is also worked for gold. In Victoria the m er s ' 
production of antimony gave employment in 1890 to 238 miners, 
but owing to the low price of the metal, production has almost 
ceased. In Queensland the fields were all showing development in 
1 89 1, when the output exhibited a very large increase compared 
with that of former years; but, as in the case of Victoria, the 
production of the metal seems to have ceased. Good lodes of stibnite 
(sulphide of antimony) have been found near Roebourne in Western 
Australia, but no attempt has yet been made to work them. 

Bismuth is known to exist in all the Australian states, but up 
to the present time it has been mined for only in three states, viz. 
New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia and Tasmania. It 
is usually found in association with tin and other minerals. The 
principal mine in New South Wales is situated at Kingsgate, in 
the New England district, where the mineral is generally associated 
with molybdenum and gold. 

Manganese probably exists in all the states, deposits having been 
found in New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland and Western 
Australia, the richest specimens being found in New South Wales. 
Little, however, has been done to utilize the deposits, the demands 
of the colonial markets being extremely limited. The ore generally 
occurs in the form of oxides, manganite and pyrolusite, and contains 
a high percentage of sesquioxide of manganese. 

Platinum and the allied compound metal iridosmine have been 
found in New South Wales, but so far in inconsiderable quantities. 
Iridosmine occurs commonly with gold or tin in alluvial drifts. 

The rare element tellurium has been discovered in New South 
Wales at Bingara and other parts of the northern districts, as well 
as at Tarana, on the western line, though at present in such minute 
quantities as would not repay the cost of working. At many of the 
mines at Kalgoorlie, Western Australia, large quantities of ores of 
telluride of gold have been found in the lode formations. 

Lead is found in all the Australian states, but is worked only 
when associated with silver. In Western Australia the lead occurs 
in the form of sulphides and carbonates of great richness, but the 
quantity of silver mixed with it is very small. The lodes are most 
frequently of great size, containing huge masses of galena, and so 
little gangue that the ore can very easily be dressed to 83 or 84%. 
The association of this metal with silver in the Broken Hill mines 
of New South Wales adds very greatly to the value of the product. 

Mercury is found in New South Wales and Queensland. In New 



COMMERCE] 



AUSTRALIA 



953 



South Wales, in the form of cinnabar, it has been discovered on the 
Cudgegong river, near Rylstone, and it also occurs at Bingara, 
Solferino, Yulgilbar and Cooma. In the last-named place the assays 
of ore yielded 22 % of mercury. 

Titanium, in the minerals known as octahedrite and brookite, is 
found in alluvial deposits in New South Wales, in conjunction with 
diamonds. 

Wolfram (tungstate of iron and manganese) occurs in some of the 
states, notably in New South Wales, Victoria, Tasmania and Queens- 
land. Scheelite, another mineral of tungsten, is also found in Queens- 
land. Molybdenum, in the form of molybdenite (sulphide of molyb- 
denum), is found in Queensland, New South Wales and Victoria, 
associated in the parent state with tin and bismuth in quartz reefs. 

Zinc ores, in the several varieties of carbonates, silicates, oxide, 
sulphide and sulphate of zinc, have been found in several of the 
Australian states, but have attracted little attention except in New 
South Wales, where special efforts are being made successfully to 
produce a high-grade zinc concentrate from the sulphide ores. 
Several companies are devoting all their energies to zinc extraction, 
and the output is now equal to about 5% of the world's production. 

Nickel, so abundant in the island of New Caledonia, has up to the 
present been found in none of the Australian states except Queens- 
land and Tasmania. Few attempts, however, have been made to 
prospect systematically for this valuable mineral. 

Cobalt occurs in New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia, 
and efforts have been made in the former state to treat the ore, the 
metal having a high commercial value ; but the market is small, and 
no attempt has been made up to 1907 to produce it on any large 
scale. The manganese ores of the Bathurst district of New South 
Wales often contain a small percentage of cobalt — sufficient, indeed, 
to warrant further attempts to work them. In New South Wales 
chromium is found in the northern portion of the state, in the 
Clarence and Tamworth districts and also near Gundagai. It is 
usually associated with serpentine. In the Gundagai district the 
industry was rapidly becoming a valuable one, but the low price of 
chrome has greatly restricted the output. Chromium has been 
discovered in Tasmania also. 

Arsenic, in its well-known and beautiful forms, orpiment and 
realgar, is found in New South Wales and Victoria. It usually occurs 
in association with other minerals in veins. 

The Australian states have been bountifully supplied with mineral 
fuel. Five distinct varieties of black coal, of well-characterized 
Fuel. types. ma Y be distinguished, and these, with the two 

extremes of brown coal or lignite and anthracite, form a 
perfectly continuous series. Brown coal, or lignite, occurs princi- 
pally in Victoria. Attempts have frequently been made to use the 
mineral for ordinary fuel purposes, but its inferior quality has 
prevented its general use. Black coal forms one of the principal 
resources of New South Wales ; and in the other states the deposits 
of this valuable mineral are being rapidly developed. Coal of a 
very fair description was discovered in the basin of the Irwin river, 
in Western Australia, as far back as the year 1846. It has been 
ascertained from recent explorations that the area of carboniferous 
formation in that state extends from the Irwin northwards to the 
Gascoyne river, about 300 m., and probably all the way to the 
Kimberley district. The most important discovery of coal in the 
state, so far, is that made in the bed of the Collie river, near Bunbury, 
to the south of Perth. The coal has been treated and found to be of 
good quality, and there are grounds for supposing that there are 
250,000,000 tons in the field. Dr Jack, late government geologist 
of Queensland, considers the extent of the coal-fields of that state 
to be practically unlimited, and is of opinion that the carboniferous 
formations extend to a considerable distance under the Great 
Western Plains. It is roughly estimated that the Coal Measures 
at present practically explored extend over an area of about 24,000 
sq. m. Coal-mining is an established industry in Queensland, and 
is progressing satisfactorily. The mines, however, are situated too 
far from the coast to permit of serious competition with Newcastle 
in an export trade, and the output is practically restricted to supply- 
ing local requirements. The coal-fields of New South Wales are 
situated in three distinct regions — the northern, southern and 
western districts. The first of these comprises chiefly the mines 
of the Hunter river districts; the second includes the Illawarra 
district, and, generally, the coastal regions to the south of Sydney, 
together with Berrima, on the tableland; and the third consists of 
the mountainous regions on the Great Western railway and extends 
as far as Dubbo. The total area of the Carboniferous strata of New 
South Wales is estimated at 2,3,950 sq. m. The seams vary in thick- 
ness. One of the richest has been found at Greta in the Hunter river 
district; it contains an average thickness of 41 ft. of clean coal, 
and the quantity underlying each acre of ground has been computed 
to be 63,700 tons. The coal mines of New South Wales give employ- 
ment to 14,000 persons, and the annual production is over 6,600,000 
tons. Black coal has been discovered in Victoria, and about 250,000 
tons are now being raised. The principal collieries in the state are 
the Outtrim Howitt, the Coal Creek Proprietary and the Jumbunna. 
In South Australia, at Leigh's Creek, north of Port Augusta, coal- 
beds have been discovered. The quantity of coal extracted annually 
in Australia had in 1906 reached 7,497,000 tons. 

Kerosene shale (torbanite) is found in several parts of New South 



Wales. It is a species of cannel coal, somewhat similar to the Bog- 
head mineral of Scotland, but yielding a much larger percentage of 
volatile hydro-carbon than the Scottish mineral. The richest quality 
yields about 100 to 130 gallons of crude oil per ton, or 17,000 to 
18,000 cub. ft. of gas, with an illuminating power of 35 to 40 sperm 
candles, when gas only is extracted from the shale. 

Large deposits of alum occur close to the village of Bulladelah, 
30 m. from Port Stephens, New South Wales. It is said to yield 
well, and a quantity of the manufactured alum is sent to Sydney 
for local consumption. Marble is found in many parts of New South 
Wales and South Australia. Kaolin, fire-clays and brick-clays are 
common to all the states. Except in the vicinity of cities and town- 
ships, however, little use has been made of the abundant deposits of 
clay. Kaolin, or porcelain clay, although capable of application to 
commercial purposes, has not as yet been utilized to any extent, 
although found in several places in New South Wales and in Western 
Australia. 

Asbestos has been found in New South Wales in the Gundagai 
Bathurst and Broken Hill districts — in the last-mentioned district 
in considerable quantities. Several specimens of very fair quality 
have also been met with in Western Australia. 

Many descriptions of gems and gem stones have been discovered 
in various parts of the Australian states, but systematic search has 
been made principally for the diamond and the noble opal. _ 

Diamonds are found in all the states; but only in New 
South Wales have any attempts been made to work the diamond 
drifts. The best of the New South Wales diamonds are harder and 
much whiter than the South African diamonds, and are classified as 
on a par with the best Brazilian gems, but no large specimens have 
yet been found. The finest opal known is obtained in the Upper 
Cretaceous formation at White Cliffs, near Wilcannia, New South 
Wales, and at these mines about 700 men find constant employment. 
Other precious stones, including the sapphire, emerald, oriental 
emerald, ruby, opal, amethyst, garnet, chrysolite, topaz, cairngorm, 
onyx, zircon, &c, have been found in the gold and tin bearing drifts 
and river gravels in numerous localities throughout the states. The 
sapphire is found in all the states, principally in the neighbourhood 
of Beechworth, Victoria. The oriental topaz has been found in New 
South Wales. Oriental amethysts also have been found in that 
state, and the ruby has been found in Queensland, as well as in 
New South Wales. Turquoises have been found near Wangaratta, 
in Victoria, and mining queries are being carried on in that state.
Chrysoberyls have been found in New South Wales; spinel rubies 
in New South Wales and Victoria ; and white topaz in all the states. 
Chalcedony, carnelian, onyx and cat's eyes are found in New South 
Wales;' and it is probable that they are also to be met with in the 
other states, particularly in Queensland. Zircon, tourmaline, garnet 
and other precious stones of little commercial value are found 
throughout Australia. 

Commerce. — The number of vessels engaged in the over-sea 
trade of Australia in 1905 was 211 2, viz. 1050 steamers, with a 
tonnage of 2,629,000, and 1062 sailers, tonnage 1,090,000; the 
total of both classes was 3,719,000 tons. The nationality of the 
tonnage was, British 2,771,000, including Australian 288,000, 
and foreign 948,000. The destination of the shipping was, to 
British ports 2,360,000 tons, and to foreign ports 1,350,000 tons. 
The value of the external trade was £95,188,000, viz. £38,347,000 
imports, and £56,841,000 exports. The imports represent 
£9:11:6 per inhabitant and the exports £14:4:2, with a 
total trade of £23:15:8. The import trade is divided between 
the United Kingdom and possessions and foreign countries as 
follows: — United Kingdom £23,074,000, British possessions 
£5,384,000, and foreign states £9,889,000, while the destination 
of the exports is, United Kingdom £26,703,000, British possessions 
£12,519,000, and' foreign countries £17,619,000. The United 
Kingdom in 1905 sent 60 % of the imports taken by Australia, 
compared with 26 % from foreign countries, and 14 % from 
British possessions; of Australian imports the United Kingdom 
takes 47 %, foreign countries 31 % and British possessions 22 %. 
In normal years (that is to say, when there is no large movement 
of capital) the exports of Australia exceed the imports by some 
£15,300,000. This sum represents the interest payable on 
government loans placed outside Australia, mainly in England, 
and the income from British and other capital invested in the 
country; the former may be estimated at £7,300,000 and the 
latter £8,000,000 per annum. The principal items of export 
are wool, skins, tallow, frozen mutton, chilled beef, preserved 
meats, butter and other articles of pastoral produce, timber, 
wheat, flour and fruits, gold, silver, lead, copper, tin and other 
metals. In 1905 the value of the wool export regained the 
£20,000,000 level, and with the rapid recovery of the numerical 



954 



AUSTRALIA 



[ABORIGINES 



strength of the flocks, great improvements in the quality and 
weight of fleeces, this item is likely to show permanent ad- 
vancement. The exports of breadstuffs — chiefly to the United 
Kingdom — exceed six millions per annum, butter two and a 
half millions, and minerals of all kinds, except gold, six millions. 
Gold is exported in large quantities from Australia. The total 
gold production of the country is from £14,500,000 to £16,000,000, 
and as not more than three-quarters of a million are required 
to strengthen existing local stocks, the balance is usually available 
for export, and the average export of the precious metal during 
the ten years, 1896-1905, was £12,500,000 per annum. The 
chief articles of import are apparel and textiles, machinery and 
hardware, stimulants, narcotics, explosives, bags and sacks, 
books and paper, oils and tea. 

Lines of steamers connect Australia with London and other 
British ports, with Germany, Belgium, France, Italy, Japan, 
China, India, San Francisco, Vancouver, New York and Monte- 
video, several important lines being subsidized by the countries 
to which they belong, notably Germany, France and Japan. 

Railways. — Almost the whole of the railway lines in Australia 
are the property of the state governments, and have been 
constructed and equipped wholly by borrowed capital. There 
were on the 30th of June 1905, 15,000 m. open for traffic, upon 
which nearly £135,000,000 had been expended. 

The railways are of different gauges, the standard narrow gauge 
of 4 ft. 8 j in. prevailing only in New South Wales; in Victoria the 
gauge is 5 ft. 3 in., in South Australia 5 ft. 3 in. and 3 ft. 6 in., and 
in the other states 3 ft. 6 in. Taking the year 1905, the gross earnings 
amounted to £11,892,262 ; the working expenses, exclusive of interest, 
£7.443.546; and the net earnings £4,448,716; the latter figure re- 
presents 3'3i% upon the capital expended upon construction and 
equipment ; in the subsequent year still better results were obtained. 
In several of the states, New South Wales and South Australia 
proper, the railways yield more than the interest paid by the govern- 
ment on the money borrowed for their construction. The earnings 
per train-mile vary greatly; but for all the lines the average is 
7s. id., and the working expenses about 4s. 5d., making the net 
earnings 2s. 8d. per train-mile. The ratio of receipts from coaching 
traffic to total receipts is about 41%, which is somewhat less than in 
the United Kingdom; but the proportion varies greatly amongst 
the states themselves, the more densely populated states approach- 
ing most nearly to the British standard. The tonnage of goods 
carried amounts to about 16,000,000 tons, or 4 tons per inhabitant, 
which must be considered fairly large, especially as no great pro- 
portion of the tonnage consists of minerals on which there is usually 
a low freightage. Excluding coal lines and other lines not open to 
general traffic, the length of railways in private hands is only 382 m. 
or about 2 \% of the total mileage open. Of this length, 277 m. are 
in Western Australia. The divergence of policy of that state from 
that pursued by the other states was caused by the inability of the 
government to construct lines, when the extension of the railway 
system was urgently needed in the interests of settlement. Private 
enterprise was, therefore, encouraged by liberal grants of land to 
undertake the work of construction; but the changed conditions of 
the state have now altered the state policy, and the government have 
already acquired one of the two trunk lines constructed by private 
enterprise, and it is not likely that any further concessions in regard 
to railway construction will be granted to private persons. 

Posts and Telegraphs. — The postal and telegraphic facilities offered 
by the various states are very considerable. There are some 6686 
post-offices throughout the Commonwealth, or about one office to 
every 600 persons. The letters carried amount to about 80 per head, 
the newspapers to 32 per head and the packets to 15 per head. 
The length of telegraph lines in use is 46,300 m., and the length of 
wire nearly three times that distance. In 1905 there were about 
11,000,000 telegraphic messages sent, which gives an average of 
2-7 messages per inhabitant. The postal services and the telegraphs 
are administered by the federal government. 

Banking. — Depositors in savings banks represent about twenty- 
nine in every hundred persons, and in 1906 the sum deposited 
amounted to £37,205,000 in the names of 1,152,000 persons. In 
ordinary banks the deposits amounted to £106,625,000, so that the 
total deposits stood at £143,830,000, equivalent to the very large 
sum of £34, 1 8s. per inhabitant. The coin and bullion held by the 
banks varies between 20 and 24 millions sterling and the note circu- 
lation is almost stationary at about 3J millions. 

Public Finance. — Australian public finance requires to be treated 
under the separate headings of Commonwealth and states finance. 
Under the Constitution Act the Commonwealth is given the control 
of the postal and telegraph departments, public defence and several 
other services, as well as the power of levying customs and excise 
duties; its powers of taxation are unrestricted, but so far no taxes 
have been imposed other than those just mentioned. The Common- 



wealth is empowered to retain one-fourth of the net revenue from 
customs and excise, the balance must be handed back to the states. 
This arrangement was to last until 1910. Including the total receipts 
derived from the customs, the Commonwealth revenue, during the 
year 1906, was made up as follows: — 

Customs and excise £8,999,485 

Posts, telegraphs, &c 2,824,182 

Other revenue 55.676 



£11,879,343 

The return made to the states was £7,385,731, so that the actual 
revenue disposed of by the Commonwealth was less by that amount, 
or £4,493,612. The expenditure was distributed as follows: — 



Customs collection 

Posts, telegraphs, &c. 

Defence 

Other expenditure 



Total . 



£261,864 

• 2,774,804 

949,286 
508,887 

• £4.494.841 



The states have the same powers of taxation as the Commonwealth 
except in regard to customs and excise, over which the Common- 
wealth has exclusive power, but the states are the owners of the 
crown lands, and the revenues derived from this source form an im- 
portant part of their income. The states have a total revenue, from 
sources apart from the Commonwealth, of £23,820,439, and if to 
this be added the return of customs duties made by the federal 
government, the total revenue is £31,206,170. Although the financial 
queries of the Commonwealth and the states are quite distinct, a
statement of the total revenue of the Australian Commonwealth 
and states is not without interest as showing the weight of taxation 
and the different sources from which revenue is obtained. For 1906 
the respective revenues were : — • 

Commonwealth £11.879,343 

States 23,820,439 



£35.699,782 



Direct taxation £3,200,000 

Indirect taxation ; customs and excise . 8,999,485 

Land revenue 3,500,000 

Post-office and telegraphs .... 2,824,182 

Railways, &c 13,650,000 

Other service 3,526,115 

The revenue from direct taxation is equal to 15s. iod. per inhabitant, 
from indirect taxation £2: 4: 6, and the total revenue from all 
sources £35,699,782, equal to £8 : 16 : 2 per inhabitant. The federal 
government has no public debt, but each of the six states has con- 
tracted debts which aggregate £237,000,000, equal to about £58, 8s. 
per inhabitant. The bulk of this indebtedness has been contracted 
for the purpose of constructing railways, tramways, water-supplies, 
and other revenue-producing works and services, and it is estimated 
that only 8% of the total indebtedness can be set down for unpro- 
ductive services. 

Information regarding Australian state finance will be found under 
the heading of each state. (T. A. C.) 

Aborigines 

The origin of the natives of Australia presents a difficult 
problem. The chief difficulty in deciding their ethnical relations 
is their remarkable physical difference from the neighbouring 
peoples. And if one turns from physical criteria to their manners 
and customs it is only to find fresh evidence of their isolation. 
While their neighbours, the Malays, Papuans and Polynesians, 
all cultivate the soil, and build substantial huts and houses, 
the Australian natives do neither. Pottery, common to Malays 
and Papuans, the bows and arrows of the latter, and the elaborate 
canoes of all three races, are unknown to the Australians. They 
then must be considered as representing an extremely primitive 
type of mankind, and it is necessary to look far afield for their 
prehistoric home. 

Wherever they came from, there is abundant evidence that 
their first occupation of the Australian continent must have 
been at a time so remote as to permit of no traditions. 
No record, no folk tales, as in the case of the Maoris 
of New Zealand, of their migration, are preserved by the 
Australians. True, there are legends and tales of tribal migra- 
tions and early tribal history, but nothing, as A. W. Howitt 
points out, which can be twisted into referring even indirectly 
to their first arrival. It is almost incredible there should be 
none, if the date of their arrival is to be reckoned as only dating 



ABORIGINES] 



AUSTRALIA 



955 



back some centuries. Again, while they differ physically from 
neighbouring races, while there is practically nothing in common 
between them and the Malays, the Polynesians, or the Papuan 
Melanesians, they agree in type so closely among themselves 
that they must be regarded as forming one race. Yet it is note- 
worthy that the languages of their several tribes are different. 
The occurrence of a large number of common roots proves them 
to be derived from one source, but the great variety of dialects — 
sometimes unintelligible between tribes separated by only a few 
miles — cannot be explained except by supposing a vast period 
to have elapsed since their first settlement. There is evidence 
in the languages, too, which supports the physical separation 
from their New Zealand neighbours and, therefore, from the 
Polynesian family of races. The numerals in use were limited. 
In some tribes there were only three in use, in most four. For 
the number " five " a word meaning " many " was employed. 
This linguistic poverty proves that the Australian tongue has 
no affinity to the Polynesian group of languages, where denary 
enumeration prevails: the nearest Polynesians, the Maoris, 
counting in thousands. Further evidence of the antiquity of 
Australian man is to be found in the strict observance of tribal 
boundaries, which would seem to show that the tribes must 
have been settled a long time in one place. 

A further difficulty is created by a consideration of the Tas- 
manian people, extinct since 1876. For the Tasmanians in 
many ways closely approximated to the Papuan type. They 
had coarse, short, woolly hair and Papuan features. They 
clearly had no racial affinities with the Australians. They did 
not possess the boomerang or woomerah, and they had no boats. 
When they were discovered, a mere raft of reeds in which they 
could scarcely venture a mile from shore was their only means of 
navigation. Yet while the Tasmanians are so distinctly separated 
in physique and customs from the Australians, the fauna and 
flora of Tasmania and Australia prove that at one time the two 
formed one continent, and it would take an enormous time for 
the formation of Bass Strait. How did the Tasmanians with 
their Papuan affinities get so far south on a continent inhabited 
by a race so differing from Papuans ? Did they get to Tasmania 
before or after its separation from the main continent? If 
before, why were they only found in the south ? It would have 
been reasonable to expect to find them sporadically all over 
Australia. If after, how did they get there at all? For it is 
impossible to accept the theory of one writer that they sailed or 
rowed round the continent — a journey requiring enormous 
maritime skill, which, according to the theory, they must have 
promptly lost. 

Four points are clear: (1) the Australians represent a distinct 
race; (2) they have no kinsfolk among the neighbouring races; 

(3) they have occupied the continent for a very long period; 

(4) it would seem that the Tasmanians must represent a still 
earlier occupation of Australia, perhaps before the Bass Strait 
existed. 

Several theories have been propounded by ethnologists. An 
attempt has been made to show that the Australians have close 
affinities with the African negro peoples, and certain resem- 
blances in language and in customs have been relied on. Sorcery, 
the scars raised on the body, the knocking out of teeth, circum- 
cision and rules as to marriage have been quoted; but many 
such customs are found among savage peoples far distant from 
each other and entirely unrelated. The alleged language 
similarities have broken down on close examination. A. R. 
Wallace is of the opinion that the Australians " are really of 
Caucasian type and are more nearly allied to ourselves than 
to the civilized Japanese or the brave and intelligent Zulus." 
He finds near kinsmen for them in the Ainus of Japan, the 
Khmers and Chams of Cambodia and among some of the Micro- 
nesian islanders who, in spite of much crossing, still exhibit 
marked Caucasic types. He regards the Australians as repre- 
senting the lowest and most primitive examples of this primitive 
Caucasic type, and he urges that they must have arrived in 
Australia at a time when their ancestors had no pottery, knew 
no agriculture, domesticated no animals, had no houses and 



used no bows and arrows. This theory has been supported by 
the investigations of Dr Klaatsch, of the university of Heidelberg, 
who would, however, date Australian ancestry still farther back, 
for his studies on the spot have convinced him that the Australians 
are " a generalized, not a specialized, type of humanity — that 
is to say, they are a very primitive people, with more of the 
common undeveloped characteristics of man, and less of the 
qualities of the specialized races of civilization." Dr Klaatsch's 
view is that they are survivals of a primitive race which inhabited 
a vast Antarctic continent of which South America, South 
Africa and Australia once formed a part, as evidenced by the 
identity of many species of birds and fish. He urges that the 
similarities of some of the primitive races of India and Africa 
to the aborigines of Australia are indications that they were 
peopled from one common stock. This theory, plausible and 
attractive as it is, and fitting in, as it does, with the acknowledged 
primitive character of the Australian blackfellow, overlooks, 
nevertheless, the Tasmanian difficulty. Why should a Papuan 
type be found in what was certainly once a portion of the 
Australian continent? The theory which meets this difficulty 
is that which has in its favour the greatest weight of evidence, 
viz. that the continent was first inhabited by a Papuan type of 
man who made his way thither from Flores and Timor, New 
Guinea and the Coral Sea. That in days so remote as to be un- 
dateable, a Dravidian people driven from their primitive home 
in the hills of the Indian Deccan made their way south via 
Ceylon (where they may to-day be regarded as represented by 
the Veddahs) and eventually sailed and drifted in their bark 
boats to the western and north-western shores of Australia. 
It is difficult to believe that they at first arrived in such numbers 
as at once to overwhelm the Papuan population. There were 
probably several migrations. What seems certain, if this theory 
is adopted, is that they did at last accumulate to an extent 
which permitted of their mastering the former occupiers of the 
soil, who were probably in very scattered and defenceless 
communities. 

In the slow process of time they drove them into the most 
southerly corner of Australia, just as the Saxons drove the 
Celts into Cornwall and the Welsh hills. Even if this Dravidian 
invasion is put subsequent to the Bass Strait forming, even if 
one allows the probability of much crossing between the two 
races at first, in time the hostilities would be renewed. With 
their earliest settlements on the north-north-west coasts, the 
Dravidians would probably tend to spread out north, north-east 
and east, and a southerly line of retreat: would be the most 
natural one for the Papuans. 1 When at last they were driven 
to the Strait they would drift over on rafts or in clumsy shallops; 
being thereafter left in peace to concentrate their race, then 
possibly only in an approximately pure state, in the island to 
which the Dravidians would not take the trouble to follow them, 
and where they would have centuries in which once more to fix 
their racial type and emphasize over again those differences, 
perhaps temporarily marred by crossing, which were found to 
exist on the arrival of the Whites. 

This Indo - Aryan origin for the Australian blackf ellows is 
borne out by their physique. In spite of their savagery they 
are admitted by those who have studied them to be far removed 
from the low or Simian type of man. Dr Charles Pickering 
(1805-1878), who studied the Australians on the spot, writes: 

1 In his Discoveries in Central Australia, E. T. Eyre has ingeniously 
attempted to reconstruct the routes taken by the Australians in 
their advance across the continent. He has relied, however, in his 
efforts to link the tribes together, too much on the prevalence or 
absence of such customs as circumcision — always very treacherous 
evidences — to allow of his hypothetical distribution being regarded 
very seriously. The migrations must have always been dependent 
upon physical difficulties, such as waterless tracts or mountain 
barriers. They were probably not definite massed movements, such 
as would permit of the survival of distinctive lines of custom between 
tribe and tribe; but rather spasmodic movements, sometimes of 
tribes or of groups, sometimes only of families or even couples, the 
first caused by tribal wars, the second to escape punishment for 
some offence against tribal law, such as the defiance of the rules as 
to clan-marriages. 



95 6 



AUSTRALIA 



[ABORIGINES 



" Strange as it may appear, I would refer to an Australian as 
the finest model of the human proportions I have ever met; in 
muscular development combining perfect symmetry, activity and 
strength, while his head might have compared with the antique 
bust of a philosopher." Huxley concluded, from descriptions, 
that " the Deccan tribes are indistinguishable from the Australian 
races." Sir W. W. Hunter states that the Dravidian tribes were 
driven southwards in Hindustan, and that the grammatical 
relations of their dialects are " expressed by suffixes," which is 
true as to the Australian languages. He states that Bishop 
Caldwell, 1 whom he calls " the great missionary scholar of the 
Dravidian tongue," showed that the south and western 
Australian tribes use almost the same words for " I, thou, he, we, 
you, as the Dravidian fishermen on the Madras coast." When 
in addition to all this it is found that physically the Dravidians 
resemble the Australians; that the boomerang is known among 
the wild tribes of the Deccan alone (with the doubtful exception 
of ancient Egypt) of all parts of the world except Australia, 
and that the Australian canoes are like those of the Dravidian 
coast tribes, it seems reasonable enough to assume that the 
Australian natives are. Dravidians, exiled in remote times from 
Hindustan, though when their migration took place and how 
they traversed the Indian Ocean must remain questions to which, 
by their very nature, there can be no satisfactory answer. 

The low stage of culture of the Australians when they reached 
their new home is thus accounted for, but their stagnation is 
remarkable, because they must have been frequently in contact 
with more civilized peoples. In the north of Australia there 
are traces of Malay and Papuan blood. That a far more advanced 
race had at one time a settlement on the north-west coast is 
indicated by the cave-paintings and sculptures discovered by 
Sir George Grey. In caves of the valley of the Glenelg river, 
north-west Australia, about 60 m. inland and 20 m. south of 
Prince Regent's river, are representations of human heads and 
bodies, apparently of females clothed to the armpits, but all 
the faces are without any indication of mouths. The heads 
are surrounded with a kind of head-dress or halo and one wears 
a necklace. They are drawn in red, blue and yellow. The figures 
are almost life-size. Rough sculptures, too, were found, and two' 
large square mounds formed of loose stones, and yet perfect 
parallelograms in outline, placed due east and west. In the same 
district Sir George Grey noticed among the blackfellows people 
he describes as " almost white." On the Gascoyne river, too, 
were seen natives of an olive colour, quite good-looking; and 
in the neighbourhood of Sydney rock-carvings have been also 
found. All this points to a temporary occupation by a race at 
a far higher stage of culture than any known Australians, who 
were certainly never capable of executing even the crude works 
of art described. 

Physically the typical Australian is the equal of the average 
European in height, but is inferior in muscular development, 
Physique. tne ^ e S s an d arms being of a leanness which is often 
emphasized by an abnormal corpulence. The bones 
are delicately formed, and there is the lack of calf usual in black 
races. The skull is abnormally thick and the cerebral capacity 
small. The head is long and somewhat narrow, the forehead 
broad and receding, with overhanging brows, the eyes sunken, 
large and black, the nose thick and very broad at the nostrils. 
The mouth is large and the lips thick but not protuberant. 
The teeth are large, white and strong. In old age they appear 
much ground down; particularly is this the case with women, 
who chew the different kinds of fibres, of which they make nets 
and bags. The lower jaw is heavy; the cheekbones somewhat 
high, and the chin small and receding. The neck is thicker and 
shorter than that of most Europeans. The colour of the skin 
is a deep copper or chocolate, never sooty black. When born, 
the Australian baby is of a much lighter colour than its parents 
and remains so for about a week. The hair is long, black or very 
dark auburn, wavy and sometimes curly, but never woolly, 
and the men have luxuriant beards and whiskers, often of an 
auburn tint, while the whole body inclines to hairiness. On 
1 The Languages of India (1875). 



the Balonne river, Queensland, Baron Mikluho Maclay found 
a group of hairless natives. The head hair is usually matted 
with grease and dirt, but when clean is fine and glossy. The 
skin gives out an objectionable odour, owing to the habit of 
anointing the body with fish-oils, but the true fetor of the negro 
is lacking in the Australian. The voices of the blackfellows are 
musical. Their mental faculties, though inferior to those of the 
Polynesian race, are not contemptible. They have much aciite- 
ness of perception for the relations of individual objects, but little 
power of generalization. No word exists in their language for 
such general terms as tree, bird or fish; yet they have invented 
a name for every species of vegetable and animal they know. 
The grammatical structure of some north Australian languages 
has a considerable degree of refinement. The verb presents a 
variety of conjugations, expressing nearly all the moods and 
tenses of the Greek. There is a dual, as well as a plural form 
in the declension of verbs, nouns, pronouns and adjectives. 
The distinction of genders is not marked, except in proper names 
of men and women. All parts of speech, except adverbs, are 
declined by terminational inflections. There are words for the 
elementary numbers, one, two, three; but " four " is usually 
expressed by " two-two." They have no idea of decimals. The 
number and diversity of separate languages is bewildering. 

In disposition the Australians are a bright, laughter-loving 
folk, but they are treacherous, untruthful and hold human life 
cheaply. They have no great physical courage. They character 
are mentally in the condition of children. None of 
them has an idea of what the West calls morality, except the 
simple one of right or wrong arising out of property. A wife 
will be beaten without mercy for unfaithfulness to her husband, 
but the same wife will have had to submit to the first-night 
promiscuity, a widespread revel which Roth shows is a regular 
custom in north-west-central Queensland. A husband claims 
his wife as his absolute property, but he has no scruple in handing 
her over for a time to another man. There is, however, no 
proof that anything like community of women or unlimited 
promiscuity exists anywhere. It would be wrong, however, to 
conclude that moral considerations have led up to this state of 
things. Of sexual morality, in the everyday sense of the word, 
there is none. In his treatment of women the aboriginal may 
be ranked lower than even the Fuegians. Yet the Australian 
is capable of strong affections, and the blind (of whom there 
have always been a great number) are cared for, and are often 
the best fed in a tribe. 

The Australians when first discovered were found to be 
living in almost a prehistoric simplicity. Their food was the 
meat they killed in the chase, or seeds and roots, Manners. 
grubs or reptiles. They never, in any situation, 
cultivated the soil for any kind of food-crop. They never 
reared any kind of cattle, or kept any domesticated animal 
except the dog, which probably came over with them in their 
canoes. They nowhere built permanent dwellings, but contented 
themselves with mere hovels for temporary shelter. They 
neither manufactured nor possessed any chattels beyond such 
articles of clothing, weapons, ornaments and utensils as they 
might carry on their persons, or in the family store-bag for 
daily use. In most districts both sexes are entirely nude. 
Sometimes in the south during the cold season they wear a cloak 
of skin or matting, fastened with a skewer, but open on the 
right-hand side. 

When going through the bush they sometimes wear an apron 
of skins, for protection merely. No headgear is worn, except 
sometimes a net to confine the hair, a bunch of feathers, or the 
tails of small animals. The breast or back, of both sexes, is 
usually tattooed, or rather, scored with rows of hideous raised 
scars, produced by deep gashes made at puberty. Their dwellings 
for the most part are either bowers, formed of the branches of 
trees, or hovels of piled logs, loosely covered with grass or bark, 
which they can erect in an hour, wherever they encamp. But 
some huts of a more substantial form were seen by Captain 
Matthew Flinders on the south-east coast in 1799, and by 
Captain King and Sir T. Mitchell on the north-east, where they 



ABORIGINES] 



AUSTRALIA 



95 



no longer appear. The ingenuity of the race is mostly exhibited 
in the manufacture of their weapons of warfare and the chase. 
While the use of the bow and arrow does not seem to have 
occurred to them, the spear and axe are in general use, commonly 
made of hard-wood; the hatchets of stone, and the javelins 
pointed with stone or bone. The characteristic weapon of the 
Australian is the boomerang (q.v.). Their nets, made by women, 
either of the tendons of animals or the fibres of plants, will 
catch and hold the kangaroo or the emu, or the very large fish 
of Australian rivers. Canoes of bent bark, for the inland waters, 
are hastily prepared at need; but the inlets and straits of the 
north-eastern sea-coast are navigated by larger canoes and 
rafts of a better construction. As to food, they are omnivorous. 
In central Queensland and elsewhere, snakes, both venomous 
and harmless, are eaten, the head being first carefully smashed 
to pulp with a stone. 

The tribal organization of the Australians was based on that 
of the family. There were no hereditary or formally elected 
chiefs, nor was there any vestige of monarchy. The 
/ .. affairs of a tribe were ruled by a council of men past 
tioa. middle age. Each tribe occupied a recognized territory, 

averaging perhaps a dozen square miles, and used a 
common dialect. This district was subdivided between the 
chief heads of families. Each family, or family group, had a 
dual organization which has been termed (i) the Social, (2) the 
Local. The first was matriarchal, inheritance being reckoned 
through the mother. No territorial association was needed. 
All belonged to the same totem or totemic class, and might be 
scattered throughout the tribe, though subject to the same 
marriage laws. The second was patriarchal and of a strictly 
territorial nature. A family or group of families had the same 
hunting-ground, which was seldom changed, and descended 
through the males. Thus, the sons inherited their fathers' 
hunting-ground, but bore their mothers' name and therewith 
the right to certain women for wives. The Social or matriarchal 
took precedence of the Local or patriarchal organization. In 
many cases it arranged the assemblies and ceremonial of the 
tribe; it regulated marriage, descent and relationship; it 
ordered blood feuds, it prescribed the rites of hospitality and so 
on. Nevertheless the Local side of tribal life in time tended 
to overwhelm the Social and to organize the tribe irrespective 
of matriarchy, and inclined towards hereditary chieftainship. 

The most intricate and stringent rules existed as to marriage 
within and without the totemic inter-marrying classes. There 
is said to be but one exception to the rule that marriage must 
be contracted outside the totem name. This exception wa,s 
discovered by Messrs Spencer and Gillen among the Arunta of 
central Australia, some allied septs, and their nearest neighbours 
to the north, the Kaitish. This tribe may legally marry within 
the totem, but always avoids such unions. Even in casual 
amours these class laws were invariably observed, and the 
young man or woman who defied them was punished, he with 
death, she with spearing or beating. At the death of a man, 
his widows passed to his brother of the same totem class. Such 
a system gave to the elder men of a tribe a predominant position, 
and generally respect was shown to the aged. Laws and penalties 
in protection of property were enforced by the tribe. Thus, 
among some tribes of Western Australia the penalty for abducting 
another's wife was to stand with leg extended while each male 
of the tribe stuck his spear into it. Laws, however, did not 
protect the women, who were the mere chattels of their lords. 
Stringent rules, too, governed the food of women and the youth 
of both sexes, and it was only after initiation that boys were 
allowed to eat of all the game the forest provided. In every 
case of death from disease or unknown causes sorcery was 
suspected and an inquest held, at which the corpse was asked 
by each relative in succession the name of the murderer. This 
formality having been gone through, the flight of the first bird 
which passed over the body was watched, the direction being 
regarded as that in which the sorcerer must be sought. Some- 
times the nearest relative sleeps with his head on the corpse, 
in the belief that he will dream of the murderer. The most 



/ 

sacred duty an Australian had to perform was the avenging of 
the death of a kinsman, and he was the object of constant 
taunts and insults till he had done so. Cannibalism was almost 
universal, either in the case of enemies killed in battle or when 
animal food was scarce. In the Luritcha tribe it was customary 
when a child was in weak health to kill a younger and healthy 
one and feed the weakling on its flesh. Cannibalism seems 
also to have sometimes been in the nature of a funeral observance, 
in honour of the deceased, of whom the relatives reverently 
ate portions. 

They had no special forms of religious worship, and no idols. 
The evidence on the question of whether they believed in a 
Supreme Being is very contradictory. Messrs Spencer R e iM oa 
and Gillen appear to think that such rudimentary idea 
of an All-Father as has, it is thought, been detected among the 
blackfellows is an exotic growth fostered by contact with mis- 
sionaries. A. W. Howitt and Dr Roth appear to have satisfied 
themselves of a belief, common to most tribes, in a mythic being 
(he has different names in different tribes) having some of the 
attributes of a Supreme Deity. But Mr Howitt finds in this 
being " no trace of a divine nature, though under favourable 
conditions the beliefs might have developed into an actual 
religion." Other authorities suggest that it is going much too 
far to deny the existence of religion altogether, and instance as 
proof of the divinity of the supra-normal anthropomorphic 
beings of the Baiame class, the fact that the Yuin and cognate 
tribes dance around the image of Daramulun (their equivalent of 
Baiame) and the medicine men " invocate his name." A good 
deal perhaps depends on each observer's view of what religion 
really is. The Australians believed in spirits, generally of an 
evil nature, and had vague notions of an after-life. The only 
idea of a god known to be entertained by them seems to be that of 
the Euahlayi and Kamilaori tribe, Baiame, a gigantic old man 
lying asleep for ages, with his head resting on his arm, which is 
deep in the sand. He is expected one day to awake and eat up 
the world. Researches go to show that Baiame has his counter- 
part in other tribes, the myth varying greatly in detail, But the 
Australians are distinguished by possessing elaborate initiatory 
ceremonies. Circumcision of one or two kinds was usual in the 
north and south, but not in Western Australia or on the Murray 
river. In South Australia boys had to undergo three stages of 
initiation in a place which women were forbidden to approach. 
At about ten they were covered with blood from head to foot, 
several elder men bleeding themselves for the purpose. At about 
twelve or fourteen circumcision took place and (or sometimes 
as an alternative on the east coast) a front tooth was knocked 
out, to the accompaniment of the booming of the bullroarer 
(q.v.). At the age of puberty the lad was tattooed or scarred 
with gashes cut in back, shoulders, arms and chest, and the 
septum of the nose was pierced. The gashes varied in patterns 
for the different tribes. Girls, too, were scarred at puberty and 
had teeth knocked out, &c. The ceremonies — known to the 
Whites under the native generic term for initiatory rites, Bora 
— were much the same throughout Australia. Polygamy was 
rare, due possibly to the scarcity of women. 1 Infanticide was 
universally recognized. The mode of disposing of the dead 
varied. Among some tribes a circular grave was dug and the 
body placed in it with its face towards the east, and a. high 
mound covered with bark or thatch raised over it. In New 
South Wales the body is often burned and the ashes buried. 
On the Lower Murray the body is placed on a platform of sticks 
and left to decay. Young children are often not buried for 
months, but are carried about by their mothers. At the funeral 
of men there is much mourning, the female relatives cutting or 
tearing their hair off and plastering their faces with clay, but for 
women no public ceremonies took place. 

The numbers of the native Australians are steadily diminishing. 
It was estimated that when first visited by Europeans the native 

1 The existence of "Group Marriage "is a much-controverted 
point. This custom, which has been denned as the invasion of 
actual marriage by allotting permanent paramours, is confined to 
a special set of tribes. 



95 8 



AUSTRALIA 



[DISCOVERY 



population did not much exceed 200,000. A remnant of the race 
exists in each of the provinces, while a few tribes still wander 
over the interior. 

Authorities. — Dr A. W. Howitt, The Native Tribes of South-east 
Australia (1904) and On the Organization of Australian Tribes (1889) ; 
G. T. Bettany, The Red, Brown and Black Men of Australia (1890); 
B. Spencer and F. J. Gillen, Native Tribes of Central Australia (1899) ; 
The Northern Tribes of Central Australia (London, 1904) ; E. M. Curr, 
The Australian Race (3 vols.,1886-1887); G. W. Rusden, History of 
Australia (1897); Australasia, British Empire. Series (Kegan Paul 
& Co., 1900); A. R. Wallace, Australasia (1880, new ed,, 2 vols., 
1893-1895); Rev. Lorimer Fison and Dr A. W. Howitt, Kamilaroi 
arid Kurnai, Group Marriage and Relationship (Melbourne, 1880); 
H. Ling Roth, Queensland Aborigines (Brisbane, 1897) '< Carl Lum- 
holtz, Among Cannibals (1889); Walter E. Roth, Ethnological 
Studies among the North-west-central Queensland A borigines (London, 
1897) ; Mrs K. Langloh Parker, Euahlayi Tribes (1905) ; F. J. Gillen, 
Notes on Manners and Customs of the Aborigines of the Macdonnell 
Ranges belonging to the Arunta Tribe; J. E. Frazer, " The Beginnings 
of Religion and Totemism among the Australian Aborigines," 
Fortnightly Review, July 1905; N. W. Thomas, Native Tribes of 
Australia (1907). (C. Ar.) 

History 
1. The Discovery of Australia. 

It is impossible to say who were the first discoverers of 
Australia, although there is evidence that the Chinese had some 
knowledge of the continent so far back as the 13th century. 
The Malays, also, would seem to have been acquainted with the 
northern coast; while Marco Polo, who visited the East at the 
close of the 13th century, makes reference to the reputed existence 
of a great southern continent. There is in existence a map, 
dedicated to Henry VIII. of England, on which a large southern 
land is shown, and the tradition of a Terra Australis appears to 
have been current for a long period before it enters into authentic 
history. 

In 1503 a French navigator named Binot Paulmyer, sieur de 
Gonneville, was blown out of his course, and landed on a large 
island, which was claimed to be the great southern land of tradi- 
tion, although Flinders and other authorities are inclined to 
think that it must have been Madagascar. Some French 
authorities confidently put forward a claim that Guillaume le 
Testu, of Provence, sighted the continent in 1531- The Portu- 
guese also advance claims to be the first discoverers of Australia, 
but so far the evidence cannot be said to establish their preten- 
sions. As early as 1597 the Dutch historian, Wytfliet, describes 
the Australis Terra as the most southern of all lands, and proceeds 
to give some circumstantial particulars respecting its geographical 
relation to New Guinea, venturing the opinion that, were it 
thoroughly explored, it would be regarded as a fifth part of the 
world. 

Early in the 17th century Philip III. of Spain sent out an 
expedition from Callao, in Peru, for the purpose of searching for 
a southern continent. The little fleet comprised three 
vessels, with the Portuguese pilot, De Quiros, as 
navigator, and De Torres as admiral or military commander. 
They left Callao on the 21st of December 1605, and in the 
following year discovered the island now known as Espiritu 
Santo, one of the New Hebrides group, which De Quiros, under 
the impression that it was indeed the land of which he was in 
search, named La Austrialia del Espiritu Santo. Sickness and 
discontent led to a mutiny on De Quiros' vessel, and the crew, 
overpowering their officers during the night, forced the captain 
to navigate his ship to Mexico. Thus, abandoned by his consort, 
De Torres, compelled to bear up for the Philippines to refit, 
discovered and sailed through the strait that bears his name, 
and may even have caught a glimpse of the northern coast of the 
Australian continent. His discovery was not, however, made 
known until 1792, when Dalrymple rescued his name from 
oblivion, bestowing it upon the passage which separates New 
Guinea from Australia. De Quiros returned to Spain to re-engage 
in the work of petitioning the king to despatch an expedition 
for the purpose of prosecuting the discovery of the Terra 
Australis. He was finally successful in his petitions, but died 
before accomplishing his work, and was buried in an unknown 



De Toms. 



grave in Panama, never being privileged to set his foot upon the 
continent the discovery of which was the inspiration of his Mfe. 

During the same year in which De Torres sailed through the 
strait destined to make him famous, a little Dutch vessel called 
the " Duyfken," or " Dove," set sail from Bantam, 
in Java, on a voyage of discovery. This ship entered coverers " 
the Gulf of Carpentaria, and sailed south as far as Cape 
Keerweer, or Turn-again. Here some of the crew landed, but, 
being attacked by natives, made no attempt to explore the 
country. In 1616 Dirk Hartog discovered the island bearing 
his name. In 1622 the " Leeuwin," or " Lioness," made some 
discoveries on the south-west coast; and during the following 
year the yachts " Pera " and " Arnheim " explored the shores 
of the Gulf of Carpentaria. Arnheim Land, a portion of the 
Northern Territory, still appears on many maps as a memento 
of this voyage. Among other early Dutch discoverers were 
Edel; Pool, in 1629, in the Gulf of Carpentaria; Nuyts, 
in the " Guide Zeepaard," along the southern coast, which he 
called, after himself, Nuyts Land; De Witt; and Pelsaert, 
in the " Batavia." Pelsaert was wrecked on Houtman's 
Abrolhos; his crew mutinied, and he and his party suffered 
greatly from want of water. The record of his voyage is interest- 
ing from the fact that he was the first to carry back to Europe 
an authentic account of the western coast of Australia, which 
he described in any but favourable terms. It is to Dutch 
navigators in the early portion of the 17 th century that we owe 
the first really authentic accounts of the western coast and 
adjacent islands, and in many instances the names given by these 
mariners to prominent physical features are still retained. By 
1665 the Dutch possessed rough charts of almost the whole 
of the western littoral, while to the mainland itself they had 
given the name of New Holland. Of the Dutch discoverers, 
Pelsaert was the only one who made any detailed observations 
of the character of the country inland, and it may here be re- 
marked that his journal contains the first notice and description 
of the kangaroo that has come down to us. 

In 1642 Abel Janszoon Tasman sailed on a voyage of discovery 
from Batavia, the headquarters of the governor and council 
of the Dutch East Indies, under whose auspices the expedition 
was undertaken. He was furnished with a yacht, the " Heems- 
kirk," and a fly-boat, the " Zeehaen " (or " Sea Hen "), under 
the command of Captain Jerrit Jansen. He left Batavia on 
what has been designated by Dutch historians the " Happy 
Voyage," on the 14th of August 1642. After a visit to the 
Mauritius, then a Dutch possession, Tasman bore away to the 
south-east, and on the 24th of November sighted the western 
coast of the land which he named Van Diemen's Land, in honour 
of the governor under whose directions he was acting. The 
honour was later transferred to the discoverer himself, and the 
island is now known as Tasmania. Tasman doubled the southern 
extremity of Van Diemen's Land and explored the east coast 
for some distance. The ceremony of hoisting a flag and taking 
possession of the country in the name of- the government of the 
Netherlands was actually performed, but the description of the 
wildness of the country, and of the fabulous giants by which 
Tasman's sailors believed it to be inhabited, deterred the Dutch 
from occupying the island, and by the international principle 
of " non-user " it passed from their hands. Resuming his voyage 
in an easterly direction, Tasman sighted the west coast of 
the South Island of New Zealand on the 13th of December of the 
same year, and describes the coast-line as consisting of " high 
mountainous country." 

The first English navigator to sight the Australian continent 
was William Dampier, who made a visit to these shores in 1688, 
as supercargo of the " Cygnet," a trader whose crew 
had turned buccaneers. On his return to England he 
published an account of his voyage, which resulted in his being 
sent out in the " Roebuck " in 1699 to prosecute his discoveries 
further. To him we owe the exploration of the coast for about 
900 m. — from Shark's Bay to Dampier's Archipelago, and 
thence to Roebuck Bay. He appears to have landed in several 
places in search of water. His account of the country was 



Dampier. 



DISCOVERY] 



AUSTRALIA 



959 



Cook. 



quite as unfavourable as Pelsaert's. He described it as barren 
and sterile, and almost devoid of animals, the only one of any 
importance somewhat resembling a raccoon — a strange creature, 
which advanced by great bounds or leaps instead of walking, 
using only its hind legs, and covering 1 2 or 1 5 f t. at a time. The 
reference is, of course, to the kangaroo, which Pelsaert had also 
remarked and quaintly described some sixty years previously. 

During the interval elapsing between Dampier's two voyages, 
an accident led to the closer examination of the coasts of Western 
Australia by the Dutch. In 1684 a vessel had sailed from 
Holland for the Dutch possessions in the East Indies, and after 
rounding the Cape of Good Hope, she was never again heard of. 
Some twelve years afterwards the East India Company fitted 
out an expedition under the leadership of Commander William 
de Vlamingh, with the object of searching for any traces of the 
lost vessel on the western shores of New Holland. Towards the 
close of the year 1696 this expedition reached the island of 
Rottnest, which was thoroughly explored, and early the following 
year a landing party discovered and named the Swan river. 
The vessels then proceeded northward without finding any traces 
of the object of their search, but, at the same time, making fairly 
accurate charts of the coast-line. 

The great voyage of Captain James Cook, in 1760-1770, was 
primarily undertaken for the purposes of observing the transit 
of Venus, but he was also expressly commissioned 
to ascertain " whether the unexplored part of the 
southern hemisphere be only an immense mass of water, or 
contain another continent." H.M.S. " Endeavour," the vessel 
fitted out for the voyage, was a small craft of 370 tons, carrying 
twenty-two guns, and built originally for a collier, with a view 
rather to strength than to speed. Chosen by Cook himself, 
she was renamed the " Endeavour," in allusion to the great work 
which her commander was setting out to achieve. Mr Charles 
Green was commissioned to conduct the astronomical observa- 
tions, and Sir Joseph Banks and Dr Solander were appointed 
botanists to the expedition. After successfully observing the 
transit from the island of Tahiti, or Otaheite, as Cook wrote it, 
the " Endeavour's " head was turned south, and then north-west, 
beating about the Pacific in search of the eastern coast of the 
great continent whose western shores had been so long known 
to the Dutch. On the 6th of October 1769 the coast of New 
Zealand was sighted, and two days later Cook cast anchor in 
Poverty Bay, so named from the inhospitality and hostility 
of the natives. 

After voyaging westward for nearly three weeks, Cook, on the 
19th of April 1770, sighted the eastern coast of Australia at a 
point which he named after his lieutenant, who discovered it, 
Point Hicks, and which modern geographers identify with 
Cape Everard. 

The " Endeavour " then coasted northward, and after passing 
and naming Mount Dromedary, the Pigeon House, Point Up- 
right, Cape St George and Red Point, Botany Bay was discovered 
on the 28th of April 1770, and as it appeared to offer a suitable 
anchorage, the " Endeavour " entered the bay and dropped 
anchor. The ship brought-to opposite a group of natives, 
who were cooking over a fire. The great navigator and his crew, 
unacquainted with the character of the Australian aborigines, 
were not a little astonished that these natives took no notice 
of them or their proceedings. Even the splash of the anchor in 
the water, and the noise of the cable running out through the 
hawse-hole, in no way disturbed them at their occupation, or 
caused them to evince the slightest curiosity. But as the captain 
of the " Endeavour " ordered out the pinnace and prepared to 
land, the natives threw off their nonchalance; for on the boat 
approaching the shore, two men, each armed with a bundle of 
spears, presented themselves on a projecting rock and made 
threatening signs to the strangers. It is interesting to note that 
the ingenious wommera, or throw-stick, which is peculiar to 
Australia, was first observed on this occasion. As the men were 
evidently determined to oppose any attempt at landing, a 
musket was discharged between them, in the hope that they 
would be frightened by the noise, but it produced no effect 



beyond causing one of them to drop his bundle of spears, of 
which, however, he immediately repossessed himself, and with his 
comrade resumed the same menacing attitude. At last one cast 
a stone towards the boat, which earned him a charge of small 
shot in the leg. Nothing daunted, the two ran back into the bush, 
and presently returned furnished with shields made of bark, 
with which to protect themselves from the firearms of the crew. 
Such intrepidity is certainly worthy of passing notice. Unlike 
the American Indians, who supposed Columbus and his crew 
to be supernatural beings, and their ships in some way endowed 
with life, and were thrown into convulsions of terror by the first 
discharge of firearms which they witnessed, these Australians 
were neither excited to wonder by the ship nor overawed by 
the superior number and unknown weapons of the strangers. 
Cook examined the bay in the pinnace, and landed several times; 
but by no endeavour could he induce the natives to hold any 
friendly communication with him. The well-known circumstance 
of the great variety of new plants here obtained, from which 
Botany Bay derives its name, should not be passed over. Before 
quitting the bay the ceremony was performed of hoisting the 
Union Jack, first on the south shore, and then near the north 
head, formal possession of the territory being thus taken for the 
British crown. During the sojourn in Botany Bay the crew had 
to perform the painful duty of burying a comrade — a seaman 
named Forby Sutherland, who was in all probability the first 
British subject whose body was committed to Australian soil. 

After leaving Botany Bay, Cook sailed northward. He saw 
and named Port Jackson, but forbore to enter the finest natural 
harbour in Australia. Broken Bay and other inlets, and several 
headlands, were also seen and named, but the vessel did not 
come to an anchor till Moreton Bay was reached, although the 
wind. prevented Cook from entering this harbour. Still sailing 
northward, taking notes as he proceeded for a rough chart of the 
coast, and landing at Bustard and Keppel Bays and the Bay of 
Inlets, Cook passed over 1300 m. without the occurrence of any 
event worthy of being chronicled, till suddenly one night at ten 
o'clock the water was found to shoal, without any sign of 
breakers or land. While Cook was speculating on the cause of 
this phenomenon, and was in the act of ordering out the boats 
to take soundings, the " Endeavour " struck heavily, and fell 
over so much that the guns, spare cables, and other heavy gear 
had at once to be thrown overboard to lighten the ship. As 
day broke, attempts were made to float the vessel off with the 
morning tide; but these were unsuccessful. The water was 
rising so rapidly in the hold that with four pumps constantly 
going the crew could hardly keep it in check. At length one of 
the midshipmen suggested the device of " fothering," which he 
had seen practised in the West Indies. This consists of passing 
a sail, attached to cords, and charged with oakum, wool, and 
other materials, under the vessel's keel, in such a manner that 
the suction of the leak may draw the canvas into the aperture, 
and thus partially stop the vent. This was performed with great 
success, and the vessel was floated off with the evening tide. 
The land was soon after made near the mouth of a small stream, 
which Cook called, after the ship, the Endeavour river. A 
headland close by he named Cape Tribulation. The ship was 
steered into the river, and there careened and thoroughly 
repaired. Cook having completed the survey of the east coast, 
to which he gave the name of New South Wales, sighted and 
named Cape York, the northernmost point of Australia, and 
took final possession of his discoveries northward from 38 S. 
to io| c S., on a spot which he named Possession Island, thence 
returning to England by way of Torres Straits and the Indian 
Ocean. 

The great navigator's second voyage, undertaken in 1772, 
with the "Resolution" and the "Adventure," is of less im- 
portance. The vessels became separated, and both at different 
times visited New Zealand. Captain Tobias Furneaux, in the 
" Adventure," also found his way to Storm Bay in Tasmania. 
In 1777, while on his way to search for a north-east passage 
between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, Cook again touched 
at the coast of Tasmania and New Zealand. 



960 



AUSTRALIA 



[EXPLORATION 



On his first voyage, in 1770, Cook had some grounds for the 
belief that Van Diemen's Land, as Tasmania was then called, 
was a separate island. The observations of Captain Furneaux, 
however, did not strengthen this belief, and when making his 
final voyage, the great navigator appears to have definitely 
concluded that it was part of the mainland of Australia. This 
continued to be the opinion of geographers until 1798, when 
Bass discovered the strait which bears his name. The next 
recorded expedition is a memorable one in the annals of Australian 
history — the despatch of a British colony to the shores of 
Botany Bay. The fleet sailed in May 1787, and arrived off the 
Australian coast early in the following January. 

2. Inland Exploration. 

For a period of twenty-five years after the first establishment 
of a British settlement in Australia, the colonists were only 
acquainted with the country along the coast extending north- 
wards about 70 m. from Sydney and about a like distance to the 
south and shut in to the west by the Blue Mountain range, 
forming a narrow strip not more than 50 m. wide at its broadest 
part. 

The Blue Mountains attain a height of between 3000 and 
4000 ft. only, but they are intersected with precipitous ravines 
1500 ft. deep, which baffled every effort to reach the interior 
until in 1813, when a summer of severe drought had made it of 
vital importance to find new pastures, three of the colonists, 
Messrs Blaxland, Lawson and Wentworth, more fortunate than 
their predecessors in exploration, after crossing the Nepean 
river at Emu Plains and ascending the Dividing Range, were 
able to reach a position enabling them to obtain a view of the 
grassy valley of the Fish river, which lies on the farther side 
of the Dividing Range. The western descent of the mountains 
appeared to the explorers comparatively easy, and they returned 
to report their discovery. A line of road was constructed 
across the mountains as far as the Macquarie river by the 
surveyor, Mr Evans, and the town of Bathurst laid out. This 
marks the beginning of the occupation of the interior of the 
continent. Some small expeditions were made from Bathurst, 
resulting in the discovery of the Lachlan, and in 1816 the first 
of the great exploration expeditions of Australia was fitted out 
under Lieutenant Oxley, R.N. Oxley was accompanied 
y ' by Mr Evans and Mr Allan Cunningham the botanist, 
and the object of his expedition was to trace the course of the 
Lachlan in a westerly direction. Oxley traced the river until 
it lost itself in the swamps east of 147 E., then crossing the 
river he traversed the country between the Lachlan and Murrum- 
bidgee as far as 34 S. and 144 30' E. On his return journey 
Oxley again crossed the Lachlan about 160 m., measured along 
the river, below the point where he left it on his journey south. 
Continuing in a north-easterly direction Oxley struck the 
Macquarie river at a place he called Wellington, and from this 
place in the following year he organized a second expedition in 
hopes of discovering an inland sea. He was, however, dis- 
appointed in this, as after descending the course of the Macquarie 
below Mount Harris, he found that the river ended in an immense 
swamp overgrown with reeds. Oxley now turned aside — led by 
Mr Evans's report of the country eastward — crossed the Arbuth- 
not range, and traversing the Liverpool Plains, and ascending 
the Peel and Cockburn rivers to the Blue Mountains, gained 
sight of the open sea, which he reached at Port Macquarie. A 
valuable extension of geographical knowledge had been gained 
by this circuitous journey of more than 800 m. Yet its result 
was a disappointment to those who had looked for means of 
inland navigation by the Macquarie river, and by its supposed 
issue in a mediterranean sea. 

During the next two or three years public attention was 
occupied with Captain King's maritime explorations of the 
north-west coast in three successive voyages, and by explorations 
of Western Australia in 182 1. These steps were followed by the 
foundation of a settlement on Melville Island, in the extreme 
north, which, however, was soon abandoned. In 1823 Lieutenant 
Oxley proceeded to Moreton Bay and Port Curtis, the first place 



Darling. 



500 m., the other 690 m. north of Sydney, to choose the site of a 
new penal establishment. From a shipwrecked English sailor 
he met with, who had lived with the savages, he heard of the 
river Brisbane. About the same time, in the opposite direction, 
south-west of Sydney, a large extent of the interior was revealed. 
Messrs Hamilton Hume and Hovell set out from Lake George, 
crossed the Murrumbidgee, and, after following the river for a 
short distance, struck south, skirting the foothills of what are 
now known as the Australian Alps until they reached a fine 
river, which was called the Hume after the leader's father. 
Crossing the Murray at Albury, the explorers, bearing to the 
south-west, skirted the western shore of Port Philip and reached 
the sea-coast near where the town of Geelong now stands. In 
1827 and the two following years, Cunningham prosecuted 
instructive explorations on both sides of the Liverpool range, 
between the upper waters of the Hunter and those of the Peel 
and other tributaries of the Brisbane north of New South Wales. 
Some of his discoveries, including those of Pandora's Pass and 
the Darling Downs, were of great practical utility. 

By this time much had thus been done to obtain an acquaint- 
ance with the eastern parts of the Australian continent, although 
the problem of what could become of the large rivers 
flowing north-west and south-west into the interior 
was still unsolved. With a view to determine this question, 
Governor Sir Ralph Darling, in the year 1828, sent out the ex- 
pedition under Captain Charles Sturt, who, proceeding first to 
the marshes at the end of the Macquarie river, found his progress 
checked by the dense mass of reeds in that quarter. He therefore 
turned westward, and struck a large river, with many affluents, 
to which he gave the name of the Darling. This river, flowing 
from north-east to south-west, drains the marshes in which the 
Macquarie and other streams from the south appeared to be lost. 
The course of the Murrumbidgee, a deep and rapid river, was 
followed by the same eminent explorer in his second expedition 
in 1 83 1 with a more satisfactory result. He travelled on this 
occasion nearly 2000 m., and discovered that both the Murrum- 
bidgee, carrying with it the waters of the Lachlan morass, and 
likewise the Darling, from a more northerly region, finally joined 
another and larger river. This stream, the Murray, in the upper 
part of its course runs in a north-westerly direction, but after- 
wards turning southwards, almost at a right angle, expands into 
Lake Alexandrina on the south coast, about 60 m. south-east of 
the town of Adelaide, and finally enters the sea at Encounter Bay 
in E. long. 139°. 

After gaining a practical solution of the problem of the destina- 
tion of the westward-flowing rivers, Sir Thomas Mitchell, in 1833, 
led an expedition northward to the upper branches 
of the Darling; the party met with a sad disaster in 
the death of Richard Cunningham, brother of the eminent 
botanist, who was murdered by the blacks near the Bogan river. 
The expedition reached the Darling on the 25th of May 1833, 
and after establishing a depot at Fort Bourke, Mitchell traced 
the Darling southwards for 300 m. until he was certain the river 
was identical with that reported by Sturt as joining the Murray 
about 142 E. 

Meantime, from the new colony of Adelaide, South Australia, 
on the shores of Gulf St Vincent, a series of adventurous journeys 
to the north and to the west was begun by Mr Eyre, 
who explored a country very difficult of access. In 
1840 he performed a feat of extraordinary personal daring, 
travelling all the way along the barren sea-coast of the Great 
Australian Bight, from Spencer Gulf to King George Sound. 
Eyre also explored the interior north of the head of Spencer 
Gulf, where he was misled, however, by appearances to form an 
erroneous theory about the water-surfaces named Lake Torrens. 
It was left to the veteran explorer, Sturt, to achieve the arduous 
enterprise of penetrating from the Darling northward to the very 
centre of the continent. This was in 1845, the route lying for the 
most part over a stony desert, where the heat (reaching 13 1° 
Fahr.), with scorching winds, caused much suffering to the party. 
The most northerly point reached by Sturt on this occasion was 
about S. lat. 24 25'. 



Mitchell. 



Byre. 



EXPLORATION] 



AUSTRALIA 



9^ 



A military station having been fixed by the British govern- 
ment at Port Victoria, on the coast of Arnheim Land, for the 

protection of shipwrecked mariners on the north coast, 
bantt '*• was thought desirable to find an overland route 

between this settlement and Moreton Bay, in what 
then was the northern portion of New South Wales, now called 
Queensland. This was the object of Dr Leichhardt's expedition 
in 1844, which proceeded first along the banks of the Dawson 
and the Mackenzie, tributaries of the Fitzroy river, in Queensland. 
It thence passed farther north to the Burdekin, ascending to 
the source of that river, and turned westward across a table-land, 
from which there was an easy descent to the Gulf of Carpentaria. 
Skirting the low shores of this gulf, all the way round its upper 
half to the Roper, Leichhardt crossed Arnheim Land to the 
Alligator river, which he descended to the western shore of the 
peninsula, and arrived at Port Victoria, otherwise Port Essington, 
after a journey of 3000 m., performed within a year and three 
months. In 1847 Leichhardt undertook a much more formidable 
task, that of crossing the entire continent from east to west. 
His starting-point was on the Fitzroy Downs, north of the river 
Condamine, in Queensland, between the 26th and 27th degrees 
of S. latitude. But this eminent explorer had not proceeded 
far into the interior before he met his death, his last despatch 
dating from the Cogoon, 3rd of April 1848. In the same region, 
from 1845 to 1847, Sir Thomas Mitchell and Mr E. B. Kennedy 
explored the northern tributaries of the Darling, and a river 
in S. lat. 24°, named the Barcoo or Victoria, which flows to 
the south-west. This river was more thoroughly examined by 
Mr A. C. Gregory in 1858. Mr Kennedy lost his life in 1848, 
being killed by the natives while attempting to explore the 
peninsula of Cape York, from Rockingham Bay to Weymouth 
Bay. 

Among the performances of less renown, but of much practical 
utility in surveying and opening new paths through the country, 
we may mention that of Captain Banister, showing the way 
across the southern part of Western Australia, from Swan river 
to King George Sound, and that of Messrs Robinson and G. H. 
Haydon in 1844, making good the route from Port Phillip to 
Gipps' Land with loaded drays, through a dense tangled scrub, 
which had been described by Strzelecki as his worst obstacle. 
Again, in Western Australia there were the explorations of the 
Arrowsmith, the Murchison, the Gascoyne, and the Ashburton 
rivers, by Captain Grey, Mr Roe, Governor Fitzgerald, Mr R. 
Austin, and the brothers Gregory, whose discoveries have great 
importance from a geographical point of view. 

These local researches, and the more comprehensive attempts 
of Leichhardt and Mitchell to solve the chief problems of 

Australian geography, must yield in importance to the 

grand achievement of Mr Stuart in 1862. The first 
of his tours independently performed, in 1858 and 1859, were 
around the South Australian lakes, namely, Lake Torrens, Lake 
Eyre and Lake Gairdner. These waters had been erroneously 
taken for parts of one vast horseshoe or sickle shaped lake, only 
some 20 m. broad, believed to encircle a large portion of the 
inland country, with drainage at one end by a marsh into 
Spencer Gulf. The mistake, shown in all the old maps of 
Australia, had originated in a curious optical illusion. When Mr 
Eyre viewed the country from Mount Deception in 1840, looking 
between Lake Torrens and the lake which now bears his own 
name, the refraction of light from the glittering crust of salt 
that covers a large space of stony or sandy ground produced an 
appearance of water. The error was discovered, after eighteen 
years, by the explorations of Mr Babbage and Major Warburton 
in 1858, while Mr Stuart, about the same time, gained a more 
complete knowledge of the same district. 

A reward of £10,000 having been offered by the legislature 
of South Australia to the first man who should traverse the 
whole continent from south to north, starting from the city of 
Adelaide, Mr Stuart resolved to make the attempt. He started 
in March i860, passing Lake Torrens and Lake Eyre, beyond 
which he found a pleasant, fertile country till he crossed the 
Macdonnell range of mountains, just under the line of the tropic 

n.31 



Stuart. 



of Capricorn. On the 23rd of April he reached a mountain in 
S. lat. nearly 22°, and E. long, nearly 134°, which is the most 
central marked point of the Australian continent, and has been 
named Central Mount Stuart. Mr Stuart did not finish his task 
on this occasion, on account of indisposition and other causes. 
But the 18th degree of latitude had been reached, where the 
watershed divided the rivers of the Gulf of Carpentaria from 
the Victoria river, flowing towards the north-west coast. He 
had also proved that the interior of Australia was not a stony 
desert, like the region visited by Sturt in 1845. On the first day 
of the next year, 1861, Mr Stuart again started for a second 
attempt to cross the continent, which occupied him eight months. 
He failed, however, to advance farther than one geographical 
degree north of the point reached in i860, his progress being 
arrested by dense scrubs and the want of water. 

Meanwhile, in the province of Victoria, by means of a fund 
subscribed among the colonists and a grant by the legislature, 
the ill-fated expedition of Messrs Burke and Wills 
was started. It made for the Barcoo (Cooper's Creek) , wins 
with a view to reach the Gulf of Carpentaria by a 
northerly cour? e midway between Sturt's track to the west and 
Leichhardt's to the east. The leading men of the party were Mr 
Robert O'Hara Burke, an officer of police, and Mr William John 
Wills, of the Melbourne observatory. Leaving the main body 
of his party at Menindie on the Darling under a man named 
Wright, Burke, with seven men, five horses and sixteen camels, 
pushed on for Cooper's Creek, the understanding being that 
Wright should follow him in easy stages to the depot proposed 
to be there established. Wright frittered away his time in the 
district beyond the Darling and did not attempt to follow the 
party to Cooper's Creek, and Burke, tired of waiting, determined 
to push on. Accordingly, dividing his party, leaving at the 
depot four men and taking with him Wills and two men, King 
and Gray, with a horse and six camels, he left Cooper's Creek 
on the 16th of December and crossed the desert traversed by 
Sturt fifteen years before. They got on in spite of great diffi- 
culties., past the McKinlay range of mountains, S. lat. 21° and 
22 , and then reached the Flinders river, which flows into the 
bead of the Gulf of Carpentaria. Here, without actually standing 
on the sea-beach of the northern shore, they met the tidal waters 
of the sea. On the 23rd of February 1861 they commenced the 
return journey, having in effect accomplished the feat of crossing 
the Australian continent. Gray, who had fallen ill, died on the 
1 6th of April. Five days later, Burke, Wills and King had 
repassed the desert to the place on Cooper's Creek (the Barcoo, 
S. lat. 27 40', E. long. 140° 30'), where they had left the depot, 
with the rest of the expedition. Here they experienced a cruel 
disappointment. The depot was abandoned; the men in charge 
had quitted the place the same day, believing that Burke and 
those with him were lost. The men who had thus abandoned 
the depot rejoined the main body of the expedition under Wright, 
who at length moved to Cooper's Creek, and, incredible to relate, 
neglected to search for the missing explorers. Burke, Wills and 
King, when they found themselves so fearfully left alone and 
unprovided in the wilderness, wandered about in that district 
till near the end of June. They subsisted miserably on the bounty 
of some natives, and partly by feeding on the seeds of a plant 
called nardoo. At last both Wills and Burke died of starvation. 
King, the sole survivor, was saved by meeting the friendly blacks, 
and was found alive in September by Mr A. W. Howitt's party, 
sent on purpose to find and relieve that of Burke. 

Four other parties, besides Howitt's, were sent out that year 
from different Australian provinces. Three of them, respectively 
commanded by Mr Walker, Mr Landsborough, and Mr Norman, 
sailed to the north, where the latter two landed on the shores 
of the Gulf of Carpentaria, while Mr Walker marched inland 
from Rockhampton. The fourth party, under Mr J. McKinlay, 
from Adelaide, made for the Barcoo by way of Lake Torrens. 
By these means, the unknown region of Mid Australia wa? 
simultaneously entered from the north, south, east and west, 
and important additions were made to geographical knowledge. 
Landsborough crossed the entire continent from north to south. 



962 



AUSTRALIA 



[EXPLORATION 



between February and June 1862; and McKinlay, from south to 
north, before the end of August in that year. The interior of 
New South Wales and Queensland, all that lies east of the 140th 
degree of longitude, was examined. The Barcoo or Cooper's 
Creek and its tributary streams were traced from the Queensland 
mountains, holding a south-westerly course to Lake Eyre in 
South Australia; the Flinders, the Gilbert, the Gregory, and 
other northern rivers watering the country towards the Gulf of 
Carpentaria were also explored. These valuable additions to 
Australian geography were gained through humane efforts to 
relieve the lost explorers. The bodies of Burke and Wills were 
recovered and brought to Melbourne for a solemn public funeral, 
and a noble monument has been erected to their honour. 

Mr Stuart, in 1862, made his third and final attempt to 
traverse the continent from Adelaide along a central line, which, 
inclining a little westward, reaches the north coast of Arnheim 
Land, opposite Melville Island. He started in January, and on 
the 7th of April reached the farthest northern point, near S. lat. 
1 7°, where he had turned back in May of the preceding year. 
He then pushed on, through a very thick forest, with scarcely 
any water, till he came to the streams which supply the Roper, 
a river flowing into the western part of the Gulf of Carpentaria. 
Having crossed a table-land of sandstone which divides these 
streams from those running to the western shores of Arnheim 
Land, Mr Stuart, in the month of July, passed down what is 
called the Adelaide river of north Australia. Thus he came at 
length to stand on the verge of the Indian Ocean; " gazing 
upon it," a writer has said, " with as much delight as Balboa, 
when he crossed the Isthmus of Darien from the Atlantic to 
the Pacific." The line crossing Australia which was thus 
explored has since been occupied by the electric telegraph 
connecting Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney, and other Australian 
cities with London. 

A third part, at least, of the interior of the whole continent, 
between the central line of Stuart and the known parts of 
Oosse Western Australia, from about 120 to 134 E. long., 

an extent of half a million square miles, still remained 
a blank in the map. But the two expeditions of 1873, conducted by 
William Christie Gosse (1842-1881) , afterwards deputy surveyor- 
general for South Australia, and Colonel (then Major) Egerton 
Warburton, made a beginning in the exploration of this terra 
incognita west of the central telegraph route. That line of more 
than 1800 m., having its southern extremity at the head of 
Spencer Gulf, its northern at Port Darwin, in Arnheim Land, 
passes Central Mount Stuart, in the middle of the continent, 
S. lat. 22°, E. long. 134°. Mr Gosse, with men and horses pro- 
vided by the South Australian government, started on the 21st 
of April from the telegraph station 50 m. south of Central Mount 
Stuart, to strike into Western Australia. He passed the Reynolds 
range and Lake Amadeus in that direction, but was compelled 
to turn south, where he found a tract of well- watered grassy 
land. A singular rock of conglomerate, 2 m. long, 1 m. wide, 
and 1 100 ft. high, with a spring of water in its centre, struck his 
attention. The country was mostly poor and barren, sandy 
hillocks, with scanty growth of spinifex. Mr Gosse, having 
travelled above 600 m., and getting to 26 32' S. and 127 E., 
two degrees within the Western Australian boundary, was forced 
to return. Meantime a more successful attempt to reach the 

western coast from the centre of Australia was made by 
bartoa. Major Warburton, with thirty camels, provided by Mr 

(afterwards Sir) T. Elder, of South Australia. Leaving 
the telegraph line at Alice Springs (23° 40' S., 133° 14' E.), 
1120 m. north of Adelaide city, Warburton succeeded in making 
his way to the De Grey river, Western Australia. Overland 
routes had now been found possible, though scarcely convenient 
for traffic, between all the widely separated Australian provinces. 
In northern Queensland, also, there were several explorations 
about this period, with results of some interest. That performed 
by Mr W. Hann, with Messrs Warner, Tate and Taylor, in 1873, 
related to the country north of the Kirchner range, watered by 
the Lynd, the Mitchell, the Walsh and the Palmer rivers, on 
the east side of the Gulf of Carpentaria. The coasting expedition 



Giles. 



of Mr G. Elphinstone Dalrymple, with Messrs Hill and Johnstone, 
finishing in December 1873, effected a valuable survey of the 
inlets and navigable rivers in the Cape York Peninsula. 

Of the several attempts to cross Western Australia, even 
Major Warburton's expedition, the most successful, had failed 
in the important particular of determining the nature of the 
country through which it passed. Major Warburton had 
virtually raced across from the Macdonnell range in South 
Australia to the headwaters of the Oakover river on the north- 
west coast, without allowing himself sufficient time to note the 
characteristics of the country. The next important expedition 
was differently conducted. John (afterwards Sir John) p ofr est. 
Forrest was despatched by the Perth government 
with general instructions to obtain information regarding the 
immense tract of country out of which flow the rivers falling 
into the sea on the northern and western shores of Western 
Australia. Leaving Yewin, a small settlement about lat. 28 S., 
long. 116 E., Forrest travelled north-east to the Murchison 
river, and followed the course of that river to the Robinson 
ranges; thence his course lay generally eastward along the 
26th parallel. Forrest and his party safely crossed the entire 
extent of Western Australia, and entering South Australia 
struck the overland telegraph line at Peake station, and, after 
resting, journeyed south to Adelaide. Forrest traversed seventeen 
degrees of desert in five months, a very wonderful achievement, 
more especially as he was able to give a full report of the country 
through which he passed. His report destroyed all hope that 
pastoral settlement would extend to the spinifex region; and 
the main object of subsequent explorers was to determine the 
extent of the desert in the direction of north and south. Ernest 
Giles made several attempts to cross the Central 
Australian Desert, but it was not until his third 
attempt that he was successful. His journey ranks almost with 
Forrest's in the importance of its results and the success with 
which the appalling difficulties of the journey were overcome. 
Through the generosity of Sir Thomas Elder, of Adelaide, Giles's 
expedition was equipped with camels. It started on the 23rd 
of May 1875 from Port Augusta. Working westerly along the 
line of the 30th parallel, Giles reached Perth in about five months. 
After resting in Perth for a short time, he commenced the return 
journey, which was made for the most part between the 24th 
and 25th parallels, and again successfully traversed the desert, 
reaching the overland telegraph line in about seven months. 
Giles's journeys added greatly to our knowledge of the character- 
istics of Western and South Australia, and he was able to bear 
out the common opinion that the interior of Australia west of 
132° E. long, is a sandy and waterless waste, entirely unfit for 
settlement. 

The list of explorers since 1875 is a long one; but after 
Forrest's and Giles's expeditions the main object ceased to be 
the discovery of pastoral country: a new zest had 
been added to the cause of exploration, and most of exp i rers. 
the smaller expeditions concerned themselves with the 
search for gold. Amongst the more important explorations 
may be ranked those of Tietkins in 1889, of Lindsay in 1891, 
of Wells in 1896, of Hiibbe in 1896, and of the Hon. David 
Carnegie in 1896-97. Lindsay's expedition, which was fitted 
out by Sir Thomas Elder, the generous patron of Australian 
exploration, entered Western Australia about the. 26th parallel 
south lat., on the line of route taken by Forrest in 1874. From 
this point the explorer worked in a south-westerly direction to 
Queen Victoria Springs, where he struck the track of Giles's 
expedition of 1875. From the Springs the expedition went 
north-west and made a useful examination of the country lying 
between 119 and 115 meridians and between 26° and 28 S. lat. 
Wells's expedition started from a base about 122° 20' E. and 
25° 54' S., and worked northward to the Joanna Springs, situated 
on the tropic of Capricorn and near the 124th meridian. From 
the springs the journey was continued along the same meridian 
to the Fitzroy river. The country passed through was mostly 
of a forbidding character, except where the Kimberley district 
was entered, and the expedition suffered even more than the 



POLITICAL HISTORY] 



AUSTRALIA 



9 6> 



usual hardships. The establishment of the gold-fields, with 
their large population, caused great interest to be taken in the 
discovery of practicable stock routes, especially from South 
Australia in the east, and from Kimberley district in the north. 
Alive to the importance of the trade, the South Australian 
government despatched Hubbe from Oodnadatta to Coolgardie. 
He successfully accomplished his journey, but had to report 
that there was no practicable route for cattle between the two 
districts. 

One of the most successful expeditions which traversed 
Western Australia was that led and equipped by the Hon. 
David Carnegie, which started in July 1896, and travelled 
north-easterly until it reached Alexander Spring; then turning 
northward, it traversed the country between Wells's track of 
1896 and the South Australian border. The expedition en- 
countered very many hardships, but successfully reached Hall 
Creek in the Kimberley district. After a few months' rest it 
started on the return journey, following Sturt Creek until its 
termination in Gregory's Salt Sea, and then keeping parallel 
with the South Australian border as far as Lake Macdonald. 
Rounding that lake the expedition moved south-west and 
reached the settled districts in August 1897. The distance 
travelled was 5000 m., and the actual time employed was eight 
months. This expedition put an end to the hope, so long 
entertained, that it was possible to obtain a direct and practicable 
route for stock between Kimberley and Coolgardie gold-fields ; and 
it also proved that, with the possible exception of small isolated 
patches, the desert traversed contained no auriferous country. 

It may be said that exploration on a large scale is now at an 
end; there remain only the spaces, nowhere very extensive, 
between the tracks of the old explorers yet to be examined, and 
these are chiefly in the Northern Territory and in Western 
Australia north of the tropic of Capricorn. The search for gold 
and the quest for unoccupied pasturage daily diminish the 
extent of these areas. 

3. Political History. 

Of the six Australian states, New South Wales is the oldest. 
It was in 1788, eighteen years after Captain Cook explored 

the east coast, that Port Jackson was founded as 
forty a penal station for criminals from England; and 

Oon"'*"' tne settlement retained that character, more or less, 

during the subsequent fifty years, transportation being 
virtually suspended in 1839. The colony, however, from 1821 
had made a fair start in free industrial progress. By this time, 
too, several of the other provinces had come into existence. 
Van Diemen's Land, now called Tasmania, had been occupied 
as early as 1803. It was an auxiliary penal station under New 
South Wales till in 1825 it became a separate government. 
From this island, ten years later, parties crossed Bass Strait 
to Port Phillip, where a new settlement was shortly established, 
forming till 1851 a part of New South Wales, but now the state of 
Victoria. In 1827 and 1829, an English company endeavoured 
to plant a settlement at the Swan river, and this, added to a small 
military station established in 1825 at King George Sound, 
constituted Western Australia. On the shores of the Gulf St 
Vincent, again, from 1835 to 1837, South Australia was created 
by another joint-stock company, as an experiment in the Wake- 
field scheme of colonization. Such were the political component 
parts of British Australia up to 1839. The early history, there- 
fore, of New South Wales is peculiar to itself. Unlike the other 
mainland provinces, it was at first held and used chiefly for the 
reception of British convicts. When that system was abolished, 
the social conditions of New South Wales, Victoria, and South 
Australia became more equal. Previous to the gold discoveries 
of 1851 they may be included, from 1839, in a general summary 
view. 

The first British governors at Sydney, from 1788, ruled with 
despotic power. They were naval or military officers in command 
of the garrison, the convicts and the few free settlers. The 
duty was performed by such men as Captain Arthur Phillip, 
Captain Hunter, and others. In the twelve years' rule of General 



Macquarie, closing with 1821, the colony made a substantial 
advance. By means of bond labour roads and bridges were con- 
structed, and a route opened into the interior beyond jj fae of 
the Blue Mountains. A population of 30,000, three- New 
fourths of them convicts, formed the infant common- South 
wealth, whose attention was soon directed to the profit- Wales. 
able trade of rearing fine wool sheep, first commenced by Captain 
John McArthur in 1803. During the next ten years, 1821-1831, 
Sir Thomas Brisbane and Sir Ralph Darling, two generals of the 
army, being successively governors, the colony increased, and 
eventually succeeded in obtaining the advantages of a repre- 
sentative institution, by means of a legislative council. Then 
came General Sir Richard Bourke, whose wise and liberal 
administration proved most beneficial. New South Wales 
became prosperous and attractive to emigrants with capital. 
Its enterprising ambition was encouraged by taking fresh 
country north and south. In the latter direction, explored by 
Mitchell in 1834 and 1836, lay Australia Felix, now Victoria, 
including the well-watered, thickly-wooded country of Gipps' 
Land. 

This district, then called Port Phillip, in the time of Governor 
Sir George Gipps, 1838-1846, was growing fast into a position 
claiming independence. Melbourne, which began with 
a few huts on the banks of the Yarra-Yarra in 1835, vMorta" 
was in 1840 a busy town of 6000 inhabitants, the 
population of the whole district, with the towns of Geelong 
and Portland, reaching 12,850; while its import trade amounted 
to £204,000, and its exports to £138,000. Such was the growth 
of infant Victoria in five years; that of Adelaide or South 
Australia, in the same period, was nearly equal to it. At Mel- 
bourne there was a deputy governor, Mr Latrobe, under Sir 
George-Gipps at Sydney. Adelaide had its own governors, first 
Captain Hindmarsh, next Colonel Gawler, and then Captain 
George Grey. Western Australia progressed but slowly, with 
less than 4000 inhabitants altogether, under Governors Stirling 
and Hutt. 

The general advancement of Australia, to the era of the gold- 
mining, had been satisfactory, in spite of a severe commercial 
crisis, from 1841 to 1843, caused by extravagant land 
speculations and inflated prices. Victoria produced of^u! 7 
already more wool than New South Wales,the aggregate 
produce of Australia in 1852 being 45,000,000 lb; and South 
Australia, between 1842 and this date, had opened most valuable 
mines of copper. The population of New South Wales in 185 1 
was 190,000; that of Victoria, 77,000; and that of South 
Australia about the same. At Summerhill Creek, 20 m. north 
of Bathurst, in the Macquarie plains, gold was discovered, in 
February 185 1, by Mr E. Hargraves, a gold-miner from California. 
The intelligence was made known in April or May; and then 
began a rush of thousands, — men leaving their former employ- 
ments in the bush or in the towns to search for the ore so greatly 
coveted in all ages. In August it was found at Anderson's 
Creek, near Melbourne; a few weeks later the great Ballarat 
gold-field, 80 m. west of that city, was opened; and after that, 
Bendigo to the north. Not only in these lucky provinces, New 
South Wales and Victoria, where the auriferous deposits were 
revealed, but in every British colony of Australasia, all ordinary 
industry was left for the one exciting pursuit. The copper mines 
of South Australia were for the time deserted, while Tasmania 
and New Zealand lost many inhabitants, who emigrated to the 
more promising country. The disturbance of social, industrial 
and commercial affairs, during the first two or three years of 
the gold era, was very great. Immigrants from Europe, and to 
some extent from North America and China, poured into Mel- 
bourne, where the arrivals in 1852 averaged 2000 persons in a 
week. The population of Victoria was doubled in the first twelve- 
month of the gold fever, and the value of imports and exports 
was multiplied tenfold between 1851 and 1853. The colony 
of Victoria was constituted a separate province in July 1851, 
Mr Latrobe being appointed governor, followed by Sir Charles 
Hotham and Sir Henry Barkly in succession. 

The separation of the northern part of eastern Australia, 



9 6 4 



AUSTRALIA 



[POLITICAL HISTORY 



under the name of Queensland, from the original province of 
New South Wales, took place in 1859. At that time the district 
contained about 25,000 inhabitants; and in the first six years 
Respon- its population was quadrupled and its trade trebled. 
sibie At the beginning of i860, when the excitement of the 

govern- gold discoveries was wearing off, five of the states 

had received from the home government the boon 
of responsible government, and were in a position to work out 
the problem of their position without external interference; it 
was not, however, until 1890 that Western Australia was placed 
in a similar position. After the establishment of responsible 
government the main questions at issue were the secular as 
opposed to the religious system of public instruction, protection 
as opposed to a revenue tariff, vote by ballot, adult suffrage, 
abolition of transportation and assignment of convicts, and 
free selection of lands before survey; these, and indeed all 
the great questions upon which the country was divided, were 
settled within twenty years of the granting of self-government. 1 
With the disposal of these important problems, politics in 
Australia became a struggle for office between men whose 
political principles were very much alike, and the tenure of power 
enjoyed by the various governments did not depend upon the 
principles of administration so much as upon the personal 
fitness of the head of the ministry, and the acceptability of his 
ministry to the members of the more popular branch of the 
legislature. 

The two most striking political events in the modern history 
of Australia, as a whole, apart from the readiness it has shown 

to remain a part of the British empire (q.v.), and to 
a "straiten develop along Imperial lines, are the advent of the 
problems. Labour party and the establishment of federation. 

As regards the last mentioned it may be said that it 
was accomplished from within, there being no real external 
necessity for the union of the states. Leading politicians have in 
all the states felt the cramping effects of mere domestic legislation, 
albeit on the proper direction of such legislation depends the well- 
being of the people; and to this sense of the limitations of local 
politics was due, as much as to anything else, the movement 
towards federation. 

Before coming, however, to the history of federation, and the 
evolution of the Labour party, we must refer briefly to some 

other questions which have been of general interest 
y*Ss/a? D in Australia. Taking the states as a whole, agrarian 
Hon. legislation has been the most important subject that 

has engrossed the attention of their parliaments, and 
every state has been more or less engaged in tinkering with its 
land laws. The main object of all such legislation is to secure 
the residence of the owners on the land. The object of settlers, 
however, in a great many, perhaps in the majority of instances, 
is to dispose of their holdings as soon as possible after the require- 
ments of the law have been complied with, and to avoid per- 
manent settlement. This has greatly facilitated the formation 
of large estates devoted chiefly to grazing purposes, contrary to 
the policy of the legislature, which has everywhere sought to en- 
courage tillage, or tillage joined to stock-rearing, and to discourage 
large holdings. The importance of the land question is so great 
that it is hardly an exaggeration to say that it is usual for every 
parliament of Australia to have before it a proposal to alter or 
amend its land laws. Since 1870 there have been five radical 
changes made in New South Wales. In Victoria the law has been 
altered five times, and in Queensland and South Australia seven 
times. 

The prevention or regulation of the immigration of coloured 
races has also claimed a great share of parliamentary attention. 

The agitation against the influx of Chinese commenced 
'tion ' very s00n a ^ ter t ' le £°ld discoveries, the European 
question, miners objecting strongly to the presence of these 

aliens upon the diggings. The allegations made con- 
cerning the Chinese really amounted to a charge of undue 

1 Australia, it may be noted, has woman's suffrage in all the 
states (Victoria, the last, adopting it in November 1908), and for 
the federal assembly. 



industry. The Chinese were hard-working and had the usual 
fortune attending those who work hard. They spent little on 
drink or with the storekeepers, and were, therefore, by no means 
popular. As early as i860 there had been disturbances of a 
serious character, and the Chinese were chased off the goldfields 
of New South Wales, serious riots occurring at Lambing Flat, 
on the Burrangong goldfield. The Chinese difficulty, so far as 
the mining population was concerned, was solved by the exhaus- 
tion of the extensive alluvial deposits; the miners' prejudice 
against the race, however, still exists, though they are no longer 
serious competitors, and the laws of some of the states forbid 
any Chinese to engage in mining without the express authority 
in writing of the minister of mines. The nearness of China to 
Australia has always appeared to the Australian democracy as a 
menace to the integrity of the white settlements; and at the 
many conferences of representatives from the various states, 
called to discuss matters of general concern, the Chinese question 
has always held a prominent place, but the absence of any federal 
authority had made common action difficult. In 1888 the last 
important conference on the Chinese question was held in 
Sydney and attended by delegates from all the states. Previ- 
ously to the meeting of the conference there had been a great deal 
of discussion in regard to the influx of Chinese, and such influx 
was on all sides agreed to be a growing danger. The conference, 
therefore, merely expressed the public sentiment when it resolved 
that, although it was not advisable to prohibit altogether this 
class of immigration, it was necessary in the public interests 
that the number of Chinese privileged to land should be so 
limited as to prevent the people of that race from ever becoming 
an important element in the community. In conformity with 
this determination the various state legislatures enacted new 
laws or amended the existing laws to cope with the difficulty; 
these remained until they were in effect superseded by Common- 
wealth legislation. The objection to admitting immigrants was 
not only to the Chinese, but extended to all Asiatics; but as a 
large proportion of the persons whose entrance into the colonies 
it was desired to stop were British subjects, and the Imperial 
government refused to sanction any measure directly prohibiting 
in plain terms the movement of British subjects from one part 
of the empire to another, resort was made to indirect legislation; 
this was the more advisable, as the rise of the Japanese power 
in the East and the alliance of that country with Great Britain 
rendered it necessary to pay attention to the susceptibilities of a 
powerful nation whose subjects might be affected by restrictive 
laws. Eventually the difficulty was overcome by the device of an 
educational test based on the provisions of an act in operation in 
Natal. It was provided that a person was to be prohibited from 
landing in Australia who failed to write in any prescribed 
language fifty words dictated to him by the commonwealth 
officer supervising immigration. The efficacy of this legislation 
is in its administration, the language in which coloured aliens 
are usually tested being European. The agitation against the 
Chinese covered a space of over fifty years, a long period in 
the history of a young country, and was promoted and kept 
alive almost entirely by the trades unions, and the restriction 
acts were the first legislative triumph of the Labour party, 
albeit that party was not at the time directly represented in 
parliament. 

One of the most notable events in the modern history of 
Australia occurred shortly after the great strike of 1890. This 
was what is ordinarily termed the bank crisis of 1893. 
Although this crisis followed on the great strike, the crisis ot 
two things had no real connexion, the crisis being the is93. 
natural result of events long anterior to 1890. The 
effects of the crisis were mainly felt in the three eastern states, 
Queensland, New South Wales and Victoria, Tasmania and South 
Australia being affected chiefly by reason of the fact of their 
intimate financial connexion with the eastern states. The 
approach of the crisis was heralded by many signs. Deposits 
were shifted from bank to bank, there were small runs on several 
of the savings banks guaranteed by the government, mortgagees 
required additional security from their debtors, bankruptcies 



POLITICAL HISTORY] 



AUSTRALIA 



963 



became frequent, and some of the banks began to accumulate 
gold against the evil day. The building societies and financial 
institutions in receipt of deposits, or so many of them as were on 
an unsound footing, failed at an early period of the depression, 
so also did the weaker banks. There was distrust in the minds 
of the depositors, especially those whose holdings were small, 
and most of the banks were, at a very early period, subjected to 
the strain of repaying a large proportion of their deposits as 
they fell due. For a time the money so withdrawn was hoarded, 
but after a while it found its way back again into the banks. 
The crisis was by no means a sudden crash, and even when the 
failures began to take place they were spread over a period of 
sixteen weeks. 

The first noticeable effect of the crisis was a great scarcity of 
employment. Much capital was locked up in the failed banks, 
and was therefore not available for distribution amongst wage- 
earners. Wages fell precipitately, as also did rents. There was 
an almost entire cessation of building, and a large number of 
houses in the chief cities remained untenanted, the occupants 
moving to lodgings and more than one family living in a single 
house. Credit became greatly restricted, and all descriptions 
of speculative enterprise came to an end. The consuming 
power of the population was greatly diminished, and in the 
year following the crisis the imports into Australia from abroad 
diminished by four and three-quarter millions. In fact, every- 
where the demand for goods, especially of those for domestic 
consumption, fell away; and there was a reduction in the 
average number of persons employed in the manufacturing 
industries to the extent of more than 20 %. The lack of 
employment in factories naturally affected the coal mining 
industry, and indeed every industry in the states, except those 
connected with the export trade, was severely affected. During 
the crisis banks having a paid-up capital and reserves of 
£5,000,000 and deposits of £53,000,000 closed their doors. Most 
of these, however, reopened for business before many weeks. 
The crisis was felt in the large cities more keenly than in the 
country districts, and in Melbourne more severely than in any 
other capital. The change of fortune proved disastrous to 
many families, previously to all appearances in opulent circum- 
stances, but by all classes alike their reverses were borne with 
the greatest bravery. In its ultimate effects the crisis was by 
no means evil. Its true meaning was not lost upon a business 
community that had had twenty years of almost unchecked 
prosperity. It required the chastening of adversity to teach it 
a salutary lesson, and a few years after, when the first effects 
of the crisis had passed away, business was on a much sounder 
footing than had been the case for very many years. One of 
the first results was to put trade on a sound basis and to abolish 
most of the abuses of the credit system, but the most striking 
effect of the crisis was the attention which was almost immedi- 
ately directed to productive pursuits. Agriculture everywhere 
expanded, the mining industry revived, and, if it had not 
been for the low prices of staple products, the visible effects 
of the crisis would have passed away within a very few 
years. 

Another matter which deserves attention was the great 
drought which culminated in the year 1902. For some years 
previously the pastoral industry had been declining 
of°iM2. an( l l ^ e num ber of sheep and cattle in Australia had 
greatly diminished, but the year 1902 was one of 
veritable drought. The failure of the crops was almost universal 
and large numbers of sheep and cattle perished for want of food. 
The truth is, pastoralists for the most part carried on their 
industry trusting very greatly to luck, not making any special 
provisions against the vicissitudes of the seasons. Enormous 
quantities of natural hay were allowed every year to rot or be 
destroyed by bush fires, and the bountiful provision made by 
nature to carry them over the seasons of dry weather absolutely 
neglected; so that when the destructive season of 1902 fell upon 
them, over a large area of territory there was no food for the 
stock. The year 1903 proved most bountiful, and in a few years 
all trace of the disastrous drought of 1902 passed away. But 



beyond this the pastoralist learnt most effectually the lesson 
that, in a country like Australia, provision must be made for the 
occasional season when the rainfall is entirely inadequate to the 
wants of the farmer and the pastoralist. 

The question of federation was not lost sight of by the framers 
of the original constitution which was bestowed upon New South 
Wales. In the report of the committee of the legislative 
council appointed in 1852 to prepare a constitution tiom 
for that colony, the following passage occurs: — " One 
of the most prominent legislative measures required by the 
colony, and the colonies of the Australian group generally, is 
the establishment at once of a general assembly, to make laws 
in relation to those intercolonial questions that have arisen or 
may hereafter arise among them. The questions which would 
claim the exercise of such a jurisdiction appear to be (1) inter- 
colonial tariffs and the coasting trade; (2) railways, roads, 
canals, and other such works running through any two of the 
colonies; (3) beacons and lighthouses on the coast; (4) inter- 
colonial gold regulations; (5) postage between the said colonies; 

(6) a general court of appeal from the courts of sucn colonies; 

(7) a power to legislate on all other subjects which may be 
submitted to them by addresses from the legislative councils 
and assemblies of the colonies, and to appropriate to any of 
the above-mentioned objects the necessary sums of money, to 
be raised by a percentage on the revenues of all the colonies 
interested." This wise recommendation received very scant 
attention, and it was not until the necessities of the colonies 
forced them to it that an attempt was made to do what the 
framers of the original constitution suggested. Federation at 
no time actually dropped out of sight, but it was not until thirty- 
five years later that any practical steps were taken towards its 
accomplishment. Meanwhile a sort of makeshift was devised, 
and the Imperial parliament passed a measure permitting the 
formation of a federal council, to which any colony that felt 
inclined to join could send delegates. Of the seven colonies 
New South Wales and New Zealand stood aloof from the council, 
and from the beginning it was therefore shorn of a large share of 
the prestige that would have attached to a body speaking and 
acting on behalf of a united Australia. The council had also 
a fatal defect in its constitution. It was merely a deliberative 
body, having no executive functions and possessing no control 
of funds or other means to put its legislation in force. Its 
existence was well-nigh forgotten by the people of Australia 
until the occurrence of its biennial meetings, and even then but 
slight interest was taken in its proceedings. The council held 
eight meetings, at which many matters of intercolonial interest 
were discussed. The last occasion of its being called together 
was in 1899, when the council met in Melbourne. In 1889 an 
important step towards federation was taken by Sir Henry 
Parkes. The occasion was the report of Major-General Edwards 
on the defences of Australia, and Sir Henry addressed the other 
premiers on the desirability of a federal union for purposes of 
defence. The immediate result was a conference at Parliament 
House, Melbourne, of representatives from each of the seven 
colonies. This conference adopted an address to the queen 
expressing its loyalty and attachment, and submitting certain 
resolutions which affirmed the desirability of an early union, 
under the crown, of the Australasian colonies, on principles 
just to all, and provided that the remoter Australasian colonies 
should be entitled to admission upon terms to be afterwards 
agreed upon, and that steps should be taken for the appointment 
of delegates to a national Australasian convention, to consider 
and report upon an adequate scheme for a federal convention. 
In accordance with the understanding arrived at, the various 
Australasian parliaments appointed delegates to attend a national 
convention to be held in Sydney, and on the 2nd March 1891 
the convention held its first meeting. Sir Henry Parkes was 
elected president, and he moved a series of resolutions embodying 
the principles necessary to establish, on an enduring foundation, 
the structure of a federal government. These resolutions were 
slightly altered by the conference, and were adopted in the 
following form: — 



9 66 



AUSTRALIA 



[POLITICAL HISTORY 



1. The powers and rights of existing colonies to remain intact, 
except as regards such powers as it may be necessary to hand over 
to the Federal government. 

2. No alteration to be made in states without the consent of the 
legislatures of such states, as well as of the federal parliament. 

3. Trade between the federated colonies to be absolutely free. 

4. Power to impose customs and excise duties to be in the Federal 
government and parliament. 

5. Military and naval defence forces to be under one command. 

6. The federal constitution to make provision to enable each 
state to make amendments in the constitution if necessary for the 
purposes of federation. 

Other formal resolutions were also agreed to, and on the 31st of 
March Sir Samuel Griffith, as chairman of the committee on 
constitutional machinery, brought up a draft Constitution Bill, 
which was carefully considered by the convention in committee 
of the whole and adopted on the 9th of April, when the conven- 
tion was formally dissolved. The bill, however, fell absolutely 
dead, not because it was not a good bill, but because the 
movement out of which it arose had not popular initiative, and 
therefore failed to reach the popular imagination. 

Although the bill drawn up by the convention of 1891 was not 
received by the people with any show of interest, the federation 
movement did not die out; on the contrary, it had many en- 
thusiastic advocates, especially in the colony of Victoria. In 
1894 an unofficial convention was held at Corowa, at which the 
cause of federation was strenuously advocated, but it was not 
until 1895 that the movement obtained new life, by reason of the 
proposals adopted at a meeting of premiers convened by Mr 
G. H. Reid of New South Wales. At this meeting all the colonies 
except New Zealand were represented, and it was agreed that 
the parliament of each colony should be asked to pass a bill 
enabling the people to choose ten persons to represent the colony 
on a federal convention; the work of such convention being the 
framing of a federal constitution to be submitted to the people 
for approval by means of the referendum. During the year 1896 
Enabling Acts were passed by New South Wales, Victoria, 
Tasmania, South Australia and Western Australia, and delegates 
were elected by popular vote in all the colonies named except 
Western Australia, where the delegates were chosen by parlia- 
ment. The convention met in Adelaide on the 22nd of March 
1897, and, after drafting a bill for the consideration of the 
various parliaments, adjourned until the 2nd of September. 
On that date the delegates reassembled in Sydney, and debated 
the bill in the light of the suggestions made by the legislatures 
of the federating colonies. In the course of the proceedings it 
was announced that Queensland desired to come within the 
proposed union; and in view of this development, and in order 
to give further opportunity for the consideration of the bill, 
the convention again adjourned. The third and final session 
was opened in Melbourne on the 20th of January 1898, but 
Queensland was still unrepresented; and, after further con- 
sideration, the draft bill was finally adopted on the 16th of March 
and remitted to the various colonies for submission to the people. 

The constitution was accepted by Victoria, South Australia 
and Tasmania by popular acclamation, but in New South Wales 
very great opposition was shown, the main points of objection 
being the financial provisions, equal representation in the Senate, 
and the difficulty in the way of the larger states securing an 
amendment of the constitution in the event of a conflict with 
the smaller states. As far as the other colonies were concerned, it 
was evident that the bill was safe, and public attention throughout 
Australia was fixed on New South Wales, where a fierce political 
contest was raging, which it was recognized would decide the 
fate of the measure for the time being. The fear was as to whether 
the statutory number of 80,000 votes necessary for the acceptance 
of the bill would be reached. This fear proved to be well founded, 
for the result of the referendum in New South Wales showed 
71,595 votes in favour of the bill and 66,228 against it, and 
it was accordingly lost. In Victoria, Tasmania and South 
Australia, on the other hand, the bill was accepted by triumphant 
majorities. Western Australia did not put it to the vote, as the 
Enabling Act of that colony only provided for joining a federation 
of which New South Wales should form a part. The existence 



of such a strong opposition to the bill in the mother colony 
convinced even its most zealous advocates that some changes 
would have to be made in the constitution before it could be 
accepted by the people; consequently, although the general 
election in New South Wales, held six or seven weeks later, 
was fought on the federal issue, yet the opposing parties seemed 
to occupy somewhat the same ground, and the question narrowed 
itself down to one as to which party should be entrusted with 
the negotiations to be conducted on behalf of the colony, with a 
view to securing a modification of the objectionable features of 
the bill. The new parliament decided to adopt the procedure 
of again sending the premier, Mr Reid, into conference, armed 
with a series of resolutions affirming its desire to bring about the 
completion of federal union, but asking the other colonies to 
agree to the reconsideration of the provisions which were most 
generally objected to in New South Wales. The other colonies 
interested were anxious to bring the matter to a speedy termina- 
tion, and readily agreed to this course of procedure. Accord- 
ingly a premiers' conference was held in Melbourne at the end 
of January 1899, at which Queensland was for the first time 
represented. At this conference a compromise was effected, 
something was conceded to the claims of New South Wales, 
but the main principles of the bill remained intact. The bill as 
amended was submitted to the electors of each colony and 
again triumphantly carried in Victoria, South Australia arid 
Tasmania. In New South Wales and Queensland there were still 
a large number of persons opposed to the measure, which was 
nevertheless carried in both colonies. New South Wales having 
decided in favour of federation, the way was clear for a decision 
on the part of Western Australia. The Enabling Bill passed the 
various stages in the parliament of that colony, and the question 
was then adopted by referendum. 

In accordance with this general verdict of all the states, the 
colonial draft bill was submitted to the imperial government for 
legislation as an imperial act; and six delegates were sent to 
England to explain the measure and to pilot it through the cabinet 
and parliament. A bill was presented to the British parliament 
which embodied and established, with such variations as had 
been accepted on behalf of Australia by the delegates, the 
constitution agreed to at the premiers' conference of 1899 and 
speedily became law. Under this act, which was dated the 9th 
of July 1900, a proclamation was issued on the 17th of September 
of the same year, declaring that, on and after the 1st of January 
1901, the people of New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, 
Queensland, Tasmania and Western Australia should be united 
in a federal commonwealth under the name of the Commonwealth 
of Australia. 

The six colonies entering the Commonwealth were denominated 
original states, and new states might be admitted, or might be 
formed by separation from or union of two or more states _^ 
or parts of states; and territories (as distinguished from /^y ?*L* 
states) might be taken over and governed under the legis- Jf^g- 
lative power of the Commonwealth. The legislative otI90e - 
power is vested in a federal parliament, consisting of the sovereign, 
a senate, and a house of representatives, the sovereign being 
represented by a governor-general. The Senate was to consist of the 
same number of members (not less than six) for each state, the 
term of service being six years, but subject to an arrangement that 
half the number would retire every three years. The House of 
Representatives was to consist of members chosen in the different 
states in numbers proportioned to their population, but never fewer 
than five. The first House of Representatives was to contain 
seventy-five members. For elections to the Senate the governors of 
states, and for general elections of the House of Representatives the 
governor-general, would cause writs to be issued. The Senate would 
choose its own president, and the House of Representatives its 
speaker; each house would make its own rules of procedure; in 
each, one-third of the number of members would form a quorum; 
the members of each must take oath, or make affirmation of allegi- 
ance ; and all alike would receive an allowance of £400 a year. The 
legislative powers of the parliament have a wide range, many 
matters being transferred to it from the colonial parliaments. The 
more important subjects with which it deals are trade, shipping 
and railways; taxation, bounties, the borrowing of money on the 
credit of the Commonwealth; the postal and telegraphic services; 
defence, census and statistics; currency, coinage, banking, bank- 
ruptcy ; weights and measures ; copyright, patents and trade 



POLITICAL HISTORY] 



AUSTRALIA 



9% 



marks; marriage and divorce; immigration and emigration; con- 
ciliation and arbitration in industrial disputes. Bills imposing 
taxation or appropriating revenue must not originate in the Senate, 
and neither taxation bills nor bills appropriating revenue for the 
annual service of the government may be amended in the Senate, 
but the Senate may return such bills to the House of Representatives 
with a request for their amendment. Appropriation laws must not 
deal with other matters. Taxation laws must deal with only one 
subject of taxation ; but customs and excise duties may, respectively, 
be dealt with together. Votes for the appropriation of the revenue 
shall not pass unless recommended by the governor-general. 
The constitution provides means for the settlement of disputes 
between the houses, and requires the assent of the sovereign to all 
laws. The executive power is vested in the governor-general, assisted 
by an executive council appointed by himself. He has command of 
the army and navy, and appoints federal ministers and judges. 
The ministers are members of the executive council, and must be, 
or within three months of their appointment must become, members 
of the parliament. The judicial powers are vested in a high court 
and other federal courts, and the federal judges hold office for life 
or during good behaviour. The High Court has appellate jurisdiction 
in cases from other federal courts and from the supreme courts of the 
states, and it has original jurisdiction in matters arising under laws 
made by the federal parliament, in disputes between states, or 
residents in different states, and in matters affecting the representa- 
tives of foreign powers. Special provisions were made respecting 
appeals from the High Court to the sovereign in council. The con- 
stitution set forth elaborate arrangements for the administration of 
finance and trade during the transition period following the trans- 
ference of departments to the Commonwealth. Within two years 
uniform customs duties were to be imposed; thereafter the parlia- 
ment of the Commonwealth had exclusive power to impose customs 
and excise duties, or to grant bounties; and trade within the 
Commonwealth was to be absolutely free. Exceptions were made 
permitting the states to grant bounties on mining and (with the 
consent of the parliament) on exports of produce or manufactures 
— Western Australia being for a time partially exempted from the 
prohibition to impose import duties. 

The constitution, parliament and laws of each state, subject to 
the federal constitution, retained their authority; state rights were 
carefully safeguarded, and an inter-state commission was given 
powers of adjudication and of administration of the laws relating 
to trade, transport and other matters. Provision was made for 
necessary alteration of the constitution of the Commonwealth, but 
so that no alteration could be effected unless the question had been 
directly submitted to, and the change accepted by the electorate in 
the states. The seat of government was to be within New South 
Wales, not less than ioo m. distant from Sydney, and of an area 
not less than ioo sq. m. Until other provision was made, the 
governor-general was to have a salary of £10,000, paid by the 
Commonwealth. Respecting the salaries of the governors of states, 
the constitution made no provision. 

The choice of governor-general of the new Commonwealth 
fell upon Lord Hopetoun (afterwards Lord Linlithgow) ,. who 
had won golden opinions as governor of Victoria a few years 
before; Mr (afterwards Sir Edmund) Barton, who had taken 
the lead among the Australian delegates, became first prime 
minister; and the Commonwealth was inaugurated at the open- 
ing of 1901. The first parliament under the constitution was 
elected on the 29th and 30th of March 1901, and was opened by 
the prince of Wales on the 9th of May following. In October 
1908 the Yass-Canberra district, near the town of Yass, N.S.W., 
was at length selected by both federal houses to contain the 
future federal capital. 

The Labour movement in Australia may be traced back to 
the early days when transportation was in vogue, and the free 
immigrant and the time-expired convict objected 
movement. t0 ^ e competition of the bond labourer. The great 
object of these early struggles being attained, Labour 
directed its attention mainly to securing shorter hours. It 
was aided very materially by the dearth of workers consequent 
on the gold discoveries, when every man could command his 
own price. When the excitement consequent on the gold finds 
had subsided, there was a considerable reaction against the claims 
of Labour, and this was greatly helped by the congested state 
of the labour market; but the principle of an eight-hours day 
made progress, and was conceded in several trades. In the early 
years of the 'seventies the colonies entered upon an era of well- 
being, and for about twelve years every man, willing to work 
and capable of exerting himself, readily found employment. 
The Labour unions were able to secure in these years many 
concessions both as to hours and wages. In 1873 there was an 



important rise in wages, in the following year there was a further 
advance, and another in 1876: but in 1877 wages fell back a. 
little, though not below the rate of 1874. In 1882 there was 
a very important advance in wages; carpenters received us. a 
day, bricklayers 12s. 6d., stone-masons 11 s. 6d., plasterers 12s., 
painters 1 is., blacksmiths 10s., and navvies and general labourers 
8s., and work was very plentiful. For five years these high 
wages ruled; but in 1886 there was a sharp fall, -though wages 
still remained very good. In 1888 there was an advance, 
and again in 1889. In 1890 matters were on the eve of a great 
change and wages fell, in most cases to a point 20 % below the 
rates of 1885. During the whole period from 1873 onwards, 
prices, other than of labour, were steadily tending downwards, 
so that the cost of living in 1890 was much below that of 1873. 
Taking everything into consideration the reduction was, perhaps, 
not less than 20 %, so that, though the nominal or money wages 
in 1873 and 1890 were the same, the actual wages were much 
higher in the latter year. Much of the improvement in the lot 
of the wage-earners has been due to the Labour organizations, 
yet so late as 1881 these organizations were of so little account, 
politically, that when the law relating to trades unions was 
passed in New South Wales, the English law was followed, and 
it was simply enacted that the purposes of any trades union 
shall not be deemed unlawful (so as to render a member liable 
to criminal prosecution for conspiracy or otherwise) merely 
by reason that they are in restraint of trade. After the year 
1884 Labour troubles became very frequent, the New South 
Wales coal miners in particular being at war with the colliery 
owners during the greater part of the six years intervening 
between then and what is called the Great Strike. The strong 
downward tendency of prices made a reduction of wages im- 
perative; but the labouring classes failed to recognize any such 
necessity, and strongly resented any reductions proposed by 
employers. It was hard indeed for a carter drawing coal to a 
gasworks to recognize the necessity which compelled a reduction 
in his wages because wool had fallen 20 %. Nor were other 
labourers, more nearly connected with the producing interests, 
satisfied with a reduction of wages because produce had fallen 
in price all round. Up to 1889 wages held their ground, although 
work had become more difficult to obtain, and some industries 
were being carried on without any profit. It was Tbeareai 
at such an inopportune time that the most extensive strike 
combination of Labour yet brought into action against of 1890. 
capital formulated its demands. It is possible that the 
London dockers' strike was not without its influence on the minds 
of the Australian Labour leaders. That strike had been liberally 
helped by the Australian unions, and it was confidently predicted 
that, as the Australian workers were more effectively organized 
than the English unions, a corresponding success would result 
from their course of action. A strike of the Newcastle miners, 
after lasting twenty-nine weeks, came to an end in January 1890, 
and throughout the rest of the year there was great unrest in 
Labour circles. On the 6th of September the silver mines closed 
down, and a week later a conference of employers issued a, 
manifesto which was met next day by a counter-manifesto of 
the Intercolonial Labour Conference, and almost immediately 
afterwards by the calling out of 40,000 men. The time chosen 
for the strike was the height of the wool season, when a cessation 
of work would be attended with the maximum of inconvenience. 
Sydney was the centre of the disturbance, and the city was in 
a state of industrial siege, feeling running to dangerous extremes. 
Riotous scenes occurred both in Sydney and on the coal-fields, 
and a large number of special constables were sworn in by the 
government. Towards the end of October 20,000 shearers were 
called out, and many other trades, principally concerned with 
the handling or shipping of wool, joined the ranks of the strikers, 
with the result that the maritime and pastoral industries through- 
out the whole of Australia were most injuriously disturbed. 
The Great Strike terminated early in November 1890, the 
employers gaining a decisive victory. The colonies were, how- 
ever, to have other and bitter experiences of strikes before 
Labour recognized that of all means for settling industrial 



9 68 



AUSTRALIA 



[POLITICAL HISTORY 



conse- 
quences. 



disputes strikes are, on the whole, the most disastrous that 
it can adopt. The strikes of the years 1890 and 1892 are just as 
important on account of their political consequences as from 
the direct gains or losses involved. 

As one result of the strike of 1890 a movement was set afoot 
by a number of enthusiasts, more visionary than practical, that 
has resulted in a measure of more or less disaster. 
Political This was thg planting of a colony of communistic 
Australians in South America. After much negotiation 
the leader, Mr William Lane, a Brisbane journalist, 
decided on Paraguay, and he tramped across the continent, 
preaching a new crusade, and gathering in funds and recruits in 
his progress. On the 16th of July 1893 the first little army of 
" New Australians " left Sydney in the " Royal Tar," which 
arrived at Montevideo on the 31st of August. Other consign- 
ments of intending settlers in " New Australia " followed; but 
though the settlement is still in existence it has completely failed 
to realize the impracticable ideals of its original members. The 
Queensland government assisted some of the disillusioned to 
escape from the paradise which proved a prison ; some managed 
to get away on their own account; and those that have remained 
have split into as many settlements almost as there are settlers. 
Another effect of the Great Strike was in a more practical direc- 
tion. New South Wales was the first country which endeavoured 
to settle its labour grievances through the ballot-box and to send 
a great party to parliament as the direct representation of 
Labour, pledged to obtain through legislation what it was 
unable to obtain by strikes and physical force. The principle 
of one-man one-vote had been persistently advocated without 
arousing any special parliamentary or public enthusiasm until 
the meeting of the Federal Convention in 189 1. The convention 
was attended by Sir George Grey, who was publicly welcomed 
to the colony by New Zealanders resident in Sydney, and by 
other admirers, and his reception was an absolute ovation. 
He eloquently and persistently advocated the principle of one- 
man one-vote as the bed-rock of all democratic reform. This 
subsequently formed the first plank of the Labour platform. 
Several attempts had been made by individuals belonging to the 
Labour party to enter the New South Wales parliament, but 
it was not until 1891 that the occurrence of a general election 
gave the party the looked-for opportunity for concerted action. 
The results of the election came as a complete surprise to the 
majority of the community. The Labour party captured 35 
seats out of a House of 125 members; and as the old parties 
almost equally divided the remaining seats, and a fusion was 
impossible, the Labour representatives dominated the situation. 
It was not long, however, before the party itself became divided 
on the fiscal question ; and a Protectionist government coming into 
power, about half the Labour members gave it consistent support 
and enabled it to maintain office for about three years, the party 
as a political unit being thus destroyed. The events of these 
three years taught the Labour leaders that a parliamentary party 
was of little practical influence unless it was able to cast on all 
important occasions a solid vote, and to meet the case a new 
method was devised. The party therefore determined that 
they would refuse to support any person standing in the Labour 
interests who refused to pledge himself to vote on all occasions 
in such way as the majority of the party might decide to be 
expedient. This was called the " solidarity pledge," and, united 
under its sanction, what was left of the Labour party contested 
the general election of 1894. The result was a defeat, their 
numbers being reduced from 35 to 19; but a signal triumph 
was won for solidarity. Very few of the members who refused 
to take the pledge were returned and the adherents of the united 
party were able to accomplish more with their reduced number 
than under the old conditions. 

The two features of the Labour party in New South Wales are 
its detachment from other parties and the control of the caucus. The 
caucus, which is the natural corollary of the detachment, determines 
by majority the vote of the whole of the members of the party, 
independence of action being allowed on minor questions only. 
So far the party has refrained from formal alliance with the other 
great parties of the state. It supports the government as the power 



alone capable of promoting legislation, but its support is given only 
so long as the measures of the government are consistent with the 
Labour policy. This position the Labour party has been able to 
maintain with great success, owing to the circumstance that the other 
parties have been almost equally balanced. 

The movement towards forming a parliamentary Labour 
party was not confined to New South Wales; on the contrary, 
it was common to all the states, having its origin in p ar n a . 
the failure of the Great Strike of 1890. The experience mentary 
of the party was also much the same as in New South Labour 
Wales, but its greatest triumphs were achieved in pa y ' 
South Australia. The Labour party has been in power in 
Queensland, Western Australia and South Australia, and has, 
on many occasions, decided the fate of the government on a 
critical division in all the states except Tasmania and Victoria". 
Different ideals dominate the party in the different states. The 
one ideal which has just been described represents the Labour 
party from the New South Wales standpoint. The only qualifica- 
tion worth mentioning is the signing of the pledge of solidarity. 
The other ideal, typified by the South Australian party, differs 
from this in one important respect. To the Labour party in 
that state are admitted only persons who have worked for their 
living at manual labour, and this qualification of being an actual 
worker is one that was strongly insisted upon at the formation 
of the party and strictly adhered to, although the temptation to 
break away from it and accept as candidates persons of superior 
education and position has been very great. On the formation 
of the Commonwealth a Labour party was established in the 
federal houses. It comprises one-third of the representation in 
the House of Representatives, and perhaps a still larger propor- 
tion in the Senate. The party is, however, formed on a broader 
basis than the state parties, the solidarity pledge extends only 
to votes upon which the fate of a government depends. Natu- 
rally, however, as the ideals of the members of the party are the 
same, the members of the Labour party will be generally found 
voting together on all important divisions, the chief exception 
being with regard to free trade or protection. The Labour party 
held power in the Commonwealth for a short period, and has 
had the balance of power in its hands ever since the formation of 
the Commonwealth. (T. A. C.) 

Australian legislation in the closing years of the 19th century 
and the first decade of the 20th bore the most evident traces 
of the Labour party's influence. In all the colonies a 
complete departure from principles laid down by the f^f* 
leading political economists of the 19th century was lation. 
made when acts were passed subjecting every branch of 
domestic industry to the control of specially constituted tribunals, 
which were empowered among other important functions to 
fix the minimum rate of wages to be paid to all grades of work- 
men. (See also the articles Arbitration and Conciliation; 
Trade Unions; Labour Legislation.) 

Victoria was the pioneer in factory legislation, the first Victorian 
act of that character dating from 1873. In 1884 a royal commission, 
appointed two years earlier to inquire into the conditions victoria. 
of employment in the colony and certain allegations of 
"sweating" that had then recently been made, reported that: — 
" The most effective mode of bringing about industrial co-operation 
and mutual sympathy between employers and employed, and thus 
obviating labour conflicts in the future, is by the establishment of 
courts of conciliation in Victoria, whose procedure and awards shall 
have the sanction and authority of law." This report led to the 
passing of a number of acts which, proving ineffectual, were followed 
by the Factories and Shops Act of 1896, passed by the ministry of 
Mr (afterwards Sir Alexander) Peacock. This measure, together 
with several subsequent amending acts, of which the most important 
became law in 1903, 1905 and 1907, forms a complete industrial code 
in which the principle of state regulation of wages is recognized 
and established. Its central enactment was to bring into existence 
(1) " Special Boards," consisting of an equal number of representa- 
tives of employers and workmen respectively in any trade, under 
the presidency of an independent chairman, and (2) a Court of 
Industrial Appeals. A special board may be formed at the request 
of any union of employers or of workmen, or on the initiative of 
the Labour department. After hearing evidence, which may be 
given on oath, the special board issues a " determination," fixing 
the minimum rate of wages to be paid to various classes of workers 
of both sexes and different ages in the trade covered by the deter- 
mination, including apprentices ; and specifying the number of hours 



POLITICAL HISTORY] 



AUSTRALIA 



9% 



per week for which such wages are payable, with the rates for over- 
time when those hours are exceeded. The determination is then 
gazetted, and it becomes operative over a specified area, which varies 
in different cases, on a date fixed by the board. Either party, or the 
minister for Labour, may refer a determination to the court of 
industrial appeals, and the court, in the event of a special board 
failing to make a determination, may itself be called upon to frame 
one. The general administration of the Factories and Shops Acts, 
to which the special boards owe their being, is vested in a chief 
inspector of factories, subject to the control of the minister of Labour 
in matters of policy. Before the end of 1906 fifty-two separate 
trades in Victoria had obtained special boards, by whose determina- 
tions their queries were controlled.

South -^ similar system was introduced into South Australia 

Australia, by an act passed in 1900 amending the Factory Act of 
1894, which was the first legislation of the sort passed in 
that state. 

In Queensland, where the earliest factory legislation dates from 

Queens- l ^9^> keen parliamentary conflict raged round the pro- 

land. posal in 1907 to introduce the special boards system for 

fixing wages. More than one change of government 

occurred before the bill became law in April 1908. 

In New South Wales, whose example was followed by Western 
Australia, the machinery adopted for fixing the statutory rate of 
New South wa S es was °f a somewhat different type. The model 
Wales. followed in these two states was not Victoria but New 
Zealand, where an Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration 
Act was passed in 1894. A similar measure, under the guidance of 
the attorney-general, the Hon. B. R. Wise, was carried after much 
opposition in New South Wales in 1901, to remain in force till the 
30th of June 1908. By it an arbitration court was instituted, con- 
sisting of a president and assessors representing the employers' 
unions and the workers' unions respectively; in any trade in which 
a dispute occurs, any union of workmen or employers registered 
under the act was given the right to bring the matter before- the 
arbitration court, and if the court makes an award, an application 
may be made to it to make the award a " common rule," which there- 
upon becomes binding over the trade affected, wherever the act 
applies. The award of the court is thus the equivalent of the deter- 
mination of a special board in Victoria, and deals with the same 
questions, the most important of which are the minimum rates of 
wages and the number of working hours per week. The act contained 
stringent provisions forbidding strikes; but in this respect it failed 
to effect its purpose, several strikes occurring in the years following 
its enactment, in which there were direct refusals to obey awards. 

In the years 1900 and 1902 acts were passed in Western Australia 
still more closely modelled on the New Zealand act than was the 
Western above-mentioned statute in New South Wales. Unlike 
Australia. tne l at ter, they reproduced the institution of district 
conciliation boards in addition to the arbitration court ; 
but these boards were a failure here as they were in New Zealand, and 
after 1903 they fell into disuse. In Western Australia, too, the act 
failed to prevent strikes taking place. In 1907 a serious strike 
occurred in the timber trade, attended by all the usual accompani- 
ments, except actual disorder, of an industrial conflict. 

In all this legislation one of the most hotly contested points was 
whether the arbitration court should be given power to lay it down 
Federal t ^ at wor ' c ers who were members of a trade union should 
Arbitra- ^ e em Pl°y e d in preference to non-unionists. This power 
tloa Act vvas gi ven to the tribunal in New South Wales, but was 
1904. withheld in Western Australia. It was the same question 

that formed the chief subject of debate over the Federal 
Conciliation and Arbitration Act, which, after causing the defeat of 
more than one ministry, passed through the Commonwealth parlia- 
ment in 1904. It was eventually compromised by giving the power, 
but only with safeguarding conditions, to the Federal arbitration 
court. This tribunal differs from similar courts in the states inasmuch 
as it consists of a single member, called the " president," an officer 
appointed by the governor-general from among the justices of the 
High Court of Australia. The president has the power to appoint 
assessors to advise him on technical points ; and considerable powers 
of devolution of authority for the purpose of inquiry and report are 
conferred upon the court, the main object of which is to secure 
settlement by conciliatory methods. The distinctive object of the 
Federal Act, as defined in the measure itself, is to provide machinery 
for dealing with industrial disputes extending beyond any one state, 
examples of which were furnished by the first two important cases 
submitted to the court — the one concerning the merchant marine 
of Australia, and the other the sheep shearers, both of which were 
heard in 1907. An additional duty was thrown on the Federal 
arbitration court by the Customs and Excise Tariff Acts of 1906, 
in which were embodied the principles known as the " New Pro- 
tection." By the Customs Act the duty was raised on imported 
agricultural implements, while as a safeguard to the consumer the 
maximum prices for the retail of the goods were fixed. In order to 
provide a similar protection for the artisans employed in the protected 
industries, an excise duty was imposed on the home-produced articles, 
which was to be remitted in favour of manufacturers who could 
show that they paid "fair and reasonable " wages, and complied 
with certain other conditions for the benefit of their workmen. The ' 



chief authority for determining whether these conditions are satisfied 
or not is the Federal arbitration court. 

The same period that saw this legislation adopted was also marked 
by the establishment of old age pensions in the three eastern states, 
and also in the Commonwealth. By the Federal Act, oidage 
passed in the session of 1908, a pension of ten shillings pen sions. 
a week was granted to persons of either sex over sixty-five 
years of age, or to persons over sixty who are incapacitated from 
earning a living. The Commonwealth legislation thus made pro- 
vision for the aged poor in the three states which up to 1908 had 
not accepted the principle of old age pensions, and also for those 
who, owing to their having resided in more than one state, were 
debarred from receiving pension in any. 

An important work of the Commonwealth parliament was the 
passing of a uniform tariff to supersede the six separate tariffs 
in force at the establishment of the Commonwealth, Tariff 
but many other important measures were considered 
and some passed into law. During the first six years of federation 
there were five ministries; the tenure of office under the three- 
yearly system was naturally uncertain, and this uncertainty was 
reflected in the proposals of whatever ministry was in office. 
The great task of adjusting the financial business of the Common- 
wealth on a permanent basis was one of very great difficulty, 
as the apparent interests of the states and of the Commonwealth 
were opposed. Up till 1908 it had been generally assumed that 
the constitution required the treasurer of the Commonwealth 
to hand over to the states month by month whatever surplus 
funds remained in his hands. But in July 1908 a Surplus 
Revenue Act was passed which was based on a different inter- 
pretation of the constitution. Under this act the appropriation 
of these surplus funds to certain trust purposes in the Federal 
treasury is held to be equivalent to payment to the states. The 
money thus obtained was appropriated in part to naval defence 
and harbours, and in part to the provision of old age pensions 
under the Federal Old Age Pension Act of 1908. The act was 
strongly opposed by the government of Queensland, and the 
question was raised as to whether it was based on a true inter- 
pretation of the constitution. The chief external interest, how- 
ever, of the new financial policy of the Commonwealth lay in 
its relation towards the empire as a whole. At the Imperial 
Conference in London in 1907 Mr Deakin, the Commonwealth 
premier, was the leadingadvocateof colonial preference witha view 
to imperial commercial union; and though no reciprocal arrange- 
ment was favoured by the Liberal cabinet, who temporarily . 
spoke for the United Kingdom, the colonial representatives 
were all agreed in urging such a policy, and found the Opposition 
(the Unionist party) in England prepared to adopt it as part of 
Mr Chamberlain's tariff reform movement. In spite of the 
official rebuff received from the mother-country, the Australian 
ministry, in drawing up the new Federal tariff, gave a substantial 
preference to British imports, and thus showed their willingness 
to go farther. (Sep the article British Empire.) (R. J.M.) 

General Bibliography. — For Physical Geography: Barton, 
Australian Physiography ■(Brisbane, 1895) ; Wall, Physical Geography 
of Australia (Melbourne, 1883) ; Taylor, Geography of New South 
Wales (Sydney, 1898) ; Saville Kent, The Great Barrier Reef of 
Australia (London, 1893) ; A. Agassiz, Visit to the Barrier Reef (Cam- 
bridge, Mass., 1899) ; J. P. Thomson, The Physical Geography of 
Australia (Smithsonian Report, Washington, 1898); J. W. Gregory, 
The Dead Heart of Australia. For Flora: Maiden, Useful. Native 
Plants of Australia (Sydney, 1889) ; Bentham and Mueller, Flora 
Australiensis (London, 1863-1878); Fitzgerald, Australian Orchids 
(Sydney, 1870-1890); Mueller, Census of Australian Plants (Mel- 
bourne, 1889). For Fauna: Forbes, " The Chatham Islands; their 
Relation to a former Southern Continent," Geographical Journal, 
vol. ii. (1893); Hedley, " Surviving Refugees in Austral Lands of 
Ancient Antarctic Life," Royal Society N. S. Wales, 1895; " The 
Relation of the Fauna and Flora of Australia to those of New 
Zealand," Nat. Science (1893); Tenison- Woods, The Fish and 
Fisheries of New South Wales (Sydney, 1883); Ogilvy, Catalogue of 
Australian Mammals (Sydney, 1892); Aflalo, Natural History of 
Australia (London, 1896); Flower and Lydekker, Mammals, Living 
and Extinct (London, 1891); J. Douglas Ogilby, Catalogue of the 
Fishes of New South Wales, 4to (Sydney, 1886). For Statistics 
and Miscellanea: T. A. Coghlan, A Statistical Account of the Seven 
Colonies of Australasia, 8vo (Sydney, 1904); G. Collingridge, The 
Discovery of Australia (Sydney, 1895); W. Epps, The Land Systems 
of Australia, 8vo (London, 1894); Ernest Favenc, The History of 
Australasian Exploration, royal Svo (Sydney, 188$); R. R. Garran, 



97° 



AUSTRASIA— AUSTRIA 



The Coming Commonwealth: a Handbook of Federal Government 
(Sydney, 1897); George William Rusden, History of Australia, 
3 vols. 8vo (London, 1883) ; K. Schmeisser, The Goldfields of Austral- 
asia, 2 vols. (London, 1899) ; G. F. Scott, The Romance of Australian 
Exploring (London, 1899) ; H. de R. Walker, Australasian Democracy 
(London, 1897); William Westgarth, Half a Century of Australian 
Progress (London, 1899); T. A. Coghlan and T. T. Ewing, Progress 
of Australia in the ioth Century; G. P. Tregarthen, Commonwealth 
of Australia; Ida Lee, Early Days of Australia; W. P. Reeves, 
State Experiments in Australia and New Zealand; A. Metin, La 
Socialisme sans doctrine. 

AUSTRASIA. The word Austria signifies the realm of the 
east (Ger. Ost Reich). In Gregory of Tours this word is still 
used vaguely, but the sense of it is gradually defined, and 
finally the name of Austria or Austrasia was given to the eastern- 
most part of the Frankish kingdom. It usually had Metz for its 
capital, and the inhabitants of the kingdom were known as the 
Austrasii. Retrospectively, later historians have given this 
name to the kingdom of Theuderich I. (511-534), of his son 
Theudebert (534-548), and of his grandson Theudebald (548- 
555); then, after the death of Clotaire I., to the kingdom of 
Sigebert (561-575), and of his son Childebert (575-597). They 
have even tried to interpret the long struggle between Fredegond 
and Brunhilda as a rivalry between the two kings of Neustria 
and Austrasia. When these two words are at last found in the 
texts in their precise signification, Austrasia is applied to that 
part of the Frankish kingdom which Clotaire II. entrusted to his 
son Dagobert, subject to the guardianship of Pippin and Arnulf 
(623-629), and which Dagobert in his turn handed on to his son 
Sigebert (634-639), under the guardianship of Cunibert, bishop 
of Cologne, and Ansegisel, mayor of the palace. After the death 
of Dagobert, Austrasia and Neustria almost always had separate 
kings, with their own mayors of the palace, and then there arose 
a real rivalry between these two provinces, which ended in the 
triumph of Austrasia. The Austrasian mayors of the palace 
succeeded in enforcing their authority in the western as well 
as in the eastern part, and in re-establishing to their own ad- 
vantage the unity of the Frankish kingdom. The mayor Pippin 
the Short was even powerful enough to take the title of king over 
the whole. 

At the time of Charlemagne, the word Austrasia underwent 
a change of meaning and became synonymous with Francia 
orientalis, and was applied to the Frankish dominions beyond 
the Rhine (Franconia). This Franconia was in 843 included 
in the kingdom of Louis the German, and was then increased 
by the addition of the territories of Mainz, Spires and Worms, 
on the right bank of the river. 

See A. Huguenin, Histoire du royaume merovingien d'Austrasie 
(Paris, 1857); Aug. Digot, Histoire du royaume d'Austrasie, 4 vols. 
(Nancy, 1863); L. Drapeyron, Essai sur I'origine, le developpement 
et les resultats de la lutte entre la Neustrie et I'Austrasie (Paris, 1867); 
Auguste Longnon, Atlas historique, 1st and 2nd parts. (C. Pf.) 

AUSTRIA. (Ger. Osterreich), a country of central Europe, 
bounded E. by Russia and Rumania, S. by Hungary, the Adriatic 
Sea and Italy, W. by Switzerland, Liechtenstein and the German 
empire (Bavaria), and N. by the German empire (Saxony and 
Prussia) and Russia. It has an area of 115,533 sq. m., or about 
twice the size of England and Wales together. Austria is one 
of the states which constitute the Austro-Hungarian (Habsburg) 
monarchy (see Austria-Hungary: History), and is also called 
Cisleithania, from the fact that it contains the portion of that 
monarchy which lies to the west of the river Leitha. Austria 
does not form a geographical unity, and the constituent parts 
of this empire belong to different geographical regions. Thus, 
Tirol, Styria and Carinthia belong, like Switzerland, to the 
system of the Alps, but these provinces together with' those 
lying in the basin of the Danube form, nevertheless, a compact 
stretch of country. On the other hand Galicia, extending on 
the eastern side of the Carpathians, belongs to the great plain 
of Russia; Bohemia stretches far into the body of Germany; 
while Dalmatia, which is quite separated from the other provinces, 
belongs to the Balkan Peninsula. 

Coasts. — Austria has amongst all the great European countries 
the most continental character, in so far as its frontiers are mostly 



land-frontiers, only about one-tenth of them being coast-land. 
The Adriatic coast, which stretches for a distance of about 1000 m., 
is greatly indented. The Gulf of Trieste on the west, and the, Gulf 
of Fiume or Quarnero on the east, include between them the pen- 
insula of Istria, which has many sheltered bays. In the Gulf of 
Quarnero are the Quarnero islands, of which the most important 
are Cherso, Veglia and Lussin. The coast west of the mouth of the 
Isonzo is fringed by lagoons, and has the same character as the 
Venetian coast, while the Gulf of Trieste and the Istrian peninsula 
have a steep coast with many bays and safe harbours. The principal 
ports are Trieste, Capodistria, Pirano, Parenzo, Rovigno and Pola, 
the great naval harbour and arsenal of Austria. The coast of Dal- 
matia also possesses many safe bays, the principal being those of 
Zara, Cattaro and Ragusa, but in some places it is very steep and 
inaccessible. On the other hand a string of islands extends along 
this coast, which offer many safe and easily accessible places of 
anchorage to ships during the fierce winter gales which rage in the 
Adriatic. The principal are Pago, Pasman, Isola Lunga and Isola 
Incoronata, Brazza, Lesina, Curzoia and Meleda. 

The political divisions of Austria correspond, for the most part, 
so closely to natural physical divisions that the detailed account 
of the physical features, natural resources and the movement of the 
population has been given under those separate headings. In this 
general article the geography of Austria — physical, economical and 
political — has been treated in its broad aspects, and those points 
insisted upon which give an adequate idea of the country as a whole. 

Mountains. — Austria is the most mountainous country of Europe 
after Switzerland, and about four-fifths of its entire area is more 
than 600 ft. above the level of the sea. The mountains of Austria 
belong to three different mountain systems, namely, the Alps (q.v.), 
the Carpathians (q.v.), and the Bohemian-Moravian Mountains. 
The Danube, which is the principal river of Austria, divides the 
Alpine region, which occupies the whole country lying at its south, 
from the Bohemian-Moravian Mountains and their offshoots lying 
at its north ; while the valleys of the March and the Oder separate 
the last-named mountains from the Carpathians. Of the three 
principal divisions of the Alps — the western, the central and the 
eastern Alps — Austria is traversed by several groups of the central 
Alps, while the eastern Alps lie entirely within its territory. The 
eastern Alps are continued by the Karst mountains, which in their 
turn are continued by the Dinaric Alps, which stretch through 
Croatia and Dalmatia. The second great mountain-system of 
Austria, the Carpathians, occupy its eastern and north-eastern 
portions, and stretch in the form of an arch through Moravia, Silesia, 
Galicia and Bukovina, forming the frontier towards Hungary, within 
which territory they principally extend. Finally, the Bohemian- 
Moravian Mountains, which enclose Bohemia and Moravia, and form 
the so-called quadrilateral of Bohemia, constitute the link of the 
Austrian mountain-system with the hilly region (the Mittelgebirge) 
of central Europe. Only a little over 25 % of the area of Austria is 
occupied by plains. The largest is the plain of Galicia, which is part 
of the extensive Sarmatic plain; while in the south, along the 
Isonzo, Austria comprises a small part of the Lombardo- Venetian 
plain. Several smaller plains are found along the Danube, as the 
Tulner Becken in Lower Austria, and the Wiener Becken, the plain 
on which the capital is situated; to the north of the Danube this 
plain is called the Marchfeld, and is continued under the name of 
the Marchebene into Moravia as far north as Olmiitz. Along the 
other principal rivers there are also plains of more or less magnitude, 
some of them possessing tracts of very fertile soil. 

Rivers. — Austria possesses a fairly great number of rivers, pretty 
equally distributed amongst its crown lands, with the exception of 
Istria and the Karst region, where there is a great scarcity of even 
the smallest rivers. The principal rivers are: the Danube, the 
Dniester, the Vistula, the Oder, the Elbe, the Rhine and the Adige 
or Etsch. As the highlands of Austria form part of the great 
watershed of Europe, which divides the waters flowing northward 
into the North Sea or the Baltic from those flowing southward or 
eastward into the Mediterranean or the Black Sea, its rivers flow 
in three different directions — northward, southward and eastward. 
With the exception of the small streams belonging to it which fall 
into the Adriatic, all its rivers have their mouths in other countries', 
and its principal river, the Danube, has also its source in another 
country. When it enters Austria at the gorge of Passau, where it 
receives the Inn, a river which has as large a body of water as itself, 
the Danube is already navigable. Till it leaves the country at 
Hainburg, just before Pressburg, its banks are pretty closely hemmed 
by the Alps, and the river passes through a succession of narrow 
defiles. But the finest part of its whole course, as regards the pictur- 
esqueness of the scenery on its banks, is between Linz and Vienna. 
Where it enters Austria the Danube is 898 ft. above the level of 
the sea, and where it leaves it is only 400 ft. ; it has thus a fall within 
the country of 498 ft., and is at first a very rapid stream, becoming 
latterly much slower. The Danube has in Austria a course of 234 m., 
and it drains an area of 50,377 sq.m. Its principal affluents in Austria, 
besides the Inn, are the Traun, the Enns and the March. The 
Dniester, which, like the Danube, flows into the Black Sea, has its 
source in the Carpathians in Eastern Galicia, and pursues a very 
winding course towards the south-east, passing into Russia. It has 
in Austria a course of 370 m. of which 300 are navigable, and drains 



AUSTRIA 



971 



an area of 12,000 sq. m. The Vistula and the Oder both fall into 
the Baltic. The former rises in Moravia, flows first north through 
Austrian Silesia, then takes an easterly direction along the borders 
of Prussian Silesia, and afterwards a north-easterly, separating 
Galicia from Russian Poland, and leaving Austria not far from 
Sandomir. Its course in Austria is 240 m., draining an area of 15,500 
sq. m. It is navigable for nearly 200 m., and its principal affluents 
are the Dunajec, the San and the Bug. The Oder has also its source 
in Moravia, flows first east and then north-east through Austrian 
Silesia into Prussia. Its length within the Austrian territory is only 
about 55 m., no part of which is navigable. The only river of this 
country which flows into the North Sea is the Elbe. It has its source 
in the Riesengebirge, not far from the Schneekoppe, flows first south, 
then west, and afterwards north-west through Bohemia, and then 
enters Saxony. Its principal affluents are the Adler, Iser and Eger, 
and, most important of all, the Moldau. The Elbe has a course 
within the Austrian dominions of 185 m., for about 65 of which it is 
navigable. It drains an area of upwards of 2 1 ,000 sq. m. The Rhine, 
though scarcely to be reckoned a river of the country, flows for about 
25 m. of its course between it and Switzerland. The principal river 
of Austria which falls into the Adriatic is the Adige or Etsch. 
It rises in the mountains of Tirol, flows south, then east, and 
afterwards south, into the plains of Lombardy. It has in Austria a 
course of 138 m., and drains an area of 4266 sq. m. Its principal 
affluent is the Eisak. Of the streams which have their course entirely 
within the country, and fall into the Adriatic, the principal is the 
Isonzo, 75 m. in length, but navigable only for a short distance from 
its mouth. 

Lakes. — Austria does not possess any great lakes ; but has numer- 
ous small mountain lakes situated in the Alpine region, the most 
renowned for the beauty of their situation being found in Salzburg, 
Salzkammergut, Tirol and Carinthia. There should also be men- 
tioned the periodical lakes situated in the Karst region, the largest 
of them being the Lake of Zirknitz. The numerous and large 
marshes, found now mostly in Galicia and Dalmatia, have been 
greatly reduced in the other provinces through the canalization of 
the rivers, and other works of sanitation. 

Mineral Springs. — No other European country equals Austria 
in the number and value of its mineral springs. They are mostly 
to be found in Bohemia, and are amongst the most frequented 
watering-places in the world. The most important are, the alkaline 
springs of Carlsbad, Marienbad, Franzensbad and Bilin; the alkaline 
acidulated waters of Giesshiibel, largely used as table waters; the 
iron springs of Marienbad, Franzensbad and of Pyrawarth in Lower 
Austria; the bitter waters of Piillna, Saidschitz and Sedlitz; the 
saline waters of Ischl and of Aussee in Styria; the iodine waters 
of Hall in Upper Austria; the different waters of Gastein; and 
lastly the thermal waters of Teplitz-Schonau, Johannisbad, and of 
Romerbad in Styria. Altogether there are reckoned to exist over 
1500 mineral springs, of which many are not used. (O. Br.) 

Geology. — The Austro-Hungarian Monarchy is traversed by the 
great belt of folded beds which constitutes the Alps and the Car- 
pathians; a secondary branch proceeding from the main belt runs 
along the Adriatic coast and forms the Julian and Dinaric Alps. In 
the space which is thus enclosed, lies the Tertiary basin of the Hun- 
garian plain ; and outside the belt, on the northern side, is a region 
which, geologically, is composite, but has uniformly resisted the 
Carpathian folding. In the neighbourhood of Vienna a gap in the 
folded belt — the gap between the Alps and the Carpathians — has 
formed a connexion between these two regions since the early part 
of the Miocene period. On its outer or convex side the folded belt 
is clearly defined by a depression which is generally filled by modern 
deposits. Beyond this, in Russia and Galicia, lies an extensive 
plateau, much of which is covered by flat-lying Miocene and Pliocene 
beds; but in the deep valleys of the Dniester and its tributaries the 
ancient rocks which form the foundation of the plateau are laid 
bare. Archaean granite is thus exposed at Yampol and other places 
in Russia, and this is followed towards the west by Silurian and 
Devonian beds in regular succession — the Devonian being of the Old 
Red Sandstone type characteristic of the British Isles and of Northern 
Russia. Throughout, the dip is very low and the beds are unaffected 
by the Carpathian folds, the strike being nearly from north to south. 
After Devonian times the region seems to have been dry land until 
the commencement of the Upper Cretaceous period, when it was 
overspread by the Cenomanian sea, and the deposits of that sea 
lie flat upon the older sediments. 

Some 25 or 30 m. of undulating country separate the Dniester 
from the margin of the Carpathian chain, and in this space the 
Palaeozoic floor sinks far beneath the surface, so that not even the 
deep-cut valley of the Pruth exposes any beds of older date than 
Miocene. Towards the north-west, also, the Palaeozoic foundation 
falls beneath an increasing thickness of Cretaceous beds and lies 
buried far below the surface. At Lemberg a boring 1650 ft. in depth 
did not reach the base of the Senonian. West of Cracow the Cretace- 
ous beds are underlaid by Jurassic and Triassic deposits, the general 
dip being eastward. It is not till Silesia that the Palaeozoic for- 
mations again rise to the surface. Here is the margin, often concealed 
by very modern deposits, of the great mass of Archaean and Palaeo- 
zoic rocks which forms nearly the whole of Bohemia and Moravia. 
The Palaeozoic beds no longer lie flat and undisturbed, as in the 



Polish plain. They are faulted and folded. But the folds are alto- 
gether independent of those of the Carpathians; they are of much 
earlier date, and are commonly different in direction. The principal 
folding took place towards the close of the Carboniferous period, 
and the massif is a fragment of an ancient mountain chain, the 
Variscische Gebirge of E. Suess, which in Permian and Triassic times 
stretched across the European area from west to east. 

In Bohemia and Moravia the whole of the beds from the Cambrian 
to the Lower Carboniferous are of marine origin; but after the 
Carboniferous period the area appears to have been dry land until the 
beginning of the Upper Cretaceous period, when the sea again spread 
over it. The deposits of this sea are now visible in the large basin 
of Upper Cretaceous beds which stretches from Dresden south- 
eastward through Bohemia. Since the close of the Cretaceous period 
the Bohemian massif has remained above the sea ; but the depression 
which lies immediately outside the Carpathian chain has at times 
been covered by an arm of the sea and at other times has been 
occupied by a chain of salt lakes, to which the salt deposits of 
Wieliczka and numerous brine springs owe their origin. 

The large area which is enclosed within the curve of the Car- 
pathians is for the most part covered by loess, alluvium and other 
modern deposits, but Miocene and Pliocene beds appear around its 
borders. In the hilly region of western Transylvania a large mass of 




1 Triassic 

1 Permian 

] Carboniferous 

M01M Devonian 



Archaean A Meiamorphlo 
Plutonic Rocks 
Volcanic Rocks 



Geological Map of Austria-Hungary. 

more ancient rocks is exposed ; the Carboniferous system and all 
the Mesozoic systems have been recognized here, and granite and 
volcanic rocks occur. In the middle of Hungary a line of hills rises 
above the plain, striking from the Platten See towards the north- 
east, where it merges into the inner girdle of the Carpathian chain. 
These hills are largely formed of volcanic rocks of late Tertiary age ; 
but near the Platten See Triassic beds of Alpine type are well de- 
veloped. The Tertiary eruptions were not confined to this line of hills. 
They were most extensive along the inner border of the Carpathians, 
and they occurred also in the north of Bohemia. Most of the erup- 
tions took place during the Miocene and Pliocene periods. 

The mineral wealth of Austria is very great. The older rocks are 
in many places peculiarly rich in metalliferous ores of all kinds. 
Amongst them may be mentioned the silver-bearing lead ores of 
Erzgebirge and of Pribram in Bohemia; the iron ores of Styria 
and Bukovina; and the iron, copper, cobalt and nickel of the dis- 
tricts of Zips and Gomor. The famous cinnabar and mercury mines 
of Idria in Carniola are in Triassic beds; and the gold and silver of 
northern Hungary and of Transylvania are associated with the 
Tertiary volcanic rocks. The Carboniferous coal-fields of Silesia 
and Bohemia are of the greatest importance; while Jurassic 
coal is worked at Steyerdorf and Funfkirchen in Hungary, and 
lignite at many places in the Tertiary beds. The great salt mines 
of Galicia are in Miocene deposits; but salt is also worked largely in 
the Trias of the Alps. (See also Alps; Carpathians; Hungary 
and Tirol.) _ (P. La.) 

Climate. — The climate of Austria, in consequence of its great 
extent, and the great differences in the elevation of its surface, is 
very various. It is usual to divide it into three distinct zones. The 
most southern extends to 46° N. lat., and includes Dalmatia and the 
country along the coast, together with the southern portions of Tirol 
and Carinthia. Here the seasons are mild and equable, the winters 
are short (snow seldom falling), and the summers last for five months. 
The vine and maize are everywhere cultivated, as well as olives and 
other southern products. In the south of Dalmatia tropical plants 
flourish in the open air. The central zone lies between 46 s and 49 
N. lat., and includes Lower and Upper Austria, Salzburg, Styria, 
Carinthia, Carniola, Central and Northern Tirol, Southern Moravia 



972 



AUSTRIA 



and a part of Bohemia. The seasons are more marked here than in 
the preceding. The winters are longer and more severe, and the 
summers are hotter. The vine and maize are cultivated in 
favourable situations, and wheat and other kinds of grain are gener- 
ally grown. The northern zone embraces the territory lying north 
of 49 N. lat., comprising Bohemia, Northern 
Moravia, Silesia and Galicia. The winters are 
here long and cold ; the vine and maize are no 
longer cultivated.the principal crops being wheat, 
barley, oats, rye, hemp and flax. The mean 
annual temperature ranges from about 59 in the 
south to 48 in the north. In some parts of the 
country, however, it is as low as 46 40' and even 
36 . In Vienna the average annual temperature 
is 50 , the highest temperature being 94 , the 
lowest 2° Fahr. In general the eastern part of 
the country receives less rain than the western. 
In the south the rains prevail chiefly in spring 
and autumn, and in the north and central parts 
during summer. Storms are frequent in the 
region of the south Alps and along the coast. 
In some parts in the vicinity of the Alps the 
rainfall is excessive, sometimes exceeding 60 in. 
It is less among the Carpathians, where it usually 
varies from 30 to 40 in. In other parts the rainfall 
usually averages from 20 to 24 in. 

Flora. — From the varied character of its 
climate and soil the vegetable productions of 
Austria are very diverse. It has floras of 
the plains, the hills and the mountains; an alpine flora, and an 
arctic flora ; a flora of marshes, and a flora of steppes ; floras peculiar 
to the clay, the chalk, the sandstone and the slate formations. The 
number of different species is estimated at 12,000, of which one-third 
are phanerogamous.or flowering plants, and two-thirds cryptogamous, 
or flowerless. The crown land of Lower Austria far surpasses in this 
respect the other divisions of the country, having about four-ninths 
of the whole, and not less than 1 700 species of flowering plants. As 
stated above, Austria is a very mountainous country and the moun- 
tains are frequently covered with vegetation to a great elevation. 
At the base are found vines and maize ; on the lower slopes are green 
pastures, or wheat, barley and other kinds of corn; above are often 
forests of oak, ash, elm, &c. ; and still higher the yew and the fir may 
be seen braving the climatic conditions. Corn grows to between 
3400 and 4500 ft. above the level of the sea, the forests extend to 
5600 or 6400 ft., and the line of perpetual snow is from 7800 to 8200 ft. 

Fauna.— -The animal kingdom embraces, besides the usual 
domestic animals (as horses, cattle, sheep, swine, goats, asses, &c), 
wild boars, deer, wild goats, hares, &c. ; also bears, wolves, lynxes, 
foxes, wild cats, jackals, otters, beavers, polecats, martens, weasels 
and the like. Eagles and hawks are common, and many kinds of 
singing birds. The rivers and lakes abound in different kinds of fish, 
which are also plentiful on the sea-coast. Among the insects the bee 
and the silkworm are the most useful. The leech forms an article 
of trade. In all there are 90 different species of mammals, 248 
species of birds, 377 of fishes and more than 13,000 of insects. 

Divisions. — Austria is composed of seventeen " lands," called 
also " crown lands." Of these, three — namely, Bohemia, Galicia 
and Lodomeria, and Dalmatia — are kingdoms; two — Lower and 
Upper Austria — archduchies; six — Salzburg, Styria, Carinthia, 
Carniola, Silesia and Bukovina — duchies ; two — Gorz-Gradisca and 
Tirol — countships of princely rank (gefilrstete Graf schaf ten); two 
— Moravia andlstria — margraviates (march counties). Vorarlberg 
bears the title simply of " land." Trieste, with its district, is a town 
treated as a special crown land. For administrative purposes Trieste, 
with Gorz-Gradisca and Istria, constituting the Kiistenland (the 
Coast land) and Tirol and Vorarlberg, are each comprehended as 
one administrative territory. The remaining lands constitute each 
an administrative territory by itself. 

Population. — Austria had in 1900 a population of 26,107,304 
inhabitants, 1 which is equivalent to 226 inhabitants per sq. m. 
As seen from the above table the density of the population is 
unequal in the various crown lands. The most thickly populated 
province is Lower Austria; the Alpine provinces are sparsely 
populated, while Salzburg is the most thinly populated crown land 
of Austria. As regards sex, for every 1000 men there were 
1035 women, the female element being the most numerous in 
every crown land,except the Kiistenland,Bukovina and Dalmatia. 
Compared with the census returns of 1890, the population shows 
an increase of 2,211,891, or 9-3% of the total population. The 
increase between the preceding census returns of 1880 and 1890 

J The census returns of 1857, and of 1869, which were the first 
systematic censuses taken, gave the population of Austria as 
18,224,500 and 20,394,980 respectively. It must be noticed that 
between these two dates Austria lost its Lombardo- Venetian terri- 
tories, with a population of about 5,000,000 inhabitants. 



was of 1,750,093 inhabitants, or 7-9% of the total population. 
A very important factor in the movement of the population 
is the large over-sea emigration, mostly to the United States of 
America, which has grown very much during the last quarter 



Administrative Territories. 


Areas in 
Square 
Miles. 


Population. 


Density of 

Population 

per sq. m. 

in 1900. 


1890. 


1900. 


Austria — 

Lower Austria .... 
Upper Austria .... 
Salzburg 

Carinthia ..... 

Carniola 

Kiistpnland 

Tirol and Vorarlberg . 
Bohemia 

Galicia 

Total . . . 

.^ ___ 


7,654 
4,617 

2,757 
8,642 

3,992 

3-844 

3,074 

11,287 

19,997 
8,555 
1,981 

30,212 
4,022 
4,923 


2,661,799 
785,831 
l73,5io 

1,282,708 
361,008 
498,958 
695,384 
928,769 

5,843,094 

2,276,870 
605,649 

6,607,816 
646,591 
527,426 


3,100,493 
809,918 

193,247 
1,356,058 

367,344 

508,348 

755,183 

979,878 

6,318,280 

2,435,o8i 

680,529 

7,295,538 

729,921 

591,597 


405 
175 

69 
156 

91 
132 

245 
86 

315 

284 

342 
241 
181 
120 


H5,533 


23,895,413 


26,107,304 


226 



of the 19th century, and which shows a tendency to become still 
larger. Between 1891 and 1900 the number of over-sea emigrants 
was 387,770 persons. The movement of the population shown 
in the other vital statistics — births, marriages, deaths — are 
mostly satisfactory, and show a steady and normal progress. 
The annual rate per thousand of population in 1900 was: births, 
37-0; still-births, i-i; deaths, 25-2; marriages, 8-2. The only 
unsatisfactory points are the great number of illegitimate births, 
and the high infant mortality. Of the total population of 
Austria 14,009,233 were scattered in 26,321 rural communities 
with less than 2000 inhabitants; while the remainder was 
distributed in 1742 communities with a population of 2000-5000; 
in 260 communities with a population of 5000-10,000; in 96 
towns with a population of 10,000-20,000; in 41 towns with 
a population of 20,000-50,000; in 6 towns with a popula- 
tion of 50,000-100,000; and in 6 towns with a population 
of over 100,000 inhabitants. The principal towns of Austria 
are Vienna (1,662,269), Prague (460,849), Trieste (132,879), 
Lemberg (159,618), Graz (138,370), Briinn (108,944), Cracow 
(91,310), Czernowitz (67,622), Pilsen (68,292) and Linz (58,778). 




I Czechs ^^ 
Slovaks.- t^/t 
ft,f/jenians....^3 
Poles. 

Slovenes H"»l 
Serto Croais..bjL!sb 
Maguars\^__i 
„ ( Italians ana 
;M Ladlns 

5 I Rumanians. „ 



•*S*JS"SR?E.;W.rt-Ji';;, 



«vi«r4^'K: 



AUSTRIA-HUNGARY 
Distribution of Races. 

English MiWs 
o 50 100 .ISO 200 



Btncry Walker K. 

Races. — From an ethnographical point of view Austria 
contains a diversity of races; in fact no other European state 
contains within its borders so many nationalities as the Austrian 
empire. The three principal races of Europe — the Latin, the 
Teutonic and the Slavonic— are all represented in Austria. 
The Slavonic race, numbering 15,690,000, is numerically the 
principal race in Austria, but as it is divided into a number 
of peoples, differing from one another in language, religion, 



AUSTRIA 



97 3 ! 



culture, customs and historical traditions, it does not possess 
a national unity. Besides, these various nationalities are 
geographically separated from one another by other races, and 
are divided into two groups. The northern group includes the 
Czechs, the Moravians, the Slovaks, the Ruthenians and the 
Poles; while the southern group contains the Slovenes, the 
Servians and the Croats. Just as their historical traditions are 
different, so are also the aspirations of these various peoples of 
the Slavonic race different, and the rivalries between them, 
as for instance between the Poles and the Ruthenians, have 
prevented them from enjoying the full political advantage due 
to their number. The Germans, numbering 9,171,614, constitute 
the most numerous nationality in Austria, and have played 
and still play the principal role in the political life of the country. 
The Germans are in a relative majority over the other peoples 
in the empire, their language is the vehicle of communication 
between all the other peoples both in official life and in the press; 
they are in a relatively more advanced state of culture, and they 
are spread over every part of the empire. Historically they have 
contributed most to the foundation and to the development 
of the Austrian monarchy, and think that for all the above- 
mentioned reasons they are entitled to the principal position 
amongst the various nationalities of Austria. The Latin race 
is represented by the Italians, Ladini and Rumanians. 

The following table gives the numbers of different nationalities, as 
determined by the languages spoken by them in 1900: — 

Germans 9,171,614 

Czechs and Slovaks 5,955,397 

Poles 4,252483 

Ruthenians 3,381,570 

Slovenes ' i,'l92,'78o 

Italians and Ladini 727,102 

Servians and Croats 711,380 

Rumanians 230,963 

Magyars 9I516 

The Germans occupy exclusively Upper Austria, Salzburg, 
Vorarlberg, and, to a large extent, Lower Austria; then the north 
and central part of Styria, the north and western part of Carinthia, 
and the north and central part of Tirol. In Bohemia they are 
concentrated round the borders, in the vicinity of the mountains, 
and they form nearly half the population of Silesia; besides they 
are found in every part of the monarchy. The Czechs occupy the 
central and eastern parts of Bohemia, the greatest part of Moravia 
and a part of Silesia. The Poles are concentrated in western Galicia, 
and in a part of Silesia; the Ruthenians in eastern Galicia and a 
part of Bukovina; the Slovenes in Carniola, Gorz and Gradisca, 
Istria, the south of Styria, and the Trieste territory. The Servians 
and Croats are found in Istria and Dalmatia ; the Italians and Ladini 
in southern Tirol, Gorz and Gradisca, Trieste, the coast of Istria, 
and in the towns of Dalmatia; while the Rumanians live mostly in 
Bukovina. 

Agriculture. — Notwithstanding the great industrial progress made 
by Austria during the last quarter of the 19th century, agriculture 
still forms the most important source of revenue of its inhabitants. 
In 1900 over 50 % of the total population of Austria derived their 
income from agricultural pursuits. The soil is generally fertile, 
although there is a great difference in the productivity of the various 
crown-lands owing to their geographical situation. The productive 
land of Austria covers 69,519,953 acres, or 93-8 % of the total area, 
which is 74,102,001 acres ; to this must be added 0-4 of lakes and fish- 
ponds, making a total of 94-2 % of productive area. The remainder 
is unproductive, or used for other, not agricultural purposes. The 
area of the productive land has been steadily increasing — it was 
estimated to cover about 89 % in 1875, — and great improvements in 
the agricultural methods have also been introduced. Of the whole 
productive area of Austria, 37-6 % is laid out in arable land ; 34-6 % 
in woods; 25-2 % in pastures and meadows; 1-3 % in gardens, 
0-9 % in vineyards; and 0-4 % in lakes, marshes and ponds. The 
provinces having the largest proportion of arable land are Bohemia, 
Galicia, Moravia and Lower Austria. The principal products are 
wheat, rye, barley, oats, maize, potatoes, sugar beet, and cattle 
turn'P- The produce of the ploughed land does not, on the whole, 
suffice for the home requirements. Large quantities in particular of 
wheat and maize are imported from Hungary for home consumption. 
Only barley and oats are usually reaped in quantity for export. 
The provinces which have the lowest proportion of arable land are 
Tirol and Salzburg. Besides these principal crops, other crops of 
considerable magnitude are : buckwheat in Styria, Galicia, Carniola 
and Carinthia ; rape and rape-seed in Bohemia and Galicia, poppy in 
Moravia and Silesia ; flax in Bohemia, Moravia, Styria and Galicia ; 
hemp in Galicia, chicory in Bohemia; tobacco, which is a state 
monopoly, in Galicia, Bukovina, Dalmatia and Tirol; fuller's 
thistle in Upper Austria and Styria; hops in Bohemia, including 



the celebrated hops round Saaz, in Galicia and Moravia ; rice in the 
Kiistenland ; and cabbage in Bohemia, Galicia, Lower Austria and 
Styria. The principal garden products are kitchen vegetables and 
fruit, of which large quantities are exported. The best fruit dis- 
tricts are in Bohemia, Moravia, Upper Austria and Styria. Certain 
districts are distinguished for particular kinds of fruit, as Tirol for 
apples, Bohemia for plums, Dalmatia for figs, pomegranates and 
olives. The chestnut, olive and mulberry trees are common in the 
south — chiefly in Dalmatia, the Kiistenland and Tirol ; while in the 
south of Dalmatia the palm grows in the open air, but bears no fruit. 

The vineyards of Austria covered in 1901 an area of 626,044 acres, 
the provinces with the largest proportion of vineyards being Dal- 
matia, the Kiistenland, Lower Austria, Styria and Moravia. The 
wines of Dalmatia are mostly sweet wines, and not suitable to bf 
kept for long periods, while those of the other provinces are not so 
sweet, but improve with age. 

Forests. — The forests occupy just a little over one-third of the 
whole productive area of Austria, and cover 24,157,709 acres. In 
the forests tall timber predominates to the extent of 85 %, and 
consists of conifers much more than of green or leaved trees, in the 
proportion of seventy against fifteen out of the 85 % of the total 
forests laid out in tall timber. Exceptions are the forest lands oi 
the Karst region, where medium-sized trees and underwood occupy 
80 %, and of Dalmatia, where underwood occupies 92-6 % of the 
whole forest land. The Alpine region is well wooded, and amongst 
the other provinces Bukovina is the most densely wooded, having 
43 -2 % of its area under forests, while Galicia with 25-9 % is the 
most thinly-wooded crown-land of Austria. The forests are chiefly 
composed of oak, pine, beech, ash, elm, and the like, and constitute 
one of the great sources of wealth of the country. Forestry is 
carried on in a thoroughly scientific manner. Large works of 
afforestation have been undertaken in Carinthia, Carniola and Tirol 
with a view of checking the periodical inundations, while similar 
works have been successfully carried out in the Karst region. 

Landed Property. — Of the whole territory of the state, 74,102,001 
acres, about 29 %, is appropriated to large landed estates; 71 % is 
disposed of in medium and smaller properties. Large landed property 
is most strongly represented in Bukovina, where it absorbs 46 % of 
the whole territory, and in Salzburg, Galicia, Silesia and Bohemia. ' 
To the state belongs 4! % of the total territory. The Church, the 
communities, and the corporations are also in possession of large 
areas of land ; 4 % (speaking roundly) of the territory of Austria 
is held on the tenure of fidei-commissum. Of the entire property in 
large landed estates, 59 % is laid out in woods ; of the property in 
fidei-commissum, 66 % is woodland ; of the entire forest land, about 
10 % is the property of the state; 14-5 % is communal property; 
and 3-8 % is the property of the Church. The whole of the territory 
in large landed estates includes 52 %'of,the entire forest land. The 
forest land held under fidei-commissum amounts to over 9 % of the 
entire forest land. 

Live Stock. — Although richly endowed by nature, Austria cannot 
be said to be remarkable as a cattle-rearing country. Indeed, except 
in certain districts of the Alpine region, where this branch of human 
activity is carried on under excellent conditions, there is much room 
for improvement. The amount of live stock is registered every ten 
years along with the census of the population. 



Horses 

Mules and asses 

Cattle 

Goats 

Sheep 

Pigs . . . . 

Beehives . 



1,463,282 
49,618 

8,584,077 
1,006,675 
3,841,340 

2,721,541 
926,312 



1890. 



1,548,197 
57,952 
8,643,936 
1,035,832 
3,186,787 
3,549,700 
920,640 



1900. 



1,711,077 
66,638 
9,506,626 
1,015,682 
2,621,026 
4,682,734 
996,i39 



Austria is distinguished for the number and superiority of its 
horses, for the improvements of which numerous studs exist all over 
the country. All kinds of horses are represented from the heaviest 
to the lightest, from the largest to the smallest. The most beautiful 
horses are found in Bukovina, the largest and strongest in Salzburg; 
those of Styria, Carinthia, Northern Tirol and Upper Austria are 
also famous. In Dalmatia, the Kiistenland and Southern Tirol, 
horses are less numerous, and mules and asses in a great measure 
take their place. The finest cattle are to be found in the Alpine 
region; of the Austrian provinces, Salzburg and Upper Austria 
contain the largest proportion of cattle. The number of sheep has 
greatly diminished, but much has been done in the way of improving 
the breeds, more particularly in Bohemia, Moravia, Silesia and 
Upper and Lower Austria. The main object has been the improve- 
ment of the wool, and with this object the merino and other fine- 
woolled_ breeds have been introduced. Goats abound mostly in 
Dalmatia, Bohemia and Tirol. The rearing of pigs is carried on 
most largely in Styria, Bohemia, Galicia and Upper and Lower 
Austria. Bees are extensively kept in Carinthia, Carniola, Lower 
Austria and Galicia. The silk-worm is reared more particularly in 
Southern Tirol and in the Kiistenland, and the average annual yielcf 
is 5,000,000 lb of cocoons. In the Alpine region dairy-farming has 
attained a great degree of development, and large quantities of 



97+ 



AUSTRIA 



butter and cheese are annually produced. Altogether, the rearing of 
cattle, with all its actual shortcomings, constitutes a great source of 
revenue, and yields a certain amount for export. 

Fisheries. — The fisheries of Austria are very extensive, and are 
divided into river, lake and sea fisheries. The numerous rivers of 
Austria swarm with a great variety of fishes. The lake fisheries are 
mostly pursued in Bohemia, where pisciculture is an art of old stand- 
ing, and largely developed. The sea fisheries on the coast of Dal- 
matia and of the Kustenland constitute an important source of 
wealth to the inhabitants of these provinces. About 4000 vessels, 
with a number of over 16,000 fishermen are employed, and the 
average annual catch realizes £240,000. 

In the mountainous regions of Austria game is plentiful, and 
constitutes a large source of income. 

Minerals. — In the extent and variety of its mineral resources 
Austria ranks among the first countries of Europe. With the ex- 
ception of platinum, it possesses every useful metal; thus, besides 
the noble metals, gold and silver, it abounds in ores of more or less 
richness in iron, copper, lead and tin. Rich deposits of coal, both 
pit coal and brown coal are to be found, as well as extensive basins 
of petroleum, and large deposits of salt. In smaller quantities are 
found zinc, antimony, arsenic, cobalt, nickel, manganese, bismuth, 
chromium, uranium, tellurium, sulphur, graphite and asphalt. 
There are also marble, roofing-slate, gypsum, porcelain-earth, 
potter's clay, and precious stones. It is therefore natural that 
mining queries should have been carried out in Austria from the
earliest times, as, for instance, the salt mines of Hallstatt in Upper 
Austria, which had already been worked during the Celtic and 
Romanic period. Famous through the middle ages were also the 
works, especially for the extraction of gold and silver, carried out 
in Bohemia and Moravia, whose early mining regulations, for instance 
those of Iglau, were adopted in other countries. But the great 
industrial development of the 19th century, with its growing necessity 
for fuel, has brought about the exploitation of the rich coal-fields 
of the country, and to-day the coal mines yield the heaviest output 
of any mineral products. To instance' the rapid growth in the ex- 
traction of coal, it is worth mentioning that in 1825 its output was 
about 150,000 tons; in 1875, or only after half a century, the output 
has become 100 times greater, namely, over 15,000,000 tons; while 
in 1900 it was 32,500,000 tons. Coal is found in nearly every province 
of Austria, with the exception of Salzburg and Bukovina, but the 
richest coal-fields are in Bohemia, Silesia, Styria, Moravia and 
Carniola in the order named. Iron ores are found more or less in 
all the crown-lands except Upper Austria, the Kustenland and 
Dalmatia, but it is most plentiful in Styria, Carinthia, Bohemia 
and Moravia. Gold and silver ores are found in Bohemia, Salzburg 
and Tirol. Quicksilver is found at Idria in Carniola, which after 
Almaden in Spain is the richest mine in Europe. Lead is extracted 
in Carinthia and Bohemia, while the only mines for tin in the whole 
of Austria are in Bohemia. Zinc is mostly found in Galicia, Tirol 
and Bohemia, and copper is extracted in Tirol, Moravia and Salzburg. 
Petroleum is found in Galicia, where ozocerite is also raised. Rock- 
salt is extracted in Galicia, while brine-salt is produced in Salzburg, 
Salzkammergut and Tirol. Graphite is extracted in Bohemia, 
Moravia, Styria and Lower Austria. Uranium, bismuth and anti- 
mony are dug out in Bohemia, while procelain earth is found in 
Bohemia and Moravia. White, red, black and variously-coloured 
marbles exist in the Alps, particularly in Tirol and Salzburg ; quartz, 
felspar, heavy spar, rock-crystal, and asbestos are found in various 
parts; and among precious stones may be specially mentioned the 
Bohemian garnets. The total value of the mines and foundry 
products throughout Austria in 1875 was £5,000,000. The number 
of persons employed in the mines and in the smelting and casting 
works in the same year was 94,019. The total value of the mining 
products throughout Austria in 1902 was £10,500,000, and the value 
of the product of the foundries was £3,795,000. Of this amount 
£3,150,000 represents the value of the iron: raw steel and pig iron. 
The increase in the value of the mining products during the period 
1892-1902 was 40 %; and the increase in the product of the furnaces 
in the same period was 35 %. The number of persons employed in 
1902 in mining was 140,890; in smelting works 7148; and in the 
extraction of salt, 7963. The value of the chief mining products of 
Austria in 1903 was: Brown coal (21,808,583 tons), £4,182,516; 
coal (12,145,000 tons), £4,059,807; iron ores (1,688,960 tons), 
£615,273; lead ores, £135,965; silver ores, £119,637; quicksilver 
ores, £92,049; graphite, £78,437; tin ores, £78,275; copper ores, 
£22,119; manganese ores, £5368; gold ores, £4407; asphalt, £2250; 
alum and vitriol slate, £992. The production of petroleum was 
660,000 tons, and of salt 340,000 tons. The value of the principal 
products of the smelting furnaces in 1903 was: Iron (955,543 tons), 
£2,970,866; coke, £862,137; zinc (metallic), £174,344; silver, 
£141,594; copper, £57,542; sulphuric acid, £8488; copper vitriol, 
£5710; mineral colours, £5565; lead, £5067; tin, £4566; gold, 
£878; iron vitriol, £603; litharge, £384; quicksilver, £218; coal 
briquettes, £92,000. 

Industry. — The manufactures of Austria were much developed 
(Juring the last quarter of the 19th century, although Austria as a 
whole cannot be said to be an industrial country. Austria possesses 
many favourable conditions for a great industrial activity. It 
possesses an abundance of raw materials, of fuel — both mineral and 



wood, — of metals and minerals, in fact all the necessaries for a great 
and flourishing industry; and the rivers can easily be utilized as 
producers of motive power. It is besides densely populated, and 
has an adequate supply of cheap labour, while the undeveloped 
industries of the Balkan states also offer a ready market for its pro- 
ducts. The glass manufacture in Bohemia is very old, and has kept 
up its leading position in the markets of the world up to the present 
day. Industrial activity is greatly developed in Bohemia, Lower 
Austria, Silesia, Moravia and Vorarlberg, while in Dalmatia and 
Bukovina it is almost non-existent. The principal branches of 
manufactures are, the textile industry, the metallurgic industries; 
brewing and distilling; leather, paper and sugar; glass, porcelain 
and earthenware; chemicals; and scientific and musical instruments. 
The textile industry in all its branches — cotton, woollen, linen, 
silk, flax and hemp — is mostly concentrated in Bohemia, Moravia, 
Silesia and Lower Austria. It is an old industry, and one which 
has made great progress since 1875. Thus the number of mechanical 
looms increased more than threefold during this period, and numbered 
in 1902 about 120,000. In the same year the number of spindles at 
work was about 3,100,000. Austria had in 1902, 21,837 textile 
factories with 337,514 workmen. The principal seat of the manu- 
facture of cotton goods is in northern Bohemia, from the Eger to 
Reichenberg, which can be considered as the Lancashire of Austria, 
Lower Austria between the Wiener Wald and the Leitha, and in 
Vorarlberg. Woollen goods are manufactured in the above places, 
and besides in Moravia, at Briinn and at Iglau ; in Silesia ; and at 
Biala in Galicia. Vienna is also distinguished for its manufacture 
of shawls. The coarser kind of woollen goods are manufactured 
all over the country, principally in the people's houses as a home 
industry. The most important places for the linen industry are in 
Bohemia at Trautenau ; in Moravia and Silesia, while the commoner 
kinds of linen are mostly produced as a home industry by the 
peasants in the above-mentioned crown-lands. The manufacture of 
ribbons, embroidery and lace, the two latter being carried on princi- 

Cally as a house industry in Vorarlberg and in the Bohemian Erzge- 
irge, also thrives. The industry in stitched stuffs is especially 
developed in northern Bohemia. Ready-made men's clothes and 
oriental caps (fezes) are produced on a large scale in Bohemia and 
Moravia. The manufacture of silk goods is mainly carried on in 
Vienna, while the spinning of silk has its principal seat in southern 
Tirol, and to a smaller extent in the Kustenland. 

The metallurgic industry forms one of the most important branches 
of industry, because'iron ore of excellent quality is extracted annually 
in great quantities. The principal seats of the iron and steel manu- 
factures are in Bohemia, Moravia, Silesia, Upper and Lower Austria, 
Styria and Carinthia, which contain extensive iron-works. The 
most important manufactured products are cutlery, firearms, files, 
wire, nails, tin-plates, scythes, sickles, steel pens, needles, rails, iron 
furniture, drains, and kitchen utensils. A famous place for its iron 
manufacture is Steyr in Upper Austria. The manufacture of 
machinery, for industrial and agricultural purposes, and of railway 
engines is mainly concentrated in Vienna, Wiener-Neustadt, Prague, 
Briinn and Trieste ; while the production of rolling stock for railways 
is carried on in Vienna, Prague and Graz. Ship-building yards for 
sea-vessels are at Trieste and Pola; while for river-vessels the largest 
yards are at Linz. Among other metal manufactures, the principal 
are copper works at Brixlegg and other places in Tirol, and in 
Galicia, tin and lead in Bohemia, and metallic alloys, especially 
Packfong or German silver, an alloy of nickel and copper, at Berndorf 
in Lower Austria. The precious metals, gold and silver, are princi- 
pally worked in the larger towns, particularly at Vienna and Prague. 
Vienna is also the principal seat for scientific and surgical instruments. 
In the manufacture of musical instruments Austria takes a leading 
part amongst European states, the principal places of production 
being Vienna, Prague, Koniggratz, Graslitz and Schonbach. 

The glass manufacture is one of the oldest industries in Austria, 
and is mainly concentrated in Bohemia. Its products are of the 
best quality, and rule the markets of the world. In the manufacture 
of earthenwares Austria plays also a leading part, and the porcelain 
industry round Carlsbad and in the Eger district in Bohemia has a 
world-wide reputation. The leather industry is widely extended, 
and is principally carried on in Lower Austria, Bohemia and Moravia. 
Vienna and Prague are great centres for the boot and shoe trade, 
and the gloves manufactured in these towns enjoy a great reputation. 
The manufacture of wooden articles is widespread over the country, 
and is very varied. In Vienna and other large towns the production 
of ornamental furniture has attained a great development. The 
industry in paper has also assumed great proportions, its principal 
seats being in Bohemia, Moravia, Upper and Lower Austria. Of 
food-stuffs, besides milling, and other flour products, the principal 
industry is the manufacture of sugar from beet-root. The sugar in- 
dustry is almost exclusively carried on in Bohemia, Moravia, Silesia 
and Galicia. It has attained such large proportions that large 
districts in those provinces have been ^converted from wheat-growing 
districts into fields for the cultivation of beet-root. Brewing is ex- 
tensively carried on, and the beer produced is of a good quality. 
The largest brewing establishment is at Schwechat near Vienna, 
and large breweries are also found at Pilsen and Budweissin Bohemia, 
whose products enjoy a great reputation abroad. There were in 
Austria 1341 breweries, which produced 422,993,120 gallons of beer. 



AUSTRIA 



975 



in 1902-1903. Distilling is carried on on a large scale in Galicia, 
Bukovina, Bohemia, Moravia and Lower Austria; the number of 
distilleries being 1257, which produced 30,435,812 gallons of spirit. 
Rosoglio, maraschino, and other liqueurs are made in Dalmatia and 
Moravia. The manufacture as well as the growth of tobacco is a 
government monopoly, which has 30 tobacco factories with over 
40,000 work-people, the largest establishment being at Hainburg in 
Lower Austria. Other important branches of industry are the 
manufacture of chemicals, in Vienna and in Bohemia; petroleum 
refineries in Galicia, and the extraction of various petroleum products ; 
the manufacture of buttons; printing, lithographing, engraving, and 
map-making, especially in Vienna, &c. 

In 1900 the various manufacturing industries employed in Austria 
3,138,800 persons, of whom 2,264,871 were workmen and 103,854 
were labourers. Including families and domestic servants, a little 
over 7,000,000 were dependent on industry for their livelihood. 

Commerce. — Austria forms together with Hungary one customs 
and commercial territory, and the statistics for the foreign trade are 
given under Austria-Hungary. Owing to its situation, the bulk 
of the Austrian trade is carried on the railways and on the inland 
navigable rivers. Only a small portion is sea-borne trade, while the 
commercial interchange between the provinces lying on the Adriatic 
coast is very small. 

Commercial Navy. — The commercial sea navy of Austria, excluding 
small coasting vessels and fishing-boats, consisted in 1900 of 154 
vessels, with a tonnage of 198,322 tons, of which 123 vessels with a 
tonnage of 183,949 were steamers. The greatest navigation company 
is the Austrian Lloyd in Trieste, which in 1900 employed 70 steamers 
of 165,430 tons. During 1900 the total tonnage of vessels engaged 
in the foreign trade, which entered all the Austrian ports, was 
1,448,764 tons under the Austro-Hungarian flag, and 888,707 under 
foreign flags; the total tonnage of vessels cleared during the same 
period was 1,503,532 tons under the Austro-Hungarian flag, and 
866,591 under foreign flags. 

Government. — Austria is a parliamentary or constitutional 
(limited) monarchy, its monarch bearing the title of emperor. 
The succession to the throne is hereditary, in the order of primo- 
geniture, in the male line of the house of Habsburg-Lothringen; 
and failing this, in the female line. The monarch must be a 
member of the Roman Catholic Church. The emperor of Austria 
is also king of Hungary, but except for having the same monarch 
and a few common affairs (see Austria-Hungary), the two 
states are quite independent of one another. The emperor 
has the supreme command over the armed forces of the country, 
has the right to confer degrees of nobility, and has the pre- 
rogatives of pardon for criminals. He is the head of the executive 
power, and shares the legislative power with the Reichsrat; 
and justice is administered in his name. The constitution of 
Austria is based upon the following statutes: — (1) the Pragmatic 
Sanction of the emperor Charles VI., first promulgated on the 
19th of April 1 713, which regulated the succession to the thrcne; 
(2) the Pragmatic Patent of the emperor Francis II. of the 
1st of August 1804, by which he took the title of Emperor of 
Austria; (3) the Diploma of the emperor Francis Joseph I. 
of the 20th of October i860, by which the constitutional form 
of government was introduced; (4) the Diploma of the emperor 
Francis Joseph I. of the 26th of February 1861, by which the 
provincial diets were created ; (5) the six fundamental laws 
of the 21st of December 1867, which contain the exposition 
and guarantee of the civil and political rights of the citizen, the 
organization of justice, the organization and method of election 
for the Reichsrat, &c. 

The executive power is vested in the council of ministers, 
at whose head is the minister-president. There are eight 
ministries, namely, the ministry of the interior, of national defence, 
of worship and instruction, of finance, of commerce, of agriculture, 
of justice, and of railways. There are, further, two ministries, 
wi thout portfolio , for Galicia and Bohemia. The civil administra- 
tion in the different provinces is carried out by governors or 
stadtholders {Statlhalter) , to whom are subordinate the heads 
of the 347 districts in which Austria was divided in 1900, and 
of the ^3 towns with special statute, i.e. of the towns which have 
also the management of the civil administration. Local self- 
government of the provinces, districts and communities is 
also granted, and is exercised by various elective bodies. Thus, 
the autonomous provincial administration is discharged by the 
provincial committees elected by the local diets; and the affairs of 
the communities are discharged by an elected communal council. 



The legislative power for all the kingdoms and lands which 
constitute Austria is vested in the Reichsrat. It consists of 
two Houses; an Upper House (the Herrenkaus), and a Lower 
House (the Abgeordnetenhaus) . The Upper House is composed 
of (1) princes of the imperial house, who are of age (14 in 1907); 
(2) of the members of the large landed nobility, to which the 
emperor had conferred this right, and which is hereditary in 
their family (78 in 1907); (3) of 9 archbishops and 8 prince- 
bishops; and (4) of life members nominated by the emperor for 
distinguished services (170 in 1907). The Lower -House has 
undergone considerable changes since its creation in 1861, by 
the various modifications of the electoral laws passed in 1867, 
1873, 1892, 1896 and 1907. The general spirit of those modifica- 
tions was to broaden the electoral basis, and to extend the 
franchise to a larger number of citizens. The law of the 26th of 
January 1907 granted universal franchise to Austrian male citizens 
over twenty-four years of age, who have resided for a year in the 
place of election. The Lower House consists of 516 members, 
elected for a period of six years. The members receive payment 
for their services, as well as an indemnity for travelling expenses. 
A bill to become law must pass through both Houses, and must 
receive the sanction of the emperor. The emperor is bound to 
summon the Reichsrat annually. 

According to the imperial Diploma of the 26th February 
1 86 1, local diets have been created for the legislation of matters 
of local interest. These provincial parliaments are 1 7 in number, 
and their membership varies from 22 members, which compose 
the diet of Gorz and Gradisca.to the 242 members which constitute 
that of Bohemia. They assemble annually and are composed 
of members elected for a period of six years, and of members 
ex-officio, namely, the archbishops and bishops of the respective 
provinces, and the rector of the local university. 



ion. — Religious toleration was secured throughout the 
Habsburg dominions by the patent of the 13th of October 1781, but 
Protestants were not given full civil rights until the issue of the 
Protestanlenpatent of the 8th of April 1861, after the promulgation of 
the imperial constitution of the 26th of February. The principle 
underlying this and all subsequent acts is the guarantee to all 
religious bodies recognized by law of freedom of worship, the manage- 
ment of their own affairs, and the undisturbed possession and disposal 
of their property. Though all the churches are, in a sense, " estab- 
lished," the Roman Catholic Church, to which the sovereign must 
belong, is the state religion. The reigning house, however, though 
strongly attached to the Roman faith, has always resisted the 
extreme claims of the papacy, an attitude which in Joseph II.'s time 
resulted, under the influence of Febronianism (q.v.), in what was 
practically a national schism. Thus the emperor retains the right 
to tax church property, to nominate bishops, and to prohibit the 
circulation of papal bulls without his permission. By the concordat 
of August 18, 1855, this traditional attitude was to some extent 
reversed; but this agreement soon became a dead letter and was 
formally denounced by the Austrian government after the promulga- 
tion of the dogma of papal infallibility. 

Of the population of Austria in 1900, 23,796,814 (91%) were 
Roman Catholics, including 3,134,439 uniate Greeks and 2096 uniate 
Armenians. There were 12,937 Old Catholics, in scattered com- 
munities, 606,764 members of the Eastern Orthodox Church, mainly 
in Bukovina and Dalmatia, and 698 Armenians, also mainly in 
Bukovina. The Protestants, who in the 16th century comprised 
90 % of the population, are now only 1 -9 %. In 1900, 365,505 of them 
were returned as belonging to the Augsburg Confession (Lutheran), 
12 8,557 to the Helvetic (Reformed). Other Christian Confessions 
in Austria are Herrnhuters (Moravian Brethren) in Bohemia, 
Mennonites in Galicia, Lippovanians (akin to the Russian Skoptsi) 
in Bukovina, and Anglicans. The Jews compose 4-7 % of the 
population, and are strongest in Galicia, Lower Austria, Bohemia, 
Moravia and Bukovina. The Roman Catholic Church is divided 
into eight 'provinces, seven of the Latin rite — Vienna, Prague, 
Lemberg, Salzburg, Olmiitz, Gorz and Zara — with 23 bishoprics, and 
one of the Greek rite (Lemberg) , with two bishoprics. The Armenian 
bishopric of Lemberg and the Austrian part of the archdiocese of 
Breslau are under the immediate jurisdiction of the Holy See. The 
Greek Orthodox Church has one archbishopric (at Czernowitz) and 
two bishoprics. There are 559 communities of the Jewish religion 
(253 in Galicia, and 255 in Bohemia). In 1900 there were, belonging 
to the Roman Catholic Church, 541 monasteries with 7775 monks, 
and 877 convents with 19,194 nuns; while the Greek Orthodox 
Church had 14 monasteries with 85 members. The Evangelical 
Church, according to the constitution granted by imperial decree 
on the 9th of April 1861 (modified by those of January 6, 1866 
and December 9, 1891) is organized on a territorial basis, being 



976 



AUSTRIA 



administered by 10 superintendents, who are, in their turn, subject 
to the Supreme Church Council (K.K. Oberkirchenrat) at Vienna, 
the emperor as sovereign being technically head of the Church. 
The small Anglican community at Trieste is under the jurisdiction 
of the Evangelical superintendent of Vienna. 

Education. — The system of elementary schools dates from the time 
of Maria Theresa; the present organization was introduced by the 
education law of May 14, 1869 (amended in 1883). By this law 
the control of the schools, hitherto in the hands of the Church, was 
assumed by the state, every local community being bound to erect 
and maintain public elementary schools. These are divided into 
Volksschulen (national or primary schools) and Biirgerschulen (higher 
elementary schools). Attendance is obligatory on all from the age of 
six to fourteen (in some provinces six to twelve). Religious instruc- 
tion is given by the parish priest, but in large schools a special grant 
is made or a teacher ad hoc appointed in the higher classes (law of 
June 17, 1888). Private schools are also allowed which, if fulfilling 
the legal requirements, may be accorded the validity of public 
primary schools. The language of instruction is that of the nation- 
ality prevalent in the district. In about 40% of the schools the 
instruction is given in German ; in 26 % in Czech ; in 28 % in other 
Slavonic languages, and in the remainder in Italian, Rumanian or 
Magyar. In 1903 there were in Austria 20,268 elementary schools 
with 78,025 teachers, frequented by 3,618,837 pupils, which compares 
favourably with the figures of the year 1875, when there were 
14,257 elementary schools with 27,677 teachers, frequented by 
2,050,808 pupils. About 88 % of the children who are of school age 
actually attend school, but in some provinces like Upper Austria and 
Salzburg nearly the full 100 attend, while in the eastern parts of the 
monarchy the percentage is much lower. In 1900 62 % of the total 
population of Austria could read and write, and 2-9% could only 
read. In the number of illiterates are included children under seven 
years of age. For the training of teachers of elementary schools 
there were in 1900 54 institutions for masters and 38 for mistresses. 
In these training colleges., as also in the secondary or " middle " 
schools (Mittelschulen), religious instruction is also in the hands of 
the Roman Catholic Church; but, by the law of June 20, 1870, 
the state must provide for such teaching in the event of the Protestant 
pupils numbering 20 or upwards (the school authorities usually 
refuse to take more than 19 Protestants in consequence). 

Besides the elementary schools three other groups of educational 
establishments exist in Austria: " middle " schools (Mittelschulen) ; 
" high " schools (Hochschulen) ; professional and technical schools 
(Fachlehranstalten and Gewerbeschulen). The " middle " schools 
include the classical schools (Gymnasien) , " modern "schools with 
some Latin teaching (Realgymnasien) , and modern schools simply 
(Realschulen). In 1903 there were 202 Gymnasien, 19 Realgymnasien 
and 117- Realschulen, with 7121 teachers and 111,012 scholars. The 
" high " schools include the universities and the technical high 
schools (Technische Hochschulen). Of state universities there 
are eight: — Vienna, Gratz, Innsbruck, Prague (German), and 
Czernowitz, in which German is the language of instruction ; Prague 
(Bohemian) with Czech; and Cracow and Lemberg with Polish as 
the language of instruction. Each university has four faculties — 
theology, law and political science, medicine, and philosophy. In 
Czernowitz, however, the faculty of medicine is wanting. Since 
1905 an Italian faculty of law has been added to the university of 
Innsbruck. The theological faculties are all Rdman Catholic, except 
Czernowitz, where the theological faculty is Orthodox Eastern. 
All the universities are maintained by the state. The number 
of professors and lecturers was about 1596 in 1903; while the 
number of students was 17,498. 

Justice.— The judicial authorities in Austria are: — (1) the county 
courts, 963 in number; (2) the provincial • and district courts, 
74 in number, to which are attached the jury courts, — both these 
courts are courts of first instance; (3) the higher provincial 
courts, 9 in number, namely, at Vienna, Graz, Trieste, Innsbruck, 
Zara, Prague, Brilnn, Cracow and Lemberg; these are courts 
of appeal from the lower courts, and have the supervision of the 
criminal courts in their jurisdiction; (4) the supreme court of 
justice and court of cassation in Vienna. The judicial organization 
is independent of the executive power. There are also special courts 
for commercial, industrial, shipping, military and other matters. 
There is also the court of the Empire at Vienna, which has the power 
to decide in case of conflict between different authorities. 



Finance. — The growth of the Austrian budget, is shown by the 
following figures: — 





1885 


1895 


1900 


1905 


Expenditure 
Revenue . . 


£44,121,600 
£43,714,666 


£55,396,916 
£57,446,091 


£66,003,494 
£66,020,475 


£74,oi3,ooo 
£74,079,000 



The chief sources of revenue are direct taxes, indirect taxes, 
customs duties, post and telegraph and post-office savings banks 
receipts, railway receipts, and profits or royalties on forests, domains 
and mining. The direct taxes are divided into two groups, real and 
personal ; the former include the land tax and house-rent tax, and 
the latter the personal income tax, tax on salaries, tax on commercial 
and industrial establishments, tax on all business with properly 
audited accounts (like the limited liability companies), and tax on 
investments. The principal indirect taxes are the tobacco monopoly, 
stamps and fees, excise duties on sugar, alcohol and beer, the salt 
monopoly, excise duty on mineral oil, and excise duty on meat and 
cattle for slaughtering. 

The national debt of Austria is divided into two groups, a general 
national debt, incurred jointly by the two halves of the Austro- 
Hungarian monarchy for common affairs, and is therefore jointly 
borne by both parts, and a separate debt owed only by Austria alone. 
The following table shows the growth of the Austrian debt in millions 
sterling :— 



1885 


1890 


1895 


1900 


1905 


45" 


88-23 


119-60 


140-68 


167-91 



At the close of 1903 the debt of Austria was £156,724,000, an 
increase since 1900 of £16,044,000. This large increase is due to the 
great expenditure on public works, as railways, navigable canals, 
harbour works, &c, started by the Austrian government since 1900. 

Railways. — As regards internal communications, Austria is 
provided with an extensive network of railways, the industrial 
provinces being specially favoured. This has been accomplished in 
spite of the engineering difficulties owing to the mountainous nature 
of the country and of the great financial expenses resulting there- 
from. The construction of the Semmering railway, opened in 1854, 
for instance, was the first mountain railway built in the European 
continent, and marked an epoch in railway engineering. The first 
railway laid down in Austria was in 1824 between Budweis and 
Kerschbaum, over a distance of 40 m., and was at first used for horse 
tramway. The first steam railway was opened in 1837 overadistance 
of about 10 m. between Floridsdorf (near Vienna) and Wagram. 
From the first, the policy of the Austrian government was to con- 
struct and to work the railways itself ; and in granting concessions 
to private companies it stipulated among its conditions the rever- 
sionary right of the state, whereby the line becomes the property of 
the state without compensation after the lapse of the period of 
concession. With various modifications, according to its financial 
means, it vigorously pursued its policy, by both building railways 
itself, and encouraging private companies to build. In 1905 the 
total length of railways in Austria was 13,590 m., of which 5017 m. 
belonged to and were worked by the state, and 3359 m. belonged to 
private companies, but were worked by the state. 

Bibliography. — F. Umlauft, Die Lander Osterreich-Ungarns in 
Wort und Bild (15 vols., Vienna, 1881-1889), Die bsterreichisch- 
ungarische Monarchic (3rd ed., Vienna, 1896), Die osterreichische 
Monarchic in Wort und Bild (24 vols., Vienna, 1888-1902), and Die 
Vblker Osterreich-Ungarns (12 vols., Teschen, 1881-1885) ; A. Supan, 
" Osterreich-Ungarn " (Vienna, 1889, in Kirchhoff's Landerkunde 
von Europa, vol. ii.) ; Auerbach, Les Races et les nationality en 
Autriche-Hongrie (Paris, 1897); Mayerhofer, Osterreich-ungarisches 
Ortslexikon (Vienna, 1896). For geology see C. Diener, &c, Bau und 
Bild Osterreichs (Vienna and Leipzig, 1903) ; F. von Hauer, Die 
Geologie (Vienna). The official statistical publications o f the central 
statistical department, of the ministry of agriculture, ana of the 
ministry of commerce, appearing annually. (O. Br.) 



PRINTED IN U.S.A. 



